APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000100010003-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-OO850R000100010003-6

FUR OH'lLIAL USP. WLY

JPRS L/8196
3 January 1979

TRANSMTIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PlBUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE («LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010003—6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transniasiona and broadcasts. ﬂaterisls from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infomtion was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was suuarired or extracted.

Unfamiliar nsnes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or name preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way repreaent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGlT MUS AND “NATIONS WERNING 00158831? 0?
$1281.51: EPIDDWED HERE!" REQUIRE THAT DISSBHIMTION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED “OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
3. Icelpleet'e Accession No.

you ' ate

3 Jenna 1979

LI N
Wwwm -
r “glut

MSMTIONS 0N HBSTERN EUROPE. (P000 1/79)

        

        
    
     
    
   
    
   
    
 
 

   

 
 

. Pedal-in; Onealudoo Nani and Mane
Joint Publication Iaeeerch Service
1000 North clebe load

Arlington. Virginia 22201

I}. Spa-eerie. G‘aalretino Jane aad Mdme

to above

  

The aeriel report conteine political/econonic intonation on ﬂeet European
energy. finance and trade policy nature on well an develop-en“ and trends
in the doctrine. program and problem of the najor col-mint partiee.
including their relations with con-mint partiea outside the ﬂeet European
area. '

  

urkey
:Uuited Kingdo-
Iceland _1leat Ger-any

    
   
 

 
 
 
 
  
     

m comm tau/am 5c, so. 10

7 Anaheim, Sum
to: official Uee Only.
Lilited “or of Copier Available Pron JPRS.

 
  
  

)\ . an
;. ; .
iii '

Um I"... .."e 0.7.! “B '0.“ “Y .‘ “EP‘W VICO‘.“ ‘OWJ’I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8196

'3 nanny 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE
(moo 1/19)

Comurs

M11011“. AFFAIRS

Soviet Count on Danish and Norwegian Aix Porcee
(V. Sekolin; mum vomum: 030mm.

m: 78)....00oeeeoeooeeeeeoooeeoeeoooeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeoooee

mropean Perlia-ent Propoeea ac Civil Righte Charter
(Karl lietthiae Met-nun; mm mm, 10 Oct 78).........

Prise Mini-t2: Diacuuee Concern an: Unrea- Pact kercieea
(PW mum. 30 Oct 78).......................

Coalition Survivea Teetn, Ready for Regen Battle
(Berna: Mal: W AUDI-I. 3 Nov 78)...........

MC!

Co-ente on Prancoia-Poncet Installation
(Claude Jncqu-art; mans mum. ‘ Dec 78)..........

[card'- ‘Thxee Iiatakae‘ (Jo-enter! Upon
(Rabat sci-newer: L'muss. 2 Dec 78)...................

Ca-nniat Student Leaﬂet hplaina henna for Lavina PC!
(Guy bnopnicki. Interview; 1.! mm. (IMAM.
“10 M 78)...0.0.0.00.0.00......OOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

European lonetary Synt. Seen Threatened
(Philippe Dntnpt; nuns Am. 6 Dec 18).........,..

Reaeona tot unite of Antitank Belicopter Explained
(Jean de Gelard; an 6 009508. 2 Dec 78)..................

Pass

13

16

20

26

30

- I - [III - HE - 150 P000)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

com (Conduct!)

Uu of nor Antiunk umn. Aboard liaison“: Described
(PM. 1108018835“ & 00m, 2 w 7a)booonooooooooo

Air Prune: mm Policy Explained
an ‘ m. 2 M 78)....0000000000000000QOOIOOOOOOOO

Brio! Ducription o! Croil us Security Hamel
(00y 316M“; my 26 Oct 78)....ooooocoooooooooonoaoooc

Briefs
Popercn on Left Union

HAL!

PCI'. Pojotu Explain. Policy on BBC
(can Carlo Pnjctta Interview; 1.2 m OBSBVATWR.
11-17 D” 78)....0...0.0.0.0....C................OOCOCOO.

mmm

0! Opposition Leader Thacher Discusses Pay Policy
(Ill! M‘m; m GUARDIAN. 19 M 78)....0000000000000000

UK Shadow Poroun Mercury Strata BBC Ties
(Inn Attica; m GUARDIAN. 20 we 78)....................

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

(01

66

46

68

69

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

SOVIET com OI 018188 ”'0 NOWIM AIR Ions

ﬂoooov zmzzwon WWW. 0902mm in union No 10. Oct 78 oignod
to pron 5 Oct 18 pp 0-52

[micio by Lt Col. V. Sohoiim 'i'ho A! o! Nowoy and mk')

[hoot-pt) Mommy and Don-nth oto constantly droning tho ottontion of tho
oggxoooivo circloo of tho um bloc of which thoy no unborn Attaching
Inch otzotoqic ottontion to thio :ogion, tho Modozohip of tho cnitod Stotoo
mo am is mtontly ourting poo-onto on tho Nomi» and Donioh qovon-
nnto, «Io-main; in! tho. o turthor incuooo o! onponditnuo on oquipping
tho and toxooo with tho iotoot mdolo of nopono no oonbot notorioi Ind
pupontion o! thoi: torritorioo for tho launching of additional oontinoonto
at tho hioc'o txoopo in tho ovont o! vor. In particulor, thooo on plan
to: building in Nanny now dopoto for hoovy u- ond also to: tho odoptotim
o! oinauoo for tho location on tho. of tho iotoot oixotott of an Unitod
Stotoo no othox of tho bloc oountrioo. voiding tho oonto: of ottontion of
mu nilitorioto io nodomisotion of tho oi: tomo- ot thooo oountnoo,
uhidt on ohottiy to ho providod with tho novoot Anoricon oircrott.

A11 thooo niiitoxiot propontiono no oceonponiod by ontiooviot oianoor one
noo. ‘l‘hoxo is no dwbt that thoy will. go ogoinot tho Vito). intorooto of tho
Danish and Nomqion pooplo ad on intondod to poison tho good noighborly
amophon an! Initial. ooopontim in Buropo.

oonnan'. 'Zoxubozhnoyo voyonnoyo daoznniyo', 1978

7697
GO: 1001

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

EUROPEAN PARLIAﬂEHT PROPOSCS EC CIVIL RIGHTS CHARTER
Bonn EUROPA ARCHIV in German 10 not 7d pp 661-668

[Article by Prof Dr Karl metthies Heeaaen, Chair for Public Law, particularly
international and European lav, Augsburg: "Basic Rights for Europe"

'[text] An EC Charter of Civil Rights

"So long as the integration process of the Community has not pro-
grassed to the point that Community law also contains a generally accepted
catalog of basic rights passed by a parliament and equal to the basic rights
catalog of the constitution," Community lau is, in the opinion of the Federal
Constitutional Court, to be judged using Ceraen basic rights as a scale.

The suggestion of issuing a catalog of basic rights for the European Communi-
ties contained in the "so long ae"-decision of 1974 has been extensively
discussed but not follovad up.2 0n 5 April 1971 the Parliament, Council

and Commission of the European Communities solemnly approved the hitherto
valid procedure, that is, the development of basic rights by decisions of

the Court of Justice, these being, among other things, oriented on the
constitutions of tge member states and the Human Rights Convention of the
Council of Europe. This served to bring the discussion to an end as the
Commission than, on the basis of an opinion by Rudolf Bernhardt, vieued the
existing basic rights protection as adequate 'for the present and near fu-
ture."‘ It has been demonstrated in the meantime, however, that the Euro-
pean Parliament is not in the mood to further delay the question of a cats-
log of basic rights. In a 16 ﬂovanber 1977 decision the Parliament tasked
.the Commission with drawing up suggestions for the ”special rights“ of
Community citizens.5 rollouing a debate in which both the incumbent presi-
dent of the Council of Foreign Hinistars and the pzeaident of the Commission
intervened, on 13 April 1978 the 9er1iament decided to call a round table
conference, to be held in Clarence in October 1918, to drau up an “EC Charter
of Civil Rights."6 The chairmanship was given to ﬂario Scalba.

The round table conference could contribute to changing a discussion hitherto
conducted at an all too legalistic level to political action. Uhereas human
rights policy has become one of the great topics of public discussion, the
same cannot be caid one of European basic rights policy. It is not so much,

2

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as in the case of human rights policy, a matter of fighting clear grievances
but rather one of promoting European integration. aut this task -— basic
rights belong to the care of every modern constitution - also deserves broad
public attention. It thus seems appropriate an the eve of the round table
conference to consider if and to what degree "basic rights for Europa" can
promote the European unity effort.

ﬂrotoction Against Sovereign Arbitrarineca

Execution and torture, imprisonment and forced labor are the instruments of
sovereign arbitrariness meet strongly affecting individuals. The task of
personal rights of freedom is to exclude their use or, in tho case of im-
prisonment, to at least bind them to tho accomplishment of constitutional
state prerequisites. Defence against sovereign force places such illegal
acts in the foreground. Thus tho basic right of freedom of religion pro-
tests a private area of freedom against sovereign attacks of all kinds and
not Just against imprisonment and exile. The right to a fair trial can,
so the federal Republic of germany uae recently lectured by the European
High Court for Human Rights , be impaired simply by excessive trial length. ‘
Since the end of Uorld Uar II protection against sovereign arbitrariness

has been at the center of efforts toward international protection of human
rights. These efforts have by no means been in vain. One not: mention

here only the human rights declaration of 19:2, the declaration of princi-
plea in the famous Socket 3 of the Final Act of Helsinki of 1975 and the
international agreement on civil and human rights of 1966 which became affro-
tivo in 1976. Because of the extent of guarantees and the effectiveness of
the legal protection system, the European Human Rights Convention of 1950
continues to be a model. Since 1974 the main convention and most of the
supplementary protocols have become effective in all member states of the
European Communities.

In European Community lau the basic rights of freedom are protected not by
explicit rules but rather by unwritten general legal principles. Their guer-
enteo would thus be placed in the center of a common legal catalog of basic
rights.

The fact that the member states can reach agreement on the content of basic

- rights of freedom relatively easily speaks for the adoption in written ccmmu-
nity lau. it appears doubtful, houever; that the material position of Commu-
nity citizens would be improved by a written formulation of the catalog of
basic rights. The High Court of the European Communities develops basic
rights as general legal principles from common constitutional transfer of

the member atateo and,from international law obligations assumed by the mem-
ber states. It has never required them to respect the maximum standard

of basic rights protection among the member states. But, on the other

hand, there is no case known in which Community legal protection has lagged
behind that of any member state. This applies even to the "so long as"-
case in which the Federal Constitutional Court came to the some verdict

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as did the High Court of the European Communities four years earlier in the
same case.9 A basic rights catalog uould hardly offer more since written

basic rights first gain form only by their development in decisions.

In its already mentioned decision of 16 November 1977 the European Parliament
required that the protection given by Community guarantees "had to apply not
only against acts by Community organs but also against acts by governments

of the individual states." Against acts of Bavarian state force one can
appeal not only to the basic rights of the Bavarian constitution but also

to the basic rights of the [federal] constitution. This degree of uniformity
of basic rights protection is typical for federated states. Eut European
integration has, as is known, not yet achieved a federated state quality.

It is difficult to judge if it will come close to this if a citiran of the
Federal Republic canappeal against the exercise of German sovereign power

by reference not only to the basic rights of the constitution and the

rights of the Human Rights Convention but also to Community basic rights.

The accumulation of guarantees does not improve their quality. Through
normally unsuccessful Community law basic rights complaints the citizen is
more likely to become irritated than strengthened in his Community sense.

The European Commu'Leias could,of course, find a portion of their identity

in a common acknouledgarent of elementary human rights. The commonality

of human rights, however, roaches beyond the borders of the Common market

and, in Europe, encomneseae all 2C member states of the Ccuncil of Europe.

The European Communities should emphasize this Joint aspect uit the other
states of free Europe and drop everything that could possibly be miebnder-
stood as competition with the institutions of the Council of Europe. A
competitive situation becomes necessary only as the protection of human rights
gross to be a "state" task for the EC in the work of political integration.

Overall, a basic rights catalog confirming basic human rights is not suitable '
as an instrument of European integration. Despite the friendly suggestion
from Karleruhe, this area of European basic rights policy can be relegated
until the European Union comes in view.

Economic and Social Order

The selection of economic policy concepts from the scale ranging from a

. free market to a centrally managed economy can be limited by basic rights.
Basic rights and other constitutional lau principles can accordingly limit
political freedom to organize in the area of social polic'. European Coamuni-
ty leu also contain: such determinations but these exhibit the structure of
subjective rights only to e alight degree. The relatively strict cartel
policy of the EEC Treaty represents a political decision - supplementable
through other elements of organirational policy - for the free market
economy. freedom of competition servos not only the integration of national
markets but also promotes the freedom of economic participation of the .
individual market participants. Articl. 119 of the EEC Treaty anchors the
principle of equal pay for men and woman for the entire area of the Common

4
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

market. Since the Degrenne/SASEHA decision it applies directly to private
labor contracts.10 Other economic and social rights guarantees have been
dnvnlonnd a: general legal principles from the constitutions of member states
by the European High Court. '

On a worldwide basis economic and social policy ideas differ widely. The
density and effectiveness of international guarantees in this area cannot,
in the narrow sense, be compared with the international protection of human
rights despite ILO Convention, the European Social Charter of 1961 and the
international social pact of 1966. Here attention is, however, new paid

to the connection between rights of freedom and economic and social order
by the United nations, this being obvious from the General Assembly resolu-
tion of 16 December 1977.11 The Committee of Hinistors of the Council of
Europe has also resolved "to devote more attention to" the doveloogent of
rights "in the social, economic and cultural area" in the future.

It is apparent that this area of European basic rights policy has as yet
failed to obtain any significance in the present discussion in the European
Communities. But the formation tasks of the Communities lie directly in
the field of economic and social policy. Further development to an econo-
mic and monetary union presupposes standardization of the economic and
social order to a for greater degree than has hitherto taken place. So
long as the negotiating framework for Community organs is not limited, one
cannot blame the member states for exercising restraint in regard to a
return to the majority principle in the Council and a transfer of further
competences such as to a European Currency Bank. '

There is no lack of questions requiring regulation. The debate about the
correct path between a market economy and a directed economy could be taken
up again. Community law regulation could regulate ownership in enterprises,
be it a question of worker participation, investment control or nationaliza-
tion. Agreements in principle about environmental protection could also be
made at the Community level.

All the problems named are extremely controversial. This is particularly
true when regulation, such as in the nationalization question, is directed
primarily at member states. It would be unrealistic to hope for unanimous
decisions in the Council on these questions. But the controversial nature
. of the questions need not be a disadvantage if, in place of the hitherto
interstate opinion formation process, the path, eased by direct elections,
of a community opinion formation by the people via the European Parliament
is taken. The Parliament could, just by dealing with controversial problems,-
direct public interest to itself and promote the formation of opinion uithin
political groups beyond state frontiers. The prerequisite would, of course,
be that the Parliament retreat from its previous preference for compromises
and dare to take up precise positions even if these were sometime supported
only by slim majorities. The fact that such'docisions are legally not
binding is not necessarily harmful. They would in themselves not represent
constitutional acts but rather only preparation for such. It will also be

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE!

thus with the European constitution. The task of the Parliament is thus

to act on the consciousness of the citizens and to lead them stop by step

to acceptance of tho decisions about European economic and social order.

Tho integration policy gain lies not in unity about current questions of
principle, this not to be expected today or tomorrou in any case, but rather
in tho politicization of the European parliamentary system vhich could start
immediately.

Political earticipation

A number of prohibitions against discrimination obligate the member states
of the European Communities to grant the nationals of other member states
the same rights guaranteed their own nationals in questions of freedom of
employment, freedom of settlment and the like. Being treated so natives
serves integration of markets and involves not Just regulated economic-rela-
ted factual areas in European Community lau. The question arises as to
whether it should be expanded to political participation rights. Thus the
member states could be obligated to grant citizens of other member states
active and passive voting rights at the municipal level. The Commission
and Parliament seem to take a positive stance toward these ideas.13 On

the one hand, the legal relevance of state borders would again decline and,
on the other, the Joining of foreigners in interest groups could strongly
influence the'political forcs relationships at the municipal level and thus
perhaps roauaken latent national opposition. A careful approach would,in
any case, do no harm.

It seems doubtful that general concepts uhich regulate political opinion
formation in the member states like Article 28 of the constitution should
become part of Community lau. A certain degree of uniformity of political
regulation is a business principle of European integration. Thus the entry
of Greece, Spain and Portugal could be considered only after the democratic
opinion formation process had again been introduced in these countries. Cut
a European law connection would not, even if agreement could be reached, on-
compass revolutionary developments and - one thinks of the formation of
national front governments in Italy or France - would make flexible reaction
difficult. Homogenity of state forms can be achieved only through political
influence such as in the model of European policy touard the Papadopoulos
government but not by European legal norms.

The legitimate task of European basic rights policy is the regulation of
political participation in the European Communities themselves. Particularly
if the Communities wish to become more than an interstate association, the
citizen must be given the impression of participating in the Community opinion
formation process. The introduction of direct elections is a step in the
right direction. Until now all important questions of election procedure
have been regulated according to different national rules. According to
Article 7 of the 20 September 1976 decision on direct elections, the Parlia-
ment is authorized to draft a uniform election procedure.14 But such impor-
tant questions as financing of parties and equal access to advertising on

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nationally centrallad media and also still not regulated by written Communi-
ty law. Such questions are, in part, not regulated at all or not uniformly
regulated in the constitutions of member states and they also have, in part,
structural peculiarities in the Communities uhich makc adoption of member
state principles difficult. The development of political participation
rights should - at any rate, outside the area of political freedom rights
such as freedom of the press and the like - not be left to court decisions
alone. They must be actively formed by the political Community organs and,

if at all possible, again in the way that the European Parliament next directs
the public discussion.

Protection by Law

I
For individuals the basic rights are no more valuable than the Judicial pre-
ceodings to make them valid. It is here that the international law instru-
ments for protecting human rights differ. The legal protection system of
the UN treaty of 1966 is so weak that neither the Soviet Union or Chile nced
fear its ratification. In contrast, the guarantees of the European Human
Rights Convention permit an individual to appeal directly to the Judicially
independent Human Rights Commission in Strassburg. To the degree that the
affected state does not redress a justifiable grievance, the Human Rights
Commission is authorized to transfer the case to the European High Court
of Human Rights which also sits in Stressburg.

The European Communities generally satisfy the standards of the Human Rights
Convention. It is true that Community law does not provide for a special
legal procedure against violations of basic rights comparable to constitu—
tional complaints but the general legal protection system has a broad reach
and, in particular, is accessible to the individual. Thus, Article 173 of
the EEC Treaty gives anyone the right to submit a plea of nullity to the
High Court of the European Communities in Luxemburg against decisions directed
at him and against Community organ legal ordinances effecting him directly
and immediately. In such proceedings the validity of Community organ legal
acts can be measured against the scale of treaties and other Community laus
including basic rights.

Every expansion of Community law basic rights will have to be reviewed to
see if the legal protection system is adequately adopted. Even within the
-frameuerk of present material lau, tha.legal protection system of the
Communities in open to improvement. There is, for example, a theoretical
gap in legal protection when national courts violate European basic rights
when applying Community law and do not make any use of the European High
Court reviou provided in Article 177 of the EEC Treaty. This gap would also
be closed by Tindaman'g prepeeed direct complaint to the High Court of the
European Communities.1 It is doubtful that this complaint -— or, in the
formulation of the Parliament, the individual complaint - should be limited
to complaints against violations of basic rights. The separation of basic
rights aspects from the other content of Community lav norms is possible
only with great difficulty and contradicts the present legal protection sys-
tom.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

Moreover, the question also arise: hcro co to uhothcr the European Communi-
ties should begin competing with the legal protection institutions of the
Human Rights Convention by introducing a basic rights complaint. It should
rather be considered if the Communities should not as such adhere to the
Human Rights Convention and thus make appeal of human rights complaints
against legal acts of the Community organs possible. The arguments raised
against this suggestion, which Hallstsin, among others, has raised, are not
convincing.16 The accomplishment of Community lau will not be hindered be-
cause the complaints do not exert a legging effect and because the Community
organs are to ensure that a complaint is unsuccessful in all cases. Th:
prartige of the European High Court world suffer as little as that of the
federal High Court from the possibility of making constitutional complaints
or that of tho federal ConstitutionalICourt through the authority to suomit
tho case to tho Stressburg courts. The Human Rights Convention, which hither-
to has provided only for the membership of states, must certainly be changrd.
the signatory states uho are not members of tho European Communities should
be prepared to accept this since the invulnersbility of legal acts of the
Communities has at least theoretically undermined the legal protection sys-
tem of the Convention. From the viewpoint of integration policy, the
Communities uould also stood to gain. within the framework of the Human
Rights Convention ,hey would be placed on the same level as states and,
finally, those who still believe that an anti-human rights development of
Jurisprudence by the Luxemburg High Court cannot be excluded would be
eppeosed.

Summary '

It is not difficult to gain allegiance to common ideas among the member
states of the European Communities by appealing to elementary human rights.
But these common ideas reach far beyond the frontiers of the Communities and
are, in Europe, to be respected primarily as the domain of the Council of
Europe. The European Communities should orient themselves within this human
rights policy frameuork and, after the international leu prerequisites for
this have been created, adhere to the European Human Rights Convention. If,
in particular, respect for the laws of the Human Rights Convention is ;uaran-
teed in this way, it uould be advisable to defer the plan for a coapreheneivs
basic rights catalog for the European Communities until politcal union comes
cloacr.

The European parliament should, as soon as possible, adopt the economic and
social basic rights as uall as the political participation loos. Progress
in the European integration process is achievable only if the frmaeuork for
a European economic and social order is marked off step by step and the
participation of Community citizens in the political opinion formation pro-
cess in the Communities is regulated. The European constitutional process
is a tedious procedure. It should be consciously emphasized that the au-
thors of the constitution are, in the and, the European people. One should
thus not shy away from controversial discussions and perhaps also slim oa-
Joritios in the foreground of enn'a oun disadvantage. This uay could ev:n
promote the intended, by direct election, politicization.of European perlie-
mentorienisn. 8

FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONE?
2.

3.

S.

6.

7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

1‘.

FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

fOOTNOTCS

Federal Conetitutional Court, decision of 29 May 1976, E 37. 271.

See. onong othere, the Heidelberg Colloqiun of 28 to 30 October 1977
(Baeic Riohte Protection in Europe, 1977) end the Luxenburg Conference
or 2 to a June 1977 (aeeic Righte in the European Comunity, 1979).

Joint Declaration of the European parliament, the Council-and the
Connieoion of tho Curopnen Communitioo on Basic Righte. cloned in
Luxenburg on s upril 1917, in Eunpwa ARcuiv 9/1977, p 0234. Cn this
declaration eee Hermann Healer and Rudolf ﬁernnnrdt in "Grundrechtv-
echut: in iurepa" [Oeeic ﬂighte protoction in Europe]. 9 226; Keri
Matthieu ﬁeoeeen (report of 3 June 1977) in "Die Grundrochto in der
Curopaeiechon Caneinecneft" [eeeic nights in the European Community].
1978. p 36.

Report of the Commission of the Euroneon Communitioe of 4 rebruory 1976
in euLLmn can tunomnsnuzr: ccncmscnmm, apgzmoix 5/76, :7 18.

Decioion of 16 November 1977 in AnTSSLATT OCR CUROPACISCHCK CECE!”-
scmncn (rm). C299/26.

Negotiation: of 12 upril 197a and decieion of 13 april 1973 in net.
"r 229, r 176', 25?.

European High Court for Human Righta, verdict of 23 June 1978, “Or.
Koenig.“ Reference in CUROPICXSCHZ caunon:cw7t-zclrscnaxr7, 1973,p 269.

Here one Hoeaeen, anurzsucu rum tuneumonucs stem, 17 (1970283.
Curopean High Court, verdict of 17 Oeceobor 1970, coup. 1970, 1125.
European High Court, verdict of 8 April 197e, coup. 1976, 455.

General éeaenbly of the United ﬂationa, Reeolution 32/130, 16 December
1977, in ur; namcu cunomcuz, 1/1978, 9 127.

Connittee or ﬂinietore of the Council of Curope, Declcration of 27
April 1972 in cunva ARCHI'I, 10/1978, 9 04237.

Connieeion (note A), p 15; Curopeen Parliament (note 5).

Oecieion or the Council or 20 September 1976 in tuacaa ancmv,
19/1976, 9 0513.

9
FOR OIYICXAL 053 ONE?
POI 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

15. Report of the Belgian Frino Miniotor Loo Tindonon on the European
Union, oont to the Council or Eu:opc on 29 December 1975, in
cunom mcmv, 3/1976. p 0559!.

16. Usitor Holiotoin, "Oio Curopooioche Gemeinochoft" [the European
Community], Ouooooidorf/Vianno, second printing, 1974, o 49!.

Copyright: 1978 Voting fuor Internationale Politik anN, Bonn

8373
C50: 3103 o

10

FOR O'PICZAL USE 0ND?
NR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

DENMARK

FREE MINISTER DISCUSSES CONCERN OVER WARSAW PACT EXERCISES
Frenltfurt/Hein mm WWI” in Ger-en 30 Oct 78 p 6

[Article by correepondent H. A.: “Dennerk Concerned About Ite Security"]

[Text] Copenheaen. 29 Oct--l>ennerk obeervee the nilitery ectivitiee of the
Uereew Pect in the leltic with growing concern. The number end eire of exer-
cieee hee increeeed eubetentielly in the recent period. Denieh Prine Hinieter
Jorgeneen told foreign journeliete in Copenhesen. lie celled thie developnent
e greet problee for the eecurity of the country end thue egreed with hie for-
eign ninieter. Chrietophereen. who in e eupplenentery reeerk noted thet "the
teetern exercieee ere epproeching ever cloeer to no.“

chrietophereen cemented on the recent decieion of Preeident Certer to order
the conetruction of inportent eluente of the eo-celled neutron boeb. While
ednitting thet Deneerk herbored certein reeervetione, he edded thet thie de-
cieion hed to be eeen--end not in the leet reeort--e3einet the becksround of
the unceeeina reeneeent in hetero Europe. In the opinion of the Denieh
foreign ninieter the leet word hee not been epoken yet in the queetion of the
neutron boob. He thought the: Certer'e intention in the firet inetence. wee
rether to i-poee certein obliaetione on the oppoeite perty in the ephere of
diner-neat policy. In the Vienne nexotietione on force reduction in Burope.
too. the intereet of Dennrk end ite pertnere in the Heetern defence mity
wee ebove ell in e “new belence" end not in e eerely proportionel reduction.
beceuee the letter would not chense the exietin; inbelence in nilitery strength.
In generel. it wee to be noted thet there could be no reel detente in nurope
”if we '5‘ not et the eeee tine in the poeition edequetely to eee to our on
defenee.

Chrietophereen. who hed eeeu-ed hie office exectly 2 unnthe ego efter the
liberel Venetre Perty led by hi- hed entered into e coelition with Jorscneen'e
SocieI-De-ncrete. expreeeed hieeeli’ ecepticelly ebout the well-bow propoeel
of Preeident Kemnen of Pinlend to declere northern Europe e zone free of
nucleer weepone. Hithout min; the nilitery end etretegic edventesee eccruin;
iron thie propoeel ebove ell to the Soviet Union, the Denieh foreign ninieter

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 9er ONLY

and that for his country-us a part of Scandinavia-«he ieportant iseue was
that the "Nordic balance" should be maintained in its present form. The new
Swedish foreign linieter. llin. has also pronounced himself in a similar sense
in recent days. thus repreaenting a viewpoint which slaost ever more reso-
lutely is also shared by horway.

Denmark. which in contrast to Norway and Sweden in also a node: of the auro-
pean Community. would nore then ever like to be seen as a kind of bridge be-
tween continental. Europe and Scandinavia. according to Christophersen's
atatenent. Copenhagen keeps its Nordic neighbors up to date on developments
and discussions inside the ac. lie noted that this applies alsonand not least
«to the present efforts to create a new currency syeten which Denmark con-
siders indispensable. While for the tins being two groupings still oppose
one another-oons inclined toward a “nu standard" and the other toward a "dol-
lar otsndard"--copenha3en was “intent on continuous relationshipu between the
two guiding currencies." together with cost of its tc pertnsrs Denmark was
of the opinion. he noted. that at the present tine the priority issue was to
strengthen the Mericsn currency.

COPYRIGII‘I': F.A.Z. “NI. Yrankfurt e- Hain. 1978.

9108
680: 3103

12

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE OSLY
NR OFFICIAL “SE ONLY

DENMARK

OOALITIOR SURVIVBS TESTS. READY FOR "AGES BATTLE
Frankfurt/Rain manna momma in Ger-an 3 Nov 78 p 12
[Article by Herner Adan: "'lliatorieal Coaproniae' Starting To Pirn up")

[Text] In the Far North the Danae are called Scendinavia'e ltaliana. Any-
one in the lively city of Copenhagen who nekea conpariaone with the cool ele-
gance of Stockholn or the ruatic. genteel Oslo. can hardly avoid agreeing with
euch a characterization. The eaey inclination toward the good life it felt in
any placea. The deaire to dabble in politica alao appeara aore pronounced

in Denmark than anywhere elae in northern Europe. Then too. Demark diaplaye
another ainilarity with Italy: the ”hiatorical conproaiae." in thia caae an
alliance between Social Denotrate and Liberale.

Such a coalition haa an aura of the aenaational. eince the two partiea found
each other here after decadea of conaidering theaeelvea the antipodea of Daniah
politica. For the firat tine aince the abolition of the abaolute anarchy in
1869 they new practice keeping etep in none conpuleory her-any.

Social Denocratic Prine Hiniater Joergenaen enplaina the tern "conpulaory"

by atating that he had to eeek the aupport of Liberal Venatre in order to

find a broader parliamentary been for the governaent'a econony aeaaurea which
have becouae indiapenaable. Alluding to high uneaploynent and an equally high
foreign debt. Venatre bean and new foreign Hinieter Chriatopheraen agreee with
thia juatification. adding that no doubt the two partiee will atay together
until the next electiona in Pebruary 1981. of courae. neither the Social
Desperate nor the Liberala are quite aure. Indeed. they do not question their
ability to obtain a aufficient najority in the Polkating. even for unpopular
deciaione. however. the big unknown factor in this calculation in the pool-
tion of the trade uniona. who feel betrayed by their for-er cochanion
Joergenaen.

iiolger Jensen. chief econoaiat of the trade union federation to. warn: If
they nuat find a partner. the Social Deanerata ahould have forned an alliance
with the Conaervative People'a Party. "The Conaervativee repreaent the employ-
era' intereate; with then. we know where we atand." he feela that. on the

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

other hand. the Venstre Party is not at all liberal but a grouping marked
by thoroughly rural characteristics which does not only fight the trade
unions but even disputes their right to exist.

Christopherssn rejects this reproach. he argues that it is not the masses
of enployees but only the trade union leaders who harbor a totally unjusti-
fied aversion toward his party. To equestion as to whether. under these cir-
cumstances. the traditional alliance between trade unions and Social Deno-
crats is still guaranteed. 1.0 speaker Jensen replies as follows: “It is true
that Anker Joergensen treated our reservations in e reprehensible manner;

however. he is a Social Denocrat and we. the trade unions. support the Social
Deaocrats."

Even so: The acid test is yet to cone for the new coalition. The trede union
reluctantly coped with the coalition's first decision. i.e. increasing the
value tax in order to curtail the spending sprees of those Danes who live
beyond their means. Now the enployers will have to pay that ouch more. Jensen
announces that the "tradition" will be continued whereby demands will be sade
for the following year which would raise the worker's income between 20 and

30 percent. 0n the other hand. the president of the association of employers.
Arne Lund. delcared in the presence of m econonists: “It is high tine for
us to deal offensively with the trade unions and we have decided to denand a
3-percent decrease in wages and s freese of intone during the next 3 years."
Jensen finds this plainly absurd and disnisses it with a compassionate smile.
Joergensen also concedes that the workers cannot be expected to take a cut in
wages. Lund. however. lakes the point that Denmark cannot control its unen-
ployment. nor reduce its chronic foreign trade deficit if its belt is not
tightened at long last. The goverment. he continues. not use tax reduc-
tions and other ”flanking neasures” in order to ensure that the real income

is not reduced. Nevertheless. drastic economy measures are necessary in order
to sake domestic industry coapetitive once again. with a deadly serious face.
the Lo's chief economist disnisses "flanking measures” with the rear]: that
this is laughable and indicates that he has reason to believe that the coali-
tion is thinking about further tax increases.

The fact that the speakers of the wage-scale negotiating parties jointly
placed the-selves at the disposal of foreign journalists for questioning
allows the supposition that. in spite of everything. they do consider then-
selves as partners and the contrasting denands are quite debatable. Lund
even concedes this in an astonishingly candid nanner on the eve of the next
wage-scale negotiations by stating that a good deal of ”tactics” will be in-
cluded and play an inportant role on both sides. Although Jensen does not
choose to go this far. he does indeed agree with the enployers' president
to the effect that the government is now praying every evening "that we nay
cone to terns without its assistance."

Should this not be achieved. the alliance between Social Denocrats and Liber-
als would be subjected to its first serious survival test. but the saying

that the stew is‘aaach hotter on the stove than on the table also applies to
Scandinavia's Italians.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum. the trade unions huvo learned to so: along. more or less. with
the ”historical comm-10¢."

COPYRIGHT: RAJ. Gab“, Frankfurt an Main 1978

9261
080: 3103

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

COMMENTS ON FRANCOIS-PONCET INSTALLATION
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 4 Dec 78 pp 34-35
[Article by Claude Jacqueeart: 'Quai d'Orsay's Man for Europe"]

[Text] The price qualification for the man to take charge of
France's foreign affairs in a period that is taking shape as
Europe-centered more than anything else is that he be a dyed-in-
the—wool Europeanist. Thursday, at the Quai d'Orsay, Mr Louis
de Guiringaud handed over the reins of the Foreign Ministry to
Mr Jean Francois-Poncet, who will be 50 years old on 8 December.

Mr Francois-Poncet had just left his post as the Elysee's Secre-
tary—General to Mr Jacques Wahl. Along with Mr Giscard d'Estaing,
he will be in Brusselsas this week opens, for the European Coun~
cil meeting.

It is several months now since
Mr Francois—Poncet's name was
first heard as that of a likely
successor to Mr de Guiringaud.

It is several months now since
Mr Francois-Poncet's name was
first bruited as a likely suc-
cessor to Mr de Guiringaud. It
is possible the latter might
have bowed out even sooner had
he not, some weeks ago, drawn

 

 

Right: Pierre Bernard-Raymond.
At the Quai d'Orsay, his spe-
cial assignment is European
matters.

 

H!

6

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

critical fire for some intcmperate remarks about the Lebanese
Christians. Even his own majority took him to task over that.
By thanking Mr de Guiringaud for his services even a little ear-
lier than planned, the head of state would necessarily have
seemed to he bowing to those critica.

r"
."

 

   

 

Jean Francois-Poncet (top):
Present at the creation

of the European Common
Market.

Mr Jacques Wahl (left),
new Secretary-General at
the Elysee. Last spring
he became deputy Secre-
tary-General, replacing
Mr Yves Cannac, who left
government for the presi-
dency of the Havas Agency.

\

 

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Setting up the European Monetary Union, and then the June elec-
tion of the European Assembly by direct universal suffrage are
the first two events the new man at the top at the Quai d'Oreay
will be dealing with. On top of that, as of 1 January 1979, the
chair of the Council of European Communities rolls around to

France again, and it will be the new Foreign Minister who sits
in that chair.

Son of the French Ambassador to Germany prior to World War II and
again after that war, Mr Francois-Poncet was, from 1956 to 1958,
deputy director of staff to Mr Maurice Fauro, then Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs, and general secretary to the French
delegation appointed to negotiate the Common Market and Buratom
treaties. He then became Under-Director of European Organiza-
tions at the Foreign Ministry.

In 1965, he was on the team put together by Mr Lecanuet to run
his campaign for the presidency against General de Gaulle. In
1967 and in 1968 he stood unsuccessfully for Parliament, running
on the Democratic Center ticket, then an opposition slate, with
the backing of Mr Maurice Faure.

This political activism barred him from high official duties.
Separated from government service at his own request in 1971,

he became president of the J-J. Carnaud and Forges de Basse-Indre
corporation.

Four years later, in December 1975, he left that position at the

insistance of Mr Giscard d'Bstaing. Starting again as Secretary

of State for Foreign Affairs (with Mr Jean Sauvagnargues), he was
next tapped for the Elysee general staff in July 1976, to replace
Mr Claude Pierre-Brossolette.

Since that time he has had more than 2 years to familiarize him-

self with the people and the dossiers, including those on domes-
tic policy.

Mr Francois-Poncet is all for an opening to the left. He made
one himself in his home departement of Lot-et-Garonne (one of
whose senators is Mr Henri Caillavet, formmr vice president of
the Left Radicals). In 1967, in that departement, he one his
first election as General Councilman for the canton of Laplume.
Regularly sent back ever since, he was chosen on 22 May of this
year as chairman of the General Council of Lot-et-Garonne. He
did it with the help of the Left Radical votes who, from the
very first ballot, preferred him to the Socialist candidate.

"I could get along just fine with social-democracy," said Fran-
cois—Poncet.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He took an active part in "Operation Fabre,” which last sunmer
led Valery Giscard d'Bstaing to entrust a study mission to the
former president of the Left Radicals. And until his move to
the Quai d'Orsay, the Elysee General Secretary actively encour-
aged all attempts to breathe life back into the center-left via
numerous Radical sub-families.

The new Foreign Minister is expected to do considerable reor-
ganizing at the Quai d'Orsay. His European outlook is shared
by both his Secretaries of State, Pierre Bernard-Raymond and
Olivier Stirn, as well as by Foreign Trade Minister Jean-Fran-
cois Deniau.

The new minister already has one test of strength on his agenda:
on 15 December the National Assembly opens debate on the expan-
sion of Europe.

COPYRIGﬂT: 197B "Valeurs Actuelles"

$32
030: 3100

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

ROCARD'S 0m: NISTAKDS' COWS!) UPON
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 2 Dec 78 pp 111-112
[Article by Robert Schneider: "Rocard's Three Histakes']

[Text] An isolated Rocard, a Rocard rejected by the right, a
Rocard forced into a silence that means allegiance or a confron-
tation that means suicide. Francois Nitterrand‘s friends be-
lieve that if the 'boss" bangs his fist on the table and clearly
voices his “Here I am and here I stay!“ this will be enough to
bring back to its true proportions the Rocard phenomenon, which
has been artificially blown up by the press; for it is nothing
nore than the expression of a reformist current represented by
a minority within the Party.

The optimism of the Hitter-rand camp can be explained: the first
secretary won the first set on 25 and 26 November, in his address
to the Socialist Convention in Paris. The victory was predicti-
blea he was fighting on his own home ground. The Convention is
like a prisms it distorts the true composition of the Party, for
the Hitterrandists are over-generously represented there. And
Hitterrand received unexpected assistance from Michel Rocard him-
self, who in previous weeks had made three mistakes that were
handily exploited by hitterrand.

l) A tactical errors urged on by his followers, Rooard had got
off to too rapid and too energetic a start. His personalized,
“American-style“ campaign, his way of counting more on the media
than on the Party, were a source of irritation.

2) A strategic error: by publicizing his intention to send a
text in to the net: Congress, he gave the impression of wanting
to attack the first secretary even before knowing whether the
latter was ready to negotiate, as had been demanded by Pierre
Meuroy. From then on, Rocard was suspected of trying to eat his
cake and have it too: the leadership of the Party in the spring
of 1979 and the Elysee [athe presidency] in 1981. “any militants

20
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who favor him as a presidential candidate nevertheless believe
that hitterrand should remain the leader of the Party.

3) A psychological error: Rocard misinterpreted the angry feel-
ings of his friend Naurey against Nitterrand, believing that he
was on the verge of making an alliance with him. Now the Mayor
of Lille would impair the unity of the administration only as a
last resort. And such leaders as Gilles Nertinet, Dominique
Teddei, Edgerd Pisani, Jean-Pierre Cot and Francoise Gaspard,
who are close to Rocard's ideas, let him know that they would
not sign a motion with him unless it were also initialed by
hauroy.

Rocerd seems to have understood that the best thing for him af-
ter that was to behave much more discreetly, and to admit that
he was in a delicate position within the Socialist Party.

ﬂee Nitterrand once and for all put his challenger out of the
race for the succession? That would be saying too much. in
analysis of the opinion polls conducted by Roland Cayrol and
Jerome Jeffre shows that Rocard is seen by most Frenchmen (ho
percent as opposed to 27 percent) as a better candidate for the
presidency than Hitterrend, and this includes the voters on the
left. Thus he does not have the 'rightist' image that his op-
ponents within the Socialist Party seek to give him.

On the other hand, Hitterrand took two risks at the time of the
Convention: that of appearing as the leader of a trend more

than as leader of the Party: after sending his picadors into ac-
tion, he was forced to go into the arena himself; and that of
shocking the Socialist electoratoo-much more moderate than the
militants and increasingly diatrustful of the Communist Party--
by giving a speech that was very much ”Pro-Union of the Lefts2'
To cast Rocard off "as a rightist“ and prepare for the possible
winning over of CERES [Center for (Socialist) Studies, Research,
and Education], the first secretary did not hesitate to make him-
self the champion of a pure, hard line. '1 would not have denied
this intervention," was the ironic comment of Jean-Pierre Chevene-
ment. '1 only regret that it comes after the March elections.‘
In Mitterrand‘s mind, it is not a question of simple tactical
skill. He teally believes that his Party must anchor itself firm-
ly on the left in order to sink its teeth more effectively into
the Communist Party and then to force it into making a new agree-
ment. In short, still as always, to reconstruct the union [of
the lofts]; but by starting with a new and different relation-
ship of strengths.

At the very moment when discussion of the Socialist project is
opening up at the summit, Rocard will not deprive himself of the
opportunity to introduce a contrasting image of the Socialist

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Pertyc thet or e party henceforth powerful enoua: to publicize
ite own ‘oele without concerning iteen‘ about the direction be-
ing token by the Col-unict Perty. without continuing to cling to

on economic etretegy upped out in 1971, before the crieie which
etopped growth.

Nor-oily, when e teet of etrength for the ieederehip of e petty
begine, the cheiienger euppcrte e ncre redicei poeition, which
contreete ehu-ply with the Iodereticn of the inn-bent. Vith
Rocerd it ie Juet the oppceitet the Perty doee not diepieeee
him the lore eo eince hie lore 'reeeonobie' etyie of ienguece
eeene to be eeducin; the votere on the left.

COPYRIGHT: 1978, S.A. Groupc Bxpreee

8117
C80: 3100

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

COMMUNIST STUDENT LEADER mums RHSONS FOR LPAVINO PCP
Perie LE NOWBL OISBRVATEUR in l’rench 6-10 Dec 78 pp 62-63 LD

[Interview with Guy Konopnicki. foreer Pcr neeber end leeder of the Union
of Col-uniet Studente. by Irene Allier: "it to heceeeery To Do Awey with
the Idee Thet Billencourt le Illiterete”)

[Text] [Queetionl Soee col-union ere etriving from within to refore the
PC!" while eone othere, like you. ere leeving it. Once your reeignetion eeen
thet you heve loet hope thet the perty cen he refereed?

Guy Konopnicki: One thing in certein--it will be inpoeeible to unfreeee the
eituetion ee fer en the french Left ie concerned unleee there in chenge with-
in the PCP. The fect thet l heve left it doee not eeen thet l heve given up
hope of eeeing the perty chenge. It neene thet l heve ecquired different
weepone et e certein eoeent. In other worde. I went to be eble to heve free
ecope in uy fight. I wee tired of heving to contend with edeinietretive ergu-
eente borrowed froe "denocretic" centreliee which heve been ueed egeinet in-
tellectuele ineteed of fectuel ergmente. Thie wee Iy first reeeon. The
eecond reeeon wee connected with the firet—the herdening of the leederehip'e
ettitude in recent eonthe eccoepenied by etteepte to win people beck-whet 1
cell "phoney overturee.” An exeeple? The publicetion of en interceting book
criticel of the Soviet Union. “The 055! end as.“ hee been ellowed but etepe
heve been token to ineure thet the diecueeion on eocieliee ee precticed in
the Soviet Union in never connected with either the PCP'e hietory. or proe-
pecte for eocielien in Prence or the eituetion of the internetionel coaeuniet
eovenent. Ae e reeult, criticieee of the 053R heve teken the force of e theo-
reticel diecueeiono-the 0588 ie fer ewey, the USSR ie eleewhere. with ite
Huehike. ee it wee in 1917 end no forth. it ie no longer en ective criticiu
which could heve eede it poeeible to think the eetter over end ineure ection
by the perty et e certeln tile.

[Queetionl All thie etc-e froe e refueel to diecuee the prone. of depth.

honopnicki: Thie refueel hee led the leederehip into eleoet perenoid be-

hevior. l heve been etruck by the wey in which the PCP deliberetely exeg-

geretee the extent of the entice-mint ceepeign. It in true thet en enti-

co-uniet ceepeign in being weged but einiler ceepeigne heve been weged eince
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1920. And the present one is not the nest powerful we have known. There
was a ouch Inre violent one during the presidential canpaign. There was a
frenzied one during the parlisnentery canpaign. But in recent nonthe...l
True a ”PC? on the Vane" operation is in progress but it does not constitute
an unusual snticonmunist canpaign. 3oneone only has to write a few lines in
LB HATIN to nahe the PCP shout: "Look. there is a plot!" And Harchaie im-
sediately nahes a state-ent of extraordinary violence and Andrieu writes an
extraordinary editorial. "by? This is exactly a Stalinist kind of be-
havior. when Stalin decided to liquidate hie opponents. he declared that
the USSR was s beeeiged fortress threatened from within and from without.
And the trials started. if the PCP is able to show that it is surrounded

by adversaries. any dissident will be seen as a traitor. a renegade who
kindles the anticoamunist campaign.

[Question] Many connunists have nade a sinilar analysis without leaving
the party.

Konopnicki: Personally I wanted to do two things. First. i wanted to make
a gesture of protest against a leadership which has overstepped the narh by
lying about socialist countries and the anti-Senitic canpaign in the 055R

and by refusing to hold an internal discussion. And second, I wanted to give
nyeelf some elbow-roon in order. aaong other things. to raise the fundanental
problea of internationalisn.

[Question] This is not a factor often used by dissidents.

Konopnichix And yet it is essential. hitherto all that PCP strntegic thought
indicated was that the correlation of forces in the world. the conjunction
of the three revolutionary currents (the socialist csap. the national libera-
tion anvenents and the working class in capitalist countries) nade peaceful
progress toward eocialisn possible and that the special alliance with the
Socialist Party was for-ed within the framework of this correction of forces.
Now what is the situation at present as far as this correlation of forces is
concerned? In the socialist camp. the crisis has assumed such proportions
that it has occasionally led to war (consider what is taking place between
Vietnam and Canbodie and at the Chinese-Soviet border). When you consider
the activities of Soviet and Chinese diplomacy it becones obvious that in

the eyes of the Chinese and the Soviets the nain enemy is not imperialism.
For the Soviets it is China and for the Chinese it is the Soviet Union.

Hence the preservation of the status quo in the imperialist csnp is con-
sistent with both sides' interests.

(Question) how can the PCP be internationalist on its own if the others
fail to keep their promises?

Knnopnichi: l observe that a catastrophic situation prevails in the inter-
national novesent and that the leadership’s answer to this is tricolored.
French and chauvinist. Re are being told: A French kind of socialise will

26

FOR OFFICIAL PSE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL 053 ONLY

be built and everything will be fine. And yet it in well known that the
eituation prevailing in all the oocialiet countriee eifecte the eituation

in l'rancenfor inetance. Soviet ”eocialin" doea not help to aobilite French
workere.

l Iaintain that. coneidering all the authority which it enjoye in the Inner-
netional Co-uniet liovenent. the PCP could becooe a new international rally-
in; point for the aomd forcee of the revolutionary noveoent and raiae the
probleo of bureaucracy in the USSR tor coneideration. In abort. eubait for

conaideration not only the problea oi capitoliee but aleo the problen of
eocialiao.

[Queetionl Do you believe that rank-and-file nilitante are awake to this
kind of probleo‘ir

Koponiclti: As a reault of oy twofold activitiea ae Journaliet and cultural
organizer l have been in contact for aeny yeare with workere in enterprinee
and trade union activitiete. It ie tine to put an end. eepecielly in the
PCP. to the ideathat billancourt [Paris working claae Suburb-HIS] does-
not underatand or that it ie illiterate. The only problen in that the PCP
frowna on people who disagree with it. This in why we can aee thoueande of
workera and intellectuale trying to expreee their view through devioue
epeechee acceptable to the party. A Jeeuit oethod. a neth uaed in the
corridora of the Vatican. a aethod generally ueed in the party.

[Queetion] A nethod which eaten the poeeeeeion of heye to help you to
decipher what hae been written neceaeery.

Konopnichi: l have acted in thia way for eeverel yearn and l have realired

the limitatione to epeechea of tbia kind. ﬂy reaignation neane that a more

clear-cut break hae been effected and it haa been a reaction auinet ell
thu.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 'le Nowel Obeervateur"

cso: 3100

25
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?IC!AL USE ONLY

PRANCB

EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTEM SEEN TﬂRBATBNBD
Paris VRLBURS ACTUBLLBS in French 4 Dec 78 pp 32-33
[Article by Philippe Durupt: "The Monetary Hager']

[Text] The European nonetary systes has been at
risk ever since its birth. Excessive fluc-
tuation in currencies of the “Nine“ seen as
prime threat.

ﬂeeting in Brussels on 4 and S Decesber, the nine heads of state
and government are going to try to reach agreesent on the esta-
blishsent of a European Monetary Systes (SHE). The idea is to
sake the Con-unity a zone of monetary stability in a world eco-
nosy that has yet to recover fro. the trausa of the dollar's
9.110

This statesent of principle cloaks a whole lot of second thoughts
and conflicting interests. Here this not the case, it would be
difficult to understand Italy's reluctance and Great Britain's
opposition.

The basic idea is to tie the European currencies together by
loans of sore or less fixed systcss of parity. A minimum of
fluctuation will be allowed. But in relation to what? The tech-
nical discussion is extremely conplicated: it is also pregnant
with consequences.

Ought the Nine, as they did in the snake, set up parities for
each currency with nargins for fluctuation around a pivotal rate
(the parity grid systes)? The cost of intervention on the cur-
rency sarkets will rest in that case on the countries with weak
currencies. Great Britain and Italy oppose that.

Ought they to set nargins for fluctuation on the basis of a bas-
ket of currencies? Here they to do that, it would require only
a few weak currencies' taking sinking spells for the strong cur-
rency to shoot upward and hit the intervention ceiling first.

26

'08 OPPICIAL USE ONLY
Had the machinery really worked over the past few years, Germany
would haVe had to intervene repeatedly to prevent revaluation
of the Deutschnark. So Ger-any is against that idea.

A third system, still acre complicated that the earlier two and
the child of cosproeise,has been devised by the Belgians. It
retains the parity grid systea, but it adds a "divergence index"
(currency basket). Whenever one currency strays away free the
rest, the Ninewill neat and consider neasures to be taken by the
country with the offending currency. Ger-any accepts the prin-
ciple behind this plan, insofar as it retains cospleto freedoe
of decision.

The chosen reference noney is to be called the "European Currency
Unity": is is the product of adding up the neabor currencies on
a proportionate basis, and is worth around 5.65 French francs.
The initials of this European accounting currenc , ecu, will stir
a ler of neeories in our national subconscious. E'scu' was the
old french s-franc crown piece.]

francs has already nade two experiments on the lonetary union
road. On 24 March 1972 and 10 July 1975, Mr Giscard d'Bstaing,
then finance minister, pegged the franc to the deutschnark in
the currency snake.

Both experiments were failures, and the latest of then -~ when
the franc dropped out of the snake on 19 March 1976 -- cost the
Bank of France 15 billion for its vain attempt to stop it.

Things look sore promising today, however. Our currency has re-
turned to greater stability. The nodes of intervention cents--
plated this tine afford a little more flexibility. within 2
years, a sinking fund of 25 billion ecus nay be set up.

for the past few weeks, the Bank of france has reportedly been
gently letting go of francs by buying up dollars and deutsch-
sarks on deposit in the nationalized banks. Rumor has it that
some $3 billion has already been affected. The idea is to get
franc-deutschnark parity set at 2.30 francs anstead of at 2.20,
which is where the sarket has it) at the tine it goes back into
the snake, and thus to snare us an extra margin of around 10
centi-es, or 5 percent.

whatever scans may eventually be chosen, the difference between
this and past experiments is still one of degree, rather than
of kind. The principle of fixed parities itself is still open
to question.

Speaking before the European Assesbly cos-ission, backers of
the Monetary Union have Just attacked the flexible exchange rate
because "it had not performed the niracles expected of it“,

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL US! ONLY

which included a growth recovery, a drop in unemployment, and a
restoration of balances of payments. A charge like that one says
a lot about the sort of monetary fetishism that is endemic in
political circles.

As Mr Samuel Britten, a British experts on such matters, explains
it, exchange rates are “merely a conveyor belt for inconsistent,
unforseeable, and inflationary monetary policies devised for domes-
tic consumption."

Tinkering with the exchange rate is tantamount to committing the
proverbial mistake of the physician who treats symptoms rather
than causes.

The Germans will unquestionably make still more concessions on 4
and 5 December. They might, for example, agree to longer repay-
ment terms for countries with weak currencies which became their
debtors. The fact is that they see advantages in the proposed
system, but those advantages have a pricetag on them.

By creating a haven of stability, they would be protecting their
markets in Europe (50 percent of their exports) and hedging the
deutschmark from rising too fast against the principal competing
currencies, the dollar and the yen.

Not to mention the fact that ”r Schmidt is assured of playing the
leading political role within monetary Europe.

The British opposition is equally easy to fathom. A document
published in London shows that, if Great Britain were to Join
the EMS on 1 January 1979, the pound sterling would be overva-
lued by 23 percent by 1982, the GNP would be down by 9.5 percent,
and employment would be up by 2.7 percent.

The French stance is a bit more difficult to grasp. Apparently
we are acting more in consonance with political aims, such as a
degree of dislike - albeit latent -- of America, and a fear of
anything unforseen on the part of a country that still bears the
brands of tight controls and protectionism.

Speaking to an audience of industry leaders in Brussels on 6 No-
vember 1978, Mr Jean Theves, president of the Paris Chamber of
Commerce, summed up the two major risks:

Either quasi-permanent speculation against the franc and, conse-
quently, an inevitable (and inglorious) pullout from the EMS; or
establishment of a rate of exchange so high as to imperil our
competitive stance.

“It is currently fashionable," he added, “to impute to a rising
rate of exchange remarkable virtue in the fight against inflation

23
POR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USB ONLY

and in the effort to restructure the cccnony. But we sust give

acne thought to the other side of these theoretical advantages:

a prolonged business slusp, and growing uneeplcynent. And even

lore, perhaps, to the fact that these renedies are designed for

countries where the labor-nanagenent consensus and the fabric of
industry are both sound and solid."

The inflation rate in france is 10 percent. It will be brought
down to 8.5 percent. In Ger-any it is 3.5 percent, and could
rise to 4 or 4.5 percent. The disparity will still be at least
4 percent against us. There is a study which shows that, on the
basis of trends over the past 5 years, our econony, in order to
keep pace with the deutschnark, would have to cut its inflation
rate not just down to the Ger-an level, but still further: be-
low l.5 percent per year, sainly because of differences in the
producing and exporting structures between our countries. For
example, French exports of seei-finished products are far more
sensitive to price variations than are Ger-an exports of capital
goods. Even given equal price variations, we should be more vul-
nerable than our partners in the Bus.

We really lust not allow ourselves any illusions: our economy
cannot possibly break the 8.5-percent barrier without sweeping
refer-s and without stringent austerity (at least in public spend-
ing).

There is every likelihood that the establishment of the syste-
will go through an initial phase of idyllic reconciliation be-
tween Helsut Schmidt's Germany and Valery Giscard d'Estaing's

France -- a preliminary to the savage attacks that proverbially
threaten ill-lads latches.

COPTRIGET: 1978 ”Vslaurs Actuallee”

6182
030: 3100

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

REASONS FOR CHOICE OF ANTITANK RBLICOPTER BXPIAINBD
Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in Prench 2 Dec 78 pp 25-29
[Article by Jean de Gelerd]

[Text] Within the scope of program authorizations it was planned to provide

the Ground Forces Tactical Air Support (ALAT) with 120 Gazelle/“0T anti-tank

helicopters. identified as SA-362H built by AEROSPATIALE [National Industrial
Aerospace Company].

The French ground forces. it is emphasized by Brig Gen Maurice Cannet. who

has commended the ALAT since June 1977. were the first, and for a long time
the only ones, to be provided with anti-tank helicopters. Today. he said.

all countries are equipping themselves with this type of aircraft.

The anti-tank helicopters now in existence can be divided into three cats-
gories corresponding to three concepts of engagement. In the first are
specialized craft with solely anti-tank missions; such is the case with the
Hughes 500 Defender. Bolkow 105. Agusts 109. and SA-362H. which range in
size from 1.5 to 2.5 tons. In the second are the multipurpose helicopters.
which weigh on the order of 4.5 tons and which are suitable on the one hand
for nissile launching and on the other hand. firing a flat-trajectory weapon
and at the same time carrying personnel; the Cobra s and H013 Lynx belong to
this class. The third and last category is that of the complex helicopters.
weighing more than 5 tons. and capable of carrying, at the same time.
missiles. guns, rockets. and bombs. belonging to this category are heli-
copters such as the Soviet Mig 26 and the Hughes AAﬂ. which are veritable
"cruisers of the air."

Bach army has adopted the concept which corresponds to the mode of engage-
ment it foresees and the experience it possesses. For its part the ALAT
has drawn upon its own in putting stress upon the characteristics which to
it seem to deserve priority.

It considers that a machine specialized for its principal mission will
accomplish it under the best conditions. because construction of the so-
called multipurpose machines very often involves compromises in the matter
of performance.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?!CIAL USE ONLY

The ABROSPATIALE SA-Jé2ﬂ helicopter is the one the ALAT wishes to acquire.
He asked Gen Cannet. who is particularly well qualified under the circum-
stances since he was commanding officer of the ALAT end of an army corps
after having been a distinguished Aloustte III officer who has flown a
total of 6,000 hours in helicopters. to indicate to us in detail the reasons
for this choice. They are amply explained in the following article.

Two French Innovations in Use of Helicopters

At the end of the war in Algeria the ground'forces had to transform them-
selves so as to be ready to face a major conflict in Europe where the main
threat would consist of armored formations.

Studies and experiments then demonstrated the capability of the helicopter
to provide-en anti-tank combat system.

Two innovations in the military employment of helicopters were to mark this
period: the general use of tactical flight. or flight at greatly varying
speeds, close to the ground and between obstacles. and the appearance of n
helicopter specialized for destruction of armor.

This new weapons system consisted of three subsidiary components: on over-
powered helicopter. artificially stabilised. a long range guided missile.
and a gyrostabilised optical device making it possible to seek out and fire
at objectives within the missile's range.

These two innovations. since adopted by all armies. first saw the light of
day in France starting in 1962.

The first generation missile-equipped helicopter. the Alouette III/SSll was
installed in the early years of the 1960 decade. It still forms the frame-
work of the ALAT anti-tank units. Its use during exercises organized by the
Grandes Uhites [corps] however. showed that the anti-tank maneuvers of
helicopters resulted in deployment of a relatively complex combat system.

The latter comprises three components: the first. "information.“ is responsi-
ble for locating the enemy and directing the fire facilities; the second. '
'ﬂestruction.” consists of the anti-tank missiles; and the third, "maneuvers,“
allows on the one hand engagement of ground combat units and on the other

hand maintenance of a sustained pace by means of air logistics.

The helicopter program of the ground forces corresponded to this concept.

In 1966. three helicopter programs were intended to provide the ALAT with

a machine for each of these three components: the SA-3bl Gazelle for in-
formation. the "6-13 Lynx in its ALAT version for anti-tank and fire support
missions. and the SA-330 Puma as maneuver helicopters.

in 1969. however. it came to light. on the one hand, that the ground forces
would not be able to sustain the financial burden represented by these three

31

FOR OFFICIAL BSE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

very similar programs and on the other hand that the 90-13. a multipurpose
helicopter of 6.5 tons futed poorly into the maneuvers developed by the
anti-tank squadrons. That is why in 1970 the ground forces withdrew from
that French-British program, leaving the navy alone on the French aide to
carry it on.

It was therefore necessary to start a new program. enabling a successor to
the Alouette III/88 ll to be provided.

The renewed questioning in which the ground forces engaged led them to return
to the concept of a specialised anti-tank helicopter, responsible for that
mission alone, and hence of the smallest possible size.

Study of the Gazelle SA-Jbl showed that from it could be derived a helicopter
corresponding to the tactical requirement and the ground forces general staff
decided to favor the SA-JbZH program.

Characteristics of Anti-tank Helicopters

The SA-JhZN inherits its geoeetry and technical specifications from the
Gazelle 341 and the composition and characteristics of its subasseablies
from the Alouette ill/SS ll.

Use of the Alouette it! had established a certain number of criteria which
had to be met by an anti-tank helicopter:

first of all, it must be greatly over-powered; tactical flight, setting up
the launching post between obstacles and in any direction at all with
respect to the wind require. under all possible conditions of altitude and
temperature. that the pilot is not in danger of reaching the limit of power:

it must be very stable and free from strong vibrations; piloting must not
monopolize the crew's attention. particularly when setting up the launching
post in the daytise (and further. by night when such launching is possible)
and the sighting system must not be disturbed by such vibrations:

it must be discreet; the develop-entof aruoredunits is resulting in their
being equipped with an entire panoply of anti-helicopter weapons and the
superiority of the helicopter resides in its ability to escape detection:

it must have sufficient autonomy; its mode of engage-ant is very different
free that of support aircraft whose presence at the battlefield is as fleet-
ing as possible;

it must have instrumentation which enables its crew to intervene at the
extreme limits of the conditions of visibility permitting the missile to be
fired (hence able to hover and return to flight by the instruaents) and

in part free from difficult navigation and acquisition probleas in tactical
flight; and

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

last. it must be equipped with a long range missile. of high velocity in
its trajectory. to minimise the time during which the carrying helicopter
is present and not requiring continual training and instruction of the
firing operator. which istooexpensive to maintain.

If to these characteristics which the new helicopter of the ALAT must
satisfy. there is added the simplest possible maintenance and high opera-
tional availability rate. it will be appreciated that the new program is
not an unembitious one.

Efforts in Five Directions

Hith the decision made to derive the second generation anti-tank helicopter
from the SA-3dl following the philosophy which has been so successful for
the air force with the family of Mirage aircraft. each derived from its
predecessor by successive modifications. efforts were devoted to five areas:
motors, equipment. discretion. adaptation to field conditions. and missile
launching post.

The Single Turbojet sa-aazu

Calculations of weight and minimum essential autonomy. estimated at 2 hours.
30 minutes, resulted in a total take-off weight of 1.900 kilograms. The
motor of the SA-Jél being inadequate to provide the power margin necessary
for such weight. the ground forces had a choice among three motors:

the Astazou [[1 Pa (PA - puissance augmentee; increased power) providing
about 40 kilowatts more than the Astazou III of the sa-Jﬁl;

the Arriel. a modular motor of practically the same power but even lower
fuel consumption; and

the Astazou XIV. at first glance excessively powerful for the need since it
provided 200 kilowatts more than the motor of the SA-3él.

The two-motor solution was rejected. the extra cost of a two-motor craft
capable of assuring flight with only one motor under highly specialized
conditions of tactical flight (altitude-spread diagram) being considered
prohibitive.

After flight testing of the three possibilities the choice was the Turbomecs
Astazou XIV precisely because of its extra thermal power. analogous with
that of the Artouste [ll which had been considered very valuable in the case
of the Alouette Ill. and because of its high reliability.

However. study of the Astazou III with increased power was not without use-
fulness. The motors of the SA-Jbl for observation are in the process of
being modified to the PA version so as to permit tactical flights at 1.800
kilograms instead of the former 1.700 kilograms. This modification is being
performed at the same time as that which consists of installing an optimized
tail rotor on the SAP361. 33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The curves below show the margin of thermal power available for tactical
flight; at the cos-tenement of a uiasion. with asxisun load. the motor
provides a sergin of 17 percent of additional power over what is required
for hovering without ground effect. That is the power surplus that the
ALA? considers necessary for the pilot to have available. at the beginning
of the Iiseion. s sufficient margin of safety.

 

Permissible take-off weight "without ground effect" of the SA—362H with
Turbonecs Astezou XIV, allowing for various levels of "tactical margin."

Key:

1. Persiesible take-off weight (kilograms) - Masses decollablea (kg)
2. Astesou XIV. 626 kilowatts. brake thermal power

3. Hargin, 02 [and so forth] - serge

6. Limit [illegible]

5. Lillit of pitch - limit de pas

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unusual Amount of Equipment

The sa-sbz is provided with an amount of equipment unusual aboard a heli-
copter of this size. The 'hxtarior" equipment is conventional; a taxi
device to provide camouflage in the field and a sand filter. indispensable
in certain theaters of operation.

In contrast. some of the "interior" equipment is completely new; the sa-362M
in particular is equipped with three radio communication posts (one VHFrAH,
one UHF. and one VHF-PH). This last has two transmitting power levels. which
enables it to attain either great range in tactical flight or short range in
order to preserve communication discretion. Moreover. this post is equipped

with a radio homing device which lets the azimuth of a correspondent station
be known.

An 1?? permits identification by friendly anti-aircraft forces and improves
the weak radar signature. much deserved in combat. but particularly trouble-
some when reception. upon returning from an operation. is provided by a
ground controlled approach.

The helicopter must be able to intervene at the limit of visibility condi-

tions. To that end it must be capable of instrument flying for night move-
ments.

The crew has available autonomous navigation equipment, based upon the
Doppler effect for navigation at the front, a radio compass with digital
display and automatic to-from sensor for navigation in rear zones. two
artificial horizons. and a high precision radio-altimeter.

Last, and above all. stabilization. already excellent with the SA-Jﬁl, has
been further improved with the adoption of an automatic pilot. the fly-
through SPIN 85. That equipment was considered necessary to assure fully
stabilized flight conditions for launchings at night.

For that purpose the interior and exterior lighting is being studied in
order to allow the crew to use goggles with more intense illumination.
The ALAT has not yet made its final choice of this type of equipment.

The last new equipment item. the radioactivity detector, is a reminder
that the ground forces must remain prepared to face an enemy equipped with
nuclear weapons. The layout of the on board panel has been so designed
that visibility of the outside. indispensable in tactical flight, remains
as satisfactory as on the SA-Jbl.

Great Discretion

The weapons or surveillance systems opposing the helicopter have recourse
to varied detection methods: visual, sound, thermal. and electromagnetic.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’lClAl. USE ONLY

In the face of the different detection procedures the first neasure is
tactical flight so as to try to drown the signal emitted by the helicopter
in the “background noise" enitted by the ground. Still. the helicopter's
own signal must be sufficiently feeble.

Against visual detection the Gazelle is renarkably effective by virtue of
its size and shape. 1he fact that the SA-Jbl is practically undetectable
to the naked eye. from a background of vegetation at 2.000 asters weighed
heavily in the choice of the SA-NZH.

As for sound detection. the SA-JAZH is anong the lost discreet in the world.
thanks to its low level of noise emission in the low frequencies. which are
the least attenuated by propagation in the atnosphere.

Against thernal detector the 342" has been equipped with a jet deflector
intended to reduce the enission levels in bands I and II. the bands in

which the self-guidance units of ground-air aissiles now in course of develop-
sent operate.

It is easy to adapt a jet deflector to a turbine. It is nuch sore difficult
to do so in such manner that the equipment does not increase teaperaturcs in
front of the turbine and that it is really effective in the face of foresee-
able threats. That is why development of such a device takes a long ties;
the theoretical studies of radiation in the various frequencies of the
infrared must be followed by practical teats against a variety of self-
guidance units. it was only after study of . and experinentstion with several
types of jet deflectors that the choice for the SA-MZH was made.

Paints with a low level of infrared reflection participate significantly

in decreasing the thernal signature. Against electromagnetic detection.

the use of rounded shapes and widespread recourse to coeposite asterials give
the SA-‘MZ a weaker radar signature than that of sinilar helicopters of sini-
lar size (and consequently, than those of helicopters of greater bulk).

Excellent Reliability in the Field

ﬁxperience with the SA-36l was indispensable in develop-em of the “-31.2".
Five hundred ten nodifications were studied in the light of experience with
the SA-36l. and incorporated in the SA-362H. Sonetinea they affected only
ainor details but all resulted in i-proved conditions for using it and
putting it into operation.

The result is manifested by adaptation to conditions in the field which is
considered good by the AMT: no lubrication, visible liquid levels. and
quick replacement of assenblies thanks to well adapted tools.

Resistance to iapacts has not been proven in a field of battle but tests
perforaed demonstrate what experts call very good “daaage tolerance"

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

against pointed projectiles end bursts of snti-aircreft cherges on the

one hand. and tree branches. collision with which in tacticel coebst flight
is difficultly evoidable. on the other hand. In this respect the shrouded
tsil rotor is one of the better truep cards of the helicopter. pereitting
landings in contact with bushes which preclude approach of helicopters
equipped with conventional opposed rotors.

four "01' Missiles Rather 1hsn Six

‘Ihe second generation anti-tank nissile. "01'. was designed as a result of
experience acquired with the preceding wespons systee.

.ihe range of 6.000 esters attained froe hovering without sodiiication of
the piloting characteristics of the nissile at the nexim distance was the
Ieln elesent in its choice.

1hc results of a duel between enti-tsnk helicopters end srnored fonetiona
depend. shove any other peraneter. upon the nutuel acquisition and firing
distances. At between 3.500 and 6.000 neters. the distance at Much the
362" will try to situate itself. the helicopter is both difficult to detect
in tactical flight end outside the renge of the direct firing weepons of
its eneny.

The MAT has edopted e aystes for carrying four sisailes. Experience having
shown that sutonony in cosbat is of every isportance. it was considered eore
useful to retein autonony of 2 hours. 30 ninutes which pernits. in sons
situstions. two successive interventions with the use fuel load: resupplying
eissiles at the front is quicker and easier than refilling with fuel. which
requires specialised fecilities: it is considered thet s helicopter cen pro-
vide lore nissile launchings per day of cost at with four nissiles end 2 hours.
)0 sinutes of autonoey then with six niesiles end 2 hours of eutonony.

The developnent of the launching post with its stabilised optics end eute-
eatic renote control took nleost 6 years. Even though it is relatively eesy
to nount nissiles on helicopters end lsunch then under stabilized flight
conditions with no wind. good nutuel. adeptstion of the two ensenbles.
enabling all csses to be covered. denends long end thorough developnents.

Leunching in a strong wind causes vibrations and a tell wind seizes the
helicopter less stable. One hundred nissiles had to be fired to echieve
this sdaptstion alone of the two ensenbles to each other.

At present the eissile is only leunched by dsy. Tests ere underway to
adopt it to firing et night in light provided by illunineting rockets.

A petrol of two “-362" helicopters. guided by ground troops threatened
with en ernored attack. would then consist of one helicopter firing nissile
end one "illuninetor" helicopter. ‘ihe er- which supports the nissiles.
noveble in elevetion. is coepstible with cerrying the rocket leuncher. it
is not now planned to count upon the $462!! rocket leunchers with types of
rockets other than the iliuninsting rockets.

37

FOR O'r'FIClAi. USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There now exist. at the ALAT Applications School at be Luc. two Dorand
ox-m MOT sisaile aimlntors: instruction in launching the lissile has
already begun. Actual firings are liaired to one per student. It can be
believed that progress achieved in the area of sisulation will even enable
instruction to be provided without actual firing.

Utilization of the anti-tank helicopter depends upon very special tactics
and training of the SA-JluZN crews is fundaaentally different fros that of
SA-Jhl pilots. It is planned to install a television sonitoting systea
aboard sosa SA-JloZH helicopters so that the student say later consider the
errors he say possibly co—it.

installation of the Sit-362M with the Ground force:

it is planned to install 120 sa-zm helicopters with the AMT to suppleasnt
the 70 Alouette Ill/SS ll helicopters in service.

‘lhe final develop-eats will take place in 1979. ‘lhey are aainly related

to engageaent by night. ‘lhe Night Experimental Center of the AMT has
determined the interior and exterior lighting nodifications allowing
piloting by aeans of intensified llluaination with goggles. These nodifica-
tiona reasin to be applied: so does continuation of nor launching tests at
night with illuination of objectives by rockets. The probles of aarginal
cospleaent of lights will be coapletely solved by the end of next year. In
this case the difficulty is sore tactical than technical.

The year 1979 will also enable units to be so prepared that the weapons
systen will be operational when it is delivered. To this end three squadrons
equipped with SA-Ml/IIO'I' are in course of formation. The first. in the south
of Septeaber 1978. has co-enced training the first crews at the be luc
Applications School of the AMT. The other two will be placed by units for
tactical training. it is the 32 me of Btain which will be the first AMT
unit to have the “01’ in service.

SA-MZH helicopters will be delivered. starting at the end of 1979 and the
first units for-ed in the beginning of l980.

Only autonoanus navigation will be lacking in the earliest helicopters and
is to be retrofitted starting in l9dl.

Size: Decisive Pars-eter

The “-352“ built by AEROSPATIALZ aeets the require-onto of the AMT. The
latter considers that site is a decisive parameter for survival of the
helicopter on a aodern battlefield: the bigger it is. the greater the
probability of its being detected and hit. In the specifications for the
SA-MZH. the studies and work performed by the Studies Bureau of the EMT
[ground forces general staff I (which is to the EMT what the Equipment
Prograas Bureau is to the air force general staff) have been of considerable
iaportance. Along the Studies Bureau. the AMT. and the aanufscturer
cooperation has been total; free this joint effort there has cone an anti-
tank helicopter which the AMT considers very successful.

fOR OFFICPAOL USE Oh'LY
FOR OP?ICXAL USE ONLY

 

An SA-J‘Z equipped with four HOT niaailea

 

The ALAT has evaluated various nodela of light intensification gogglea in
order to deter-inc which are best adopted to uae upon the helicopter and
provide the illumination of the SA-342H corresponding to auch use.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Jet deflector used to eliminate the infrared "signature"

 

Compatibility with secondary armament: Brandt rocket-launching carrier
(2 x 12 rocketa of 68 millimeters)

COPYRICNT: Alt 6 Cosmos, Paris, 1978

11,706
cso: 3100 ‘0

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

FRANCE

use O! HO! MITANK Insane ABOARD HELIOOPTERS DESCRIBED
Paria AIR 6 cosms in French 2 Dec 78 p 32
[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The Gazelle SA 3‘1! and SA 36211 helicoptera of the ALAT [Ground
Porcaa Tactical Air Support] are each arned with (our 1m anti-tank niraileo
with range of 4.000 netera. capable of deetroying any presently exieting
tank and even piercing the neat eophiaticated arnor (coapoaite arnor) of
future count tanka.

The helicopter. becauaa of ita nobility and flexibility of e-ployeent which
enable it to get peat ground obataclea. ia an excellent launching platfor-
tor exploiting the capabilitiea of the HOT miaailc while renaining out of
range of eneny defanaive facilitiea. The “01' can be launched fro- heli-
coptera (Gazelle. no 105. Dauphin. Lynx. and no forth) and also from armored
ground tank deatroyera (aee AIR 5 OOSDIOS, No 74.0). It ia being near produced
for nine countriea. among then France and Germany.

The IIOT (Rant aubaonique Optiquement Teleguida; high aubaonic. renotely,
optically guided) ia a eecond generation anti-tank mieaile cooperatively
developed by AEROSPATIALB of France and theaerachnitt-Bolhow-Blohn of
Ger-any. with the assistance of the French SAT and German ELTRO firms

within the ecope of the Buromierile group. It meeta the technical specifica-
tiona of the Prench and German general ataffa and ground forces technical
directoratea. The latter required a niaaile with reliability of more than

97 percent, with greater than 90 percent probability of hitting. at diatancea
of from 600 to ‘.000 matera. of fixed (2.3 x 2.3 notara) or moving (2.3 x (0.6
metera) NATO targata from a hovering helicopter or one moving laterally at up
to 150 kilontera per hour; the firing rate had to enable the helicopter to
attack at leaat three objectivea per minute at all diatancea and to make
evaaive Ianeuvera i-adiately after the niaeila waa launched.

The HOT miaaile ha a military warhead. caliber 136 millimeters. of 6.5
kilograms. of which 3 kilogran are arploeive ignited by electrical iqulee
relaaaed by deformation of the noae at inact. The "01' hollow charge piercea

#1

FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the NATO target with triple armor (corresponding to 272 millimeters of
steel) at up to 65‘ incident angle and the heavy NATO target for more

than 800 millimeters (at 0‘ incidence). The acceleration propulsor of the
NOT brings it to 200 meters per second in 1 second, velocity which is then
maintained by the solid fuel cruise motor. The HOT thus travels a distance
of 2,000 meters in 9 seconds, 3,000 meters in l3 seconds, and 6.000 meters
in i6.3 seconds. Nith a launch from a helicopter moving laterally at 180
kilometers per hour the range of the NOT can reach 6,400 meters.

The NOT comes as a ready-to-launch weapon. which requires no preparation

and no testing before firing and which can be used from -60’ to +52'c

(NATO standards). The weapon is exactly the same for firing from helicopters
or from ground armor. It is 1.3 meters long by 175 millimeters in diameter
and weighs 32 kilograms (of which 23.6 kilograms are for the missile itself
(1.27 meters long, 165 millimeters in diameter. and overall span of 312
millimeters. wings deployed). The NOT weapon consists of a missile within
an expendable tube of resin-fiberglass which serves both as a container for
tactical transport and launching ramp. It is delivered in a logistic package
and can be stored more than 10 years with no maintenance at all, the

missile's power supply being provided by a thermal battery with pyrotechnic
excitation which ages extremely slowly.

The NOT firing post for helicopters and ground vehicles is made from a

number of standard common parts. The helicopter firing post can be mounted
on the craft in #5 minutes by two men. It weighs in toto about 270 kilo-
grams with 128 kilograms for the weapons (four missiles) and 162 kilograms

for the launching installations comprising a guidance system with aiming
device (73 kilograms) and four manually reloadsble launch stands (67 kilo-
grams). The guidance system comprises the electronics boxes for firing and
guiding the missiles as well as an APXH-397 SPIN gyrostabilized viewer and
localizer device mounted on the roof of the helicopter cabin. This peri-
scopic viewer makes possible observation, detection. acquisition. and identi-
ficstion of the objective (while the helicopter is partially concealed behind
a screen) as well as the precise aim at the objective necessary to guide the
missile. The “OT is a wire guided missile. with semi-automatic remote
infrared control by alignment upon the axes of the optical aim. This guidance
system is practically jamproof, except for chance cutting of the remote con-
trol wire unreeled by the missile in flight.. or shooting down the helicopter.

For launching the HOT missile the helicopter is directed on a bearing toward
the objective according to the direction of aim indicated to the pilot by a
pointer on the artificial horizon; the launch stands are elevated in
accordance with the elevation of the aiming device (from +30“ to - 0‘). The
launch operator who is also copilot of the helicopter, has only to keep the
reticle of the gyrostabilized viewer upon the objective (precision 0.1
milliradian) and thus press the firing button after having selected one of
the four missiles. The missile firing sequence proceeds automatically in
0.55 second; voltage applied from the thermal battery. ignition of the

solid fuel gyroscope providing the vertical reference for guidance (the

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

missile in autorotation). ignition of the tracers. releasing the missile
from its tube. and ignition of the acceleration propulsor. Ignition of
the cruise motor and release of the warhead operational safety devices
occur automatically during flight.

The sissile departs only when the angle of roll is less than 10° and the
line of sight makes an angle of less then 3' with the longitudinal axes of
the helicopter. when these conditions are met the data is automatically
provided to the firing operator (illumination of an indicator light on the
sighting reticle). firing is feasible in all flight configurations of the
helicopter. lateral movement or hovering, including especially close to
the ground where the helicopter is best protected against enemy weapons.
After the missile leaves the helicopter can perform evasive maneuvers (up
to 6' per second turning, 05' roll, and lg lateral load factor) without
disturbing the aim of the firing operator since the gyrostabilired viewer
makes the sighting axes independent of the helicopter's pitch and yaw.

When it leaves the launch tube (0.6 second of slight) the missile is subject
to the optical line of sight by the guidance system. The localize: senses
the infrared radiation emitted by the missile's tracers and determines the
missile's angular deviation from the line of sight. From these deviations
the control computer calculates the remote control signals sent by wire to
the missile in order to return it to the line of sight (0.7 second of flight).
These signals. decoded by the missile actuate the letters piloting rudder.
One of the original features of the HOT system is that the nozzle of the
cruise motor has a single jet-deflecting rudder to direct the missile in
both elevation and azimuth. it being stabilized in flight by rotation about
its axis of roll; this is accomplished by precise synchronization of jet
deviator control and missile rotation. The remote control wire is auto-
matically jettisoned 0.5 second after impact of the missile. A helicopter
can thus attack four objectives in less than 2 minutes.

Several hours of flying suffice to instruct a firing operator to manipulate
the nor launching post by means of the 0x167 launching simulator of the
Giravions Dorand Company.

comment: so: 5 Goa-08. Paris, 1978

11,706
680: 3100

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

AIR FRANCE COMMERCIAL POLICY EXPLAINED
Paris AIR 6 cosuos in French 2 Dec 78 p 45

[Text] Pierre Sautet, Air France's general agent for France. in a recent
speech to the Congress of Travel Agents. meeting in Thailand. laid great
stress on the continued advances of the travel. These advances are due to
technological progress, to the increased purchasing power of the French.
and innovation at the commercial level. To go to the United States from
France today takes only one twentieth as much working time as 30 years ago.

Toward Service Adapted to the Price the Customer Pays

"Business" traffic used to represent 80 percent of the activity of the air-
lines. It now accounts for only half the traffic while family and tourist
traffic is tending to become the najor part. Such traffic has been
developed by establishment of many proaotional fares. As the present service
provided by air transport is no longer adapted to the new traffic structure
it is not sound to provide the same on-board service to customers paying

very different fares. The policy toward which the large airlines. and
notably Air France, are being directed is to provide service strictly adapted
to the price paid by the customer.

The clientele which travels for business reasons needs frequent departures,
large reservation facilities, maximum comfort. and complete service so as
to arrive at the destination fresh and ready for work. This clientele,
which can put a monetary value on time saved. is prepared to pay for the
service it needs. The policy of Air France is to meet the needs of this
clientele and endeavor to keep it separate.

The clientele which travels for tourism does not have the same needs. It
seeks above all to pay as little as possible in order to have a budget as
large as possible at its destination. As it cannot put a monetary value
on the time saved and as it is paying the cost of such transport out of
personal funds it appears prepared to accept sinpler service in order to
reduce its travel costs. In an aircraft space is valuable and with the
conventional service of the regular airlines considerable space is occupied

u.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

by storage of provisions. By reducing those. thereby saving space used for
storage. and by slightly reducing the spacing of seats. but redesigning
then so as to maintain an acceptable degree of comfort in a reduced space.

the number of seats can be increased. the costs can be reduced. alloving
fares to be lowered.

Sautet stated that the president [of the company]. Pierre Giraudet, will
naha an iaportant announce-ant in the course of this month. stating vhet

Air France intends to try an experiaent which it hopes to apply generally
in 1980.

Development of Charter Flights Hill Continue

The equipaent of a fleet such as that of Air France cannot be codified over
the short term for technical and supply reasons. On the other hand.it is
the wish of Air France to meet all the needs of the aarketplace by adapting
its product to its cuetoaers. Develop-ant of charter flights will continue
in 1978; the activity of French charter airlines was greater than in 1977.
Such activity vill increase further for there is no aonopoly. the bulk of
the traffic; especially to Spain. being carried by foreign airlines. The
very marked decrease in North Atlantic charter flights will continue be-
cause of very low fares put into effect by the regular airlines and innova-
tionu which they have programmed.

Sautet expressed the hope that the French air transport distribution systene
be improved. The entire industry. froa carriere to forwarding agents. must

exert a constant effort to adapt itself and continually improve its manage-

ment.

COPYRICRT: Air 6 Cosmos. Paris. 1978

11.706
CSO: 3100

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEF orscnxpuou OF (2181!. APB SECURITY MEASURES
Paris m in French 26 Oct 78 p 10
[Article by Guy Richard]

[hxt] HSP [Security and Protection Measures] . Air comndos. The photo-
grapher had taken his two cases. his Zoo- 43-86, and regretted not having
the actor. There was going to be some action there. Courage testing
course. Crawling. ju-ping. pa [machine-pistol] firing fro. the hip. Per-
hape soars close coabat. If we asked politely. they eight lake us a little
damnstration. would they not?

Meeting with Major De nongeaux, chief of security and protection seasures
ot BA [Air Base] 110. at Creil. “ESP nilitary duty is not only crawling.”
You don't say. "They do not engage in close-cabat drill 3 hours a day.“
‘Ibo bad. especially for photographs. Of course, in the NSF there is the
protection squadron. consisting of air comndo-riflenen. hey are the
closest to what we were expecting, because they represent the trained con-
bat coaponent strictly speaking. Assigned for protecting the base. their
training is earnest. their discipline is rigorous. hey are meant to be
per-anently operational. And in order to respond better to a poasible
attack attewt or illegal penetration in the base, they sonstius put
themselves in theplace of their ene-ies by attacking other air bases.
1hese air bases will. moreover. nice it a point of honor to do the sane

to the- so-e tine later.

The conscripts in the protection squadron would like to have lore inten-
sive coabat training at times, but. according to their officers. they al-
ready have a certain degree of effectiveness and utility.

firefighting Service: Pirefighters on the Base but Also on the Outside
"men, Major. if the co-Isndo-rifleaen are only one aspect of the H39.
what are the others?“ “more are the firefighters in the firefighting

service who enjoy an especially inortant role on the base. my take
care of the security of the aircraft runway. ‘ihey protect the base

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

facilities and nore eapecielly the nuclear facilitiee and they participate
on behalf of the civilian eector."

In fact. Air Baae 110 firefightere lend aeeiatance to the civiliane in

caae of large firee. Although a facilitiee fire (ea happened recently

in an m [low-coat Housing Project] or even a foreat fire ie controlled
Iore rapidly by neane of their aeeietance. their foaa projection equipnent
beconee eapecielly effective in a hydrocarbone fire. like the one that hit
a i0,000-aquare-neter etorage facility for oil nateriele. ae ehort tine ago.

For the conecript performing hie national eervice an an 831’ firefighter. a
direct leaeurenent of the mefulneee of hie taekx the meter of livee
caved. the value of aaterial preeerved.

Radioactivity Measured Every Day

“The nuclear eafety epecialiete must not be forgotten. They too play an
irportant part. rortunataly. they intervene only in a preventive capacity.”

Por the moat part , they have diecovered, in the as». certain little known
aepecte of radioactivity: natural radioactivity, for examle, that they
neaeure every day. On the one hand, the work of neaeureunt ie the pre-
ventive aspect of their nieeion. The work of decontamination likewiee.
lore epectacular: wearing inner-able juqaeuite. headgear. boots. their
face dieappearing under a breathing leek, they wash. becaueeJiirage air-
craft affected (fictitiouelyl) by radioactive fallout lust be waehed and
than rineed with abundant water for decontamination.

‘1here ie one great objective for the firefighting and nuclear eafety eer-
vicee. ae well ae for the protection equadron: protection of property and
persona. 'lhen. if an incident or accident occure. warning. protection,
saving. with a machine pistol, police doge, a firehoee nozzle, wearing
dungareee or waterproof clothing or a breathing look. me uniform or the
neane matter little. The spirit ie the can.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "rm" Magazine doe Aneee

10,0‘2
GO: 3100

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BRIEFS
POPBREN 0“ LEFT UNION—Jean Poperen. PS? deputy for Rhone Department. eug-
seete in his forthcontng book. "we Are All Outdated” [Nous some tone dee

archuqueel. that the socialists try once note. at their Aptil congreee.

to get the Union on the Left hack on track. [Text] [Perle PARIS mm
15 Dec 78 p 127]

080: 3100

68

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

PCI'S PAJE‘I'TA EXPLAINS POLICY ON BBC
Perle LB NOWBL OBSERVATBUR in French 11-17 Dec 78 p 55 L1)

[Undeted interview in Rome with PCI Secretariat Hember Gian Carlo Pajetta
by Hacelle Padovani: "Why the PCI Is Not Afraid of Europe"]

[Text] [Question] A section of left in France has reservations about or

is even openly hostile to enlarging the European community and strengthening
the European parliament's powers. But this is not the case in Italy. where
the PCI appears to be the most European of all the parties. Should this be
explained by the desire to safeguard your political autonomy, and that of
the state you intend to create, in the face of the Soviet Union?

[Answer] I do not understand. We have said that Europe must be capable
of cooperating, while preserving its autonomous role and its independence,
with both the United States and the Soviet Union. As for the PCI, its
autonomy is guaranteed by its policy and by the consensus of millions of
Italians. That is all, we need neither the ERG nor Luxembourg to defend it
against anyone. To sum up, we want a Europe which is friendly with both
superpowers. In other words, capable of cooperating with them.

[Question] Are you not afraid of Europe being dominated by the power of
Germany? Despite everything, will you seek a compromise in the European
parliament not only with Craxi's and Hitterrand's socialists but also with
Schmidt's social democrats?

[Answer] Re believe that if Europe is threatened by a power, whoever it may
be, it is not by remaining divided that we will beat defend it. So, please,
let us avoid erecting false barriers which are merely a heritage from another
age. But I want to be more precise. If the calm-unity has complex tasks to
perform, one of them may be to make the Germans understand that they cannot
impose their will. that there is no new empire and that these two points
favor the interests of the German workers. The great majority of the latter,
let us not forget, are represented by the SPD, which you talk of as being
Schmidt's but which is no more Schmidt's than Brandt's or anyone else's.

We believe that although a joint program is inconceivable, even amng com-
munists. agreements can be achieved. even with the social democrats. Any-
thing which may-facilitate rebuilding the unity of the workers' movement
must be attempted. 49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Queetionl You fece the June Europeen electione with poeitione which ere
totelly oppoeed to those of the PCP, which in not only hoetile to Portugel,
Spein end Greece joining the con-unity end the executive being etrengthened
but which hee ewberlted on e veriteble enti-Buropeen crueede. to thin not en
election hendicep? um thie not conplicete your reletione with the PCP?

[Anewer] He ere going to have e meeting with e PCP delegetion very eoon
end we will etreee thet our eutuel eutonoey end even our differencee over
fundenentel ieeuee do not etop certein eieilnritiee exieting; for eunple.
when we together denend e eociel policy which does not inflict the coet of
the econonic crieie on the workere end the weekeet regione: end when we
cell for hereoniution of co-unity policiee with regerd to improving work-
ing houre. the retirement ege end uneoploynent benefite. The eene eppliee

to environment policy, workere' living conditione end the etetue of i-i-
grente.

Theee in feet ere einileritiee which we heve not only with the PC? but eleo
with other denocretic end workere' pertiee. In ehort. dieegreenente exlet
enong no on in other «open! en thinking of the eocieliete. It ie in our
intereete not to conceel then, otherwiee we would loee ell credibility.

[Queetion] Are you not troubled by the prospect of being in e ninority,
ieoleted end perhepe helpleee. Uhet do you expect fro- thio Europe.

[Anewer] For e long tine we were in e ninority in our own country'e perli-
enent end thie neither troubled nor diecoureged ue. eince we ere todey pert
of the govern-ent nejority. One thing we hope to do in the Streebourg perlie-
nent ie to ineure thet Itely iteelf beconee on ective force. And. eecond.
we hope-wind thin in why we ere no in (ever of enlerging the co-unityu
thet Italy will find eid end underetending tron countries euch ee Spein.
Greece end Portugal. Even though certein econonic einileritiee plece ue in
conpetition with these countriee. we hope thet we will eventuelly be eble
to resolve our co-on problene within the coIIIunity frenework, precieely
by eeeerting thie new front of Hediterreneen eoliderity. But we do not
believe in the need for e pitched bettle between olive oil end butter or
between orengee end nillt.

[Queetionl Could one tun up your policy by eeying thet you fevor e "Buropeen
conprooiee?"

[Anewerl It in not e queetion of eetting up e etete or e government. I
epoke of convergencee juet now end, in view of the feet thet no one cen con-
eider inpoeing hie will on the othere. it in certeinly neceeeery to reech
conprouieee. The word does not chock ne et ell. And eince. et leeet until
the next Pct Congreee echeduled for March, it ie etill penieeible to refer

to Lenin. I will edd thet I took thie tern "co-protein" from "the etete end
revolution” . . . .

50
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

In abort. our keoneaa on Europe ia the rceult of neither a romance nor a
peaaionate affair but rorher our obaervation the: there ie a battle to be
waged end, let ua aay it. e challenge to be not. But we have confidence
in the forcee repreeenting Europe'e workers. And naturally. ebove all. ue
have confidence in oureelvee end our policy of unit.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "le Nouvel Obeerveteur"

C80: 3100

51

[OR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDW

UK OPPOSITION m2]! mama 018608838 PAY POLICY
London me GUARDIAN in Ength 19 Dec 78 pp 1, 26 Lb
[Report by Ian Aitken: "Thetcher'a Proety Olive Branch")

[Text] Hra Margaret Thatcher yeeterdey offered a alightly froetbitten olive
branch to the noderatea in her own party who are aeeking a new approach to
pay bargaining and the trade union aovenent. In a nuch-debated epeech to
Paddington Toriea, ahe renounced the concept of a free-for-all on wegea. but
offered a new alogan of "Preedon Under the Law."

Delivering a keynote apeech. which ia expected to lay down party policy for
the coeing election year. Hre Thatcher refuaed to give nore than a narrow
inch or two to her critica. But the conceaeion waa aufficient to teke the
conaervetiva party back to ita agreed tranlinea on pay policy-wthe propoeele
originally contained in ita policy docunent called "The Right Approach to the

Bconony . "

Thie conceeaion appeared laat night to be aufficient to aetiafy the noderatee
in the ahadov cabinet who had becoae alaraed by the apparent lurch towarda a
“free for all" approach to pay bargaining. They believe that it haa retracted
the phreaea ueed by lire Thatcher at the Conservative Party Conference in Octo-
ber. in which ahe apolte of "realiatic and reaponaible collective bargaining
without govern-ant interference."

The change, however, waa inperceptible to anyone unreheareed in the detailed
textual iaeuea which have been occupying aenior ahadow ninietera recently.
Drafta of lire Thetcher'a apeechee have been circulated over the peat few

daye, and etudied with the kind of care nor-ally reaerved for newly diacovered
Egyptian perch-ante.

To an outaide obaerver, Hra Thatcher's the-e wee no leae radical and strident
than in the peat. ahe revived the iaeue of the cloeed ahop and the aubject of
eecret bellote in the context of an alleged imbalance between uniona and nan-
egeaente ae e reault of recent labour legialation. She repeated her pledge
to deal with theae thinga, although in a eonewhat equivocel nenner. And ahe
iaeued a pledge that a future Tory governnent would neither beah the uniona
nor bow to then. 52

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iler keynote phrase was Mr Churchill‘s slogan for the 1951 general election.
“Once nore we say 'set the people fres' and once nore. cone the conserva-
tive year. we shall do just that." she said.

but the crucial phrase was probably obscure to her audience in Paddington.
She said: "Our policy on incense was set out nore than a year ago in our

published paper The Right Approach to the Booneny.‘ It renains our policy
today."

Although she coupled it with feailiar pledges about control of the noney
supply. restraint on goverusent spending and govern-ent borrowing. reduced
taxation on earnings and new incentives to productivity. the gesture was
accepted by those of her shadow cabinet colleagues who feared that the party
was beconing identified with the concept of a pay iree-for-all.

The concession was wrapped up in a characteristic attack on the labour govern-
nent's approach to pay policy. the trade unions and industry in general. She
argued that the balance of power in nornal wage bargaining had been tipped
drastically away from aanagenent towards the union as a result of recent
government legislation.

She pledged that a future conservative goverment would look at recent trade
union legislation to are what enendnents were needed. "For exanple. we are
deeply concerned about sons aspects of the closed shop. particularly in cases
where it can take a nan's job away iron hin without conpensation. Re are also
considering ways to extend the secret ballot."

But she added that any trade union leaders were daily conducting negotia-
tions with a cosplete sense of responsibility. “He will consult together
in the knowledge that there are prizes to be won. not only by the public but
by the unions thenaelves if sensible refer: can be achieved."

She went on: "He shall invite the unions "to join with us in building the

new and proaperous Britain we all went. He shall not baeh the unions. Neither
shall we bow to then. In the long run. unions can only prosper when the
nation prospers-oand vice versa."

COPYRIGB": GUARDIAN NEWSPAI’BRS LIMITED. Deceaber 19, 1978

C80. 3120

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDOH

UK SHADOW TORSION SECRETARY STRESSBS EEC TIES
London T!!! GUARDIAN in English 20 Dec 78 p 2!. LI)
[Article by Ian Aitkan: "Tories Stress Their Co-ituent to 320"]

[Text] Mr Francis Pym. Tory spokesman on foreign affairs. yesterday gave
the conservative party a new and totally unequivocal couituent to Britain‘s
future role in Europe. His speech, clearly designed to and any residual
doubts about the Tory couitaent to the Cosmos Market, cane Just as the
argument over Europe seensd to be gaining new strength in the Labour Party.

Hr Pym, addressing journalists in London. poured scorn on the fainthearted
attitude of the labour novenent towards the £30 and declared firmly that a
future conservative government would recognise that Britain's new role oust
be a European one. lie insiated that Europe had not failed Britain but that
Britain had failed to asks the best of her no as-bership.

A docuasnt delivered to. labour and trade union readers this week by Mr Denis
Iiealey. the Chancellor. insisted that the prouises given to Britain by her
partners in Europe before Britain became a teacher of the 380 had not been ful-
filled. It insisted that Britain's net contribution to the rat's agricultural
budget was running at between 600 rillion pounds sterling and 700 nillion

pounds sterling last year and night well amount to 1,000 aillion pounds sterling
in the current year.

The docuent, which for-ed the basis for some heated exchanges between the
Prine hinister and left-wing numbers of Labour's National Bcecutive Co-ittee
at a meeting on Honday. conceded that Britain had already becone the second
largest net contributor to the annuity budget, even though it is only the
seventh in terns of gross national product per head of population. It fore-
casts that Britain could well becoue the largest single net contributor by
1980 if corrective action were not taken.

Hr. Callaghan. who was attending a nesting of the liaison co-ittee repre-
senting the government. the TUC and the Labour Party. insisted that his govern-
Ient was making real progress in achieving a correction of this trend. But

he was challenged by left-wingers to give figures provingthat progress was
being aade. lie declined to do so. 5’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ’lClM. USE ONLY

The treasury document, which was circulated by Mr Heeley to nembern of the
liaison Couittee, is now expected to be discussed today by the executive
couittee. It insists that British ministers have sought this year to per-
suade the why that the severe level of unesploynent requires vigorous
action in the field of EEC policies.

But Mr Py- took a wholly different approach yesterday. he clained that the
labour government had been at best reluctant and half-hearted. and at worst
obstructive end nalevolent. in its attitude to the col-unity. lle blamed
hr Callaghan for allowing his ninisters to go on fighting their old anti-
market battles. leaving Britain with no European policy at all.

lie declared: "It is high time we lifted our eyes from the ground and looked
towards the future. Our new role nuet be a European one to exercise effec-
tive poliical and economic influence at the European level."

he called for a return to the outward-looking coa-itment of the last conserva-
tive governeent when it took Britain into Europe. "He seen to have got into
the habit of worrying only about ourselves-«o be obsessed with our own douse-
tic political battle. It is not a question of suggesting that other people
should be put first. In today's world a short-sighted and exclusive concen-
tration on our own problens is the least effective way of finding a solution
to then."

ﬂy Pym was enphatic that withdrawal fron Europe was not an option now. and
never had been. The ergunents for staying in were stronger now even than

in 1975. "Only by showing our faith and conitnant to the conunity's pur-
pose can we bank sufficient credit with our friendsucredit we can then draw
on when special circunstences in Britain have to be considered."

Hr Pym'e speech seen certain to delight anti-marketeers in the Labour Party.
who believe that Europe has becoae so 'unpopuler with the electorate that it
is an electoral liability to any party which is seen to be wholly co-itted
to Europeanian. But it may also surprise sons Tory agnostics in the European
debate, who have always believe Hrs Thatcher to be privately unenthusiestic
about the enmity. This view has prevailed among many Tories. even in the
face of repeated pledges of Europeanism by Mrs Thatcher.

After Mr Pym'a speech, there can no longer be any doubt that the conservative
party sees itself officially as the party of Europe once again. he said:

"A conservative government will aim to sake the best. not the worst. of our
membership. He went to show our faith in the commity's objectives. A con-
servative govemnent will work to rebuild our bargaining strength, aha-efully
run down by Labour Ministers, so as to be able to combine successfully both
the protection of particularly British interests and the advance of the con-
munity's overall objectives."

Be cowlained that britain's stock with our European partners now stood at
its lowest point ever.

COPYRIGHT: GUARDIAN NEWSPAPERS Lungs. December 20, 1978

. 55
080- 312° ron omcm. use om: