FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10483

28 April 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 27/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain intonation prinrily tron foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
trensaissLons and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated; those tron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JP”. Processing indicators such as [rent]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. were no processing indicator is given. the infor-
Iltion was sunrized or extracted.

Unfaniliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. rinse within itm are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 11.3. Governnent.

COMIC!“ MRS AND REGULATIONS GWBRRNG MRI? 0?
mmms ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(rouo 27/32)

CONTENTS

THEATER FORCES

FRANCE

Anny Chief Lacaze Diacuaaea Strategic Weapona, Neutron Ila-b
(Jeannou Lacaze Interview; L'EXPRBSS, 2 Apr 82)

POLITICAL

SPAIN

Coalition with Page Not Inpouible. Cabanillae Says
(Pio Cabanillaa Interview; CAHBIO 16, 22 Feb 82) .......

Carrillo's Demise Expected To Aggravate Centrifugal Porcea
(Joec Manuel Arija; CAHBIO 16, 1 Feb 82)

MILITARY
FRANCE

Ground-Air Missiles, Reather Conditione Challenge Light
Anny Plane

(Bertrand de Lacroix de Vauboia; ARHBES D'AUJOURD'RUI,

"at 82) ...O...0.0.0.000...0....OOOOOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOOO...

Increased E ff ic iency , Reduced Vulnerability Sought
for Helicopter

(Andre Martini; ARHEES D'AUJOURD'HUI, Mar 82) ..........

'6- [III-WE-ISC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARMY CHIEF LACAZB DISCUSSBS STRATEGIC WEAPONS, NEUTRON sous
31151351 Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 2 Apr 82 pp 37-62

[Interview with French Arned Forces Chief of Staff Jeannou Lacue by
Guillemette de Sairigne: "the Amy Talks"—date and place not given]

[Excerpts] L'BXP'RBSS: In 1978. in reply to a question put to you by
L'EXPRESS following the parliamentary elections ("Hhat if the left had
come to power?") you replied: "l'he armed forces would not have noved but
I know my officers who would have gone hone." In May 1981 the left Inn
and they did not....

General Lacaze: First, the nilitary hierarchy did not save. Second. we
were not forced into a fundamentally different line fros the one previously
followed. A politicization of the armed forces by a kind of Anerican-styls
"spoils syeta" night also have been feared: that did not happen. That is
extrenely encouraging and entirely to the armed forces' credit since they
have been able to demonstrate their apolitical nature. finally, aside fron
a few except ions, the postings and appointnents which have been nade so far
are ones which we had been planning for months. If there had been an abrupt
change, some officers would possibly have left, and I would probably have
been the first. That was not the case.

The image of the arnsd forces is that of a rather conservative calamity
because by nature they need to hold on to basic values and feel the ground
firm under their feet. But to a very large extent the armed forces are the
reflection of the nation. Over the past few years they have shown they
could adapt to society's development and were not hostile to change.

L'EXPRESS: Some people clain that the armed forces are the only big state
body which would allow itself to be radically reformed without saying
anything. . . .

General Lacaze: First, is it particularly desirable? And to what extent
would we accept it? I do not know. Then that do you mean by "doing
something?" That military would have the task of leading the different

armed forces. I think it would be impossible to reproach them if they
carried their ideas through and said to the governnent: "A different tool

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

must have new missions." For instance that would mean abandoning the

large volume of external technical aid, reducing the number of conventional
units in the army, producing additional helicopter regiments, having a few
extremely heavily equipped armored and mechanized d.visiona and professional
or volunteer armed forces. If that were the case it would be possible

to create a new concept. A concept still based on the nuclear deterrent but
with a conventional system having much less manpower, which would probably

be more costly on the whole and would reflect a national will for a
different kind of defense.

L'EXPRESS: What would you find unacceptable?

General Lacaze: Any upheaval which would call into question the very
foundations of discipline and anything which could reduce the armed forces'
capability to fulfill its missions. For instance. if our budget retained
below 4 percent of the gross domestic commercial product for long, the
missions set and the means provided would be incompatible!

L'EXPRESS: Are you now the great coordinator of the French Armed Forces?

General Lacaze: The job of armed forces chief of staff was created arotmd
20 years ago with the aim of unifying the armed forces following the
Algerian war. While each branch of the armed forces has a chief of staff
responsible for its administration and training, I am responsible for the
use of the forces. It is my job to ensure coordination between the branches
of the armed forces in plaming short and medium-term spending. It is also
my job :0 help define the requirements for the men and equipment of which

I will have operational use in case of serious crisis.

L'EXPRESS: what happens in time of crisis?

General Lacaze: The armed forces chief of staff can become armed forces
chief of general staff by government decree—the former job of "col-ander-in-
chief" if you prefer. That is an initial spectacular gesture toward a
possible aggressor: it means that the government regards the situation as
serious and that large-scale operations may be started. In case of a limited
crisis in peacetime, like the one in Kolwezi or Chad for instance. it is also
the armed forces chief of staff who is responsible for the use of forces

and who directs the units put into action.

L'EXPRESS: What about the use of strategic nuclear weapons?

General Lacaze: The head of state alone is responsible for using them. Those
weapons--and this is the very principle of deterrence-quake us capable. even
after a strike which would have destroyed a large part of the country's

vital forces. of responding strongly enough to cause the aggressor damage
which in total represents the demographic and economic stake which we our-
seIVes represent. Thus they strip its actions of any logic.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
But, before reaching that point. there can be several stages. For instance
a conventional response which, if it proved powerless to halt the sunny
offensive alone, could be combined with nuclear moans. That would be

the final warning, showing our deternination to go on to the end if
necessary. But the use of those nuclear weapons, even tactical nuclear
weapons. is subject to the president's agreement. It is I who endorses
the check but it is he who signs it.... Moreover the strategic nuclear
"button" is only the last resort. In that connection I would like to
recall that our objective is not to have an arsenal capable of destroying
the world several times over as the two superpowers have. It is necessary
and sufficient for us to be able to inflict on an adversary. in the very
heart of his territory. loss of life and material danage disproportionate
to the benefit he could derive from his offensive action against us. Thus

we are not seeking parity but only the level of sufficiency which we regard
as necessary. ~

L'EXPRESS: Would the emanced radiation bod), known as the neutron bomb,
upset that plan?

General Lacaze: No. it too is Ierely a defemive weapon. It simply gives
the victim the cpportmity, not of showing additional determination. but of
envisaging the use of tactical nuclear weapons in conditions less unfavorable
to the inhabitants who are likely to find themselves on the battlefield.
This is because it is very accurate and makes it possible to limit the threat
more to troop. by considerably reducing the blast and heat effects.

L'EXPRESS: So tactical nuclear weapons delay the use of strategic arns....

General Lacaze: No, because they still renain closely linked with strategic
armaments. It is important to understand clearly that. in the French concept.
tactical and strategic nuclear weapons differ only in their objectives:
tactical weapons are aimed at forces and strategic weapons are aimed at
cities. But both are based on the same deterrent principle; both imply the
same extraordinary change of level from conventional weapons.

L'EXPRESS: la France capable of nanufacturing the neutron bonb?
General Locate: From the technological viewpoint we are fully capable of
manufacturing that weapon. It can even be done in the eighties if the

decision is taken .

L'FXPRESS: Is a soldier bound to favor such a weapon which limits civilian
losses?

General Lacazs: Yes. in a country like ours which is not showing any aggres-
sive intention. But the choice is not only military—it is primarily political.

L'EXPRESS: In case of a limited crisis. what is the overseas intervention
forces' mission?

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General Lacaze: Those forces, which have been renamed "rapid assistance
elements," can intervene in several cases. 1. to protect the overseas
departments and territories and French people living abroad whose property
or persons are threatened; 2. to honor a particular agreement which binds
us to a number of countries, particularly on the African continent;

3. to protect our channels of communication, which are vital for transport-
ing the: goods essential to our economy, I am thinking. for instance of oil;
6. finally, some countries, which are not bound to us by explicit agree-
ments but with which France traditionally has friendly relations, may

turn to us for assistance and advice.

L'EXPRESS: Does France have adequate means of carrying out such operations?

General Laeaze: Yes, as regards personnel. Possibly not fully adequate

as regards equipment. and that forces us to limit our ambitions. Last
November, during the bright star maneuvers in Egypt and Sudan, the Americana
demonstrated that they could drop a battalion of paratroopers 7,000 or 8,000 km
from their bases with all its "support." We cannot do that. But that is

a question of economic choices. In France, for the time being. there are

no large military transport aircraft. Even in the United States the C-161

is already an old-fashioned airplane. But perhaps a new plane will be
available on the Western market between now and 1985.

In any case three questions must be answered: exactly what type of machine
do we want? "here can we find it? Supposing the Europeans of Americans
design sucn a machine, will we be able to buy it? Meanwhile we are making
do by increasing the range and number of our transall aircraft.

L'EXPRBSS: When President Reagan envisages the battlefield in Europe, how
do you react?

General Lacaze: I am not particularly surprised. That is one of the
hypotheses which we must take into account. The Soviets and Americans will
do all they can to preserve their territory from strategic weapons. That is
only human. There is no doubt that this possible battle in the plains and
mountains of northeast Europe wOuld be the most dangerous hypothesis for us.
Politicians and the military are perfectly aware of that situation, particu-
larly in France, and, in that respect. I note that the Haurras-stylc tone
[reference to Charles Haurras, a staunch supporter of the Vichy government
who was sentenced to life imprisonment for treason after World Her II]
adopted by some commentators on the subject .f our country possibly
capitulating without fighting shows either their extreme insincerity or
their profound misunderstanding both of the French concept and of the
determination of those responsible for implementing it.

That leaves another possibility: that the conflict might break out not
abruptly and directly between the two superpowers but outside Europe, using
a proxy. For instance in the Middle East, in Africa (and in that case we
would probably be directly involved) or in Southeast Asia. I think that
that is the most probable hypothesis. That is why I think it essential for

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all our rapid assistance forces to be constantly kept at optimal level. which,
of course, is not the needs“- level. Indeed, if we could not help to stop
that foreign conflict—localized one to begin with—there could be a

process of escalation which it would be difficult to control;

[Lacaze continues] "hat I say there refers to the eighties. But if there
were to be nuclear proliferation later and if other, less important,
countries succeed in Isnufaeturing 3. 6 or 10 bode, then s new danger would
emerge. Indeed those countries. which would not necessarily follow our
reasoning, could contenplete using those weapons without the enormous
precautions with which we surround then. And that would be very serious
because either the escalation would becone uncontrollable and would lad

to the threshold of generalized nuclear exchange or the authority of the
superpowers would succeed in controlling the escalation and nuclear weapons
would have lost cone of their deterrent value. ‘lhat is one of the major

risks in the next 10 or 15 years: that possible "banslizetion" of nuclear
weapon.

L'EXPRBS: Do you think that the Polish crisis increases the present risk of
conflict?

General Lacare: I do not think so. It merely confined that the Soviet
bloc was still as we conceive it: the seat of a power based on a very
strong state systas, a monolithic religion. and anxious to fight to the
end against any schism which would be likely to underline its dogma.

COPYRIM: s.a. Groupe Express 1982

CSO: 3100/5106

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COALITION HIT“ FIAGA NOT IMPOSSIBLB. CABANILLAS SAYS
Hadrid CANDID lb in Spanish 22 feb 82 pp 18-21

[Interview with Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development Pio
Cabanillas by Antxon Sarasqueta. date and place not given]

[Text] Pio Cabanillas. in addition to being minister of justice. is the con-
cealed hand behind almost all that is inexplicable in national political life.
Pacts. maneuvers. operations. This is the enduring legend in political circles
and among observers. These are "intimate" issues which he himself defines as
"household matters."

CAMBIO 16: It is said that you, who have been everywhere. control the Founda-
tion for Progress and Democracy.

Pio Cabanillaa: No. no. lt is a fact that when one has been in politics for a
long time. it seems that one has many men in place. although basically the fact
is that one knows many uen.

Cabanillas says that he does not aspire to heed the cabinet. because "1 sin-
cerely do not believe I have the qualifications to be prime minister. In this
matter I want no aistakes made.“ he concluded. Perhaps because he is so close
to the palace post now held by Calvo Sotelo. "Hell, I an a good friend of the
prime minister. but this friendship exerts no decisive influence on the ability
to organize problems."

He denies almost everything end enjoys geniel digs. For example, when asked if
the UCD [Democratic Center Union] group is more or less valuable now then when
he founded it. he responded with a Galician anecdote. "A pair of lovers are
sitting on a bench end a very well-dressed young woman passes by. They both
watch her closely. Then the girl asks her sweetheart: ‘would you love no more
if I were rich?' And he answers: 'There would be no reason to love you less.'"

But the political personality of Cabenillaa. who has a passion for the politi-
cal right wing and. by his own admission, an obsession to get close to things.
subjects and persons. has another dimension. which in the course of an inter-
view of more than 2 hours. leads a journalist along the paths of current polit-
ical development and the historical importance of events and personalities. For
example. Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo.

6
FOR OPTICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

CAHBIO 16: Do you believe that Calvo Sotelo is going to be prime minister in
the cabinet and the 000 for a long time?

Pio Cabanillas: I will tell you something which seems contradictory. Do not
forget the type of person who is prepared to depart. because ordinarily it is
these people who remain. I believe that there is in the personality of Calvo
Sotelo a tranquility of being and a certain background of seriousness as to how
one should be. I also think that the morning after the day it is concluded that
he will stay. he will depart. but I am also certain that he will not do so in
an arrogant way. There is a very valuable framework of human and personal
balance in his political personality.

CAHBIO l6: And do you believe that this image will serve the UCD well when it
comes to the elections. being in the final analysis drastically different from
the image which prevailed in past elections?

Pio Cabanillasx What has changed is the mechanisms for getting close to the
voters. where the leader we had in Adolfo Suarez and the personality of Calvo
Sotelo are concerned. The political "attractive force," in terms of a sincere
and cordial humanity. was something which Adolfo Suarez very obviously had.
Like many other individuals. I have been a witness to what I called his
capacity to enchant. One emerged from an interview with Adolfo Suarez convinced
of two major qualities-when I see him in the morning. I remember this. and I
sincerely believe it is still true. '

CAMBIO 16: Can you name these qualities?

Pio Cabanillas: They are a desire to please and an attractively normal way of
presenting himself. Adolfo could maneuver very skillfully in politics because
he bore within him a total rejection of any other type of attitude. interest or
curiosity other than political. He won votes and did so in brief specific
actions--speeches on television. trips. etc.

CAMBIO l6: what about Calvo Sotelo?

Pio Cabanillas: The breakdown of Calvo Sotelo's political personality is
rather different. First of all. there is a jarring note. In Calvo Sotelo the
predominant note is correctness. but not the intention to charm. He gives his
equals a hearing and explains his beliefs to them. but not solely to persuade
them. Naturally. he also attempts persuasion like any other politician. but
this is not his a priori intention as was the case with Suarez. Secondly. his
approach to subjects is less balanced by intuition or instinct. Calvo Sotelo
usually has methodical research on the subject behind him. For example (here
Cabanillas laughed ironically). there is no weightier problem when it comes to
the prime minister than drafting notes. because he is a man much given to
grammatical requirements. and therefore he is a great corrector of documents.

CAHBIO 16: What about Calvo Sotelo's image?

Pio Csbenillas: I think we must overcome a certain primitive compulsion to
attribute a certain kind of qualities to the political leader administering the

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
liie of a country at a historic moment. There is the assurance resulting from
high-level leadership. the great charisma. the exceptional character. There is
no longer any need for men of genius who can save the country every morning
with mysterious or primitive formulae. Democratic and liberal life approaches
rather close to the ordinary political knowledge of the average man. I think
that mature men, thoroughly familiar with Spanish life and properly oriented
quite suffice and always do well.

CAHBIO 16: During recent months it has been said that Suarez might leave the
0CD. Have you assessed the harm this might do the party?

Pio Cabanillas: Naturally. it would be a serious loss. Adolfo Suarez has ren-
dered great service to the UCD. I am a witness and I can assure you that Suarez
achieved the central post after a rather well thought out and responsible
analysis. Initially there was doubt. but after then no one had either similar
or comparable personal achievements when it came to establishing the framework.
achieving ideological goals and sacrifice for the survival of the party. A
general analysis of the content of his political activity is a different prob-
lem.

During the interview and throughout the discussion. the elections seemed an in-
evitable point of reference. "The political reality." Cabanillas said. “made it
very difficult for last year to be other than a year colored by the election.
This is not an abnormal phenomenon. but rather I would say that I see normalcy
therein."

In his ministerial office in Old Madrid. near the noisy Gran Via. there was
silence for long moments. Cabanillas meditated. eyes downcasf as if in a
trance. sketching squares and symmetrical lines on the back of a letter with
his pen. "The fact is I assign great importance to 1982. It is one of those
years marked by history. in which something new begins. The elections in 1983
will be highly indicative. For the first time. you cannot claim to be experi-
menting. And obviously, one thing is indeed very important in Spain. If there
are justifications it will no longer be defensive assertions. but a confession
of ineptness."

CAHB!O 16: And how do you think our government should be affected until then?
Do you support a parliamentary or electoral alliance or coalition with other
parties. with Frnga?

Pio Cabanillas: There is a whole series of laws to be completed which are of
total interest--they are laws for all. I am speaking of the laws on which ideo-
logical content exerts an influence to justify their existence as laws. not be-

cause i believe that ideological content should prevail in each one of them. It
is state laws--like the LOAPA, the most important since it winds up a major

operation regulating the autonomous bodies--which should be the focus of the
greatest volume of this legislature's work.

CAHBIO 16: Do you then exclude an alliance with Fraga?

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pio Cabanillasx When we know what the electoral results are. we will see. I
believe that in each electoral confrontation there is a renewal in the politi-
cal sense. either because of a change of goals. of focus or of circumstances.
If the electoral results tomorrow lead to the formation of coalitions or what-
ever it may be (he emphasized these words). naturally one must deal with the
new reality. But it should not be forgotten that this is a logical need justi-
fied by the electoral results.

CAHBIO 16: But you do exclude such a coalition a priori, do you not?

Pio Cabanillas: No. no. a priori. no. As it says in the romantic poem "Not all
is thought of thee til then."

CAHBIO 16: I am speaking in terms of strategy.

Pio Cabanillas: Strategy has only one principle. to the effect that if you
think you can reach understanding. you begin cautiously to reduce emphasis on
the differences.

CAHBIO 16: But how can it be. for example. that the 630! employers' group can
decide to support Frags against a party which is in power and which represents
interests close to yours?

Pio Cabanillas: The CEO! is a new institution. In political activity, it is a
consistent phenomenon for business associations to have to try to defend their
interests in the normal struggle in any political process, and in this connec-
tion, to support the political groups consistent with the content of these
interests. What they must analyze is whether in order to do so. they need
political leaders produced from among themselves, or whether it suffices to
support individuals already to be found in politics. One of the great problems
will have to do with whether political leaders emerge from within the 6308.
something which for the time being we will have to wait to see. It may be more
or less advisable for the CEO! to support the political content characteristic
of a party of the right wing and another of the center. but this does not seem
to me abnormal. What would be inconsistent is to support choices which if
jointly supported would produce a negative effect. And this is a subject for
the 6303 and for concrete analysis with each electoral event.

CAHBIO 16: Probably this is one reason the socialists want to govern in
coalition with the UCD after the elections. is it not?

Pio Cabanillas: Naturally I believe that it would be a very good thing for the
P503 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party] to arrange a government alliance with
the UCD. My concern is as to whether this would be good for the UCD.

CAHBIO 16: You were one of the main sponsors at the time of the establishment
of the U60. In what way has the situation of your party changed since then?

Pio Cabanillas: As a party governing during one of the most uncertain stages.
characterized by the need to build up the institution simultaneously. the UCD

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
has been affected by the inevitable wear and tear of governing. above all if
one undertakes the basic analysis of the difference between what it would be
desirable to achieve. what has been achieved. and the time frame within which
both considerations operate. As the sum total of the interests of the 000 mem-
bers who particularly want to continue in political life. our party has been
subject to the loss of those who do not see as possible or deem likely their
political survival within the confines of the U00.

CAMBlO 16: In your view. which then has been more important. the departure of
three deputies to join the right wing or the resignation of Fernandez Ordones
and his deputies to join the left?

Pic Cabsnillas: Fernandez Ordones and the deputies who went with him had
always had what we might call "plans to depart." I think that they always
achieved what they wanted by making their possible stay conditional. Sometimes
this was a pleasant horse trade, and in other cases, it appeared to be or was
justified on the basis of ideological dogmatism. The departure of other depu-
ties to join the right wing was an act by men who had always indicated this
type of inclination, such that it was consistent.

CAMBIO 16: And what will the government and your party do in the coming months
to rebuild all that has been lost as well as the credibility and confidence
which may have declined following all of these vicissitude intentions?

Pio Cabanillas: I believe that we are doing this in the course of governing.
We are facing up to three or four themes which are truly hard and difficult.
The level of demand is strictly speaking the political thermometer. Those who
demand everything and are doing so here and now are obviously revealing their
own lack of maturity.

CAHBIO 16: They are continuing to do so now?

Pio Cabanillas: Yes. due to the natural tendency of certain groups to dissent
by way of proof that they exist. It is only when they do not agree that it is
clearly obvious that they have a position. Basically what is forgotten is that
one of the great current needs is to "settle" sufficiently on the main guide-
lines in a period which will require another legislative terms. for the good of
Spanish democracy.

CAHBIO 16: How do you explain and assess the fact, for example. that a govern-
ment which seems to have won one round (Gibraltar, the antiterrorist struggle)
could within 26 hours come to the point of dissolving the chambers because
three deputies in its group have gone over to another?

Pio Cubanillas: This is the most important problem at the present time:
assessment of political events. There are three negative constants in such an
assessment. First, a high dose of skepticism. The second has to do with the
fact that the parties have not as yet found the mechanism for justifying their
own actions. and all of the political speeches are aggressive toward their
opponents. We have just had an obvious demonstration of this in the speech by a
veteran politician (Santiago Carrillo) who. while having a problem in his own
party. spent all his time attacking the others.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAHBIO 16: what is the third constant to which you referred?

Pio Cabanillas: Political error. Clarifying formulae are needed but we con-
tinually have evidences that what we view as problems are not that. For
example. the analysis in political law on the pros and cons of nationalisation.
and whether a policy of self-management will soon be achieved. Two terms which
are absolutely clear and are keys to the content of political doctrine are
deliberately camouflaged. and there is even more contradiction in deed and gas-
ture than in content in order to relieve tension. while on the other hand tre-
mendous importance is given to the slightest political event. above all if it,
has to do with personal issues.

CAHBIO l6: Returning to the UCD. how will your party accomodate this liberal
resurgence it seems to be experiencing?

Pio Cabanillas: The most important thing about the liberalism within the UCD is
its identification with the concept of democracy. Support of pluralism as a
field of political action--this is the liberalism of the UCD! Now if the inten-
ticn is to get into the UCD with a liberal label. there is no problem. but
understand us clearly. this does not mean liberalising the UCD other than in
the sense of being free. In other words. it is not that you make of it a
liberal party fundamentally.

CAHBIO 16: Probably this is indeed the intention of some liberals.

Pio Cabanillas: But I do not believe that this means that the liberals alone
will rule in the UCD. And that is the issue.

CAHBIO 16: what is the importance of the Christian Democrats as a party?

Pio Cahanillas: No one can place a claim on the gospel or utilize it exclu-
sively in his own favor. Politics is a particularly secular phenomenon. There-
fore. one cannot take the religious concept and embed it in the ideological
content of a party: this is ipso facto fraudulent. Now then. no one can deny
the weight of religious faith in Spanish society: to know its value is the
intelligent responibility of a politician.

CAMBIO 16: How might the Pope's October visit influence the elections?

Pio Cabanilias: The people are sensitive to this event and they relate results
with attitudes. The visit of the Pope in October will be a very important event
in Spain. For we will see very clearly how firmly anchored the essence of
Catholicism is in Spanish life.

From the anecdote to the political situation. Calicia came to the fore re-
peatedly in the interview with Cabanillas. and he went so far as to say that
this subject "merits a separate interview." But the fact is that certain sec-
tors have placed the blame for the shrinkage of the UCD in Calicia on the
politician from Orense.

'11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"I have always thought and done everything poaaibie" he responded. "to find a
great representative of the UCD in Galicia. Things did not work out that way.
Now the two most important group: in the Galician parliament (the 060 and the
AP [Popular Alliance]) have a duty to reach agreement no that Galician
interests will benefit."

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacio y Revistaa, s.A.

5157
C80: 3110/94

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

CARRILLO'S DENISE EXPECTED TO AGGRAVATE CENTRJFUGAL FORCES
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 1 Feb 82 pp 28~32

[Article by Jose Manuel Arija. based on interviews conducted by Rafael Cid (Madrid).
Ander Lsndaburu (Basque Region), Santiago 8. Traver (Seville). Mario 6. Bongo
(Asturias). Albert Arbos (Catalonia) and Juan de Dios Hellado (Halaga)]

[Text] The Spanish Commist Party is currently going through one of the nest
difficult periods in its history, as described by PC! members theneelves. They

avoid using the word "crisis," but it is certain that they are deeply caught up
in one.

Unlike other occasions. the crisis is not taking place within party walla. Sonething
different happened when the debate went public, with loud voices raised and with

all the ensuing consequences. This time the crisis is so serious that the PCB's

very future is at stake, its isolation or participation in society. But above

all. this is a crisis of identity: ﬂow must the PCB function in a democracy? that
is its role in the left, with a dominant socialist party?

A drop in nembership, the loss of intellectuals, the closing of offices which have
been empty for some time, disillusioned ailitants, confusion among cadres. a trade
union breakdown. the decline of voter support, expulsiona and the danger of a schisn
characterise the serious overall situation of the co-Iunists. And what is more
alarming: For the time being, there is no note of optimism concerning their inedi-
ate future; on the contrary, it looks even darker.

The ship of Santiago Carrillo, the PCB general secretary. is being pulled to star-
ooerd by pro-Soviets and to port by the Buroreformers while the co-uniat leadership
tries to set a course that will lead then out of the storm.

The joy over the legalization of the Commist Party in 1977 was short-lived.
Opposition leaders were released from jail, exiles returned fron abroad and masher
intellectuals and professionals publicly revealed their affiliation. But the warm
reunion also contained the seed of their differences. As Jaine Sartorius. a 46-year-
old lawyer who was expelled from the Central Couittee. said: "He reformers are
cosmmists who have been shaped by fighting for denocracy." And these young profes-
sionals, who combined democracy and conuninl in their anti-Franco struggle and
enjoyed great independence in aaking decisions. were soon directly controlled by
former legendary exiles, who dominate the party apparatus and aaka decisions. which
is something they know how to do very well. since the "French leadership" is. above
all. made up of trained and experienced apparatchike.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rho PCB leadershipi. is starting to make party policy from on high and to pass out
orders below. The legendary leaders are starting to fall from their pedestal.

not so such because of inplanenting incorrect political decisions as for not bothering
to give party members thaselves any explanation; not because of their externally
oriented democracy and Buroco-unist policy. but for internally maintaining an
old-style party concept.

At least this is what the reformers think. According to the pro-Soviets. there
have been both external and internal mistakes. in the case of both domestic and
foreign policy. The policy of alliances. put into practice by Santiago Carrillo
from the final years of Francoise up to the present time. is criticized as "middle-

:lass" and "turncoat" by some and by others as "inadequate" because of its lack
of internal democracy.

The results of the June 197‘] general elections meant something more than just a
cold shower for the coenuaiste. “any members and especially cadres felt betrayed
by the voters: [low can it benthey thought and said-that we. who struggled as
the opposition. were jailed and have always fought. received only one-third as
many votes as the socialists, who are all a bunch of upsterts?

The blow at the polls was hard to take. One explanation was that the low percentage
of votes was due to the fear of comeunism generated by Francoism. To overcome

that fear-~they saidnthe policy of alliances must be intensified and citizens

must become accustomed to seeing comemists together with parties to their right.
But the 1979 elections produced the s-e results. The cal-mists received a maximi-
of 10 percent of the votes. The reformers concluded that only a more internally
open party could break through that percentage barrier. The pro-Soviets think

the opposite: only a pure, hardline party will win over the masses.

The nest recent congress of Catalonian co-unist meﬂers of the PSUC [Unified
Socialist Party of Catalonia] and the 10th PCB Congress in June further increased

the distance between Carrillists. reformers and pro-Soviets. The,leadsrahip is
proving to be unable to unify the party. The decision of the Madrid co-unist
council members. who refused to resign from their posts as a penalty for having ‘
'upported the Basque betchundi in his process of unity with the Basque working-

‘lass left. has given an added dimension to the PCB crisis.

’xtension of Crisis

The proportions of the new diagreement have given the conflict its own special
Jvnanics. due to the intransigence of the opposing sides. The reformer faction.
.ahlch includes the chastised council members. and the Carrillists are playing for

keeps and in the end they will both lose. Bapulsions and an extension of the problea
".re the imediate result.

we sore intense the crisis grows. the more radical positions become. Differences
political views are being replaced by motives of "individual dignity" and

:crsonal insults." Accusations. insults and content characterise the present
.evel of the debates.

The latest opinion polls on voter intentions also reveal that the rat's internal
crisis has spread from menbcrs to the voters. In Andalusia. on the eve of the

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

elections for the Autonomous Parliament, the conunist loss could be very great.
according to the latest surveys. In Catalonia. another poll shows that the P800
would lose 7 percentage points in Barcelona and the province (from 21 to 16 percent)
and it is not hard to predict that comunist vote pruspects will decline in Madrid
following the scandal over the expelled council members. both in the capital and

in its outlying suburbs of the industrial belt.

A quick look over the map of connunisn shows that no area with a significant
establishment has escaped the crisis.

On a cold afternoon in March 1978. dozens of Asturian menbers deserted the PC!
on the first day of the Third Regional Conference, having criticized the party's
organizational methods and operation some days before. Since then they have been

subject to persecution which they describe as Stalinistic. "until we were forced
to leave.”

The Asturian coununists were the pioneers of the present crisis. "The proceedings
ended. however. showing that we were right. because our problem." one of the dissi-
dents said, "was a problem of all conunist organizations in the country and sooner
or later they will all end up the way things are now. 11 total disarray. He sinply
preceded some events that were easy to foresee."

The year of 1981 was an ill-fated period for the columnists. Fro- the beginning-
with the Fifth PSUC Congress in January, which chucked Euroconunism out the window-
to the end. with the expulsions of the council members. it was a series of departures
and expulsions, reaching to the Central Conittee itself.

In Catalonia. the pro-Soviet faction. with a strong influence on Workers Cos-issions.
has turned official party policy upside down. Referring to the pro-Soviets. Prencesc
Frutos. the general secretary, said: "This is an initiative based on lies. slander
and denagoguery."

The Catalonian columnists will hold their Sixth Congress in March and the schism
could arise there. Frutos thinks that the pro-Soviets' strategy consists of organiz-
ing to convince the Sixth Congress to adopt its positions and, if it does not do

so. to mount another similar initiative. "we discovered the conspiracy in tine."
Prutos concluded.

In Catalonia, the result thus far is the expulsion of 12 leaders. including Pete
Ardiaca. who until recently was party chairman. and 17 others penalized. not to
mention an ongoing serious internal split within the PSUC over political fragmenta-
tion and incompetence.

Leopoldo Bspuny. a 61-year-old lawyer who is one of the principal theorists of

the Catalonian pro-Soviet faction. said: "We are going to try to establish a demo-
cratic congress in practice. but if our requests are ignored, we will hold our

own assembly. which will take place right after the official congress."

The split within Catalonian communion has become more and more pronounced within
the last 2 nonths. "It is up to the menbers to decide whether to establish a new
party and the time will be that possible constituent congress." Bspuny affirmed.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"he pro-Soviets have little influence in the rest of the country. but carry con-
sidel’able weight in Catalonia. What is the reason for this presence of hardline
col-nunism in the most developed region with the most moderate electorate? Several
reasons are given in the corridors of the Central Omittee's headquarters in Madrid.
They first cite the "democratitis" of the PSUC's previous leadership, which. for
lack of authority. permitted the expansion and maneuvering of the "orthodoxy."

The second reason given is the Soviet Union's clandestine activities and third.

as s result of the irritation over unemployment. the status of i-nigrants and elec-
tion results.

The fact that a man such as 71-year-old Pere Ardiaca. the founder of the PSUC and
who has great prestige among co-unists. is leading the rebellion against Carrillo
has helped to give the Catalonian pro-Soviets an image of cohesion.

These rebels have now formed a--"parallel." the leadership criticises—coordinating
committee. are publishing a weekly bulletin in which they explain their political
positions and have launched a canpaign to collect signatures and attract members.
They are also backed by about 1.000 Workers Cos-isaions cadres.

According to Pere Ardiaca. "Our identity as conunists is at stake. From a general
standpoint. because agreeing to the leadership's denands means a return to social
democracy; from an internationalist standpoint. because it means isolating ourselves
from all connunist parties and finally. from the standpoint of Spanish and Catalonian
politics, because it means actually giving in to the right. We have to become
comunists again; only in that way will we be able to recover lost ground."

New Coununist Parties

Another expelled pro-Soviet. Francisco Garcia Salve. Father Paco. is also currently
very active in trying to establish a "true" Harxist-Leninist coununist party. He
has just published a book, "Por que sonos conunistas" [why we Are Constraints].

In which he not only calls for the creation of a new party but also provides advice
on how to start building such a party.

'-et us build a new coununist party." Garcia Salve writes. "He must get on with
'I.." And with the most fiery fervor and euphoria. he repeats: "Filled with that
w: inspiration. with that strength which propels us along the path awaiting us:

:he unity of all comunists in creating the new Spanish Conunist Party." And

..e book concludes: "This green tree, tender and looking toward the sea. is planted
Iwere."

5ut from this side. even looking toward the sea. unity does not appear easy. An
r-‘d leader. Enrique Lister, the founder of the Fifth Regiment in the civil war. a
general in the Soviet Army and in other Eastern countries and the general secretary

another pro-Soviet group. scowls and stresses loudly that there should be no
. her connunist parties.

Areaking with the PCB general secretary is not a sufficient guarantee. The first
'hnught of all those who break with the party is to create their own party." And
.iuter goes on to say that the practical thing for his organization to do is to
"mamtain relations for specific actions with all those who share our views." be-
v-ruse'amng the anti-Carrillists there are all kinds. even people like the Euro-
7... Hints. "ho have little liking for Santiago Carrillo'e anticoslsunist and anti-
ism."

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE 0NI.Y

1f the pro-Soviets seem determined to establish a new party. with the aim of creating
a situation such as that in Greece-where there are two parties. an orthodox majority
party and another small. Buroconnunist party-.the reformers are taking another approscl

The plan which the Euroreformers have prepared also seems confused. Personal pride.
political differences and views on organization have managed to permeate the ranks
of Eurocomunist supporters. dashing any possibility of homogeneity or understanding.

Carrillists and reformers acknowledge that they have made nonmental mistakes and
that they were wrong not to estimate the consequences of their actions. ﬂow the
situation is irreversible and each side is devoting its time and energy to justifying
its own positions and belittling opposite views as loudly as possible.

Free the time the problem developed up to the present time. it is not clear why
the reformers. who agree with Carrillo's foreign policy and with the main features
of domestic policy strategy. have broken almost completely with the party over
issues of internal operation.

"We reformers." Jaime Sartorius admits. "have also made gross errors which have

led to a weakening of the party on both sides. to a loss of its credibility and
possibly to an election defeat as well. And sore seriously. to its social isolation.
But still most at fault is the leadership, which has the means and the power to

try to resolve this situation."

Another group of reformers is much more critical. Amparo Rubiales. vice chairman
of the Seville delegation. states: "I believe that there is no way out and that
there will only he a long-term solution. " Julio Anguita, the mayor of Cordoba.
confirms: "A solution will be more and more difficult."

This is the opinion of most municipal representatives. among whom the reformers

have their greatest strength. But they do not want to leave the PCB. They hope

to be expelled. which they consider to be more and more inevitable. Their intention
is not to form another party. but rather "collectives," “platforms" or "theoretical
revisions . "

There are very few reformers who would be bold enough to sever the umbilical cord
on their own or to join another political party. as Luis Larroque. vice chairman
of the Madrid delegation. has done. having requested entry into the P80! [Spanish
Socialist Workers Party]. "I know that my position is contrary to that of other
comrade reformers. who are thinking." Larroque answers. "about the possibility
of a middle path between socialism and comunism. I do not believe that; there
is no such electoral space.” Host reformers have adopted a wait-and-see stance
until one of two miracles happens: until Carrillo modifies his position or until
the 980?. changes.

But the PCS leadership. led by its general secretary. Santiago Carrillo. seems
more willing to do without 1.000 or 2,000 members than to allow a faction which
is bothersome. because of its criticism. to remain in the party. even though it

is a group of the beat prepared people.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The vice general secretary of the cos-uniats. Nicolas Sartoriua. will be in charge
of stopping the spread of the pro-Soviet and reforner he-orrhage that is draining
the PCB. "A debate eust be opened with the critical factions in order to integrate
than." Sartoriua says. proposing the channels of party by-laws as a fruework for
discussion.

The start of reconciliation will prove difficult. because expulsions are continuing
at the same rate as the signs of intransiganca. In Andalucia. for eat-ole. refor-ers
coaplain of being ignored when the tickets for the Andalucian Parli-sent were pre-
pared. when they are precisely the ones who enjoy the best public reputation.

An election defeat of the col-unists in Andalucia. within just a few nonths of

the general elections. could result in profound changes in the PCB. changes which
would undoubtedly affect Santiago Carrillo hinself. Many fear this and are starting
to plan for the post-Carrillo period. especially since the general secretary has
become the nain target of both pro-Soviets and Buroreforners. although for different
reasons and opposite sins.

A Difficult Future

Despite his harsh criticise of the Soviet Union. Carrillo continues to be the bridge
between Soviet synpathisers and those critical of "Soviet inperialisn." And not
only among rsnk-and-file members. but even along the Central and Bucutive Connittees

Leaders such as Romero Mario and Ignacio Gallego. when reforeers describe as pro-
Soviets and eve1 Stalinists, would be hard pressed to work together with Burocolsun-
ists in defining their party's political policy in the absence of a Santiago Carrillo.

The question of what happens after Carrillo today represents a disturbing unlmown
for the communists. especially since the PCB is running the risk. because of its
internal problems. of withdrawing into a shall and acting according to a defensive
policy of fear concerning national issues.

This latter question has now caught the attention of the leadership. During the
Fatalonian coununists' Trebsll period. Nicolas Sartoriue said: "The situation
requires that the leadership take the initiative. by putting the party in contact
with the masses. putting the leadership itself in close contact with party neabers.
in order to avoid the defensive tenptstions to which the party night yield and

as the only way of increasing our moral and political authority."

The Communist Party knows that it is risking the party's future with the present
crisis and its future views are thus aimed at overconing "traditional co-unisa.“
This requires two things: urging and convincing the electorate that the P802 is

a social-democratic party and devoting itself to what party nenbers call "occupying -
soaces in society."

L'tth only slight differences between socialist and cos-unist programs. the PCB

mill only be able to justify its existence by trying to displace the P503 toward

the right, in order to thus occupy the place of socialise. Its second strategy.
infiltrating society. would provide it with s new inage. which would at least render
credible its intention to govern. an image which even a party with few voters.

such as Popular Alliance. has today.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Santiago Carrillo's challenge is to overcome the problems of advancing this dual
strategy and preventing a loss of votes in the upcoming elections. Bis internal
obstacle lies in the difficulty of doing so with a party in crisis and being the
general secretary who has raised the most opposition among the lie-hers. Neither
Jose Bullejos nor Jose Dis: nor Dolores Ibarruri. his predecessors as head of the
PCB. created so such hatred or opposition among party nsnbars.

It nay be that such ill will is a tribute to Carrillo for his attupta to lodernise
the party. to accept democracy, to renove his organization iron the Soviet orbit
and to put coexistence above the class struggle. The result has been that the
strongest contradictions did not occur between the PCB and society. but within

the comunist fanily itself.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Infomcion y Ravistaa. S.A.

119l5
C80: 3110/84

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GROUND-AIR HISSILES, HEATHER CONDITIONS CHALLENGE LIGHT ARMY PLAHE
Paris ARHEBS D'AUJOURD'RUI in French Mar 82 pp 32-35

[Article by Col Bertrand de Lacroix de Vaubois (a graduate of Saint-Cyr [class
of 1953], Col Bertrand de Lacroix de Vauboia served in the armored branch and
the cavalry. Having earned the BBHS [Certificate of Higher Military Studies],
he was assigned to the general staff of the First Army, and subsequently cre-
ated the 6th RHC [Helicopter Combat Regiment] at Compiegne. Assigned to the
ALAT [Light Army Plane] command in 1978, he is presently the assistant senior
officer to the ALAT commmnding general. He has more than 3,000 hours of flying
time.): “TheEnemiesof the ALAT"]

[Text] Combat helicopters are faced with a multitude of threats.
The permanent ones. connected with weather and urban develop-
ment. can be attenuated by appropriate training. The others
arise in combat, and these are more difficult to parry.

The particular qualities of helicopters--mobility, maneuverability. transport
and reach capacity--give the Army's light-aviation formations tactical possi-
bilities that are of great advantage vis-a-vis the requirements of ground com-
bat. However, these possibilities are attenuated by passive or active threats
that limit their regular availability on the battlefield and sometimes make
them vulnerable.

The first threata have to do with certain meteorological phenomena or the over-
flying of built-up areas; unfortunately, these threats are ongoing and exist in
peacetime too. The second are the doing of the enemy. with his antiaircraft
weapons or his own helicopters equipped with intensive-fire weaponry based on
the most advanced technology.

Let us attempt to identify them and to describe the parries that can decrease
our helicopters' vulnerability.

The Passive Threats

There is a very widespread notion that the ALAT flies only in good'weather.
This [8 not at all true--first of all, because the borderline between good and
bad weather is often difficult to define in the European theater, and secondly
because the safety of the personnel makes it necessary to impose in peacetime
measures that are far more severe than in combat.

20
IOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOB1OFFMJAI.USE(NVLV

  
 
 
 
    
 

VolsTBA sanssidt(l,)dsnls (1,.)
uuoniudmfpeusoadnne

Volsmou unique; svet(l$)
Alkun(2)dmulésbnleuuunn.

(l6)
' Volt TBA ou Wave:
Mﬁmnduunhhnuuumut

 
    
     
   
    
     

deTBAtmluﬁousswn
Aﬂamnduulidonnxonnut
' (16)

 
 

Volsi altitude dc shunt.
(17)

Vols a mama: dc accurate
(17)

(I) This type of Very-Low-Altitude flight is presently done only be the crews
of the ALAT Night Experimentation Center and by experimental flights.

(2) HICAN: microtuhe binoculars.

 

Key:
1. Night levels 12. Very dark
2. Definition of night 13. or
3. 1 per year 14. VLA [Very Low Altitude) flight unaided
b. Amount of light (1) in regions whose relief has little
5. Measured in millilux irregularity
6. Moon o clouds 15. VLA or tactical flights with HICAN (2)
7. Types of flight possible in known region
8. Very bright l6. VLA or tactical flights with HICAN in
9. Bright known region
10. Intermediate 1?. Flights at safety altitude
11. Dark

 

Reduction of visibility (night. clouds or fog). snow and frost conditions,
electric-power lines--these are the dangers with which the ALA? crews are con-
tinually confronted.

Even though reduced-visibility conditions sometines offer the advantage of
masking movements and therefore of achieving surprise more surely, helicopters.

21
FOR OFFKIAI.USE(HNLY
FOI:0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY

not equipped with special instruments, need a minimum of space for moving
about. Study of the meteorological statistics enables one to form a more exact
idea of the constraints in this domain: they show that in Europe, visibility is
greater than l.8 km and the ceiling is higher than 100 m an average of 95 days
out of 100.

If the standards for movement of ALAT helicopters are considered--500 to 800
meters of horizontal visibility, depending on whether a single machine or a
formation is involved, and flight at altitude of more than 100 m--one notes
that these constraints are not very limiting. But if one wants to be able to
use one's weaponry effectively, one has to be able to see the target correctly,
especially if the practical range of the munition is capable of reaching

4,000 m, as with the “at. Night complicates the use of the machines, inasmuch
as they generally fly "by sight."

In recent years, the ALAT has made a spectacular leap forward in the use of its
nighttime resources: in 1974, 3,500 hours were flown, on bright nights and at
above-ground altitudes on the order of 300 meters, and in 1981, 12,000 hours
were flown in dark nights and at variable altitudes, sometimes no more than 50
meters.

This type of flying, now well-mastered, considerably increases the effective-
ness of the ALAT, since it permits sac movements of 150 to 200 kilometers, dawn
actions after nighttime positioning, helicopter transport to known zones bea-
coned by personnel of the recipient units, or participation in night crossings,
etc (see table).

In addition to these possibilities in flying by sight or with use of HICAN bi-
noculars, there are those offered by the practice of instrument flight, which
permits movement in clouds or in fog, with the sole restriction of avoiding
storm clouds (cumulonimbus). whose turbulence risks damaging the instruments.

There is one particularly dangerous enemy that it has not been possible to
eliminate: icing--that is. the appearance of ice over the whole of an aircraft
flying in a humid atmosphere at negative temperature. Contrary to airplanes,
no helicopter to date seems to have a complete deicing device. At present, the
only really effective counter consists in not flying under icing conditions.

In our regions, the development of urban zones entails multiplication of over-
head wires, electrical or other. They are the helicopter pilot's nightmare:
over the last 8 years, there have been lb ALAT helicopter collisions with
lines, causing the destruction of 5 machines and wounding or killing a certain
number of personnel.1

Detection of wires is in its exploratory phase with development of LlDAR (Light
Detection and Ranging), which acts like radar but with greater precision, while
having shorter range.

I. To our knowledge, the 0.5. Army Aviation has experienced a percentage of
collisions with lines in relation to flying hours that is roughly equal to
ours.

22
FOIIOIFICUULIENE(H‘LY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A last resource has been designed and tested by the Canadians: it involves a
big shears,mounted on the cabin, that cuts the wire when it is contacted. It
seems that this device is effective for any wire that hits the cabin. but it
does nothing about collisions with the main rotor.

Night, fog, icing conditions, electric lines-these are some of the threats
that the ALAT has to contend with and that it is seeking to counter. The most
effective_way to counter them lies in the skill of the crews, with rigorous and
ongoing training, and especially, the application of strict flying procedures.

In addition to these "enemies," whose effects can be attenuated by appropriate
measures in peacetime, there are, in the event of conflict, other threats that
are far more dangerous. Put into effect by the enemy of the moment and aimed
at destroying the helicopter, they are either ground-based or serial.

The Ground-Based Threats

They take the form of actions on the ground or from antiaircraft weaponry. Ar-
tillery fire presents a threat to helicopters, which are vulnerable to projec-
tile bursts. Against such a danger there is no perfect parry, the only pallia-
tive being to avoid being seen during positioning and to stay in one position
for the shortest time possible.

Ground-to-air weaponry as such is far more formidable. We cite some of it:

--the portable ground-to—sir missile of the Redeye or 3A7 type. The latter,
with its Mach 1.5 speed and its 6,000-m range, is an excellent individual weap-
on against helicoptera flying at low altitude--all the more so because it is
almost impossible to detect it ahead of time, since it is not tied to a ve-
hicle. It is formidable because of its infrared self-buidance system;

--the very-short-range ground-to-sir missile such as the Soviet 5A9, also with
infrared self-guidance system, is capable of hitting a target at more than
7,000 m. Being transported by a launching vehicle, it is easier to detect,
though;

--the multitube cannon of the ZSU-23/4 type--a formidable weapon because of its
effectiveness at very low altitudes, its speed of readiness for action, and its
great mobility on the battlefield.

ZSU-23/4 cannons and 8A9 missiles are quite often grouped in the same mixed
battery. and the crews for the latter weapon have available to them the data
from the cannon's radar for detection and preorientation.

Depending on their capacities, these weapons constitute the priority target of
armed helicopters. An example of the importance attached to this task is fur-
nished us by the Americans, who have for this purpose developed a particularly
effective high-performance charge for the 2.7S-inch rockets that can be fired
by their Cobra helicopters.

If one does not have such offensive weaponry, the only counter, apart from the
mounting of special equipment designed to diminish the thermal signature of the
turbines, lies in continual practice of tactical flying, as close to the ground

23
FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
as possible, and respect for the reach offered by the modern antitank missiles
[as published].

The Aerial Threats

Until the relatively recent past, these threats were represented only by high-
performance tactical-support aircraft. It was considered that while such a
threat represented a certain danger to helicopters surprised on the ground, it
was minimal for the same machines in flight, because of the difficulty of spot-
ting them and their great maneuverability.

The recent reappearance of armored airplanes on the battlefield--the American
A-lO, for example--presents the risk of imminent introduction of a new kind of
threat. so far not very well identified.

Such is not the case with the heavily armed helicopters such as the Soviet
Hl-Zé Hind or HI-8. or the American AR-l S Cobra. As Colonel Belov, a Soviet
author, stresses in "Soviet Military Review"; "Just as the best antitank weapon
has always been the tank in the conflicts of the past, the helicopter should
prove to be the most effective antihelicopter weapon in future operations."

Indeed. the existence of a hostile cannon-helicopter in the battlefield repre-
sents a more acute danger than the high-performance fighter planes, for its

use environment is the same as that of friendly helicopters. Flying at the
same altitude and having the same turning radii. the enemy combat helicopter
detects and attacks other helicopters. without its being possible to employ ef-
fective parries against it in the face of this threat.

By way of information, the carrying capacity of an HI-Za Hind is as follows: a
12.7-mm quadruple machine gun of Gatling type mounted in a turret under the
nose, capable of use both for air-to-air combat and for air-to-ground firing;
A antitank missiles; and 4 carriers with 32 S7-mm rockets (or a bombs of 50 to
250 kg).

In the face of such a danger and until their powerful AH-64 is placed in serv-
ice. the Americans have decided to improve the offensive capacities of their
Cobras by replacing the present 7.62-mm Hinigun turret with a far more high-
performance turret capable of receiving either a ZOﬁMH or a 30-mm three-tube
Gatling cannon.

The French Army is going toward the placing in service of an SATCP2 capable of
air-to-air firing and construction of a specialized protection-support helicop-
ter.

Meanwhile, the problem of self-defense remains.

In the face of such a range of dangers. one cannot but wonder about the justi-
fication of the military helicopter; yet more and more countries are equipping

2. Very-Short-Range Weapon System

26
Fill(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(MNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE40NLY

themselves with such materiel, and the number of military helicopters built is
constantly growing. Two examples show why this current trend is well-founded:

--despite the extension of night flying, the development of instrument flying
and the collisions with lines,3 the accident rate of the French ALAI has
dropped steadily in recent years. Statistics for the year 1979 show that it
was seven times lower than for civilian helicopters;

--during the Chad operations, 36 impacts against our helicopters were noted,
yet despite this. none interrupted its mission. Likewise, helicopters belong-
ing to foreign countries have continued flying despite considerable material
damage caused by ASA.“

Let us therefore be optimistic. while at the same time instilling in our crews
a concern for painstaking preparation of missions. In the absence of invulner-
ability. that alone will enable them, in time of conflict, first of all to move
undetected. and subsequently, to remain untakable.

3. None of these collisions occurred in the course of tactical exercises.

4. Ground-to-air artillery

COPYRIGHT: I982 Revue des forces armees frencaises "Armees d'Aujourd'hui"

11267
C80: 3100/498

25
[NIB 0i“ﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂE(HHLY
INCREASED EFFICIENCY, RBDUCED VULNBRABILITY SOUGHT FOR HELICOPTER
Paris ARHEES D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Mar 82 pp 36-38

[Article by Lt Col Andre Martin: (a graduate of Saint-Cyr [class of 1954). Lt
Col Andre Martini is a qualified test pilot and has h,700 hours of flying time.
He has commanded the 1st Helicopter Combat Regiment. Re is presently chief of
the ALAT [Light Army Plane] group of the Army Technical Section at Valence.):
”Combat of the Future--the Evolution of the Materiel"!

[Excerpts] Toincreasethecombatcapacitiesofthehelicopter,
three actions are currently being carried out: overcoming
poor visibility conditions, fighting enemy helicopters and
reducing vulnerability to antiaircraft weapons.

When the subject of use of the ALAT is raised, two limitations are necessarily
cited:

--it is not possible to construct a maneuver that includes the ALA? because its
availability is too often subject to meteorological conditions;

--helicopters are too fragile and too vulnerable to be engaged in combat zones.

These reservations are largely well-founded. It is true that helicopters can-
not fight when fog hits. But who can? It is true that a well-placed projec-
tile can do in a Gazelle or a Puma. But it has to be hit.

The available techniques and appropriate modes of use already make it possible
to reduce these constraints. For tomorrow, the studies in progress permit one
to foresee, for the helicopter, less dependence on meteorological conditions as
well as better ability to keep its freedom of action and to fight on a modern
battlefield.

Night Vision

Increasing the regular availability of helicopters means giving them the capac-
ity to overcome reduced visibility conditions at night or under low clouds.
since the security of the movement of the craft under these conditions has
practically been ensured, it remains to give the crews the means for combat--
that is, for piloting, observing, identifying and firing.

26
FOI.0PIICIULIJSI:CN‘LY
FOR¢OFFﬂJAl.USEZONLV

Combat in fog is still in the realm of the future and will not be examined
here. It would, in effect, require extremely elaborate aids, the technology of
which is far from mastered and the cost of which is prohibitive.

Night combat. though, offers more promising outlooks for an attractive cost-
effectiveness balance-sheet. Two techniques are presently envisioned for pro-
viding the crew with the necessary information:

--intensification of light;
--thermal imagery.

The ALAT Night Experimentation Center and the Technical Section of the Army
have carried out evaluations that have led the EHAT [Army General Staff] to or-
der an initial series of binoculars termed "third generation." The microtubes
with which they are fitted are more sensitive than those of the preceding gen-
erations and offer better definition. They therefore have greater range (up to
20 percent more). This equipment makes it possible to read the on-board in-
struments and to obtain a good image of the outside in dark night. Piloting is
thus made possible in 75 percent of cases. at an altitude on the order of 50 m
above the ground--in any case, above the power lines, which are not detectable
in all cases. Firing, though, is not possible by virtue of the ranges ob-
tained. Thermal imagery has to be used.

The Technical Section of the Army and the Night Experimentation Center have
evaluated thermal cameras mounted on helicopters. The tests show that the ob-
servation and firing functions can be achieved under good conditions, but that
piloting remains very tricky and calls for greater system sophistication, es-
pecially to furnish to the pilot the image corresponding continually to the di-
rection observed.

It therefore seems realistic to go first toward a mixed system combining micro-
tube binoculars for piloting and thermal camera for observation and firing, un-
til the integral system, such as the one on the American AAH [expansion un-
known]. can be installed on French machines.

The Antihelicopter Helicopter

Increasing the regular availability of the ALAT in the field also means giving
it the means for preserving if freedom of action in the face of enemy helicop-
ters. The helicopter has to be given the means for downing a machine of the
same type that is moving, as it is. in tactical flight and that it detects at
200 km per hour as it comes around the edge of a wood.

It is more or less obvious that the man in the best position to react effec-
tively in such a situation is the one flying the craft--that is, the pilot. he
has to have a weapon that he can aim immediately and of sufficient effect to
have a good probability of neutralizing the adversary. Initially, this weapon
could be a medium-caliber cannon with a practical range of more than 1,000 me-
ters and a rate of fire giving high fire density, so as to make up for the
weaponsystem'sscattering, no matter how sophisticated the system might be. In
the second phase, an air-to-air missile should be adopted, precisely because of
the ease of use that it provides. It is indeed considered the most effective
antihelicopter weapon.

27
FIHICMHHCIAI.USE(NNLY
The helicopter is a platform whose instability is well-known, and high-perform-
ance conduct-of-fire is therefore necessary in order to achieve real effective-
ness of the weapons system. It should therefore make it possible, in particu-
lar, to do telemetering, automatic tracking of target. to take the movements of
the carrier helicopter and the target into account, and finally to aim the
weapon on the basis of the firing corrections calculated. Immediate use of
such conduct-of-fire will require the use of a helmet sight, which implicitly
requires that the weapon be mounted on a turret whose clearances are sufficient
to permit aiming of the weapon in the forward sector. In other circumstances.
use of an electronic sight will be necessary to permit use of the weapon system
under good conditions.

The weapon, conduct-of-fire and helicopter now constitute a whole; thus the
armed helicopter should be specific to the military need and be defined around
its weapon system. In addition, it will be necessary, despite the use of so-
phisticated materiel. to seek simplicity of employment.

A good many of the technologies cited above have not been totally mastered yet.
Thus, in order to take on at this time, with minimal effectiveness, enemy heli-
copters that threaten the freedom of action of our own machines, it is desir-
able to equip them with existing weapons assemblies.

Reducing Vulnerability

Finally, increasing the ALAT's regular availability on the battlefield means
reducing the machines' vulnerability.

Tactical flying already makes it very difficult for a projectile to hit a heli-
copter, but with the performance characteristics of the specialized weapons im-
proving, it is necessary to use supplementary protection, diminishing the
machines' signatures, improving their resistance to impacts and limiting the
consequences of forced landings.

This is the object of the studies in progress, which will be applied to the ex-
isting fleet insofar as possible, and then integrated into all future craft.

The French choice of small, heavily engined machines that fit easily into the
relief is in itself a factor that reduces vulnerability, by diminution of the
visual signature.

The use of composite materials, for fabrication of the blades in particular,
makes electromagnetic detection difficult, while backswept cuffs and fenestrons
considerably reduce the sound levels.

The infrared signature remains the most preoccupying one. While thinning and
diversion of the jet flows from the turbine are sufficient to reduce the effec-
tiveness of self-guidance systems that use the frequency band close to the via-
ible, the situation may change with the appearance of missiles whose self-guid-
ance systems work on higher frequencies.

To improve resistance to impacts, not only the present weapons but also the fu-
ture ones have to be taken into consideration-~in particular, the electrostatic

K\";) 28

FORlOFFﬂJA1.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proximity-fuse missiles, the sntihelicopter munitions of tanks, and the neu-
tralization weapons (lasers, smoke bombs). The solutions envisioned combine
various techniques:

--genera1 architecture providing judicious arrangement of the elements in rela-
tion to one another so as to create natural masks;

--choice of materials, especially composites, insensitive to gash effect;

--redundsncies, self-shutoff of tanks;

--srmoring (opaque or transparent)--a solution to be adopted only as a last re-
sort, since it penalizes in terms of mass (50 kg/mz) and is in principle re-
served for crew protection.

Finally. if the machine has to make a forced landing. the consequences for the
materiel and the personnel must be limited. The characteristics of a heli-
copter's crash protection depend essentially on its basic design. The present
machines, which were not designed in this spirit, offer a probability of sur-
vival for vertical speeds less than S to 7 m per second. On the other hand,
when this concern is introduced in the design stage, it is possible to achieve
a far higher level of protection, up to 10 or even 12 m per second, as with the
American AAH. The rule of the art is to use the existing elements. both for
their own function and as elements of protection. The techniques employed
range from anticrash seats capable of reducing vertical acceleration from 60 g
to 20 g to beams capable of absorbing energy by collapsing. and also special
tanks and flexible fuel lines.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces armees francaises "Armees d'Aujourd'hui"

11267
cso: 3100/499 8ND

29
FIN!(”HNC1AI.USE(NVLY