APPROVID FOR NIL-MI: 20°7IOZIOO: CIA-RDPOS-OOOBOR0001000300024
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100030002-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPHS L/8299

1 Match 1979

TRANSlATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 114/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030002-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are rranscribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. there no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items «are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNBRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
). lee-paeu'a Access”- No.

 

mus L/ 8299

BIBLIOCRA'NIC OA‘I’A
SNEET

TRANSLATION; 0" WESTERN EUROPE.

 
     
 

  
   
    

 

Report no

1 March 1979

I- zealots-a; Ouaanuauoa Keys.
0.

l0. l’nojrn/Taal/Iovl Unit No.

      
 
  

  

(POUO 14/79)

  
  
      
      
    
       
     
    
        
 
           
   
         
       
  
 
 

 
 

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

 
   
   

ll. Connect/Gum No.

  

 

II. Type 0' new: a Penal

12. Sponsotan. Ovaaoiaeuon Nate and Mea-
Coven.)

As above

Id. Abauana

  

‘l'he aerial report contains political/economic intonation on Heat European
energy. finance and trade policy matters as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine, programs and problems of the major columnist parties.
including their relations with con-mist parties outside the West European
area. .

  

- Key I'anda and Dormer Analysis. In. Oeulipwu

 

Political Science _International affairs Lune-hours

  

Sociology _Auatria _Netherlanda
Propaganda _Be1;iu __Norvay
Bcononica _Oanada _Portusal
Energy _Cyprus LSpain
Indus try _Demark _$veden
Trade _l-‘inland _SHitaerland
finance Ll’rance _‘rurkey
__Greecc _United Kingdom
m Idendien/Opea-Eaded Tens _Iceland _Heat Ger-any
1: Italy

   

 
 
  
  
  

m. cmrtneumcow SC, 50. 10

IO. Aunlabaluy Statement

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available l’ron JPRS.

   
 

mu—
. . , 40
mm

run roan an ac senoouczo “"°""°‘ ""“’"

  

'0.“ Q'lla II C-‘v. lull.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8299
1 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(9000 14/79)

CONTENTS

FRANCE

Position of Various PS 'Currents' Analyzed
(Franz-Olivier Giesbert; LB mum. OBSDWATKUR,

30 NC 78)ossoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo

Laurent Pabiue Co-enta on PS Unity. Economic Austerity
(Laurent Patina; LB NOUVBL onsmam, 13-21 Jan 79)....

ITALY
lie-bership. Structure, Fiscal Policy of Labor Unions
(Salvatore Coi; IL SOLE-21¢ ORE. various dates)............
SPAIN
PNV President Discusses Basque Perspective on Constitution
(CAMBIO 16, 12 Nov 78)..
Catalan Viewpoint on Constitutional Issues
(Jordi Pujol Soley; CAEIO 16. 12 Nov 78)................
WEST GERMANY

Public holoyeea Union [lead intenievad on Del-Ma
(using muncker Interview; Sim. 11 Jan 79)...............
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY

FRANCE

POSITIONS 0? VARIOUS PS 'CURRMS' ANALYZBD
Paris LE NOUVItl. OBSERVATBUR in French 30 Dec 78 pp 25-26

[Article by Praia-Olivier Gissbert: "Socisliat Party: Inventory of a
True Debate")

[Text] "111 the "er (5f the three" take place? On 6 January. in the big
hell of the third underground floor of the national assembly. where the
directive co-ittee of the Socialist Party will hold its session. Francois
Hitterrsnd.Pierre Hauroy. and Michel Rocsrd will know if they will truly
becone unstitched. Until then there is suspense. In any case. as a few
weeks sepsrste us from the Congress in lhtz. the tespersture is rising.
This is the tine of unifestos end polenica. The socialist leaders are
tense as on the eve of cosbst. Yet. will they drew their swords fro. their
scnbbsrds? All of then are resdy or. at least. so they say.

Believing in preserving his lugs of unifier. Pierre Hauroy keeps repeat-
ing that he has decided to achieve. at all costs. s synthesis of sajority
trends. This would work against some Rocsrd and Hitterrsnd supporters.
"In any case." he said. sounding more cct-enicel than ever. "a synthesis
will be achieved. because the party wants it. If we act as collectively
stupid in exposing our divisions. the Socialist Party could slip in a few
Ionths. Therefore. we oust put an end to the dialectics of an internal
divisiveness . "

Yes. but-how? Not necessarily by closing down the debate which is beginning
today within the Socialist Party. for the play which is being staged in
"France's first party” is. nevertheless. for sore than a family affair.

The political theater is such that all we see on the stage is the bouncing
back of a settlement of accounts. Beyond that. however. basic questions
are being decided concealed by too ouch excite-eat. It is in that area
however. that the reel debste should stsrt. Its topics are quite well
known.

FOR OFFICIAL USE OR?
l’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Break with Capitalism

Francois Mitterrand willingly speaks of a "break" and so do the ”historical
chiefs" of the CERES [Center for [Socialist] Studies. Research. and Educa-
tion]. So does Gaston Defferre. Michel Rocard speaks of it almost never.
to he against it? No. he is for. However, he does not like the ten, that
is all. With this latter." says Patrick Viveret. for the past 30 years
one of the theoreticisna of the Rocsrd team. "the practice of the forked
tongue has reached its peak. "nun proves the e..tent to which the Mollet
teaptation threatens our party. With such kind of hollow foraula one can-
not prepare the party for real change." "Lenin." goes on to say the
deputy from Yvelines, "took four years to break with capitalise. There-
fore. . . ."

Therefore. the debate on the "break" is quite sinly theological. Its
evangelists. actually. are in great trouble the aoaent they try to define
it. To tone it is the "irreversible threshold" to be reached within the
first 100 days of the future leftist goverment. To others it is the tine
when social relations among forces overturn. Like Pierre Msuroy. Gilles
Martinet. or' Dodini'que'raddei. Michel Rocard would rather speak of a "pro-
cess." He believes that a county cannot be turned upside down suddenly.
by adopting three laws and asking three notions. replacing one system with
another. Nor does Jean Poperen. A Mitterrand supporter, hardly suspected
of supporting Rocard. the deputy fro. the Rhone says: "In history there
has been no touch with a nagic wand. No such thing has ever existed."

Me reainds us that our "bourgeois revolution-«he 'classical' exaaple of
a revolution--took several decades."I

2. The Market Econouy

This is. above all. a seeantic quarrel. Michel Rocard inaugurated it by
proaoting the virtues of the asrket. "let us call a cat a cat.” he said
one day. "All experiaenta which have led to the disappearance of the
risk and of economic penalties have consisted of building bureaucratic
developeent uodels." llis plan is clear: The econoey Iuat be guided.
framed, and corrected; the Iarket would do the rest. . . .

Francois Mitterrand shares that view. "Outside of any aonopoly phenoeenon,"
he stated two years ago. "the Iarket econouy will continue to douinate
the developeent of French society. . . . It is not the purpose of the
socialist experience to elilinate it." Yes. but the first secretary al-
llowed. at that tine. one of his lieutenants. Pierre Jose. to accuse
Michel Rocard of having spoken once of "global Iarket control." Ah!

Joxe is the lost Marxist oriented and the least Rocardian. i.e.. he be-
longs to the Mitterrand tests. A plodder. he has the particular character-
istic of being thoroughly falilisr with his files. So is Rocard. A
rather stony coapetition developed between these two set: within the
Socialist Party. while Francois Migterrand rained uninvolved.

2

POI! OFFICIAL USE MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet. the first secretary easily supports today the predominance of the
plan over the narket'. Yet. so do Mauroy and Rocard. Any possible breach
would be betweeh the hitterrand-Hauroy-Rocard trio and the CERES which is
more of a "planner" than all the others.

3. The State and Nationaliutions

A graduate of the National ministration School and the Finance Inspec-
torate. and forner secretary general of the Nation's Accounts Coll-ission.
Michel Rocard presents hisself as the chief salemn of the state. Yet.
he is the lost anti-atatiat aaong the socialist leaders. One of his thene
songs is. "the establisluent of socialism in France does not go through
the strengthening of our adninistrative apparatus. already otsnipotent as
it is." This was also said in May 1968. . . .

A super-regionalist yat less reticent in terns of nationalisations, Pierre
Msuroy does not think of fighting the state. Nor does Francois Hitterrand.
The first secretary of the Socialist Party, who considers nationalization
one of the funda-ental principles of socialist. opposes Rocard's "basin":
"To think that the base could instinctively resolve the problcss which n
methodical organization alone could undertake would lead us into utopia."
At CERES. hearing such "Girondist" atatnents by the deputy fro: Yvelines,
the "historical chiefs" raise their ans: ”Not to use the levers offered
by the state would lean cutting one's own hands! If we do not take then
over the state apparatus would turn against us!"

6. Econosic harshness

On this point as well Michel Rocard is quite alone. lie uphaaizas that,
"the left must not prosise nore than it could keep." Before the elections
Rocard opposed the Socialist Party leadership on the sum [Interoccupatinnal
Mini-u- Growth ﬂage] of 2.1000 francs. Facing the Co-unist Party, he
thought that the 2,000 franc level should have been supported—the initial
socialist position. "Let us explain to the workers that, by skipping
stages. we risk an inflation erplosion. They would understand." Pressured
by Pierre Hauroy. Francois Hitterrand finally decided in favor of the
2.400 franc sure. he does not regret it. "had a leftist govem-ent been
unable to set up a 2,600 franc SHIC in liarch 1978," he stated to LA CROIX,
last Tuesday. ”it would have meant that such a goverI-ant would have been
totally ineffective!"

The sane applies to the last najor socialist proposal: The 35-hour work
week with no drop in wages. In this case. Hichel Rocard believes that one
should dare to lower the high salaries. Francois Hitterrand‘shrugs. In
his case. unquestionably, politics is nore important than econosics. This

applies to Rocard as well even though the latter adds snilingly: ”Providing.
however. that one is able to control it.”

3

.POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. International Politics

0n the preceding matters Pierre hauroy is ready to accept any kind of
coeproeiae. he stops short at international politics. He considers bending
the European line followed by the Socialist Party out of the question.
Socialisa's future goes through Europe. Not s Europe as conceived by
Giscard. naturally. but that of the "workers." Inevitably. the European
social desoctats will evolve. If criticized in his presence. the nyor

of Lille always concludes by saying: "True. they wake errors. Frequent-
ly they are too cautious. however. these are workers and they hold the
power." Let the French socialists be warned. . . .

Michel Rocard is also a European. Both men share the view of Gille Har-
tinet or Dosinique Taddei that one must answer positively and i-ediately
the call of the Italian Co-uniat Party for tightening up relations among
the European political left. “they are horrified by the wave of chauviniaa
which is rolling today over France. Soaetiacs they ask themselves whether
Francois hittcrrand has not lost his European fiber.

He has not. A Europvnn from the very first. France is Hitterrand has al-
ways favored the development of the Canon Market within the fraaework of
the Treaty of Rome. He has always called for a “free France within an
independent Europe." Yet. true. he has becoee quite cautious. he would
rather let Giscard to extricate hinself with "his cum" type of Europe. The
Socialist Party's fomlation of the great European manifesto has been
delayed. ln parliasent the socialists abstain in voting on European prob-
lens. Actually. Jean-Pierre Cot has been so affected by the "tiaidity"
of his party when it concerns Europe that he has asked for a "clarifica-
tion" neeting of the socialist group in the National Assenbly. ”If this
goes on." he says, "we will end up nowhere." Indeed. everything has been
clarified. and the Europeans within the Socialist Party have found then-
selves facing the coebined assaults sounted by the hitterrand-chosen
people. the CERES or the . . . "wine growers." what worries the Europeans
within the Socialist Party. in fact. is the ascendancy of what they de-
scribe as "the new nationalien" within the Hitterrand current. through
Pierre Jose. that sane Joxe who holds today the position of the first
secretary's great political coordinator.

However. it is probably in terns of the CEIES that the anti-European
ideology has scored the biggest number of points in recent months. The
ninority's contribution plan is greatly hindered by the dislike of a
"Gerun-Nserican Europe." flhe "historical chiefs" of the CERES willingly
state that France would be able to accoquish a revolution only through

a nationalistic upsurge: They have no intention of letting the right
accoeplish this. All this is onto-passed within an overall view of the
world. The view is quite pessimistic. It is also very "authoritarian
socialist." Thus. the CERES denounces the ”anti-Vietnam" cupsign launched
by the leftist press: "linen rights are part of the debate on hulsnisa.
on the docinant ideology."2 They are concerned with "the use of dissidence
by i-perialist ideology."

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Unification of the Left

Everyone favors it. Opinions diverge on the way to pro-ore it. According
to Pierre Mauroy. Michel Rocard. or Jean-Pierre Cot, a new policy must be
formulated, along with a new substance of such a unification. Their thesis
is the following: "The Socialist Party can no longer preach union with
the Oo-unist Party without an effort to intensify the discussion. linit-
ing itself to violent critician of the conunist line. End to the wait-
and-see attitude! No more a defensive union!” "He must heap questions on
our partners." Gilles Hartinet says. how? Hell, the socialists will make
the co-unists "evolve" by questioning Soviet reality. the world crisis,
or else their contradictions between "social chauvinisn" and proletarian
internationalian.

Really? Neither Francois Hitterrand nor the CERES leadership believe this.
The former would like to ”keep up" with the Bpinay Line while the latter
would like to "return” to it. Yet. in their view, the ways to unity, long
and tortuous though they night he. have not changed since 19 March. llere
is the explanation of Gerard Delfau. one of the Fitterrand theoreticiana,
Paris-VII professor and Iayor of a null col-unity in the Herault: "In
the final account. one of the two big parties will have to take over. He
nuat first put the Co-uniat Party in the position of accepting the experi-
ence of a leftist union. outside of which it would not avoid an electoral
erosion. Then we oust be able to withstand the shock with it in the vari-
ous undertakings and associations. Such are our targets. Yet. it would
be absurd to plunge into an ideological debate with the (Jo-uniat Party."

7. The Party Concept

Pierre Mauroy and Michel Rocard dream of a great Socialist Party. less of
an "electoral nachine" and sore popular and stronger in the factories.

They willingly mention Francois Hitterrand‘a "preaidentialisa" and desand
"more collegial action at all levels." On this point their positions are
similar to those held by the CERES. However. to both Francois Mitterrand
has the opportunity to aention the state of French socialism when he as-
sued leadership in the Socialist Party in 1971. "Reader those scattered.
divided, worn out socialists. who had sunk to nothing."

So there. There are five big currents today within the Socialist Party:
The Mitterrand group; the French style social dmcratic noveaent, favoring
unity and decentralization. headed by Pierre Hauroy; Michel Rocard's self-
nanagessnt "Hendesian"; a new type of Marxian. free fro. the ideological
twists of a Gilles Hertinet or Christian Pierret; and the canes "progres-
sivion." None of these currents could govern the Socialist Party by itself.
Therefore. anything could happen before the Hat: Congress: All kinds of
alliances and twists. Including the Hitterrand-Hauroy-Rocard synthesis.

5

roe omcm. ass out! "
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

worms

1. See “Nona 80-" Tom Archniqueo" [Ila an :11 Archaic] by Jean
Poperen. Editions noblot.

2. means, November issue.
00mm: 1978 "10 Nouvel moenatcur"

5157
(:80: 8119/0745

6

1’03 OFFICIAL USE Gil-I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

LAURENT PABIUS oomw‘rs ON PS UNITY, BOOMC AUSTERITY
Paris LB NOWBL OBSERVATEUR in French 15-21 Jan 79 p 33

[Article by Laurent Fabius. deputy froa Seine-Maritime. aenber of the range-
nent comittee of the Socialist Party (PS) and associate of Francois Hitterrand]

[Text] When I found some 15 contributions from P8 activists on my table. I
was reminded of a remark node by woody Allen. It provides a good introduction
to our discussion: "The answer is 'yes'; but tell me again: what was the
question?" Accordingly. in the current polemics, in which the party's inter-
est is often neglected for the pleasure of a provocative state-ant. I suggest
that we abandon ready-made answers and get back to a few sinple questions.

1. Party unity is necessary. Without a doubt. But what is party unity?

In the first place party unity rests upon a certain number of points which,
one could say. sake up the Bpinay line: unity of the Left, class front.
self-nanageuent. nation. licution. planning. One cannot really be a partisan
of unity and question this premise. One cannot say that he agrees with group
strategy and reject essential aspects of the program which accompanies it.
One cannot proclaim his fidelity to the spirit of Epinay and speak of "auton-
omous action" of the PS. One cannot hope to extend socializations and to
nationalize without transferring capital property. One cannot declare his
attachment to the Plan and 'advocate maintenance of most of the present narket
operations. One cannot proclaim the international character of socialism
and take pride in nationalist feelings.

To seek unity also neans‘ wanting to be militant together. How many socialists
are today discouraged by the networks. bureaus and parallel finances being
maintained by certain individuals who sing the praises everywhere of forth-
rightness., democracy-and togetherness! How many new adherents drop out, dis-
appointed after a few meetings, because they come to fight against the Right
and find themselves thrust into vague procedural struggles between nino' clan
chieftains, constructors of sectarisnism and destroyers of activism. Is not
the desire for unity also a preference for the partisans of this unity over
the proponents of divisionism?

POl OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.POIl OFFICIAL USB.ONLY

2. Econosic stringency is necessary. Without a doubt. But what is econonic
stringency?

Is it a question of postponing socialism until the year 3000? Certainly not.
On the other hand. is it a question of deeanding everything inediately and
for everyone? Not that either. One readily confuses econonic stringency
with social stringency. But Ray-0nd barre is not an econonist of stringency;
he is only an econoaist of the Right. Of course. there is evidence that no
one can ignore today. Re are no longer living in the 1960's, during which
the necessary redistribution could have taken place on the surpluses alone
of large growth. France, subjected to the "laws of the world narhet." has
attained a degree of integration which'renders any political independence
sore delicate and sore necessary. That is true. even obvious, but it is part
of the trappings of a diplosa and not of econonic stringency.

0n the other side of the coin. a false. pseudoscientific idea is flourishing
concerning econoeic stringency. The raising of the smc [inter-occupational
niniaun growth wage] to 2.1.00 francs (April 1978 level) would not be stringent
because it is the shared opinion of Valery Giscard d'Bstaing and Ray-0nd
Barre. The reducing of the work week to 35 hours also would not be stringent
because Francois Ceyrac shares the opinion of these two nen. It is a quick
forgetfulness of the express conditions established precisely by the PS so
that these measures. which were socially necessary, would be econoeically
bearable: tightening the spectrun of revenues. aid to the empower-using
industries, progressiveness. negotiations. European harnonization. It is not
in the.foraulating of these proposals that stringency is lacking. It is in
the denying of the neans and conditions for these proposals. For examle,
failure to take into account the facts of the world situation. Or better
yet. doing without the essential tools such as credit control, a voluntarist
Plan. extension of worker rights, a new fiscal deal. Econonic stringency can
be lacking because of dog-atlas. It can also be lacking because of weakness.

3. The Socialist Party nust take into consideration the stakes of the
future. Without a doubt. But what are these stakes?

First. questions about the France of tonorrow: eaploynent and the tramtised
regions. independence, excessive inequalities. our entire country in the near
future. Let us go farther. Are we not in the process of shifting the center
of the world. fro. the Atlantic to the Pacific? "hat is the next stage after
the fragile oil respite? "hat are the consequences of and the remedies for
the denographic crises of the Heat? Are these not enough questions to nobilize
our energies?

The future is also the upconing elections. All socialists agree on the con-
struction of another Europe: however, we oust guard against drift. 1 an a

little concerned when I observe that the leadership of our party has had sub-
mitted to it a draft of the European progran of the Socialist Party which is
totally unacceptable for the defense of French socialise because it is nerely
an inport product. This concern seizes ne again when. a little later, there

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in an effort to once were question a decision of the socialist group in the
National Assembly. which had the audacity to vote against the govern-eat in
order to signal an end to the sabotaging of the Asselbly in the European TVA
[value-added taxl latter. 0n the other hand. we must shun the other drift
like the plague; i.e.. the nationalist drift. Nationalism is in accordance
with neither our economic not our political interests. nor with the vacation
of socialise. ls it not up to us to give our own answer: the Europe of the
workers of the 35 hours. of the "Airbus." etc.7

1 fully believe that the future will belong to those (no matter what their
age" who share with me these feelings, these questions and these propossla.
These individuals do not belong to any church and are not beholden to any
fietdcs. They are socialists; that is all. And they want a great Socialist
Party. This aspiration does not have the solidity of the cyclic alliance
between old resenteents and new anbitions. But it is fortunately, 1 think.
in the majority in the PS.

COPYRIGRT: 1978 "le Nouvel Observateur"

8143
080: 3100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

MERSHIPs STRUC‘NE. flm POLICY 0? MBOR WINS
Milan IL sour-26 on in Italian 29. 31 Aug 78: 3. 20 Sep 781 t. 11 Nov 78

[Article by Salvatore Ooi: “Behind the Labor Union Scenes”; for related

articles see JPRS L’8263. 25 January 1979 (P000 7/79) pp 18-25 and JPRS
110271., 12 February 1979 (ropo 11/79) 99 38-47)

{29 Aug 78, p 3)

[text] Oo-onplaces. reticenoe. half-truths have aur-
romded the organizational aspects of Italian labor
unions with aystery for a long tine. Md they still
surround it to a considerable degree. In the recent
past. ideological divisions. organizational weakness.
financial problem have justified gross taspering with
data or aere silence.

The picture of the situation has inroved slightly in
these last 3 years. In I977, at the tine of their
congresses, the can. {Italian General Confederation
of Labor). the CISL {Italian Confederation of Labor
Unions] and. for the first tine. also the UIL [Ital-
ian Union of Labor] disclosed figures on their own
aed>ere. Previously. the can. and the CISI. had pu-
blished soae figures on financing and on structure.
These data are, however. either inmlete and full
of gaps or very aggregate. for emle. were of
craft unions are counted in as single figure for
all Italy.

- ' In other countries, like Great Britain and Ger-any.
lehor union organizations sake no ayatery of their
organizational activity. It is not understood vhy.
in Italy. this is a letter reserved only for the
persons in charge of the confederation organization
bureaus. The investigation to he presented on
these pages will eaaaine three aspects priaarily:
the nﬁer of assbere in labor union organisations
in the period fro- 1968 to 1976, the labor union

structure. financing. mgoof the data to be

me omcm use om:
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

revealed in a study by Salvatore Get that we are be-
ginning to publish have not yet been reported by
labor mions.

In 1916, there were 0.245.399 sewers enrolled in the three labor union cen-
federations. 'Ihis figure also includes 1.099.335 retired actors who have
a union wrehip card, although they are no longer active in the labor
world. “niemfore, in 1976. there were 7,146,064 workers enrolled as labor
mien sedaers. me ratio between this last figure and the total mdwer of
wogo-oorningworkers is the-rateofunienisation. In 1976. the rate of union-
ization in Italy was 51.2 percent. mic figure is higher then the average
figure in other European countries (in Ger-any it is 33 percent) in Great
Britain. 52 percent. in trance 25 percent). In when with 1960, the

increase in enrolled ssdaers is very considerable: over ‘M percent. In
fact. in 1968. there were 4.170.000 heaters enrolled in the three labor

union confederations (excluding retired asters). The rate of unionization.
only 33.6 percent. shows the weakness of labor union presence up to that
tine. It should “be noted that these last-untimed figures were revealed
only between the end of 1974 and the end of 1975. The esti-etes provided

previously by the labor unions were entirely different. In the period
fra 1968 to 1976, the increase in newership occurred constantly (8-9

percentage increase points each year). with the exception of 1973.

The strong expansion of Italian labor unions is tied first of all to the
resuptien of indmtrial conflicts at the end of the 1960's. The new
cycle of struggles specifically involved industrial workers (setalwork-
ing and dtenistry) in the north. In 1969, 216 aillion hours were lost in
labor conflicts in northern Italy (71 percent of the total for Italy).

In the industrial sector alone in that geographic area. 105 aillion hours
were lost (61 percent of the total for Italy).

At the seas tine. there were 6.613.000 wage-earning workers in northern
Italy. in 1969 (52.5 percent of the total for Italy). including 4.160.000
in the industrial sector. his last figure is 63 percent of the total
nunber of workers in northern Italy and 33 percent of the total for the
nation. In the years following 1969. conflicts were spread sore uni-
fernly (with the exception of 1973 became of contract renewals in in-
dustry) nong the geographic areas and along the econesic activity sec-

CO" e

The revival of conflicts enabled labor unions to strengthen their pre-
sence in factories considerably. In fact. in industry. the rate of
unionization increased free 25 percent, in 1968. to 49.5 percent. in
1976. This last figure is very close to, but still below, the national

average figure for the rate ofunienisation (51.2 percent). are hot autum
also naturally involves the other sectors of labor unionisn. The griev-

ance drive accospanying these struggles and reflected also in the peli-
tical world, «tabled labor unionisn to pick up esters and followers in

the sector of services. agriculture and pdalic office. Ihe South was
also involved in this process of labor union change and growth.

11
FOR OFFICIAL BSE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

Light ehould be thrown on a very iwortent eepect of labor union growth.
In the period fron 1968 to 1976. labor union nenberehip increeeed alnoet
identically in each of the three confederatione. In 1976. cm. Delbert
increased 75.4 percent in marine with 1968; CISL mabera. 74.1 per-
cent and on. newere. 70.4 percent. “thie parallel growth in Wrehip
in the three confederation left the etrength relationehip unchanged within
then. In fact. in 1968. the can. had 52 percent of the total nuber of
newborn the CISL. 34.7 percent: the OIL. 13.7 percent. In 1976. the ei-
tuation wee unchanged. The figuree are. reepectively. 52.4 percent. 34.2
percent and 13.4 percent. The can. etill has an absolute majority of the
nueber of neebere in comarieon with the other two organizatione. The
internal ccepactneee of the can. hae been etrengthenlng ita poeition
eubeequently end has actually been putting it in e eituation of “relative
hegenony" with regard to the (2181. end the 011..

A queetion conee up epontaneouely. when the equilibrium exieting between
the confederated organization are mentioned and the figures preeented
above are known. I: the stability of the sire ratio between the confedera-
tione in the period free: 1968 to 1976 an accidental etability or a ”con-
trolled“ stability? In other worde. ie thie equilibrium of forcee the na-
tural continuation of an equilibriue already in exietence eince ”61. or

ie it the reeult of the new couree. duracterired by the interconfederation
agreeeent on “freezing” the debate on organic unity. on eechenieel govern-
ing repreeentation of the confederatione in the mified Federation?

An unconvincing anawer ie that the ceuee of thie eguilibriu ie the decline
of the ideological activation that had driven a worker. up to then. to join
one labor union rather than another. Anyone who has followed labor union
viciaeitudee in recent years knows that thie hae not happened. even in

the neat mified craft federatione. Inetead. it ie lore likely that the
0611.. the CISI. and the on. have operated. in order to nintain a certain
degree of equilibrium of forcee within each one. The plan for labor union
mity alwaye taker thie feet into account. The problen. rather. ie eo
deeply felt that often recouree has to be had to not very orthodox eethoda
of election and cooptation for for-inc the comeil of delegates (the baeic
mified structure of the labor union in plecee of work in whoee election
ell wage-earning workere nay participate with their vote. regardleae of
whether or not they are adieu of the mion). Every effort ie leade to
guarantee the eetiefactory preeence of each of the three confederatione
within thie body. ' ‘ ‘

mm- mionien itself recognieea the existence of theee cathode and de-
nomcee the more serious ceaee. Aldo Anoretti. national eecretary of
the rum [Italian Federation of workers in Carpentry. Oonetructicn and
Felated Industrial-can. and a newer of the confederation organization
bureau. deecribee the eituetion ae followez .‘It rengee free the direct
appoint-ant of organization not subject to control by the aeeeebly or
the comcil to eituatione in which firet the delegate to be elected has
been epecified and then the houogenoue group suitable for that purpoee.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'mis latter becoess worse when it goes fro. the council to the executive
co-ittee. In this respect. the lost serious phone-anon is not. actually.
reproduction of the federative eschanise. that is to say the establishint
of a joint executive ce-ittaa. Actually. the truly serious situations oc-
cur when this egos place under the table. going so far as to give rise to
secret voting with predeteruined results."

Then. in addition to the intercenfederation relations. there are problem
of relationship between the various political party trendswithin each in-
divual confederation. Keeping this coqnex eguilibriua of forces alive re-
quires a considerable expenditure of energy by Italian labor mionisl.

Wage-earning workers (in thousands) and mien ﬂowers by Calfederation.
Date for All Italy

Wage-earning union hsebsrs: Absolute Date

Year workers COIL cm. on. MAI.

1968 12.396 2.461.297 1.622.158 648.393 4.731.848
1972 12.988 3.214.821 2.184.279 842.912 6.242.018
1973 13.239 3.435.405 2.214.199 901.916 6.551.520
1974 13.620 3.830.175 2.472.701 965.051 7.267.927
1975 13.802 4.081.480 2.593.544 1.032.605 7,707,629
1976 13.955 4.316.699 2.823.812 1.104.888 8.245.399

Sources: Is”? [Central Statistics Institute) (Labor Statistics Yearbook)
can. CISL. Il‘he 1976 on. data were furnished by the OIL itself.
The rest of the data were worked 19 by us.

131‘“; 78. p 3)_

l'i‘ext) The considerable increase in eedaership by the three labor union
confederaticns involved every econonic activity sector and every geographic

area. But not uniformly. A detailed exaeination of the data ashes it
possible to show the factors affecting this expansion.

first of all. political tradition. degrees of conflict. oconoeic structure.
scant original presence of labor unionisn. In 1976. there were 4.268.881
lee-bars enrolled in the three confederation: in northern Italy. Retired
union as-bers are also included in these figures. more are no upstate
dath for thee. with the exception of 0611. embers. therefore. the rate
of unionization turns out to be overestimated. This rate is 59.4 percent
in northern Italy (the national rate. including retired chars. is 59.1
percent). In northern Italy. the C611. has 2.392.773 chars: the CISL.
1.395.469: the OIL, 480.639. The percentage ratios are 57 percent. 31
percent. 12 percent. respectively. ‘ihese figures show that the greatest
weight goes to the con. also with regard to the national average.

‘i'he.high nuber of wage-earning workers in the indmtrial sector and the
presence of the PCI are strength factors for the COIL. It is interesting

13
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
ion orncm. us: ONLY

to'note that the regions administered by the Conunist Party have very high
unionization rates. Naturally. the largest contribution to the formation
of this rate was provided by the can. In other words. there is a direct
relation between the voting force of the Conunist Party and the presence
of the above-untioned confederation. Take. for exawle. hilia-ﬂoaagna.
There. in 1976. there were 1.041.549 mien seabers (96.4 percent of the
wage-earning workers). 755.227 (73 percent) of who- are con. asters. he
we shall see. a similar situation occurs in Tuscany.

me situation in the northern regions atinietered by the Christian Deno-
cratic Party (Veneto. rriuli-Venesia Giulia. Trentino-hlto hdige) is quite
different. In these regions. which have. however. a good degree of indus-
trialisation. the am. not only does not aaintain the levels attained in
other regions. but it is definitely surpassed by the C185. The rate of
unionisation itself if auch lower then the national average. In Veneto.
there are 600.159 union senbere (56 percent of the wage-earning workers).
or these. there are only 252.7“ (42 percent) enrolled in the COIL. while
the C381: has 208.602 (48 percent). It should be noted that the ecomaic
structure in Veneto is not substantially different fro- the one in Baillie.
aoaagna. Therefore . there is a close relationship between political tra-
dition and labor union presence. with an inortant characteristic: the
mist tradition is eccoapanied by a very high labor union participation.
such higher than what is true of the Catholic tradition.

The opinion is widespread that Italian labor unionism has the largest mn-
ber of asdaers in the store industrialised areas. ﬂow. although i‘E‘is true
that labor unionism in the north has Iuch higher levels of organization and
activity than the rest of Italy. it is not equally true that a higher rate
of labor union nedaership by wage-earning workers is recorded in that area.
This does not occur in Piechont. the seat industrialised region. where

the rate of unionization is fixed at 43 percent. one of the absolutely
lowest rates. and it does not occur in lodurdy. where the level of union-
ization is higher (56 percent) but still below the national average. A
high degree of participation in strikes. in the industrial sector. has only
a partial influence on the choice of union aesbership. As further proof
of this. in 1968. that is to say before the outbreak of conflicts in in-
dustry. the rate of unionization in loabardy (36 percent) was higher than
the national average (34 percent).

The narrow relationship between industrialisation and degrees of unionizr
tion (in the two regions exaained the relation eases definitely to be the
reverse) is also proved by a rapid parallel between regions with a different
degree of industrialisation. The largest mﬂer of lowers is recorded
precisely in the less industrialised regions. For exasple. the rate of
unioniration in Vaneto is 56 percent. In lriuli-Venesia Giulia it is 59
percent.

Moreover. the national rate of unionization in indmtry iteself is lower
than in public atinistration and in agriculture. In northern Italy. the

16
FOR OFPXCIAA. USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

percentage increase in union nebers in the period free 1961‘- to 1916 is 62
percent. such lower than the national average increase owing to the high
initial presence in the Red regions (hills lineage and Liguria) and owing
to the snail percentage incidence in Piehont.

In central Italy. there were 1.574.152 labor union esters. in 1916. 58.6
percent of the total nwer of workers. ‘lhe miter is distributed as fol--
lows asong the three confederations: core. 920.032 (58 percent): CISL.
453.101 (29 percent); 011.. 200.939 (13 percent). .

Necany is the nest interesting point in this geographic area. In that re-
gion. do-lnated by the POI. the reearks pads on- ideological eotivetione

of labor mien fourship are exactly confined. The doeinant presence

of the can. is confined there. with 70 percent of the union masters and

a rate of unionization of 67 percent. a rate abundantly above the national
average. is recorded. The nest evident confinetion is furnished us . how-
ever. by Lucca Province. the only province in macany adeinistered by the
be (Christian Democratic Party]. The percentage participation in the 0611.
out of the total nusber of organized union meters is 40 percent. while
the CISL. which has 22 percent in Tuscany. cones out here with 40 percent.

Although the degrees of conflict showed a definite increase in central
Italy. starting in 1969. they are still within the physiological linits.
especially if eight ie not lost of the situation in the north. Greater
fraguntation of the production situation and a lack of the serious social
prdalees peculiar to the industrial areas in the north have sade labor
conflicts less severe.

when we go on to exastine the South. the first thing noted is the distor-
tion in the strength relations between the confederation organizations.
In 1976, of the 2.401.704 union seabers (58.0 percent of the wage-earning
workers) the can. had 1,003,312 (11.0 percent): the CISL. 915,162 (40.6
percent): the 011., 423.310 (17.6 percent). A first explanation of these
figures is the South's econoeic structure. In fact. that is where 13 per-
cent of the national total of the wage-earning workers in agriculture.
21.7 percent of the wage-earning workers in industry and 30 percent of
the wage-earning workers in sewicea and in public abiniatration are
concentrated. Of the total mﬂaer of wage-earning workers in the South.
20 percent are emloyed in agriculture: 30 percent. in indutrya 02 per-
cent in services and public ahinistration.

The weight of the bureaucratic structure favors. in the South. the action
of the C181. and the 011., organizations traditionally more suited for pick-
ing up the consensus of the eiddle classes and also owing to their rela-
tions with the Christian Deeocratic Party and the lay parties. Rather.
the activity of the CISI. is often tied to the utership of the party
with a relative sajority in the South. The (1311.. which. in the last few
years. has succeeded in doubling the under of its on eeabers and in
strengthening its structures. is undergoing the initiative of the CISL.

15
P0)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he closed attitude of any croft federations and a practice of corpora-
tnvo grievances are still preventing the establish-ent of new labor union
struatures and renovation and reform action.

The high rate of percentage increase in 1976 in cowarison with 1968 -- plus
130 pement for the con. and plus 108 percent for the ctst. -- is certainly
explained also by the increase in participation in political activity Md
labor union action, in addition to the initial?" sull labor mion presence.
‘lhoroforo, the gap with regard to the North is -ill vory pronounced. Idoo-
logical dualiss (Catholic tradition of the C181. and conunist tradition of
the con.) 0 WIﬂIic dualiss (strong participation in labor union activity
in the North and survival of the old bureaucratic structures in the south),
social dualiss (worker labor unions and siddlo-class labor unions) are the
structural facts of Italian labor unionism, often suppressed and ignored.

wage-earning Workers (in thousands) and Union Members by Confederation.
'JICI broken down by large geographic distribution

Southern and lnsular Italy (Nolise, Abruzsi, Camania, Puglio, Basilicata,
Calabria, Sicily, Sardinia)

Union Manors: Absolute Data

wage-earning

Year workers can. can. on. MAI.
1968 3,622 435,491 469,470

1972 3,753 615,750 656,743

1973 3,823 672,960 660,498

1974 3,969 845,305 804,426

1975 4,024 929,268 861,368 330,719 2,121,265
1976 4,084 !,003,312 975,162 423,310 2,401,784

Sources: xsm (Labor Statistics Yearbook); cart. 8181.. 011..
[3 SOP 78, P 3]

[Text] Confederatod labor unionists is present in agriculture both among
faruorkors (wage-earning workers) and along sharecroppers and tenant far-
ors (solf-oqoloyed workers). The data furnished by the confodorstions do-
serve special attention. As Table 1 shows, in 1976 there were 1,165,021
faruworkers enrolled as nsbers of confodorations, a figure higher than
the figure furnished by lS‘l‘A‘l‘, still in 1976, for the total nuﬁer of wage-
earning workers in agriculture. The three labor union confederations ju-
tify this phonononon by Iaintoining that part of those counted by IS‘rM'
along self-osployed workers (tenant far-ore, assistants, sharocroppors)
are also Iod>ere of the far-vorker federations. the indiscriminate
classification of solf-esployed workers in fact sakes it difficult to
make a definite classification along wage-earning workers or among self-
owloyod workers. In case of doubt, the confederations. prilarily the
can. prefer to organise part of the far-ore in far-vorkor federations.
The reason is obvious. Mg the far-vorkors, the labor union can count

16

FOR OFPXCIAI'. USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on almst unaniaity of mbership and on a good organizational level. es-
pecially after the agree-ant signed at the end of 1973 omitting the 1m
(National Social Security Institute] to lake the labor mien deduction by
delegation. That is to say that e far-worker is not a an»: of the con-
federation organizations only if he explicitly refuses to pay labor union
dues by declaring this on a specific fore.

“the picture changes coupletely along far-ere. 0f “000.000 far-ere. 0611..
CISL. on. have a little sore than 200.000 card-carrying were. while the
very great asjority. around 00 percent of the far-ere. belong to the
comma: [Confederation of Snell Parnrsl . an organization that exists
under the protection of the Christian Dementia Party and that rejects any
kind of dialog with labor unions.

In spite of the desiretoparticipato stated by the COIL. CISL. UII. (in July
1977. on occasion of the congresses of the three organisations. the Par-rs
Alliance. a mified craft federation of far-rs. held its constituent as-
sedaly). efforts in this field have been very linited. This is the fact
that eearges fro- the figures on unbers of the mum-can. [Share-
croppers hderation affiliated with the can]. In 1960. the restatement
hcd 220.173 aadaers. lhis nwer decreased constantly. in subsequnt years.
to 71.072. in 1976. one-third of the original figure. It is obvious that
what we have here is a shift into the stronger. organized assessment-
can. [Mr-torn“ federation affiliated with the 0311.]. rather than a loss
of Indoors.

Organizing in the fer-workers federations persons who are not far-vorkers
(tenant far-rs. sharecroppers. leaseholders) is a sign of wealmess and
confusion within labor unionism. no interest: that should be protected
are. in fact. too heterogenous to be able to restrict than to one single
organization and to the field of a single policy line. unless ideological
count intervenes to blot out such dwious conflicts.

Seventy percent of the femorkere are concentrated in the South. especially
in Puglie and Sicily. In the South. the "mm-con. and the
FISBA [Italian liege-earner mdl‘ar-vorker federation affiliated with‘ths
CISIJ for- 60 percent and 50 percent of the total nuﬂnr of ssdaers in the
respective confederations. In many parts of this geographic area. they
are the only labor union reality of any inortancs. 0n the other hand.
the numerical weight and political influence in the North (Pied-ant. wet-
berdy. Veneto) . the only geographic area in Italy with an efficient agri-
cultural structure. organized in accordance with capitalist criteria and
with a good rate of «ploy-eni- of youth Impaler. are slight. There.
labor mien activity in agriculture is cowletely obscured by the presence
of industrial craft federations.

It should be noted that the murical density of the mmxm-con.
PISBA-CISI. and DISH-0n. is not at all in agree-ant with an equal political
weight within the respective confederations. In fact. although the craft

17

FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

federations are larger by far in number of answers. they exercise very
little political influence on the confederation level. The “Southern”
policy itself of the labor union organizations is determined primarily by
the industrial labor unions and such loss by the unions that carry on their
activity in the south. like the farmerker federations. precisely. The
causes of this situation are to be sought especially in the extreme frag-
mentation of agricultural economy in the South and in the resultant dif-
ficulty for labor unions to intervene. The above-mentioned agreement with
the INPS, an agreement sanctioned by law in Decewer 1973 guaranteeing
labor unions an automatic collection of the deduction by delegation. has
remedied this problem in part. Nevertheless. the organisational problems
connected with the dispersion of the active population in this sector and
with job instability are still serious.

But the first cause of the molealous relationship existing between confedera-
tions and femorker unions is to be sought in the slight amount of in-
ternal renovation in the farmorker unions. lie find the two original in-
spirations of Italian labor union activity preserved in the IBDEMBZZADRI-
con. and in the ”SBA-c181“ especially in the South, more than in any other
craft union. The conunist tradit-on.tied to the seizure of land in the
early 1950's and the Catholic tradition enclosed in an often obscurantist
clerical atmosphere still find few points of agreement and alsost no no-
tive for co-on action in the South. The troubled history of the unified
relations between the PBDBBBMCCIMI on‘the one hand and the PISBA and
0183A on the other is in fact very familiar. This trouble has deep roots
in our country's rural situatiOn. owing to the great influence had by Oddl
of the three federations especially among farmrkers.

The problem unsolved by these craft federations lies in the nonlabor-union
connected motivations of their influence and activity. It is difficult to
find points of convergence for canon action within that situation, since,
among other things. there is slight participation by the mesbers in labor
union activity. This last-neutioned phone-anon is not accidental but.
rather. is tied directly to the organisational structures adopted to chan-
nel and feed influence on the members themselves. The endemic crisis of
agriculture should induce these labor unions to see): first points of unified
participation and of cos-on reflection.

The fact that the labor union organisations have vast followers in this
area and do not succeed then in using this strength of theirs for promoting

thesector's transformation and rationalisation is serious. It is-the only
way for defending effectively the interests of the sewers the-selves.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE OIL!

‘l'ehle 1: ﬂags-earning lorters (in thousands) ad Labor mion Indore by
confederation. Agriculture (Par-vortera)

wage-earning mic: mm Absolute Date

Year workers con. 1:181. 0'11. MM.
1960 1.332 368.138 191.675

1972 1.226 401.700 213.321

1973 1.212 407.513 215.534

1974 1.109 517.257 331.360

ms Mao 555.532 374.609

1976 1.147 590.275 415.632 159.114 1.165.021

Sources: ”or Statistics rearhook. variws years. cannons. 011..

fable 2: lags-earning workers (in thousands) and Labor mion Dieters by
Confederation. Agriculture (tenant farssrs. sharecreppers)

‘ lags-earning Union liters: Absolute Data

workers G31]. C181. UH. W

1968 2.841 220. 173 77.898

1972 2.072. 124.746 83.045

1973 1.980 “.511 84.738

1974 1.922 82.625 89.103

1975 1.834 79.048 66.432

1976 1.702 71.072 14.521 59.486 205.079

sources: Labor Statistics Yearbook. various years. 0611.. 6181.. 011..
120 Sep 70. p 3]

[least] In 1976. there were 3.242.497 “ere of craft federations belong-
ing to the COIL-€181.43“ in industry. A short calculation. based on
Table 1. halos. gives us. fer 1976. a 49.5-percant canonization rate.

‘Ihis percentage is very close to but lower than the overall rate of mice-
iration (51.2 percent). It is maful to note that this figure of 49.5
percent was attained by leans of an increase in worship slanting to
99.2 percent for the con. and 82.1 percent for the 0181.. in cowarison
with 1968. mese percentages are such my»: than the respective national
average increases “75.4 percent for the can, 074.1 percent for the C181.
in the period free 1960 to 1976. lhese first figures throw light on an
aspect of indmtriel labor unions in Italy that is not secolldary. It is
my believed that craft federations in industry. an only ones sub-
jected to analysis and evaluation in our country. organize vithin the:
alaost all vagecearning workers in the sector. “these federations. midi
veretheabsoluteprotagonistsinthehotantt-Iandthenainauthorsof
the political. organizational and institutimal recovery of the entire
labor mion sow-ant. reveal so. lagging in proselytiss. the increase

in ushers in the period wider ex-ination is very high. but is still
insufficient to put this sector of labor unionis- in line with the na-
ational average values for the rate of unimiration.

19

m OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a rate of unionization lower than the average had already sesrged from the
data pertaining to some regions along the nest industrialised regions in
the North (Piedmont. Veneto). what are the cause of this phone-anon? Of
course. the small size at first. In fact. in 1968, the rate of unioniza-
tion in the industrial sector was slightly above 25 percent, with some
branches (building. food purveying) aron 20 percent. Surely. the struc-
ture of our systea of production. characterised by a very large nueber of
small and very small businesses within which labor unions find it difficult
to act or do not act. has a bearing. It is true. however. that. in the
agriculture sector. also full of very snail-sired businesses. labor unionism
solved the problee brilliantly. at least judging from the figures. Their
figures are the motivation adopted most frequently for justifying the
“anomalous“ situation. '

me basic cause for the relatively s-all nuber of answers in the industrial
labor unions is to be sought elsewhere. Especially in 'politicalization.”
the doainant characteristic in the branches (seaipublic. local institutions.
hospital workers. to mention etly a few). The vicissitudes are well known.
In public acbainistration. eewership in a party or open expression of one's
own liking for certain prominent individuals in the political world are
indispensable factors for obtaining any employment. mce the job has been
obtained. Ila-berehip in a labor union -- one of the three (COIL. CISL.

UIL) - is alnost auto-atic. An example of the different method of labor
union proselytisla in industry and in public eaploynant is offered to us

by a branch of the industrial sector itself. the energy products branch
(gas. water. electricity). In 1976, there were 150.395 labor union embers
in this branch. 80 percent of the wage-earning workers. These {figures are
characteristic of public addnistration together with the high rate of in-
cidence by the C151. on the total (45.6 percent). a rate slightly higher
than the rate for the COIL (45.2 percent) itself. In spite of this high
nutter of members (in 1968. the rate of unionization was already higher
than 70 percent). it certainly cannot be stated that the labor unions in-
volved in this branch made an appreciable contribution during the hot
autumn and later. Moreover. it is difficult to find an scone-1c activity
branch more fragmented than this one. The wage-earning workers are scat-
tered about 8.000 Italian coeemnes.

This branch is placed by 15m in the industrial sector. because of national
accounting exigencies. It should be placed nore properly in public adlainis-
tration. from the labor union point of view. because the business in-
volved here (micipal-wned businesses. am. [National Electric Power
Agency] are public.

In the light of all that has been said. the gap between the figures in the
various sectors of econonic activity in Italy finds its explanation. The
levels of unionization in industry are. therefore. to be entirely respected.
because they have been obtained with a proselytisn action based almost er-
clusively on a reasonable. sincere relationship between workers and labor
unions. without other filters. at least without the ones operating in other

20

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sectors. “the figures given in table 2. below. say be of assistance for
further confirmation of this asst-nation. There. it can easily be observed
that a respectable nudaer of unified proxies are present only in industrial
labor unions. in the Federation of Metalworkers in particular. A proxy is
signed by a wage-earning worker for pay-ant of the mnthly dues to his own
craft union. The deductions are nade by the ewloyer. The worker out in-
dicate to which of the three craft unions belonging to the com-c181.-

on. the dues paid by his go. Signing the proxy in favor of the unified
craft mion. without a confederation choice. is an act that expresses a
desire for greater unity in labor union activity and greater autono-y with
regard to the vorld of political parties. This desire is linitsd to the
industrial sector. It is a desire fed by the establish-snt and presence of
new bodies of labor union deeocracy within a csepany: the assesny and the
council of delegates.

In 1976, there were i,803,825 embers of the COIL in industry, 55.6 percent
of the total nusberof numbers in confederated unionism in this sector:
997,487 (30.3 percent) CISL misers and «1,180 (13.6) on. usbers.

me can. percentage. higher than the average percentage of overall union
neabership (52.4 percent). is an indication of the consensus picked up by
it among the ranks of the working class. Other data enhance this charac-
teristic of the can. In 1976, meters of the oonfederated unions in the
industrial sector, for exanple. anounted to 45.4 of the total nuaber of
neinrs (excluding retired esters) : in the (1:11., nettership in the in-
dustrial federations anountod to 50.7 percent: in the CISL, 39.3 percent:
in the 01b, “.9 percent. The worker presence in the can, enhanced also
by the weakness of the c181. in scale branches of industry (building). charges
indeed free these figures in absolute texts and in internal percentage coe-
position, with regard to the average values. However. the consensus picked
up in industry does not at all lake it possible to descrbie the CGIL. as
has often been done. as a blue-collar worker confederation, and. on the
other hand. the CISL and the 01!. as confederations of the white collar
working class. The ideological eqshasis iq‘licit in this distribution can-
not be supported by any of the data pertaining to the social cowosition
of the individual labor union organizations. In this connection. there
still are no reliable figures for the industiial sector on degrees of
unionization along the white-collar classes and the blue-collar classes.
This is an isportant eatter for evaluating the weight that the white-
collar classes in the industrial sector have within the three different
confederations.

This big gap sakes it i-possible. noreover. to evaluate. even only approxi-
mately, the presence of the labor union movement along the white-collar
classes in industry. me urgent need for a greater coordination of data
is also lotivated by the constantly increasing percentage incidence of
white-collar workers on the total nulber of wage-earning workers in the

sector .
t

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The factors contributing to describing the organizational strength and the
mobilization capability of the industrial labor unions cannot, naturally.
be reduced to were levels of unionization. However, this does not justify

the indifference, and stare frequently the diffidence, to which the issue
is still subjected.

Table 1: Wage-earning Workers (in thousands) and Labor Union Hssbers by
Confederation. Industry.

Year Wags-earning Union Hesbers : Absolute Data
workers can. CISL 01!. MAI.

1968 905' .749 547 , 727

1972 6,454 1,497,560 837,074

1973 6,495 1,558,286 856,149

1974 6,603 1,698,964 900,611

1975 6,569 1,746,264 926,941 351,754 3,024,959
1976 6,555 1,803,825 997,487 441,180 3.242.492

Sources: Labor Statistics Yearbook, mm, holes, 1977: CGIL, CISL, UIL.

Table 2: Proxies without Choice of Confederation. Distribution by Craft
Labor Unions, 1974

total “Proxies Pergzt of proxies
thout oon- of CGIb-CISL-
Union OGIL-ClSL-UIL federation choice OIL total
Hetelworkers 951,907 220 ,564 23.17
Textile workers 512,560 37,700 7.35
chemical-Oil
workers 463,435 11,509 2.48
Building workers 671,838 6,022 0.89
Food workers 172,199 1,928 1.11
Local institutions
and hospital 571,990 1,897 0.33
workers .
Business 297 .604 1, 538 0. 51
Papsrworkers and
printers 130, 366 846 0 . 64
Auto-rail-street-
car workers 138,848 472 0.33

Sources: 0131!. Organisation Bureau.
[1 Nov 78, p 3]

[Text] Labor union presence in the two sectors of public echinistration
and of services has a double aspect: very high in public uploylsent and
very low in the services sector. It should be borne in mind that there
are many points in counn between these two economic activity sectors.
The transportation branch (auto-rail-streetcar workers, nariti-s workers,
air workers, and so on) in services, and the State Railroads, in public

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

adninietration. do not show any great disparity fro. the point of view of
functional structure. ‘Ihio is so true that the can. has grouped then in

one single federation, the "81' [Italian Federation of Transportation Unions].
The sane nay be said of the credit and insurance branch. a branch purely
white-collar by nature. like nest of the public owloyees. Nevertheless.

the rate of mionisation in any branches of public emloy-nt lines we

at aromd 80 percent. while in the services sector. at 25 percent.

(ﬁstulas in the Services Sector

We have already exe-ined the factors causing the high rate of unionization
along public eeployees. Now account should be taken of a phone-anon that
is one of the soot ieportant ones in the world of labor unions. my is the
confederation labor mion. so strong in public ad-inistration mood alnost
exclusively of white-collar workers. finding serious obstacles in service
activities. a sector that is also white-collar?

In the public sphere. the confederations enjoy relationships of mediation
that the parties establish between the confederations and the pualic work-

9].".

Therefore. this is the framework in which the pheno-enon of labor union
representation is placed in the greatest variety of ptblic agencies. In
fact, as Roeagnoli states. there is. in public splay-ant. 'a thick under-
growth. still unexplored. of variegated lined omissions of bureaucrats
and labor union representatives. often with codeined duties of personnel
nanagenent and nanegeaent of the agency. A cautious estinate indicates
that there are 5,000 labor union representatives within these agencies.

In the private services sector. labor unionisn has to contend with pro-
blens of participation and of proselytisn entailed by a normal labor union
practice.

At the roots of this imassc lies the superficial analysis conducted by
labor unionism on the role of the niddle classes in the present-day si-
tuation and the resultant attitude taken with regard to grievances and
conflict behavior of these classes. Very often, in the recent past, the
three labor union confederations have supported definitely corporative
grievances and strikes of eaployees working in public administration. At
the sane ties. the sane confederations viewed the services sector with

very little confidence as a sector without inortance and at any rate
not deterninant.

The labor union situation in public employment was nade nora comlex and
difficult by the presence of autonoeous labor unions and of sons craft
federations of the COIL. C181. and on. the-selves. These federations are
not differentiated from the above-untioned autonoslous labor unions by
the kind of grievances put forth by then and at tines by their own in-
ternal structure. 0n the other hand. they have often welco-ed labor
unions whose line of corporative nanagenent does not differ fro-I that
of the autonoms labor unions.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

Let us now give sees figures. in 1976. there were 962,506 easbers in the
uniried federation. in the services sector, 25.8 percent of the wage-
earning workers. In 1968. sewership in the three labor union confedera-
tions did not exceed the 10-percent threshold. They practically did not
exist prior to i968. As has already been said, the presence of coc'sdera-
tion labor unionists in the services sector is still very slight. weakened
in addition by the instability of the relations between the craft federa-
tions in the ccm-cxsn-uxt. In fact. it is difficult to find unified nest-
ing places owing to the small amount of uniforeity between the numreus
craft labor unions of the three cenfederationa operating in this sector.
HoweVer. the division into ideological spheres does not show on the out-
side. as often happens on the other hand in other sectors. me weakness
prevailing in confederation labor unionise in the services sector and the
impossibility for each of the three confederations to influence the be-
havior of the others. prevents excessively bitter political conflicts
between the various labor union leaders working in the sector.

In order to solve the nu-eruus problees and to cancel out the considerable
lag accumulated in the services sector. the confederations are aiming at
merging activity branches that have a certain degree of heeogeneity. Thus.
the can. created the 9151', the structure that coordinates the six craft
federations in the transportation and window branch. An atteapt
is ads in this way to simlify the activity of the labor union and to
unify. wherever possible. the discussion and resolution of probleas coe-
eon to the various craft federations. In the c131. and the on. the pro-
ble- of Iergers is being handled lore cautiously. because of the different
organizational structure of the two confearations.

Before going on to exa-ine the data for public administration. I believe
that it is useful to present the figures pertaining to the craft federa-
tions operating in the credit and insurance branch. The nwer of sewers
is 131,324. 47.8 percent of the wage-earning workers. me leap forward
with regard to 1968, the year in which the rate of unionization fluctuated
around 23 percent. is considerable. The can. especially benefited fro: this
increase. with its “.000 scatters in 1968 it was practically nonexistent.
In 1976. this confederation has 59,109 asters owing to a 325-percent in-
crease. ‘rhe growth of the (318:. is also good. It went free 22,707 heaters.
in 1968. to 54,071 in 1976, with a percentage increase of 138 percent.

A similar example of growth. sore accurately we should speak of birth, is
offered to us by the 8315 [National School thionlomlb, which increased its
membership from 3.992, in 1968, to "7,380. in 1976.

In 1976, there were 1.574.905 ﬁlters of confederation unionis- in the
public ministration sector, 63.? percent of tje total under of wage-
earning workers. The rate of unionization exceeded 80 percent. if state
schools. a branch foreing a case of its own for various reasons, are ex-
cluded from the count. A rate of unionization rather close to 80 percent
is also obtained by adding the timber of heaters of the autononom unions

(about 250,000 were) to the nusber of confederation labor union sen-
bore.
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY

The autono-ous labor unions are somewhat present in every branch of public
achinistration. especially along teachers. railroahn and in se-ipdalic
agencies. The strength relations between the confederation- are favorable
to the czsz. in public athinistration. In fact. this organization had
736.)“ ”int! in 1976, «9.8 percent of the total. ‘l'he (1211. had 600,830
lowers (38.2 percent). The 1111. had 237,111 (15 percent) endure. In
order to understand the inaortance of these figures better, it is useful
to bear in aind that the (2181. in public ahinietration concentrates 29
percent of its asters: tho COIL. 16.9 percent) tho 011.. 22.6 percent.

Preponderance of the cm.

1herefore. the figures given eqzhaaize the weight that the craft federations
in public administration have within the C181. and. in part, within the 011..
This weight is definitely greater then the weight that the industrial labor
miona have within the (1:11.. tree this point of view. it is proper to
state that the C181. has aore followers. in relative tor-e. mg the white-
collar classes than the 0611. has within the blue-collar classes. 1ho
larger mder of eaebera in the c181. aaong ptblic eaployeea enables this
organization to affect the other two confederatione very etrongly.

‘l'he figuree recorded in local institutions and insurance agencies create

a certain amount of interest. of 101,000 wags-earnin' workers. a good
651,8“. 93.1 percent, are esters of confederation ‘e—‘r unions. In this
branch, the 0611. WI. (288,000) exceed. although not by such, the C161.
aesbera (270,000). This shows that the €611. also picks up lowers along
public workers. And they are in this branch. In fact was shinistered
entirely or partially by the Clo-mist Party are becoaing lore and more
nt-orom. In 1976, can. aaabers along ml and hospital worker: re-
presented 50 percent of the total nus: of peters of that organization

in ptblic atinistration.

The failure to prepare a consistent labor union policy of reforl of public
administration. a policy that will not be inleaented only with words,

the presence of hundreb of autonoaom miona in especially critical points
of our society (education) and of our economy (railroads) . the state of
syﬂiosis existing. in any cases. between labor union organizations and
political parties lake the labor union situation in public ministration
particularly confusing. Labor union practice in this sector has been
affected only niniaally by the profound organizational changes that occurred
during the 1970's within the Italian labor union love-ent. On the contrary,
the centrifugal thrusts within the C155. the 011. and in sone cases the 611..

are still very strong.

The very strong tendency toward consorvatise and inability. present in
various craft unions in public adninistration. is a very serious threat
to the desire for change that inspires the Italian labor mien nave-ant
on the whole. although contradictorily. An accurate analysis free free
any deeagogic objective is indispensable at present. in order to throw

25

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
light on what the labor union situation is like in public administration
and in order to change it.

Table 1: "ago-earning Workers (in thousands) and Labor Union numbers by
Confederation. Services.

Rage-earning Union heaters: Absolute Date
Year workers CGIL CISL OIL MAL
I968 3,295 268,901 187,750
1972 3,295 359,115 255,814
1973 3,409 366,492 261,021
1974 3.545 422,403 269,393
1975 3,633 449,475 285,396 133,490 868,361
I976 3,735 489,860 313,070 159,576 962,506

Sources: Labor Statistics Yearbook, 1977, m, 18m. COIL, CISL, UIL.

Tabla 2: Hugo-earning workers (in thousands) and Labor Union Wars by
Confederation. Public Administration.

Hage-carning Union Hesbers: Absolute Data

Year workers can. CISL 01!. MAI.
1968 253,563 446,361

1972 2,255 391,301 587,315

1973 2,334 1 444,670 604,595

1974 2,374 481,511 633,329

1975 2,418 564,257 678,430 174,614 1,417,301
1976 2 ,473 600,830 736, 364 237,711 1, 574,905

Sources: Italian Statistical Yearbook, 1977, Isn‘t, than. (1:11., CISL, OIL.
[11 Nov 78, p 3]. .

[Text] We can estimate at about 12,000 the nulbsr of labor union officials
«played full-tine in the three confederations. his fionn would increase
to 55.01"). if the union season detached fro. production and occupied within
the coapany or agency in which they are ewloyed (labor union representa-
tives, nesbers of the executive co-ittee of the council of delegates) were
included in the labor union apparatus. Owing to certain characteristics
that I shall Iaention below, the close to 3,000 ”detached” “en within
places of work cannot be regarded as true labor union officials, except by
unjustified stretching of a point. Even if this last-lentioned group is
excluded, ltalian labor union bureaucracy is unrivaled in Europe, owing to
the number of officials and owing to the ratio between then and nunber of
ushers.

Thanks to the cognitive effort made by the confederations in these last
3 years, it is possible to have an already sufficiently broad picture of
the labor union bureaucracy in Italy. Serious reflection has been ini-
tiated on this matter by sons students of the Italian labor union love-
nent (especially Bruno ﬂanghi, Giuseppe Della Rocco, rilippo aattsqlia),
to which I shall often refer. 26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL 083 OIL?

There vers 5.301 can. officials vorhing in the S9 labor confederation com-
cils. (Bicjtt hundred officials sorting in the collateral bodies of the (£11..
charitable institutions. tourism professional training. plus 900 sore

in the central and regional orgnisations. shouldbsaddsd to this figure.
Therefore. altogether. the con. has at least 7,000 full-tins officials.) 0f
the 5.30) officials. 1.676 for. the horisontal organisation (that is to say.
they vor): in the territorial structures): the other 3.625 for- the vertical
organisation (they vork in the provincial craft flederations). 'lhsre vere
1.032 officials vith purely technical duties (typists. secretaries. and

so on) , 423 of an m the horiaontal organisation and 609 in the vertial
organisation. The technical organisation consists aleost exclusively of
van (8&5 percent). noun are an insignificant percentage in the can
political apparatus (6.3 percent). in vhich. a-mg other things. they cover
duties vith slight respectability.

The presence of voeen in the horisontal political apparatm is alaost sys-
bolic quantitatively (3.4 percent) and qualitatively. A si-ilar situation.
even sore closed to wean. is found in the (2181. and on. political organi-
ration-Is.

The very slall nmr of vo-n mg the political officials is the peculiar
characteristic of our labor union bumaucracy. This characteristic is quite
expected. because bureaucratic structures in general leave little rooe for
voeen to be represented, at least in our country. ‘lhe fact that voun are
fev in m‘er also in the rank-and-filo leadership bodies vithin marries
in vhich they represent the greater part of the labor force (textile in-
dustry. food indmtry. trade) is less obvious. rectory oomcilc med
so to 90 percent by sen operate in mice annoying a-labor force con-
sisting. on the average. of 60 to 70 percent man. The situation is vorse
vhen ve go free the factory comcil to the executive co-ittse. m federa-
tions nest directly involved are reacting to this state of affairs. So-
results have been obtained. especially in the COIL. but the prdalen is
still comletely unsolved.

With regard to the ratio betveen the adninistrative eachinery and the card-
holding aeﬁers, the figures are extra-sly diversified. aside fro. the three
confederations. also for distribution of the apparatus vithin each confed-
eration. If account is taken only of the political organizations. in 1976,
the above-antiqued ratio was 1.0" eeﬂaers for each official in the an,
l.206 uﬁers in the 6181. (in 1974) and 789 in the 011.. ‘lhen. if the tech-
nical officials are muted also, the ratio drops to 814 for the con. and
to $57 for the 011.. On the basis of available figures. it can be stated
that the nusber of officials tends to increase wherever there is an un-
stable labor union pr sence and vhere one of the three confederaticns finds
to difficult to operate. because it is saothered by the preponderant pre-
sence of the other ones. The confederation give us definite confirmation
of that.

mm». the confederation vith the snalleat nutter of wars, has the
highest nmer of officials in proportion to its size (1 official for 557

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Olv‘PICtM. USE ONLY

centers). Naturally. it is trying to leesen the disadvantage separating
it from the other organizations by ensuring space for itself also with an
adequate number of officials. The CISL offers us the lowest eel-ber-
apparatus ratio precisely in the “Red” regions. where the COIL absorbs

70 percent of labor union use-hers. In nailia Renegna. the CISL hae 1 of-
ficial for every 776 aesbere: in Tuscany. t for every 867. These two
apparatus-newer regional ratios are absolutely the lowest in the CIBL.

We find a sieilar trend in the can. In fact. this confederation is also
seeking to remedy the difficult situation in the south by fattening the
ranks of its organization in that area. In 1976. the con. had 1 official
for eVery 745 meters in the South. The COIL apparatus in the South dis-
plays. among other things, sons peculiarities in the way in which it is
distributed in the various regions. for exasple. it is difficult to
understand on what criteria the cos-unist confederation has 1 official

for every 450 eenbere in Sicily (1 for every 226 in Palermo) and t of-
ficial for every 1,136 centers in Puglie. a region sieilar to sioily with
regard to labor unions. especially for the COIL. It is likely that the
introduction of a very high nusber of officials in the labor confederation
councils in the South has given rise to acne isbalanoe in the distribution
of forces even for the very short tins span in which the operation was
carried out.

The present Italian labor union organisation was forled in two successive
phases. The first phase is tied to the establishment and expansion of
coapany contracting in the early 1960's. This generation of officials had
the task of recaeting the ranks of labor mien organisation within the
congeanies after the seriom crisis in the ”50's. a second group of of-
ficials has cone into the apparatus in this last decade to cope with the
further expansion of comany contracting. but especially to perfor- du-
ties previous unknown. tied to the headlong increase in sesberehip. to
the constantly lore comlex internal organization and to the institutional
role won by the labor union sovensnt. :ézis second influx has taken on
manticipated di-ensions. By way of era-pie. it suffices to point out
that. in 1970. the can. had 3.6“) full-tins officials (an already consid-
erable figure) for the confederation labor councils, while 6 years later.
in 1976, there were 5.301 officials. In this period, 1,654 new officials
came in. This figure does not include new officials who cans into the
apparatus with nor-a1 turnover. a sinner situation is observed in the
UII. and partially in 'the CISL.

The expansion of labor union organizations in these to years shows no so-
lution of continuity with the past. In fact. while rank-and-file labor
union structures within the miss are weed of delegates elected
by the votes of the workers. there is nothing sieilar for the apparatm
outside places of work. In fact, the principle instnnent for recruit-
ing new officials is cooptation, while the election of leadership groups
during the congresses is tied to the distribution of posts among the
various political parties. Thus. the leadership groups have prevented

28

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

laber mien bureaucracy free undergoing too sudden changes. guaranteeing.
at the sane tine. internal comactnass of the structures.

The circusspcction in selecting officials and the cautiousnesa with which
organisational innovation was carried out in the structures outside places
of work deeonetrate confederation leadership's adaptability capability in
the period free 1968 to 1972, during the lost critical years in recent labor
mien history.

As Bruno Hanghi eaintained. precisely at the end of that period (during a
debate that took place in 1972 on labor union executive persomel in the
can. periodical 90mm: DI mm 8mm) . I'the change has been. to
a large part. a phenoslenon of adaptation. an attewt by a type of leads}:
to respond to various pressures. to new prebless that had to be solved.
This has not yet Isant a physical replace-Int of leaders (there is a 90-
percent per-anency in the leadership group. even in the lore sought after
places in the labor mien love-mt) . but it her; not even naant a radical.
fire change in the way of thinking. of acting and of behaving by these
leaders in political activity."

Naturally. in this period. thanks primarily to the action taken by indi-
vidual leaders or by seell very united grows. there have been profound
changes in the structure. it suffices to think of the role psrfor-ed at
the rank-and-file level of the cxsx. and within its leadership group by
the nu (ntalworkers) executives who seemed during the 1968-1972 worker
struggles. Their influence. however. was liuited and rarely went beyond
the lilits of certain craft federations in industry.

If there has been change within the labor union stmctures. it has occurred
sporadically and. especially. it has never affected the decision-“king
eechanisns and selection criteria.

[Table on next page)

29

P02 OFFXCIAI. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000300026

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.33- uou 5 cu; 05..
.333 ugusuaa .3390» .nsnnuuug

Lao-dawning 33.3333 Hausa—”8 uo 8313.330 23 no 333 on- 83:88:00.
333:0 nouns». «48.32. 05 .7630.» on» henna. 8.505 00: av non—63 SF

.QHD .38 :38 «Nun—Dom
N00: OVOQN pom.“ Agni-.303 + Adouuqnav 300; A309

«8 3 «8.. 34:53 «3120....

m2. 08.. .8; 8... ovo.~ $~.v 82.3... 35.2....” $203623" Jon

Re: now: on» «3 on. «.8: 93.8. 0368 «8.23: 3!: .m

-m «on 3.: mom. «3 a2. 2868 03.8» «3.93 .23" £8

«2. .2: 3.... 2o 5... an.“ 30.8. «2.2.x... n2..~a....~ .23» .z

49 awn. d8 .5. .38 .38 45 .88 £8 38..
"cacao 103:8 a!» 3103.6 32-! Sign.
on?“ bad nuonu' uo his 303:8.ﬂunuvznm .000

.26— ..03-8 guaguaunnui tag: «ado—558.. 90 9.53.1.2 1.55
unaum “363.30: 05 1.0.3.5) .anncg .35 3an .38. 83333.30 some: Mon:

1978 Battle. 11 Solo-2‘ 0n 3.x.1.

\ t‘l‘Ylell‘l':

'0.042
:50:

3104

30

FOR OFFICIAL L'SS ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00860R000100030002-6
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

SPAIN

PNV PRESIDENT Discusses BASQUE PERSPECTIVE 0N CONSTITUTION
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 12 Nov 78 p 33

[Text] it is not easy to explain our view of the constitutional text.

or rather. it is not simple to express from a Basque nationalist perspective
an opinion that requires large a-ounts of understanding toward a cause that
does not enjoy too such popularity along so sany readers. especially since
the recent attacks upon our statsents in this and other publications.
Nevertheless. only by speaking can people sake themselves understood. and

I shall not be one to pass up this opportunity to explain our point of

view off the top of ay head.

"hat is the attitude of Basque nationalists of the PNV [Basque Nationalist
Party] toward this or any other constitution that say be drafted in the
Spanish state? Very simple. Our specific and fundanental objective is to
proeote the cause of a people. the Basque people. vhich is suffering one
of the seat serious soeents in its history. Lacking the political power
resources indispensable for the protection and develop-ent of their own
national identity. our people are facing one of the sost disturbing pros-
pects that can present itself to any people--their disappearance fro. the
sap as a distinct cosnunity. This explains the appearance of radicalneas
and exasperation that Basque nationalias soaetises assuaes in its various
sectors. a people that sees its language. its culture. its economy. its
environsent. its very identity being destroyed without a single constitu-
tional resource to ensure its coexistence finds it difficult to wait calsly
for a sore prosising future...

 

31

FOR OF?ICIAL "$8 ONLY
m OVI’ICIAL illit- UNA

ln this situation our position is to obtain enough political power for Bus-
hadi to put an end to this state of affairs and guarantee the future de-
velopnent of the Basque nstion.

we are opposed to the establishnent of relations of interdependence and
solidarity with the other peoples of the state. to when we are joined by
close feelings and affinities. Quite the contrary. But we do inpese a
dual requiresent. and it is that the state nodal on which these relations
be established should respect two principles-~the principle of the pre-
existence of sone peoples endowed with their own original political power.
on voluntary union with which the state is established. with the obliga-
tion of recognising and respecting such a principle; and the consensual
relationship between the representatives of the central authority and those
of those territories in order to work out. once and for all. the distribu-
tion of jurisdictions and respective spheres of operation. This should be
done in such a way as to resolve that historical controversy in which the
Basques. at least. feel enbroiled since the despoiling of their "fueros"

in the last century. with the consequent resistance at feeling incorporated
in the state nodeln that the Spanish constituent process has been estab-
lishing.

Reality. as Bushndi sees it. is whnt it is. not what sore than one wants to
inngine it. Bushadi struggles between the cenplete political frustration
that leads to independentisn and the hope of these who still believe thst
it is possible to devise a state sodel in which the nationalities can sur-
vive and develop satisfactorily. Our constitutional position would be to
find an acceptable solution for the great najority of the sectors of public
opinion of this people through e specific constitutional resolution of the
Basque case. not even requiring the generalizing of a federal establishnent
of the state. i believe that the najority political parties have displayed
conplete blindness in rejecting a solution which in ny opinion settled an
old cuntrowersy in the best possible way. .lt night not be the nest de-
sirable fornuls to sone people. but it solved a serious state problen. which.
whether we like it or not. is not going to find lower-cost solutions for
centralistic and unifornistic ninds.

Therefore. without anger. with the fire deternination to continue to operate
in the strictest legality. and always chsnpioning political. civilised
courses of action. we are not going to be able to esbrsce this constitution.

we recognise and proclain its general good points. its inprovenent over the
past. and even the progressivist quality that it has in a good part of its
text. And i shall not go into an analysis of its general content. which i
as sure will be enply consented upon by friends in other parties. with when

i shall in large part agree. to be sure. But as Basque nationalists we
cannot accept a concept whereby the state is the beginning and the end of
our existence. 0n the contrary. we shall always clain that the peoples

who conprisc it. Iron their very political being. forn the basis for and give
the state its reason for being. To us it is not just a natter of principles.
but also a practical natter that guarantees profundity in sutononic concept
and innutability of the sane without the consent of our people.

COMIGI‘I': I978 CANDID 16
7‘28 32

C80: 3110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFPICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

CATMAN VIEWPOINT ou cousn'nn'tom. Issues
Madrid CANDID lb in Spanish l2 Nov 78 p 37
[Intel‘s by Jordi Pujol Soley: "the Constitution is Positive-27

[Text] With the approval of the constitutional text which has emerged from
legislative discussion, a new phase in Spanish political life will be ini-
tiated. The Constitution means a break with the pest and the starting point
for the effective exercise of democratic coexistence of all citizens. which
we hope will be long-lasting and definitive. The text can end must be con-
sidered in its positive entirety.

Actually. it means a break with the past because it outlines a democratic
system and when it is approved. all existing basic legislation must be changed
and adapted to the innovations introduced within the constitutional framework.
The remnants of the legislation and institutions of totalitarian type must
cease to exist at all levels and must be adapted to the new juridical order
established.

Fll

in great part. the importance of the constitutional text is derived from the -
wav in which its preparation has been effected. The widely heralded. but to
our understanding. positive. consensus. has allowed a text to emerge with
whose content it can be said the great majority of citizens agree. The Con-
stitutional referendum should soon ratify that which has been prepared by

the rcprcsentatives elected by the people on [5 June. These basic norms, on
which there is agreement in principle among the majority groups and ideologies
of the cauntry, should allow a final consolidation of democracy through their
strict application. The Constitution thus written offers enough safeguards

to achieve a peaceful and democratic coexistence of the Spanish people; a
democratic coexistence in freedom because it is not in vein that the text con-
tains a detailed list of human rights and public freedoms whose exercise and
application shall be insured and protected by the public powers. however,

the constitutional text not only insures that final possibility of a democra-
tic coexistence in freedom, but also the possibility that with its applica-
tion some democratic institutions will be consolidated. which shall place us
on an equal plane with the west European systems with long democratic tradi-
tions.

' ' 33

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

A careful analyaie of ita content oatenaibly tilta the acelea toward the
poaitive aapecta. The egreenent on the political fern of the atate. config-
ured coneenaually aa a parlienentarian monarchy. can definitively cloae the
breachea of old antagoniaae.

Pron our point of view. the inportance of the text is detemincd by the ape-
cific treat-ent of the right to autono-y of the nationalitiee and regions
of the etate. It hae been aeid-oend not without reaaon-othet thia ia the
conatitution of autononiee. It nay be true. The text which haa eaerged
fro. the dlecuaaione of the Congreaa of Deputiee ellova the netionelitiea
and regione to give the-eelwee inetitutiona of aelf-goveruent with a real
and aufficient autonoaoua content.

It ie aleo true, however, that use triﬂing cf the authority of the auton-
onoua cmnitiea in certain lettere. which for Catalonia are of great in-
portence, hee been introduced in the Senate diecueaiona.

Undoubtedly. however. the autono-wa co-unitiea can attain levele of auton-
day such higher then any they ever attained before. It ia obvioueufron our
point of viewo-thet the text could be such better. It would have been desir-
able if one reaponeibilitiee on baaic nettere euch ae the tax eyeten would
have adopted another aepect and at leaet a broader acope in their content.
however. overall. the treat-ant and regulation of the authority of the auton-
oaonu co-anltiea ia poaitive and ellowa, at leaet from our Catalonian per-
epective, an inportant degree of autonay.

The Conatitution ia. all in all, of e progreaaiwe nature. In thie reapect

lt lntroducee legal and political inatitutiona of a urhedly advanced nature
The figure of the ”abode-en.” the aboliel-ent of the death penalty. the poe-
aibllity of a divorce regulation. the atteit-ent of adulthood at 18 yeara-
of-age. the inatitution of the jury. the broad and detailed liet of human
righta and public freedm. the recognition of the hietoric righte of the
legal territoriea-othe writing of which could have been inporveduadded, ea

3‘

roe OFFICIAL USE OIL!
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ls obvious. to those of the institutions of every denocratic state end its
opt-rat ions. make of it a modern and progressive text capable of melting pos-
uihle in definitive tom the true deeocratic coexistence in freedom of all
Spanish citizens and conunities.

It seems to lac, however, that it is necessary to make one final observation.
which I have already nude in the Congress of Deputies. The best. the lost
enlightened. the nost sdvenced constitution fails if the political habits
of the country ere bad, if the political parties are not strong and well-
structured. if the unions and business organizations are not well-rooted and
do not have a highsensc of responsibility. A constitution. no setter how
good it is, is not I panacea: it is only a Ermork, or if you wish. a tool

with which one must work. In our opinion the tool is good. It is up to every-
one to use it well.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 CAHBIO 16

8908
C80: 3110

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEST GERMANY

PUBLIC EMPLOYEES UNION READ INTERVIEHED ON DEMANDS

Hamburg STERN in German 11 Jan 79 pp 88-92

[Interview with Neinz Kloncker. president of the OTV: "Unions-"We Are
Not the Government's Coalition Partners'")

[Text] STERN spoke with the president of the OTV (Public
Service. Transportation and Traffic Trade Union] Heinz
Kluncker. about wage demands, vacations and shortened
work hours for sanitation nen, policemen, firemen and hos-
pital employees.

STERN: Hr Kluncker, if your recommendations are followed. the OTV in the
March contract negotiations will demand wage and salary increases of 6.5
percent and an increase in the vacation cospensation by 250 marks to a
uniform level of 400 narks. However. the union's position is already being
criticized for lacking a social component.

Kluncker: The demand for an increase in the vacation compensation is,
after all, also a social component. One who takes this deaand seriously
cannot squander it.

STERN: In five rounds of contract negotiations since 1971 you have pushed
through wage floors for the lower wage earners, or a minimum wage. A com-
nunal worker in the lowest classification earning at this tine 1,628.59
marks would receive only a 58 asrk increase in the event of a realistic
contract increase of a percent, but almost double that with a 100 mark
basic increase.

Kluncker: First of all. I would not like to share your estimate of 4 per-
cent. In 1979 generally no more can be done for the public service than
for employees and workers of private industry--except at the price of
private enterprises being drawn into the areas in which many employees

of the lowest salary classes are working. These salary classes include
mainly cleaning ladies or the nest simple activities. And it is precisely
their salaries that are much lower in private cleaning businesses than in
the public service.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US]! ONLY

swan: According to estinatea by 01"! officials. however. it is possible
that this recon-ended deaand of your presidiu will be rejected in the
contract emission on 21 February and that a rsiniaun increase of 120 to
100 aarks will be deaanded.

Kluncker: If you show ne a wage deasnd of IO lietall that is based on an
increase of 120 to no marks for everybody. then I will be ready to re-
think this issue.

STERN: But aust you not. after all. take into account that within your
union, just as within the to ”stall. there exists a certain alienation
between the aanageaent and the aesbership?

Kluncker: I would decidedly question an alienation within 16 Hetell. I
see that the strike front is standing Ill". And the leadership of IO
hetell has even broadened the strike front. By the way. I s- of the
opinion that it is no national disaster when aesbers correct teen-tended
demands.

STERN: Can you achieve good results in this round of contract negotia-
tiona without strike action?

Kluncker: I would not like to threaten strike action at this tine. For
use it is always a means of resolving conflict. not the conflict itself.
Neither have final wage denands been fixed nor negotiations started. And
as long as the latter have not failed. I an convinced that one should not
enter the fray with precipitate action. If it is necessary. there will
be a strike. and one that will be felt.

STERN: You once said that "a union without a strike is like a grand-other
without teeth."

\

Kluncker: l have nothing to add to that.

STERN: Hill your denand be net with understanding by the public consid-
ering the increasing national debt and the growing criticise of the effi-
ciency of public services?

Kluncker: It will be our task to sake the public aware that esployees of
public services perfora well for the citizen and thus have a justified
claia to just coapensation. He cannot deaand that they waive their sal-
ariea just because the financial policies are the way they are.

STERN: it is certain that there will be renewed criticism of public serv-
ices during this round of wage negotiations.

Kluncker: who are the critics? Such groupings as the "League oi Taxpayers"
or the businessoen‘l Also. public enployers soaetiles feel that criticiu

37

M OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

vs public services strengthens their negotiating position. That is why
the} play dead. instead of taking a stand for the public service employee
more often.

STERN: A critic is. for example. the man on the street who has to wait
3 or 6 hours to get his car registered at the motor vehicles bureau.

Kluncker: If I made as much of a furor over every complaint in the private
sector as the critics of the public services do. then by such talk I would
create an image of our economy that does not exist in reality. Just take a
look at the fine print of the sales contracts: just watch out when you have
claims on your insurance policy. Only in the public service are human er-
rors dramatized. Opposed to this is the dream picture of the service
achievements of the so-called free enterprise system.

STERN: Did we hear correctly-~the "so-called free enterprise'system?"

Kluncker: The existence of cartels and monopolies is. after all. not in
harmony with the idealized image of our economy. I consider the market
economy a useful instrument. But I do not idealize it to a degree that is
not a true reflection of reality.

STERN: At this time you are not looking for shorter workweeks. Do you
consider the 35-hour week to be a useful instrument for the elimination
of unemployment? Do you think it conceivable that your membership will
still push for this demand?

Kluncker: Concelvable yes. realistic no. The work tenure regulations of
the public services have been fixed by framework agreements until 1980.
Only when a 6-week vacation has been agreed upon for all employees will

we put greater pressure behind the question of the length of the workweek.
I consider it a matter of course that the 35-hour week will one day be in-
troduced in the public service as well. and for humanitarian reasons.

STERN: Strike actions seem to become more embittered. If the employers
continue to persist in lockouts, as has again been the case in the steel
industry. will you as a non Presidium member say that solidarity strikes
by other 008 unions are possible?

Kluncker: You will understand that I do not like to talk about this.

Not that I am too cowsrdly to commit myself. I consider the lockout to
indeed be an arbitrary step; the imbalance between capital and labor that
exists anyway will become worse due to the lockout. This is indeed class
struggle from above. The struggle against this position is not only the
affair of the union-that happens to be involved in the specific dispute.
All 063 unions are concerned in this matter.

STERN: Thus you do not exclude the possibility of sympathy strikes?

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Kluncker: I would prefer not to co-ent on this. But we will not abandon

our colleagues.
\ .

STERN: Is a lockout in the public services thinksble?

Kluncker: If the provincial finance sinistries decreed a closure of the
internal revenue offices. than all kinds of interesting effects would be
certain. But I envision a lockout in a hospital to be just as ispoasihle
as strikes in the health field. fire fighting or police. which we have
never called. The Federal Republic just happens to he one of the least
strike-prone countrier-but also one of the moat lockout-enthusiastic.
This is also characteristic of the mentality of the Ger-an business-en.
That is a class in itself.

STERN: Hr Klmcker. you and the leading unionists are Social Democrats.
. The unions and the S?!) are again drawing closer together. Are we heading
toward a union state?

Kluncker: This solidarity is not a new developeent. Besides. today there
are even Christian Democrats to who. the positions of the unions are sore
relevant than the signals of the industry associations.

STERR: Hr Blues, for example?

Kluncker: Not only he. but he. too. And it is a pleasure to hear such
voices fros tine to tine. The blabber about a union state is not new.
but the danger is not at all relevant. Unions do not want to be either
ersatz parties or shadow governments. They cannot becoee the third or
the nth coalition partner. They auat naintain a critical distance free
all ruling powers of the state and society. But as a rule the unions re-
ceive greater support froe the Social Democratic Party.

8TB“: but the SPD has.another coalition partner.

Kluncker: My relationship with the PD? is unbroken. But it is sore dif-
f icult to get a clear understanding with the various wings of the FD? than
with those of the SPD. '

SW: 00 you prefer to negotiate with Mr Baun. the federal minister of
the interior. rather. than with Count Lubsdorff. the minister of econosics?

Kluncker: I don’t know. To Ie the count is not a negative syshol. Only
his statesents aoeetises reveal class conscious interests. Ministers just
happen to be difficult soeetinea. But we don't choose them. we just take
then as given quantities.

COPYRIGHT: I979 sum

9240 ' ~ m
cso: 3103 .39

'0. OFFICIAL 088 OIL!