APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007IOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 0003003.-.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030038-6

FOR UFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8335

14 March 1979

TRANSLATIMS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 16/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030038-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. liaterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT “"3 AND REGULATIONS GWERNIM MERSHIP OF
MTERIALS REPRODUCED liEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
05' THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
3. Recipient's Accession No.

'epou an

14 Match 19 79

I.“ N.

tl‘al \ lul-

  
 
  

     
     

TMNSLM'IONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE, (P000 16/79)

9. l'etlu-na‘ Unumunon .Naaue and Mun-as I0. onnu/Tssh/l'oul Usn ho.
Joint Publication Research Service
1000 North Clebe Road

Ari ington. Virginia 22201

 
  
  

       
  
  

   

ll. Contact/Gnu No.

 
    

)1. 5mm»; Uuanueauoa Nana and Address

  

l). Type ol legion l Pernod
oven

 
 
  

As above

 
 
 

n e
In.

 
 
  

IS. Smle-rntsly Notes

     
  

IO. A§iillﬂl

  

The serial report contains politicallecononic information on Heat European
energy. finance and trade policy aatters as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine, prograas and problems of the major conunist parties.

including their relations with co-mist parties outside the Best European
area. '

 
 
      
  

  

. Rey Mm an Doro-est Analysis. e. Deunptors

    

 
  
     
      
      
       
       
      
 

  

Political Science __lnternational Affairs _l.uxeabourg

Sociology __Auetria ___Iletherlands

Propaganda Lulgius _llonvay

Econoaics _Canada _Portogal

Energy mrus _Spain

Industry _Dennark _Swede.

Trade ___Pinland _Svitrerland

Finance _x_l’rsnce _Turkey

__6reece ' _United Kingdon

In. Heuulms/Open—Esded 1.... Iceland Heat Germany

      
  
  

  
  
  
    

lie. (”OSA'I’I Field/010w SC. SD. 10
ll. Assalab-luty State-est

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available Pros: JPRS.

  
   
    

  
  

. amyClass ( as 2|. No. oi Pages
“(MI 4 3
'\' ' ‘ s

" See-my ass( In
Pa e .

    
    
 
 
    

voles salty to "age. l-In

THE FORM AMY OE [Epnooucﬂ’ vacouoc asap-u
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/833!
14 March 15

TRANSLATIONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE
(rouo 16/79)

Comems

3815111“

FRANCE

warring Political Parties Threaten National Survival
(LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR, Various sources. various dates).

Analysis of Bi-cultural Problems. by Lucien Rioux
Cultural Co-existence Problems lie-analyzed. by
Antoine Leytens

Maverick Oo-unist Konopniclti Interviewed
(Guy Konopnicki Interview; PARIS HATCH. 16 Peb 79) .....

GDR Spy's Penetration Techniques Outlined
(Gerard de Villiers; PARIS HATCH, 16 Feb 79) ...........

Hauroy's Support waivers Between Hitterrand. Rocard
(Pierre Hauroy Interviev; [.8 Iowa. OBSERVATEUR,
21-28 Jan 79) so oseoaaoescooesOs-aca.OOOCOOOOOQQQOOOOOO.

Hitterrand. Rocard. Mauroy Alliances Ree-in Uncrystallieed
(Kathleen Evin; LE ROWE]. OISBRVATM. 27-28 Jan 79)....

Hitterrand Seen Retaking Initiative in PSP
(Andre Lesueur; VALEURS ACTUELLES, 5 Feb 79) ...........

PCF's 'Anti-European' offensive Reviewed
(Andre Lesueur; VALEURS ACTUELLES, 5 Feb 79) ...........

Biographical Notes on Interior Minister Bonnet
(Christian Pauvet; L'EXPRESS. 27 Jan 79) ............'...
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007mm: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030038-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Police Horslo Problems Investigated
(Jacques Renard; L'EXPRBSS, 27 Jan 79) .......

Briefs

Top Communists Disturbed
French-PRC Cooperation

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007i02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100030038-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mom

ammo pouncu. muss 1mm umouu. suavnm.

Analysis of Iii-cultural Problems
pm: In mum. ommn in French 18-22 Dec 78 pp 48-49
[Article by Lucien Rioux]

[Text] Following the elections. Flemish and Hallons must
choose between compromise and their country's breakdown.

Fran now on should people talk about Belgian as a thing of the past? (h Monday.
the day this copy of the mom. OBSERVA‘I'DJR reaches the newstands in Brussels.
Belgians will know the composition of their new parliament. They will have
voted en massenvoting is compulsory in King naudoin's country-«but without
enthusiasm. Elections were inposed on a population which obviously had no
desire to vote and. although the new Assembly was given power to change the
Constitution. no one expects it to perfon a miracle.

As it stands. it .would take a miracle to restore a semblance of unity to the
country. Never has division been more apparent: the linguistic quarrel cor-
rodes everything; it occupies the forefront of the stage; it overshadows and
embraces all the other problems. including the crisis and unemployment: people
are either Flemish or Uallons. ﬁ’ench- or Dutch-speakers. rare are those who
still feel Belgian.

We still had one I'national" party—the PS [Socialist PartyJ—in Belgiu. last
October. it split in two and the leaders of the two resulting factions—French-
speaking Andre Cools and Dutch—speaking Karel Van Hiert—are spending most of
their energy verbally assaulting one another.

Is it all folklore? Certainly not. There are serious underlying causes for
this daily "petty war." First, there is what Hallons call "Flemish imperial-
in." The Flemish were once the kingdom's outcasts. i.e., farmers thought to
be uncouth and who sometimes left their own region to perform in Uallon steel-
works the tasks which are now reserved for inigrant workers. Their language
was held in contenpt; their bosses-—the bourgeois of (land or Antwerp and the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

foremen of Charleroi—only spoke French to them. No wonder the federalist
concept-which seeks to give a certain autonomy to each community—«was born in

Flanders .

Today. that era is far behind. More prolific-~perhpas due to the omnipotence

of the Church-«he Flemish are now far more numerous: they represent approxi-
mately 60 percent of the kingdom's population; they are also sharply wealthier
than the Vallons: their per capita income for 1977 amounted to 237,392 Belgian
francs as compared to 203.723 Belgian francs for the Wallons (the Belgian franc
is worth approximately 0.15 French franc). That they are taking advantage of
this supremacy is not surprising. However despite a slow beginning. the Hallon
protest is becoming more pronounced.

This is due to Hallonin being a region in crisis. Its wealth was the product
of a few heavy industries: coal mining. iron-smelting. textiles. some heavy
machinery firms; as a whole. structures and equipment were relatively run-down.
Mines are shutting down. the iron-smelting industry has seen a decrease in the
number of its workers: 62.000 mailoyees at the end of 1974. less than 48.000 as
of January 1978. Unuployment has reached 18.4 percent in Hons. 15.9 percent
in Liége. 12.9 percent in Charleroi while it is 7.2 percent in Antwerp. 8.7
percent in Bruges and 9.8 percent in sand.

To be sure, the Belgian state helps Hallontn compensate its unemployed and
settle problems of restructuralisation. whatever their leaning. Walloon poli-
ticians say it is "insufficient." while Flemish protest: "Should wealth due to
Flemish efficiency help support an economy which has been outstripped and is
incapable of resisting competition?" To which the Walloons reply: "The crea-
tion and modernization of Flemish industry was paid for by the Belgian state
thanks to the wealth of the Vallenia of yesteryears." Those are undoubtedly
serious problems. but federalism and a new allocation of national credits could
offer a solution.

There is something more serious. i.e.. the Brussels abscess. Brussels is a
wealthy town (a per capita income of 337.639 Belgian francs for 1977) with a
strong French—speaking majoritynm percent of its residents speak French—but.
it is also an old Flaish city, located in the middle of Flemish territory and
the Flemish want it as their capital. however. when they speak their own lan-
guage in shops and cafes. they encounter much difficulty being served. To be
sure. an administrative compromise was achieved: one Flemish employee is hired
for each French-speaking one. A practice which sometimes leads to strange
results: queues form in front of the "French" windows at the pest office while
the “Flemish" window has no customers; and Flemish teachers in Brussels teach
classes of five or six students while their French-speaking colleagues must
take care of 25 or 30 children. The system may appear ridiculous; it is expen-
sive; it often results in recriminations from the French-speakers. It neverthe-
less works; it prevents serious incidents; and Brussels residents have gotten
used to it. Bilinguism is now a reality.

The drama derives from the fact that. like all great cities. Brussels has resi-
dents who comute to neighboring couuunes. Some work in Brussels and live in

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

suburbian bedroom calamities. However. Brussels' suburbs are Huish: only

Flemish is spoken there; administrative texts are in l'leuish, etc. Dulless
conflicts ensue. '

and receive adainistrative docuents written in French. These are spurious

solutions, but, says Anton Van Overstracten. "typically Belgian. that is to
say. based on a questionable and realistic compromise."

past. are rare. although some Flemish believe the tine has come to take advantage

of their nunber to ilpOse their prevalence. However, the federal solution

. appears to be con-landing recognition among the leadership of political parties.
As early as 1974. regional organizations were being set up. Then. things went

further. In the night of 23 to 24 Hay 1977, the leading Belgian parties—

Tindelans was the CV? leader; a rapid inplenentation of the Pact could there-
fore be expected. however, soue of its leaders and ﬁbers thought that too

strong offensive against him supported. moreover. by a great Iany Pie-ish
partisans of the Pact. including CV? mbers (along the- the party chair-an,
Hilfried Martens). Hhence his sudden decision: without consulting his minis-
ters. on 11 October, Leo Tindenans suhaitted his goverment's resignation to
the king. His goal was to obtain more power for the prime ninister and install
a strong governaent in Belgian. A strong language node to Ieasure for the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such an attitude could only wake up Walloon and Brussels particularism. Lucien
Outrrs. minister of cooperation and leader of the Brussels French-speakers'
Front. declared: "French-speaking Belgian is in a state of self-defense." The
French-speaking parties of the majority came to an agreement on a defense pact.
The Hallon Rally-which for some years has been in the background (some of its
members having joined the liberals)--began to stir with the arrival of journalist
Henri Mordant. a television star. to head it. Finally. with due caution, people
began talking about independence in Vallonia. 0h! Not clearly. Nobody wants
to "break" Belgium and no one expects the birth of a front for the liberation
of Wallonia which would practice terrorism like similar Irish or Basque move-
mcnts.

Yet. some of Mordant's friends are‘wondering about the survival of Belgian and
Jean (:01. a liberal leader from Liege who calls himself a "federalist and a
Belgian of convenience," blurts out: "If irrationality were to triuph and

lead to a total domination of the Flemish. I would obviously prefer autonomy to
servi tude."

And there it stands. Very few old-style unitarians remain. Obviously, there
is the king: his crown is tied to the maintenance of the Belgian state; there
are a few politicians like the bright socialist minister of foreign affairs.
Henri Simonet, for whom the Belgian crisis has little weight as compared to
world problems. Not many people listen to them. People rally instead around
those who speak loudly about language and region. They are still calling them—
selves federalists; however. having experienced failure with the Spent Pact,
this time they have little inclination to making many concessions. In a
negotiation—for negotiations must be reopened some day, the survival of Belgian
depends on it--. they will discuss forcefully and yield with difficulty.

Cultural Co-existence Problems lie-analyzed

Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 15-21 Jan 79 p 18

[Letter to the editors written by Antoine leytens from Overijse. Belgium, and
excerpted by the editors]

[Text] You have devoted some articles to the recent political crisis in
Belgian (1e NWVEI. OBSERVATM. No 736). I regret that those articles shed
only a small light for a person trying to understand a rather complex situation
L. ..]. In my opinion. the basis of the problem rests on the fact that Flemish
public opinion did not understand and. consequently. did not accept the terms
of the agreements. The Flemish social-Christians' fault was to have underesti—

muted that public opinion [...J. For the Flemish, any agnements--especially
if it leads to important modifications in the structures of the state-must
ensure a better equality between the two cultures, not only in the texts. but

.1! so in spirit' [...]. In a country in which two cultures, and not only two
languages. must coexist, it is important that mechanisms exist to ensure their
being respected: these mechanisms can hamper some freedoms. it is the price of
the Belgian "originalityu which comes from Latin and Germanic thought patterns
[...J. A person must be bilingual to hold public office in Brussels. Moreover.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this is required of supervisory staffs in nunerous enterprises, but the politi-
cal system rejected the principle of bilinguin and the teaching of the second
language is increasingly less efficient, particularly in the Hench-speaking
section of the country! Belgian is not the only country having to maintain a
delicate balance between afferent and. efferent forces. It is deceptive to want

to consider realistically any given factor without taking into account the whole
situation.

COPYRIGHT: 1918 "le Nouvel Observateur"

6857
080: 3100

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

MAVERICK COMMUNIST KONOPNICKI INTERVIBWED
Paris PARIS MATCH in French 16 Feb 79 p 67

[Interview by Florence Portes with Guy Konopnicki, communist
journalist, writer, pamphleteer, former president of the
French National Student Union (um-0]

[Question] How is it that you slammed the door and stormed
out of the PC a year ago, and today you are asking to be let
back in?

[Answer] A million people go out every day to buy cigarettes.
There are those who never come back, and then there are the
rest. Statistically, the rest are more numerous; I am one
of the most numerous.

[Question] Is the Party card still something special to you?

[Answer] With or without a card, nobody can stop me from liv-
ing as a communist, not even Marchais. I found in the Party

a faction with the same political sensitivity as my own, and

I think that a good slogan for these days would be Mao's:
“Let's shell headquarters." I wanted to back up that shelling
with more concentrated fire on the rear ranks. I may well be
charged with involuntary manslaughter when Marchais has his
next coronary.

[Question] Are you serious?
[Answer] No, I'm the mountebank of politics.
[Question] Can one be a communist and a mountebank?

[Answer] You can certainly be a dirty dog and secretary—gene-
ral of the Party!

[Question] Are you a communist out of family tradition and up-
bringing, or out of conviction?

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answer] I keep on believing that this society is bad, and
that we must change it. Up to now, all such experiments have
been disasters. The USSR is an ocean of vodka and despair.

In France, the PC looks to me like a miniature Soviet society
with its Kremlin over on Place du Colonel Fabien, its central-
ized operation, and its ritual. Unfortunately, they don't even
have vodka.

[Question] As you were growing up, which did you encounter
first: Marx or Stalin?

[Answer] Pif the dog and Marousr-a. "Maroussia Goes to School"
is about a little girl in braids who used to play hopscotch

at the foot of Stalin's statue. I think it was on account of
her that I became a communist. But then when I was 19 and went
to the USSR, I found that Maroussia had grown up, and that all
she was interested in was getting western groceries. Teen—age
Maroussia used to dream about the boutiques in Saint-Germain-
des Pres. Of all my childhood idols, the only one that hasn't
changed is Pif the dog.

[Question] What about life in the [Party] cells?

[Answer] Life in the cells is the right side. I feel right at
home with that deep mass of communists. Host of the workers
I know are sharper and better educated than Marchais.

[Question] Marchais again! You really do have it in for him]

[Answer] Marchais is a zombie, a living caricature of the Party
apparatchik. He makes you wonder whether he wasn't manufactured
by imperialist propaganda just to discredit all communists. So.
But let's be serious. Harchais did have an intelligent line,
which I often approved: he had it for as long as his adviser,
Kanapa, was alive.

[Question] What must the CP do to change?

[Answer] It will have to change its operation, come to grips
with reality, get over its centralist view of society and of
the people's movement, and change its policy toward the social-
ist bloc.

[Question] What if it doesn't change?

[Answer] In Buzzati's "Desert des Tartares," there is a mili-
tary strongpoint guarding a frontier where nothing ever hap-
pens, and people who go on repeating a futile ritual inside the
fort. The Party can hang on in its present soap-box oratory
function, as an anti-government force, without any prospects of
getting into government itself, with a historic oscillation [in

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ternu of votesl by the eternal 20 percent. That's what it has
been doing for the past 50 years. But if it doesn't change,
it will eventually be just that, forever: a fine fortress
that will never be used for anything at all.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 by Cogedipreaae SA

0182
C80: 3100

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

GDR SPY'S PENETRATION TECHNIQUES OUTLINED
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 16 Feb 79 pp 64-66
[Article by Gerard do Villiers]

[Text] The Friedrichstrasse railroad station was all but enpty
on the evening of 18 January. The unheated building was icy
cold. The police officer in charge of checking the papers of
passengers authorized to enter the portion of the platform
where the west Berlin section would stop was chilled to the
bone. The man who appeared before his, accompanied by a woman
and a child, showed him not only his pass, but an officer's ID
card from the People's Arty. That cut the fornalities short.
East German citizens frequently go to visit with family and
relations in West Germany. The two VOPOs opened the access
gate for then, then shut it again behind the three. A few
minutes later, the S-Bahn train stopped at the platforn. The
nan, the woman, and the child boarded it. The doors slam-ed
shut, and the cars began to love.

Lieutenant Werner Stieler, a spy-handler for the East German
intelligence Service, was safe, along with his spouse and their
little daughter. One more spy story was beginning: in his
briefcase, Walter Stieler was carrying dossiers on half a dozen
of the agents he had handled. Those files were subjected to
inuediste analysis bv the Ger-an Federal Republic's intelli-
gence service. Along the. was one particular name: Rolf
Dobbertin.

Claining to be a West Ger-an, Rolf Dobbertin was working as a
physicist in the field of nuclear research, and had been enployed
in that capacity by the National Center for Scientific Research
(CSRS) since 1963! He had entered France in 1958, carrying a
West Gernan passport. He was a brilliant nan. He was also a
"mole,” an underground agent for the HFS, the East Cor-an in-
telligence systeo. Lt Stieler's file on him left no possible
doubt. Word went out over Telex to the French Directorate of
Territorial Surveillance (DST) on the afternoon of 19 January.

9
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In cases like this, one usual procedure is sinply to put the
"sole" under surveillance, to keep an eye on his conings and
goings. This tine, though, Marcel Chalet, who heads France's
Counterintelligence service, decided to arrest Rolf Dobbertin.
The fact was that the Hrs was aware of Lt Stieler's defection
and had the nanes of the agents he handled. With advance warn-
ing, those agents sight well slip away.

Along about 1900 hours, six DST agents knocked at the door of
an apart-ent at 204 Rue de Tolbiac in Paris' 13th arrondisse-
nent. They arrested Rolf Dobbertin and his wife, Hyluis. The
two were taken to different places. Heanwhil, the DST had got
sone sore infornation from the Nest Gersan 8ND about the phy-
sicist's wife. She was born on 6 March 1938 in Bielefeld in
West Ger-any, had never set foot in the DRG , had never been
active in left-wing politics or in a col-unist party. She net
Rolf Dobbertin in 1961 at the Alliance Prancaise. Having cone
to France to perfect her con-and of the language, she fell in
love with Dobbertin and married his on 30 October 1962, at the
sunicipal office of the 17th arrondissenent. At first she de-
nied any knowledge of her husband's activities. Then, on the
sorning of 20 January, she cracked.

I'Yes, I knew that ny husband was a spy,” she admitted. 'He
told so about it in 1969, after our son was born. He told me
he had cone to Paris on orders fros his “central,” with orders
to infiltrate the CNRS, and that since 1963 he had been sending
his East Berlin 'central" copies of all the docunents he had
worked on, as well as such of his colleagues' docunents as he
could get his hands on, and reports on the proceedings of the
foreign connissions with which he was associated by reason of
his position as a therno-nuclear physicist. I as not a con-
nunist nyself, but, little by little, Lease to accept Rolf's
ideas, and I helped his in his radio trans-issions. After all,
he was ny husband, and the father of ny son...’

That was all that was to be got free Mrs Dobbertin. Actually
that was all she knew. The agents concentrated on Rolf Dobber-
tin. The watch-en at the nodern building where he had lived for
5 years in a 4-roon apartnentknewnothing. The owner of the
delicatessen across the street fron 204 Rue de Tolbiac, who

saw Hrs Dobbertin every day, had never noticed anything out of
the ordinary. Apparently the Dobbertins' only recreation was
to go for long walks in the forest of Conpiegne, often taking
their 11-year-old son with then.

Tirelessly the DST sen went on with their questioning. They had

6 days to hold his. 0n the 5th day, 23 January, Rolf Dobbertin
finally agreed to talk.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"Yes,” he admitted, "I am an East German agent, a top-level pro-
fessional, a 'mole'.“ However, he had held out long enough for
any members of his network to dive for cover...

At the CNRS consternation reigned. At the same time, they tried
to play down the Dobbertin case. 0n 1 February Mr Jancel, head
of research at the theoretical physics and mathematics labora-
tory in the 7th arrondissement of Paris stated: "The laboratory
in which Mr Dobbertin worked is engaged only in basic research,
purely theoretical stuff, having to do with quantum field theory
and statistical mechanics. There is nothing in the least secret
about this work."

That was a lie.

For 3 years, the DST agents discovered, Rolf Dobbertin had been
working with experts on lasers, very high intensity light beams.
They may well make it possible very shortly to build powerful
weapons for use against spy satellites or for missile intercep-
tion. A kind of “death-ray", if you will.

The inquiry led from one discovery to another. Rolf Dobbertin
was also a member of the Appliedkesearch Commission on the neu-
tron bomb, the most advanced and most secret of French military
achievements. The I‘mole" had been working at the very top level
in the CNRS.

As the questioning went on, his real personality began to take
shape. From 1955 to 1957, Rolf Dobbertin had been a student

of mathematics and physics at Humboldt University in the GDR.

He was brilliant and politically reliable: first a member of
the Communist Youth Organization, then of the Communist Party

of the CDR. When his studies were completed, he was contacted
by ab MFS man. This is standard procedure in the Eastern coun-
tries, whera spying is not looked on as a somewhat shameful line
of endeavor, but as a duty toward the Communist Party. The

best students are regularly recruited by the Intelligence Ser-

vices. The officer who recruited Rolf Dubbertin harped on two
sensitive strongs:

"You've got the intellectual qualities to become an ace in nu-
clear physics,“ he said. "Unfortunately, here in the GDR, we
don't have the means to let you increase your knowledge. Why
not go to a country where you can make some progress? And do
us some good."

Rolf Dobbertin accepted without hesitation. He left the univer-
sity for a training course at intelligence headquarters in Pan-
kow. There he was taught the rudiments of clandestine broad-

casting and of handling "microdots‘ -- reducing a message to the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

size of the dot over an 'i“ for insertion into an otherwise
innocent letter. in 1959, Rolf Dobbertin was ready. Officially,
he "escaped“ to West Berlin.

Within 8 days, West Germany gave him a passport. How could they
chek out hie background? Every week, dozens of refugees flee

to the west. Most of them are real refugees. Rolf Dobbertin
thus became a citizen of West Berlin. A brilliant physicist.

A few months later, as part of the student exchange program
between the PRC and France, Dobbertin found himself a job as a
research worker at the Poincare Institute in Paris.

He was getting closer to his aim.

He would reach it thanks to a meeting which may properly be

styled troubling, since coincidences play very little part in
the world of espionage.

Late in 1959, Rolf Dobbertin made the acquaintance of Jean-Pierre
Vigier, a research worker at the CNRS and a sember of the French
Communist Party. They became friends, and Rolf Dobbertin moved
to the CNRS in 1963, as a specialist in nuclear physics. His
research there led him into the thermonuclear field.

And so the first phase of the mission entrusted to him by East
German l'Centrsl" was crowned with success. Now all that was
left for the "mole“ to do was to dig his tunnels...

The MES gave Rolf Dobbertin a free hand in making his career,
but kept in touch with his progress through the information he
sent in regularly. The “raw" intelligence he sent to East Ger-
many was useful in the technical area. Furthenmore, Dobbertin
was plugged in to a lot of current projects headed by foreign

research people. For ls years, Rolf Dobbertin sent along all
he found out.

were it not for Lt Stieler's defection, he might be doing it now.
His systes was absolutely flawless.

First, the transmissions. In his apartment, they found a Grun-
dig receiver that could pick up coded messages on short wave.
These were usually series of numbers transmitted at fixed times
over Radio Berlin, for example. Either in sound or in print, it
could carry instructions on “dead" letter-drops. Drops were
isolated places, such as a park, where someone would drop a
mini-container, hiding it, for instance, at the foot of a tree.
These containers held a capsule of magnesium. Should they be

chanced upon by someone othvr than the "handler,' the contents
would self-destruct.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The containers were then picked up by Rolf Dobbortin's handling
officer, whom Dobbortin did not know, as a matter of security.

Dobbertin's wife took care of other kinds of transmissions, in
the form of microdots, which she produced with sophisticated
photographic apparatus which was found in the couple's apartment.

Once a year or so, Rolf Dobbertin would make direct contact with
Central. Somewhere abroad he would meet with a GDR officer who
would subject him to an in~depth “examination,“ bearing both on
the development of his contacts, of course, and on the security
of his operations and on his future instructions. It is quite
possible, too, that from time to time Dobbortin was visited in
Paris by a con agent, a sort of "mole" inspector.

It is quite common for a couple to be involved in espionage.
A single man is psychologically more vulnerable. A "molc's"
life is made up of continuing constraints: everything is pro-
grammed. The wife usually takes care of close—up cover and of

passing information. This makes it possible to "anchor” her,
and thus avoid any leaks or indiscretions.

Rolf Dobbertin new is in no position to do any more harm. His
wife is under surveillance. But that still leaves a question:
Whom did all this information help?

To answer that question, you have to know a few things about the
East European intelligence services. There is an intelligence
pool involving East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania,
Bulgaria, and the Soviet Union. All intelligence gathered by
the agents of any of these services is forwarded to the Soviet
Union. In the KGB's first General Directorate, in charge of
foreign operations, there is a Sub—Directorate "T", set up in
1963 to replace the old Department 10. Its primary mission is
the theft of documents from the West on matters of nuclear re-
search, missiles, space, and Cybernetics.

For obvious reasons, the Soviets would rather sub-contract with
their satellites. Each of the Eastern countries has its "cli-
ent." France is penetrated primarily by the Poles and the East
Germans. There are dozens of Rolf Dobbertins. Thanks to the
division between the two Germanies, the GDR furnishes a large
quota of spies. There is no way to distinguish between an East
German and a West German. There is no way to check on the back-
grounds of can citizens. Thanks in part to them, the Soviets
have woven a capillary system that sucks up scientific secrets
and works like a charm. Their prime targets are international
agencies: the U.N., the ILO, the European Community, and
above all the scientific institutes engaged in pure research.
To the Soviet Union, such pilferage brings enormous advantages.
For one thing, they save tremendous amounts out of their basic
research budget.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For another, they keep abreast of the latest Western discove-
rise, and this allows them to copy them. In 1964 Jean-Paul
Suppert, another Bast German engineer and a member of the So-
viet system, was arrested by the DST after having fllched prac-
tically all the plans for the Concorde. His arrest prevented
the Russians from obtaining some of those documents, which
meant that the Tupolev 144, known in aeronautics circles as the
“Concordeski,” was never able to fly satisfactorily.

The year before that, Georges Pacques, deputy director of the
NATO Press Office was arrested for handing military intelli-
gence to the Soviets. In 1971, five East European diplomats,
all of them "handling" officers, were expelled from France....
And the list goes on. In Switzerland, the European Center for
Nuclear Research (CBRN) is also closely watched by spies from
the East. Thanks to foreign research people on scholarships,
the Soviets, with the help of their allies, can slip in "males"
who are a lot more effective than people recruited on the spot.
And the longer the "mole" stays in one place, the more danger-
ous his work becomes, because people start entrusting him with
more and more important secrets, some of which may be of vital
importance to the Soviets.

But back to Rolf Dobbertin. One of his targets was to study
the superdense plasmas which are formed during thermonuclear
reactions. These are of some civilian and great military in-
terest, and it is particularly difficult to study them. It
requires vast technical and financial means, and makes it pos-
sible to drop certain lines of research that have proved unre-
warding. The Soviets therefore attached great importance to
the information Rolf Dobbertin was giving them, since it saved
them the bother of launching costly programs that would turn
out to be fruitless. That meant major savings of time and
money.

Further, using a "mole" like Dobbertin cost them nothing, since
he could get along on his legal salary...

Even so, one may wonder how a spy can be so successful. There
are a lot of reasons, having to do with the scientific milieu
and with our country.

First, take the scientists. There is a tradition of exchanging
information which is not often free of naiveté on the part of
Western savants, who are loath to look upon their fellows from
the Eastern countries as what they are all too often: spies.

There are specialists of all nationalities in the scientific
research agencies. At the CNRS, for example, there were in
1976 633 foreign research people (8.8 percent) of whom 48 were

1a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from Eastern countries. To protect secrets, it is necessary to
classify certain areas, to confine access to them to research
people who theoretically present no potential risk... Obviously,
this is going to cause some problems in the area of scientific
cooperation. Without going so far as all that, however, it
ought to be possible to make some improvement over the present
laxness. This laxness stems from the fact that we are a demo-
cracy where a horror of talebearing has become so grotesque
that people even hesitate to report child abusers. Well, a
spy... That laxness is of course common to all democracies --
West Germany is always flushing out spies from the East --

but it is heightened in our country by several typically French
elements.

The leftist intelligentsia has for years constituted a Hrend of
thought prone to favor everything that comes from communist
countries, systematically denouncing the United States as im-
perialist and modestly overlooking the galloping imperialism
of the Soviets and their countless violations of human rights.
Insofar as I know, nobody has ever arrested a spy working for
the Americans in France.

Jean-Pierre Vigier, a former FTP officer and member of the French
Communist Party (from which he has since resigned), Rolf Dobber-
tin's friend at CNRS, showed which way the wind was blowing 10
years ago. In an article that appeared in December 1968 in ‘

the Cuban magazine TRICONTINBNTAL, Jean-Louis Vigier wrote, a
propos of the new paths of the Revolution:

"There is no longer any legal parliamentary path to power, We
must engage in extra-parliamentary political tactics, designed
to dislocate the system and strike at the economic nerve cen-

ters of the production mechanism. This means the distribution

centers for energy, for electricity, the technological centers,
the computers, etc."

At that time, the GDR "mole," Rolf Dobbertin, had already been
working for 5 years.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 par Cogediprcssc SA

0182
C80: 3100

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

MAUROY'S SUPPORT wuvms m MITTBRRAND, Rm”!!!
Paris LE NWVEL OBSENATEUR in French 27-28 Jan 79 pp 30. 31

[Interview with Socialist Party's Huber M nan, Pierre Mauroy, conducted by
Frans-Olivier Giesbert]

[Text] [Question] It is difficult to understand you, Pierre Mauroy. First
you team up with Michel Rocard and you sign an agreenent which, if it were to
obtain the majority at the Met: Congress. would lead to Francois Mitterrond's
departure. Then. when Rocard announces that you are a candidate for the post
of first secretary of the partyusince you head the signatories-won deny it
right away.

[Answer] I have been fighting for months for the renewal of the party majority
«without exclusion-«round Francois Mitterrand. I have not changed one iota.
You must even admit that I have been repeating myself lately. where do you

see hesitations?

[Question] In your waivering between Francois Mitterrand and Michel Rocard as
though you cannot decide which camp to choose.

[Answer] Let us recapitulate. After the elections, several party leaders
began accusing Michel Rocard of "deviationisn." It was obvious they had
decided to exclude him from the party majority. Totally unwilling to follow
then. I wanted then to meet with him for discussions. Impossible. Three
times we found ourselves around the same table in what has been dubbed "acet-
ings of verifications.“ thee there, discussions were ilpossible. We were up
against a wall. Francois Mitterrand did agree to let us use two of his speeches
as working background on which to base the leadership's notion. Homer, when,
for the purpose of synthesis. Michel Rocard and I tried to bring into the
debate the docunents we had drawn with several friends (Jean-Pierre Cot,
Francoise Gaspard, Gilles Martinet. Dominique Taddéi, etc) then. we found the
door closed.

[Question] Because Francois Mitterrand believed you were challenging hin by
filing a joint text.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The PS [Socialist Party] is no longer what it once was. It has
entered adulthood. It would no longer allow discussions to be stifled.

We had a series of proposals to make. since the March defeat. the party has
been been acting as though it were frozen. We think it should find itself
once again and move forward, that is all. As a first step, debate was blocked,
as though some people were afraid to discover convergent opinions among
members. I now wonder if we are not running the risk of making the synthesis
difficult by acknowledging—if not charicaturing—barbed references. The
militants must say enough!

[Question] Are not you falling in an easy unanimism?

[Answer] What is now happening in the PS sometimes appears to me ridiculous
as compared to our collective ambition. Look around us. It is obvious that
France is entering an era of destabilization. Host forecasters are expecting
a continuous increase in unemployement until 1984, to the tune of an addition-
al 100.000 to 130,000 unemployed per year. Who can measure the risks of such
a situation? merything is possible within the next few years: a social
explosion. but also the country having recourse to a strong and, obviously,
"providential" man.

As for the world around us. it is completely destabilized. We see the old
West at grips with three crises: economic, energy and demographic. We see
the rise of new economic powers which, like Korea and Indonesia, are beginning
to compete vigorously with our industry. Finally, we see the cooperation of
China with Japan and the United States increasingly frightening the "Soviet
bear." In this general upheaval, how can we quarrel desultorily instead of
discussing knowledgeably?

[Question] Are you, therefore. a partisan of compromise at all cost, even a
"lame" one, as Michel Rocard would say?

[Answer] Come now, the PS—the gathering of all the trends of socialism—is
a pcnnanent compromise! For the time being, it seems essential to me that
our party escape sectarian temptations. Some people would like to push
Michel Rocard aside as well as reject the Christians. In short, they would
like to cut off some branches instead of grafting new ones. And this, at a
time when the party is in the process of acquiring a certain political coher-
ence. Take the submitted texts to be presented at the congress, they all
refer to the Epinay policy even if they do not reach the same conclusions
concerning the 1978 failure.

[Question] All the same. in their last petition in behalf of the first
secretary.:11tterrand's partisans implied that, with you and Hichel Rocard, the
Bpinay policy was in danger.

[Answer] Does it mean there is an Epinay nobility that is the sole keeper of
the revealed truth opposite a third estate to which I belong? You must admit
that I did accomplish something in the 1971 Epinay Congress. I renewed the
union-of-the-left agreement I had'lade in the previous congress. I also fought

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to enable Francois Hittorrand to teach the PS leadership. I did not have to
regret it. I repeat, I an not questioning Fr ois Mitterrand's role! I
have endorsed all the activities of the party s nce 1971.

[Question] What do you want then?

[Answer] To work in harmony with Francois Mitterrand. as we always have done
over the past 7 years. It is obvious that synthesis remains possible, unless
someone decides to establish a new type of party in which an elite would rule
on everything'and indicate the "right path" to others; unless we continue to
be locked in rigid attitudes. '

[Question] h‘hy those rigid attitudes?

[Answer] Since the evening of 19 March, Michel Rocard has developed arguments
which were not at odds with the party line and he has raised questions'ashed
by many people. Did he speak too much? In any case, it would not be a suf-
ficient reason to sales him keep quiet and bring the party to withdraw upon
itself-«for it is the way declines always begin.

[Question] All the sane. you still have disagreenents with Francois Mitten-and
concerning the union of the left for example?

[Answer] In my opinion, the PS must be prevented fro. beco-ing prisoner of a
political party which, after causing the fall of the left, has no other anbi-
tion than to manage the opposition with a policy of electoral outbidding and
class collaboration with the nationalist right. Consequently, it is inperative
to relaunch the union by calling not upon the political machines only, but also
upon the unions, associations and all extrapolitical groups. That is what I

call the people's union. What makes you believe Francois Mitten-and thinks
otherwise?

[Question] You are not on the sane wave length that he is concerning Europe?

[Answer] These past few months, the PS has not been very European in its
state-eats. However. it has not changed on fondanental issues. Francois
Mitterrnnd remains partisan of Europe. Moreover. all the socialists of impor-
tance car only be European: since capitalise is beconing world-wide, the
socialist answer must, at least. become organised at the continental level.
Besides, I do not believe that renascent nationalia will have such future in
the left. It is disconnected from everything and dangerous too. hotection-
ism leads to anarchy which brings in economic disorders. It always ends up

the sane way, with rationing and more police. I know it is Francois Hitterrand'a
conviction, and line too.

[Question] All the sale. you must admit that Michel Rocard and you favor less
state control and more decentralization than Francois Hitterrand.

[Answer] Yes. It may be the only real difference between us. It has not been
the subject of any debates. which shows the artifical nature of our current

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

divisions. I want a Socialist Party leaning more toward labor and I have a
very decentralizing conception of socialism. In my opinion. the best way to
govern is to ahinister less and to increase the centers of responsibility.

for it will not be the PS ministers and cadres who, on their own, will bring
socialism to France, but also the unionists, militants in tenants' associa-
tions. leaders of daily life activities-in short all the civilian society.
Agreed.. . Then what? If Francois Hitterrand and 1 have this different approach,
it is not new. I do not believe that it has prevented us fro. doing good work
together since Epinay.

{Question] how do you react when you are told that, with Michel Rocard. you
embody the right of the party?

[Answer] It is the traditional parlor game of those who have nothing to say.
It is absurd. I will only note that. of all the socialist leaders. Michel
Rocard is considered to be, according to public opinion polls. the most to the
left and I an the spokesnan of one of the party's federations most opened to

workers. the heir to a long fighting tradition. Where was the French socialist
movement born? Well, then...

COPYRIGHI': 1978 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

6857
680: 3100

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FICIAL USE ONLY

Hlﬂlmmmm. WNW ALLIANCE MN "WWW
Paris LE "m OMAN in French 27-28 Jan 79 p 31
[Article by Kathleen Min]

[Text] "I an ready to seek all possible agreements. but we lust speak clear-
ly." On Thursday. 18 January, over 'l‘.F. l. Francois Hitterrand implied that
the "synthesis" along the various PS [Socialist Party] trends was still
possible at the April congress. specifying. however. "without contusion." It
was a fink-but rather aniable-answer to the barbs that Michel Rocard had
directed against hin 3 days before. during the "Cards on the Table" broadcast.
1“ that time. the Yvelines deputy had blaned h-anqois Hitterrand for refusing
a political debate on fundaentals, due to "questions of precedence and proce-
dure." With barbed "short sentences." as he is prone to do. he had added
that. should Francois Mitterrand be placed it nimrity at the next congress. Pierre
Mauroy would seek his succession.

Listening to hin. one of his fomer assistants who has shifted to the Mauroy
team, said angrily: "Michel cannot talk 5 ninutes without naking a blunder.
Three months of work destroyed in one minute."

A blunder. is it a fact? Undoubtedly, if one believes the reaction of Pierre
Mauroy who declared on the very next day that he remained a firm partisan "of
the renewal of the present majority. without exclusion. if not expanded;" he
felt the synthesis was "indispensable;" and "the sooner the better." That
was proof that Michel Rocard's strategy did not coincide exactly with that of
the mayor of Lille. What is Pierre Hauroy seeking? To preserve the party‘s
unity by keeping Hitterrand in his position as first secretary. even if he sees
him nore as a "constitutional monarch" than as an "absolute nonarch." What is
Michel Rocard's goal? To propose to the party a true political alternative.»
Francois Mitterrand. To bring this about. Pierre Mauroy must become first
secretary.

For the time being. the two halves of the former P8 majority appear to have
approximately equal influence in the party: between 30 and 40 percent. accord-
ing to estimates. The 400 signatures gathered by Hauroy-Rocard lotion was
matched by the 500 signers who answered the call sent by Francois Kitterrand's

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

partisans in his behalf. Taking or leaving a few, each aligns the same pro-
portion of young elect, old notables and business leaders.

While some of Pierre Mauroy's partisans have Joined Francois Hitterrandulike
Michel Sainte-Maric, deputy of Gironde. or the elect of the South's wine
region—a few faithful of the Niévre deputy joined the Mauroy—Rocard team:
Jacques Badet, Iayor of Saint Chaond; Alain Vivien, Seine ot Marne deputy;
Georges Freche. nayor of Hontpellier; and Francois-Régis Bastide.

On 11 February. it will be Francois Mitterrand‘s turn to propose his .own con-
tribution to the leadership counittee of his party. on that date. if the
synthesis does not take place—which appears likely—it will be a real

electoral cmpaign which will open within the PS, each camp trying to obtain
the nest votes in order to begin negotiations under the best circlnstances.

Claude Estier. one of Francois Mitterrand's intimates, declared recently: "that
in order not to conpronise the chances fora synthesis in Nets. this electoral

canpaign must not get out of hand." Hill the socialists conclude a pact of
non-aggression for internal use on 11 February?

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

6857
050: 3100

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"MCI

HITTEIIMD sun MAKING INITIATIVE IN PS?
Paria VALE!” mates in French 5 Feb 79 pp 20-22

[Article by Andre Laeueur: "Deter-lined")

[Text] irancoia hitterrand again takee the initiative-in public. where
he preeente hineelf aa "preaidential material;" in hie party. where the
alliance between Mauroy and Rocard in already aplitting.

he in the cue of Jacquea Chirec laet week. Prancoie hitterrand eade a
coeeback lee: ‘I‘ueeday-win the eaee eanner-by eeana of a preee conference.
The preaident of the ”It [Rally for the Republic] had just been
convaleecence. The firet eecretary of the aocialiet party had been
experiencing the eyeptoee of a career malady which had been becoming
ineietently apparent in recent eontha: a drop in hie pereonal rating

in the public opinion polla and in hie own party. concurrently with e riee
in the preatige of Michel Rocard in the public view and Dong the
eocialiete.

Therefore Hitterrand'e aie on ‘l’ueaday wae recovery-in the public view
and in hie own party.

with reepect to the public. it wae inportant to revive that old attraction
which for eoue lo yeara had reaulted in hie being the only poeeible—ii‘ not
cndieputed—leader of the oppoeition. Hitterrand tried to regain his
poeition through the language of a ateteeean. that of the preeidential
candidate that he wee in 1974. end which-he intenda to keep.

Hie harah criticiee of the econoeic end eocial policy that ie currently
being carried out wee addressed not to the gowernnent. "which ie only a
ateward." but to the prelident of the republic. ln hie opinion it ie "the
Giecerd plan." that in leading France to bankruptcy. And Hitterrend intends
to oppoee the policy of the chief of state with an "econoeic and eocial
comterpolicy." to be publiahed by the end of April. that ie. after the
net: Socialiat Congreae. Thie iepliee that he atill deairee at thie the
to be the firet eecretary of the PS.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I0! OVHCIM. USE ONLY

Hitterrsnd cells on ell trend-en es witnesses to his reurlts concerning

the president of the republic: the workers. victies of the industrisl traslc
occurrences in the Nord and in Lorrt inc. the Imogerlel personnel. whose
"snger" he justifies; end even the heeds of concerns. whose min” I in

the fece of en incressed nuher of feilures he understnds.

in this connection. it is synptoestic thet. except for sone worldwide
coneideretioneuconcerning Chine. the “688R. lren. the Ansricen policy-o

to which eVery etstes-en oust now devote sons tile. Irenoois hitterrsnd
ceused his press conference to concentrete on econonic end socisl prohleee.
This is the loophole thet Jscquss Chirec‘s enti-luropeen offensive of lest

week left open. It is else the nettsr concerning which the French ere
nost sensitive.

After ell. prohlees ere whet will deter-inc the behevior of the voters on
two future dstss: the centonel elections. "truly politicsl voting which
will ultinstely he the reel public opinion poll;" end the Europeen elec-
tions. which obviously will neesurs lore the relstive strength of the
French with regsrd to doesstic policy then their pen-luropesn fervor.

Intended for the public. Hitterrend's demonstretion wee Ieent else for
nilitent socieliste.

The P8 is very wesry eftsr sons six nonths of fighting st the top level.
Both nilitsnts end the officiele in chsrge ere beginning to neesurc the
possible consequent loss of prestige to the petty es s result of those
internsl splits. Appeele free ell regions of Prencs for unity ers culti-
plying.

Prencois hittsrrsnd hes heerd thee. Also he node sure thet he snewered

the desire of eilitente when he wss questioned shout the internel struggles
of the PS this pest Tuesdey:

"I edeit thet ell of thet hed slipped sy eind. It is true thet those
frictions ere ninor centered to the problem with which the French ere
feced end to which we lust respond."

Clever point. hitterrend see-ed thus to present his possible chellengere.
Pierre heuroy end hichel locerd. es divisive persons. while he. hieself.

would sesute the continuence of the perty end its presence in the true
politicsl life of the country.

This spperent detect-eat on the pert of Hitterrend. this willingness to
rise shove internsl squsbhlee is the result of seversl convictions thet he
ecquired while sttentively observing his perty during the pest two eonths.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh’L‘l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he now known that unity among the various basic currents of the PS majority
will be realized at the Met: Congress. Ila bows also that it will take
place around himv-end that for three reasons.

. The pressure of the militants. it is intense. Pierre hauroy felt it
first. On his initiative. the Nord Federation. which he controls. and the
Pea-de-Calais Federation. which Daniel Percheron heads. together launched
an appeal for unity two weeks ago. beet week. the Loire-Atlantique
Federation. headed by Alain Chensrd (mayor of Nantes and close to Manny).
also asked for the return of the majority that was leaving the PS. "hoover

would henceforth go against thia desire for unity of the base would rial:
provoking rejection at the Diet: Congress.

. Proportionate atrength. It is just about fixed now. All of the
estimates of percentages that could be collected by the various currents
lead to the same conclusion that Jean-Pierre Cheyennant. deputy from

Belfort and leeder of cans [Center for Studiea. Research. and Education].
stated last week:

”No motion can be a majority by itaelf. Therefore a compromise in needed."

. As for Mauroy's attitude. Hitterrsnd now know precisely where the
mayor of Lille wants to so. A faux pas on the part of Michel Iocard made
it known on 15 January.

“that day. Rocard was the guest of the broadcast. "Cards on the Table." on
channel 2. Confidently assured because of the support that Nauroy seemed
to have accorded him when he signed the same declaration that he. himself.

signed two weeks earlier. the deputy mayor of Conflens-Sainte-aonorine
aaid:

"The name of Pierre limroy ia No l on the list of signatories of our
declaration. lie is therefore the candidate for the post of first aecretary
of the party...nut i think that he would not have wanted me to say it in
this manner."

Actually Heuroy was shocked by that statement. Once more locerd tried to
involve him more than he. himself. wished. After a telephone altercation
with the uayor of Conflans. he made this correction:

"i say firmly. but amicably. to liichel Rocard: Francois hitterrand is the
first secretary of the party and I have always been for the return of the
present majority without exception; indeed. for an even broader majority."

Pron that aoment. Hitterrand knew what to expect of the subtle tactic car-
ried out by the deputy mayor of Lille.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First. the alliance concluded at the beginning of January between Nauroy
snd Rocsrd had surprised hin. After hsving tirelessly advocated unity.
Hauroy was suddenly choosing confrontation. That could seen two things:
either a division of power had been the subject of an agreelent between
hauroy and Rocard (to the forner. the post of first secretsry of the
pertyzto tne latter. the candidacy for president of the republic); or
Hauroy had brought Rocsrd around only in order to obtain one concessions
from Mitterrand.

'l.-.e incident on channel 2 lakes the latter clear. If liocsrd wants to

carry the confrontation to its conclusion. Heuroy does not want liltterrand's
downfall. The first secretary of the PS thus scquires two certainties.

He will keep his office and the unity of the socielist party will prevail
er the Net: Congress. The three-hour conversation on Thursdey with the
nayor of Lille doubtless strengthened this ispression.

That does not seen that the battle is over. No one really expected any
sgreelent fron the meeting of representatives of the majority of the PS
that was convened last friday at the request of hauroy and Defferre.

Hopes are hardly any greater with respect to achieving a colpro-ise
between now and 12 February. the date on which the directive cousittee will
neet in order to record the proposals for the congress.

The stakeswith respect to this congress in fact renain intact. 0n
6 January. hitterrand stated it precisely in one sentence (in an interview
granted to LB want):

"It is not in sy nature to be a king of nonentities (neither a king, nor
a nonentity)."

So. that precisely is the situation: the present test of strength between
Pierre Hsuroy and Francois Hitterrand will deter-inc under what conditions
the first secretary of the socialist party will be continued in office.

Hauroy wants more "democracy" snd"collegislity" in the lanagenent of the
party. That would neon the elinination of the directive posts of several
of those close to Hitterrend and the strengthening of the power of the
deputy nayor of Lille. To counter that plan. hitterrand proposes to
henceforth prooote to posts of responsibility "the generation of In that
the party hes produced." The pretotype of these nen say be found in the
person of Jospin. currently national secretary.

The division of power at the Met: Congress will depend essentially on thw
proportion of strength that will be nade evident fro- now until then
between .‘ieuroy and hitterrand. The battle thus continues. with inter-edisry
lieutenants—each striving to withdraw supporters free the other.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'hua there appeer on the declaration of Heuroy and Rocard the aigneturee
of pareona forlarly clean to Hitterrand; vhile. convemly. Hitterrand'a

friende have obtained the eupport of for-er curedee of Pierre Hauroy for
their declaration.

The Hitter-rand offeneiva in Mord end in Paa-de-Cnleie—uhere texta favoring

the firat eocretary appeared—hen reaponded to the one thet Heuroy had
Ienifeated in Muchee-du-Ihone in order to dissuade Defferre fron uncon-
ditionally aupportins liiuterrand. Cherlaa-hile boo. notional treasurer

of the PS end firat lieutenent of the deputy mayor of Nemille. hen
joined Hooray.

In order to break dovn the unaninity of the feninine current which. headed
by Prancoiae Ceapard. hen rellied the poaitione of Heuroy and locard.
Yvette Roudy produced her own declaration. favoring Hitterrend. And

Edith Creaaon. through reguler attandence at ell official denonatrationa
of the P8. nanifeate her aupport of the current firet eecretery.

finally. an old comrade of heuroy in Word. Pierre Bereaovoy (he later
joined Hitterrmd). has been given the reeponeibility of organizing the
Nationel Conference of the PS on Siderurgy on 10 l'ebruery. for the purpose
of effinin; the preaence of the perty in the reel- of eeriouo eocial
evente—three veehe after Heuroy had nanifeated hie concern over theae
problem in a Ieetins with Giacard d'Beteing and Barre.

wPYRIGBT: 1979 ”Valenre actuallea"

080: 3100

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MC!

PCF'S 'ANTI-IUROPW' 0mm WIRED
Paris VAme ammzs in French 5 Feb 79 pp 22
[Article by Andre Lesueur: "Strategy of Outrage")

[Text] The PC offensive. especially with regard to Europe, sin to quiet
the nood of the militants.

A hard line in all directions: that is the line adopted by the co-nnist
party inpreparing for its 23rd Congreaa. which is scheduled to near this
coaing Hay. A central co-ittee seating Tuesday and "edneaday. a day of
parli-entary study concluded Thursday with a press conference by Georges
Harchaia confined this.

The attack is nov taking on the appearance of a caricature. Thus the
secretary general of the PC presents Giscard d'Bstaing as "a dictator,"
governing "alone" with the assistance of acne ”technocrats in tha service
of aultinational fires." Ilia option in favor of Europe is considered "to
be a flight abroad." where "as always the bourgeoisie finds the supporters
it does not have in France."

The socialist party. having ilpleaented its faaous "turnabout," is now
"frankly to the right." And one uould doubtless have to be one of the
journalists vhon Harchaia last week on television characterised as
”acoundrela and stooges" not to see that ”the PC is indeed the only deno-
cratic party in this country." But it is true that intonation. itself.
ia also in the hands of the "totalitarian power.”

"I an not proud of what is written in the papers." reasrhed Georges
Harchaia.

In addition to the caricature that the secretary general of the PC sketches
of hinaelf. this hardening in tone outlines the reply now furniahed by the
conuniat hierarchy to the profound disarray within the party that folloued
the failure of the left in the legislative elections. The European
election. in particular. cones in the to silence the questioninga that

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’FICIAL USE ONLY

becaae aanifest at the con-mist base—chiefly aaong the intellectuals-

with respect to the justice of the party strategy and even with respect
to the necessity of agonizing doctrinal reviews. The general nobilisa-
tion causes needs to be forgotten.

In fact the co-unist leaders are calling their militants to a vast
anti-Buropean offensive—beginning with a clever amalgam In short, the
Canon harlot is responsible for French industrial failures. for serious
social events. And the European institutions, in the supranational per-
spective.are the ones that would enable Giscard Bataing to find a legi-

tinacy at the level of the Co-unity which would be lacking to hi. in
France.

The co-unist party is alone. Union with the socialists is no longer
sought: they are "sbettors" of foreign seizure of national independence.
The am lts position is "enbiguous': it is part of the parliaaentery
majority and thus has full responsibility in the present situation.

0n the other hand. the appeal to voters is stirring-«o the socialists who
cannot help but observe that their party has returned ”to the old deaon
of class cooperation"; to the Gaulliste:

"Like De Gaulle, I believe that French laws should be voted by the French
parliaaent and not by foreign deputies." says Harchais.

In his solitary fight. the latter thinks he will surely win. lie believes
that he has observed that the partial elections already bear witness to
rectification of his party. This offensive introduces another advantage:
it say dainate the work of the congress and thus sidestep the internal
probleas that could be posed by the militants.

comment: 1979 "Valeurs actuelles"

C30: 3100

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BIOGRAPHICAL ms 0" INTERIOR MINISTER summ-
Paris vacuum in French 27 Jan 79 p 89
[Article by Christian Pauvet: 'duistian Bonnet, France's Mater ale Cop")

[Text] ”A plodder who, day after day. plows his furrow" That is how
christian Bonnet. “France's ntﬂer one cop.“ describes himself. A glance
at his silhouette: snail. dry. authoritarian. In one word. ordinary.

A brief biographical note: born in Paris. in 1921, student in the Free
School of Political Science. manager of a fish canning comany. his oc-
cupation took his to Morbihan. where he was elected an m [Popular Rs-
publican hove-ant] deputy in 1956.

But. in that year. the 'plodder" had a stroke of genius. "the only one in
his career," evil tongues say. he ninute he arrived at the Palais nour-
bon [legislative usedaly] . he joined a club of young deputies organised
by another young successful candidate. Valery Giscard d'Bstaing. 'me fur-
row was open. At the end of the field. the ninisterial paradise.

Meanwhile. Christian Bonnet engaged in politics. without drawing attention
to himself. The nan is discreet and there is nothing visionary about his.
No great plan,no brilliant speech. But he is a record man. his unory

of facts and figures, his sense of realities make his: valuable in the

eyes of Giscard.

Nevertheless. he is conservative and makes no secret of it. as prefers
plain liberalism to “advanced liberalism" with law and order at a pre-
mium. Sensitivity, he is rather a nationalist. The Gaullists know this
and they have never bade hie one of their favorite targets. In short, he
is an authoritarian nan. which is not necessarily a handicap at Beauveu
Square [Ministry of Interior].

In private life. he proves to be nordant, cheerful. witty. his gift as
an initetor -- he excels in animal cries -- was the joy of news-en and
sonstines of the Cabinet. zver since he has been boss of the policenen,

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

some persons state the: he hes become ”es dleerful es the grove.” His 301:
does not go very well with huor. Moreover. so s successor o: Nichol Ponie-
wweki. whose blustering speech finally disturbed the hood or etste. Bonnet
hes ssde silence his golden rule.

Nov here he is, today. thrown under the tire of current events by «ﬁling
police-en. us will probsbly cone out of it all right. He who stetes that
he has only one passion -- service of the stste -- is well overs that. for
republlcen low and order. s de-onstration by police-en is always s bed onen.

COPYRIGHT: 1979, 8.x. Groupe Express

10.042
CSOI 3100

30
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLICE Mom swamps INVESTIGATED
Paris L'mms in French 27 Jan 79 pp 84-86, 88
[Article by Jacques Renard: 'ﬂhat Do the Oops Rant?“

[next] Police-en in the street ready to cone to
blows with other police-en. L'mms has con-
ducted an investigation on this unrest that is
being added to such other unrest. at present.

”Grief, you wouldn't happen to have a paper clip?“ The chief has no paper
clip. The police-an roaas about the station. asking everyone for a paper
clip. Seventeenth District Police Station, in Paris: 257 patroluen, 41 ser-
geants, S officers. 1 deputy superintendent.- 1 divisional smerintendsnt.
Tuesday 23 January, 2000 hours. Ayoung lady who has just caused an autono-
bile accident is taken to the station. mesuperintendent decidestesakeher
breathe in a balloon. He looks for one for 5 Iinutes. in vain. as fills
out a form and sends a police-an to get an alcotest device from the office
two stories above. Five minutes. The duty supervisor telephones: 'Can you
send no down a balloon?" Five lore minutes. half an hour later. it is
necessary to face the facts: there is no kiloon in the whole police sta-
tion. A policeman suggests: "All we have to do to wait for the patrol

car to come in. 1hey may have a balloon. but that would surprise me." me
of the four station cars is broken down. “we know that it will not be re-
paired _for 2 or 3 weeks. The central garage cannot give one leanwhile. there
are none." Superintendent Jean Paul Roger said to Jacqueline Remy. .In the
middle of the station. a huge wooden table. ‘lhe police officers are typing
out their reports there on ancient typewriters. No out of five are un-
usable.

Three minors are cooling their heels behind the desk. One bust be 10 years
old. Another is standing, with a hard, fixed, distant gaze. he had a fight

with a police officer a short tine before. "It is the present tines." the
sergeant renarked. “he is a victim of society!" a police-an stated, adding
"Advanced liberal society!"

‘ 31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(hiriously. Liliane Sichler. who is in the Fifth District Police station.
also discovers yomgsters there. Tattooed. natal-tipped shoes and wind-
breakers. The headmaster of the Lavoisier Hi9: School had reported a
racket to the police. ‘l'hey case back with two young boys. They are not
put in prison. hey are going to be turned over to the ‘lerritorial Bri-
gade.

we did not choose those two police stations. We had asked Police Head-
quarters for a station in the 38th or the 20th district, the Nth district
or in the stburbs. They offered us the 17th and the 5th. Take it or leave
it. Why? Because the premises have been renovated. N: one should say
that Paris police stations are ancient and even unhealthy at tines.

'Bverything is new,“ Jacqueline Rely notes, “but the walls are already in-
pregnated with dirt. Inside, it is grey. diesel. 1hey pointed out to Is:
'You understand, we operate 24 hours out of 24.‘ with an unsatisfactory
tine schedule. 'Hhen we are on “big rounds,“ 0630 hours to noon. 19 hourn
to 2330 hours. we barely have tine to go home in the afternoon. He got up
at 0430 hours and go to bed at 0130 hours. It is a probles.‘ a police of-
ficer said. host of then live in the suburbs. The tines of the Parisian
cop in his janitor's quarters are over.”

L'EXPRESS reporters and correspondents will take these remarks and many
more, from one end of France to the other. in Marseilles. Lyons. Lille,
Grenoble. 'l'he "unrest" of the police lies prisarily there. Even if the
causes are deeper, even if the crisis of society has no reason for sparing
the police. 111s president of the republicstressed thison thundey 25 Jan-
uary in the Cannes-Bcluse Police School. that is resented lost directly?
A lack of material mans. poor working conditions. a feeling of ineffec-
tiveness. shared by the public. And, in the long rm. a canon feeling
of insecurity. “mat is indeed why the banners of the ”angry cope" pro-
claimed. on Saturday 20 January. between Bastille and Notre Dan: "the
people's security depends on the security of the policemen.” 'me tradi-
tional "me police with us" was answered by a "me public with u,” less
custonary. And a I’Bonnet, you are in an awful way. your police are in
the street." to which we were not accustomed. either.

"a dangerous gas," the principal private secretary of the sinister of
Interior. former Paris police chief Jean Paolini. told us. "these de-
monstrations rm the risk of discrediting the police. And of increasing
the spiral of the feeling of insecurity that asks for nothing sore than to
feed itself.“

Priority to Security

obviously, labor unions are exploiting the suction created by the recent
"repeated attacks against the police force.“ Ilenri Buch. secretary gen-
eral of the Independent Federation of Police Unions, confided to Bric
Schnoll: ”The case history of the police has never been taken into account.

32
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the first opportunity. that was to blow up. we tried to give a more
action turn to the denonstration. which cans fro. a spontaneous rank-
and-file Inovenent. The parade was to hit public opinion.”

While the Paris Police Headquarters. which will definitely never be in
agreement with organizers of grievances in the street. even if they are
cops. contrasts his figures (1.500 demnstrators) with theirs (7,000).
Christian Bonnet strove to dedrasatise the atnosphere. in Europe 1 Press
Club. Of course. he was far fro- forgetting the nanes of the five police
officers killed on duty in 1978, but. overconing his suction. he noted
that in 1976 there were 10 killed: nine policeesn and one gendame:
eight in 1977: seven police-en and one gendarne: and, in 1978, five po-
licemen and two gendarnes. as also pointed out that the rate of increase
of crime and delinquency in Paris. which was 11.39 percent in 1977, was
only 1.21 percent in 1978. he does not yet have figures for the entire
country. but he thinks that they will follow the sens curve. He is entirely
happy. In Grenoble. the departuntel director of urban police. Yves Sou-
terene. revealed his estilates to Jacques Marie Bourgetx a 10-percent
absolute decline of cries. A tentative explanation by police inspector

Serge Ibcheport: ”At all tines priority is given to strict police work
and safety."

In Lille, Francois ngniault obtained figures that are still confidential:

a 2.06-percent decline. The high crime rate in the department of Nord,
which has 2.5 million inhabitants. decreased 4.8 percent and arned rob-
beries decreased 36.11 percent. The average crime rate increased 3.3 per-
cent owing. primarily. to e S.2~percent'increase in burglaries. Delinquency
declined 2.8 percent. Explanation by police chief Alex Gobin: ”merever
it has been possible to do so. we have taken officials out of the offices.

Their mission is to be on the public streets and we established mobile
security units.”

In Harseilles. where the saint Gerard massacre caused ten deaths. last
year. the chief of police announced: “Although we hit the headlines with
sensational cases that explain the appreciable increase in honicides. a
trend to a stabilization of delinquency was confined in 1978 in Bouches
du Rhone.“ The chief of Urban Investigative Police. Pierre diatelain.
was pleased to note that violent thefts decreased by 8.5 percent. and he
told Jean Louis Bysaartel: ”Those are the acts that give rise directly
to the etnoshpere of insecurity along the public. Not settle-ants of
accounts between shady characters. mat is disturbing is when a handbag
is snatched from you or when you are mugged for stall amounts of money."

Thevunions dispute these statistics in general. Pierre Hatreloos. secretary
general of the National Plainclotheslsen's Union, told Liliane sichler:

"Statistics are not everything. Petty crimes, like burglaries of cellars.
have been eliminated. It is easy to make the figures go down by doing that.“

33
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another slogan of the demonstrators on Saturday 20 January: “No leave for
prisoneu." Shouts denouncing the laxity of the courts were .still stronger
on Monday 22 January, on lle de la cite. where the Independent National
Police Union. established in 1951 by police inspector Dides and mich.
nevertheless. denies that it is of me far right, decided to go into the
street: 'Peyrefitte resign, Bonnet treason." Its ushers are afraid :
that the verdict of the flagrant crins court, whichwas trying at that very
Ito-ant the four young independents iron the Saint Lazaro. Station will be
too lenient. a vain worry, it seeas. because two sentences of 4 years in
prison and two of 3 years, including one with 1 year suspension were pro-
nounced early, on Tuesday 23 January.

“The courts are the cause of the unrest."apolicenan in the 17th.Diatrict Police
Station, in Paris, said. “The police are disgusted by the courts.‘ Another,
in the 5th District Police Station: “I do not engage in politics, but. never-
theless, 1 have arrested the same lad four times in a Death. me judges

take us for fools.“ In Grenoble, Jacques narie Bourget reports that In-
spector Paul Castes is nicknamed ”Mounou“ by his colleagues. a doubled
syllable of the name of a robber whom he has already arrested 15 tines.

the problem is not specifically French. In the United States the cops talk
about courts with revolving doors: no sooner in than out. Nevertheless,
the nusber of persons detained in Prance increased by 4,000 in 5 years,
going from 26,000 to 30,000. as many policemen as there are in Paris. crown
included.

Three Years of ”flower Pot”

111s other great topic of gambling: the personnel strength. Host police-
men believe that it is insufficient. Up to now, that was the opinion of
every minister of Interior. Surprise: not the opinion of alristian Bon-
net this year. "Ne have one police-an or gendarne for every 305 inhabi-
tants. We are beaten. if I dare say so, only by Belgiul. which has one
for 303. There is one for 350 in the Federal mpublic of Germany and one
for 457 in Great Britain.“ he announced to the Press club. L'mssss made
a count in four large cities: Marseilles and Lyons have one cop for 500
inhabitants. Grenoble has one for 600. Paris, where Jacques cum is
demanding 3,000 more, has one for every 163 inhabitants! a record due

in part to its rank as capital and to its being the headquarters of a
nwber of international organizations. Neverthelesu. when a head of state
on an official visit mobilizes 5.000 polices-en, “they take a third of lay
personnel free no," Superintendent Saillardof the 5th District cosplains.
And all those guards of prominent persons . of embassies, of official
buildings!

At the bottom, they gripe: "On graduation from school. we serve sosetines
3 years as 'flower pots' in front of an elnbassy. That is no job for a po-
liceman. Passeraby laugh. us get bored. when I was on guard duty at
the Elysee Palace, at the end of an hour. I said to melt: 'Hhat an I

310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

doing there? What am I good for?’ Then I counted the pikee on the Rooster
Gate and I can tell you that there are 520 orange pikes on that gate.‘

Poor utilization of personnel? Oaristian Bonnet himself ordered the Office
of the Inspector General to make a report on this subject. he conclusions
are overwhelming. Almost 10 .000 policemen are diverted from security tasks
and 5.800 of these detachments -- into administrative or technical services.
sometimes into other administrations . or even in the private service of
prominent persons -- are completely unjust; fied. In the ministry itself,
43 officers and patrolman are superfluous. Even supposing that Nesrine
gate into the premises. A legitimate assumption. because the greenish-
yellow guardhousa on Beauvau Square has , for its entire decoration. two
maps of Paris - subwsy and bus routes -- and, in a good place, behind

the telephone, two photographs of the man most wanted by all the police
forces in France. fullfsce and profile . wearing a mustache shaved off a
long time ago.

The report listed 300 'privileged" enployees as head waiters, cooks. foot-
men. gardeners. Jean Louis Bysssrtel tracked down some in Marseilles.
”Three policemen are regularly used in the police headquarters kitchens.
'No more also take care of the gardens. “At L'Bveche -- the police head-
quarters -- policemen are employed in housekeeping tasks and are seen
with mop in hand." A sergeant said.

QIristian Bonnet is also determined to do some sweeping. Starting in I979.
1,100 of these policemen are going to be put back on the street. They will
be replaced by administrative personnel costing almost two times less than
a police officer. Good business. because the Blois prograe. providing

for increasing the security forces by 5,000 policemen and by 5,000 gen-
darmes in 5 years. gives him funds for hiring 1,000 policemen in 1979.

And he points out: "me real problem is one of training and utilizing
personnel. of adapting the police to the new conditions of the modern
world. much more than a problee of personnel strength.“

The remedies? Inproveeent of training. Policeman training has been in-
creased to 6 months instead of 5. It is short. of the 3.681 policemen
who graduated in the last two classes in 1978. 2,244 were city workers.
385 office esployees, 270 civil servants, 253 trade employees. 238 crafts-
men. 172 not gainfully employed, 78 students, and 41 fsrnrs. Last year.
there were 28,082 candidates, 4,211 passed. A 1S-percent selection.

Why does one become a cop? "For stability." _one said. “In my region.
there was unewloyment," another said. ”Out of calling," a third said.
General shrugging of shoulders: “You would do better to tell the truth.“

The real solutions? ”Time and money," Jean Paolini, Bonnet's principal
private secretary, said. "our 1979 budget shows a 21.1-percent increase.
With regard to equipment. the increase is 66 percent, in cog-arisen with
1978: 190 eillion francs are going to make it possible to renew one

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

quarter of our autonobiles and 197 million francs are going to give us
65,000 square meters of new buildings. Arlnent. data processing, com-

nicaticne are not neglected. All that goes in the direction of the police-
nen‘e grievances.“

1he Ministry of Interior is placing much hope on a gadget. a niniaturieed
traneceiver costing 10,000 francs. Orders have been placed for 550. ob-
jective: for each police officer on duty to be equipped with one. effec-
tiveness: "begins a holdup in the Latin Quarter. 'lhe gangsters' car is
identified. it nay pass by 300 traffic polioenent with full ilpunity.
becauee they are not aware that it is wanted. witha portable radio, the
vehicle will not go far.” Jean Paolini pointed out. Deterrence; "leagine
two cope in the stbway confronted by eight toughe. The uniform no longer
makes the- fall back. Draw their service weapon. no. me reeponse out
be appropriate. They would be shared. with a radio, the policeman will
be able to call for assistance. Less isolated, he will feel more safe.
And he actually will be safe. Assaults will becoae infrequent.“

The Gendarme 'e Uniform

1he mien neebere are pouting. They state that too my unhept promises
are nade to then. 1hey are already nouriehing more concern on seeing
their colleagues in the Gendarmerie. provided with rogatory conissione
and investigative police powers, encroach on urban areas.

Pierre Hatreloos. of the Uniformed Police Union. nakes the following ac-
cueion: ”Gendarme are seen arriving in Paris, changing clothes in the
Gendamrio headquarters and pursuing their investigation in civilian
clothes. his is forbidden by the 1903 decree. mat reeoves all legal
value from their reports. because they always start with the phrase: "Us.
genderme. wearing our uniform and acting in accordance with the orders of
our superiors." The real fear of eone is to see a police force under aili-
tary status replace the civilian police force little by little. ”the
Gendarmerie does not have the right to express itself in its unione. Put-

ting it in a privileged etatue would amunt to throwing the police into
eilence.‘

The 76.000 French gendarues are not complaining, in fact. "By military
tradition. they are disciplined," ltCol Robert Meet, in charge of public
relations, said siuply. But Paul Kat: came on a young gender-e who
“would not hesitate to join a union. if he had to right to deoonstrate
in the street. if need be.“

Uninhibited, he gave his name: ”Michel Louvet. You lay write it."

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Prime minister

2. Hinister 0! Interior

3. Minister of Defense

4. Director General of the Nationel Police

5. Director of the Gsndarnerie

6. Five central bureau

7. Pour central depertnents

a. Central eaninistration

9. Office of the Inspector General

10. Rspublicen Security Cowaniee

11. Bureau of Personnel and Police Schools

12. Investigative Police

13. Mr and borders

14. Urban police forces

15. officiel tripe and protection of prominent persons

16. Bureau of Technical Services

17. General Intelligence

18. International police technical cooperation

19. Territorial surveillance
20. 108.000 policemen
21. Security Police '
22. Regional centera; pursuit groups and detachments (departmt):

coupaniea (district): detachments (m or grow of cos-mes):
42,660 + 5.500 auxiliaries

23. Republic Guard
2‘. Sea Gendarnsrie
25. Air Gendarmerie
26. Oversees
27. French Forces in Germany

COPYRIGHT: 1979, SJ. Groupe Express

l0,042
C80: 3100

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLICE W OUTLINE!)
Parie warm in French 27 Jan 79 p 88

[Text] Uniformed Police

Student. at the end of 6 natthe 3.348 trance
Patrolman on probation 3,348
Patrolman and lance corporal 3,407-5,025
Sergeant 4 , 729-5 , 472
Senior sergeant 5.742

Theee figuree are applicable to unnarried police officers. a 'epecial
servitude“ or 700 trance at the bottoe or the ecale and 95g trance at the
top ie included. It 'coqnneatee" for the right to etrike loet by the
police-en in 1948. A homing allowance ie provided in Paris. Manet
all policeun cone iron the provincee and few eucceed in going back.

or 5.000 regueete tor tranerer tron Perle to the provincee, only 500 are
approved every year. in accordance with a cowlicated eyeten taking into
account the fully eituation. eeniority, the nuiaer of tranefer requeete
already eubnitted. hey are proceeeed by coqmter. he elighteet error
in drawing then up entaile canoelation and etarting all over again.

A new patroan receivee a unifor- allowance of 570 trance a year. but.
on hie appointment, he hee to buy hiuelf a winter mirorn, a ell-er uni-
form, an overcoat, ehirte. tiee, ehoee. or about 2,000 trance that will
be withheld tron hie pay. He drawn a neretal or mique 7.65 autonatic
pietol. two clipe and 10 cartidgee. Student -- minim age 21 years.
height 1 meter 68 centimetere -- training in 5 nonthe of etudiee and one
month probation. No diplona required. Coquetitive examination: inter-
mediate level between elementary couree certificate and tiret cycle ele-
nentary certificate

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Plainclothssoen

Inspectors

student inspector 3,393 francs
Probationary inspector 3,691

Police impoctor 3.9dO-S,72d
Principal inspector incl-6,165
Divisional inspector 6,554,120
Olief divisional inspsctor 6,932-7,396

Recruiting by cospetitivs examination, with high school diplona. equivalent
diplone. or 4 years active duty for uniforlsdpatrolnsn. (he year of school.
at Cannes-Bcluee. near Hontereau. in Seine st Marne. An inspector receives
a pair of Hassenote handcuffs and a Smith 6 lesson 38 special (9 millimeter)
revolver. 11.. pay of plainclothesnen is increased by 'an 80-franc Ionthly
allowance for expenses. called “pink bonds.” expenditures lads by inspec-
tors during their investigations are not reinbursed. but a syste- of bonus.
paid by the P‘blic Prosecutor's Department. brings the. 30 francs for each
arrest of a pickpocket, 250 francs for a burglar, 800 francs for an armed
attacker. m. P: [Investigative Police) officers work in a six-nan group.
plus two ”procedure non“ (responsible for interrogations and procedure) .
under the direction of a chief, nine persons in all. who each collect the
arrest bonus. An arrested pickpocket costs the Public Prosecutor's office.
in fact, 30 x 9 - 27o francs. If the investigation falls through, a blank
is drawn.

Police Superintendents

Student superintendent (1 year) 4,523 francs
Probationary swerintendent (1 year) «592

Superintendent 4 , 1024.468
Principal swsrintendent Lass-9.079
Divisonal superintendent mom-10,192

This pay may be increased by a certain nurber of "fees“: attachnnto,
adultery affidavits. funeral formalities. These amounts are paid to the
Urban Corps of Police Superintendents fund and are distributed in equal
shares. For a large city. this bonus may amount to fro. 2,000 to 3.000
francs a month. The entrance examination is open to bachelors of law, or
holders of an equivalent diploma, and inspector after 4 years' service.

common. 1979. SJ. Grows Express

10.042
(30: 3100

60
FOR OFFICIAL. USE Oh'iY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BRIEFS

TOP COMINISTS DISTURBED—The book by [Jean] Hontsldo. "The Secrets of the
Soviet Bank in France” (published by Albin Hichel). has caused a stir song
the conunists. Several menbers of the [PCP] politburo and most of the ma-
bers of the Central Couittse discovered on reading it that their party has
financial connections about which they have never been informed. Georges
Gosnat. FCF treasurer. refuses to offer any explanation. [Georges] larchsis.
to whom protests have been addressed. admits that "serious blunders" have
been co-itted. [Text] [Paris VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 26 Feb 79 p 15]

Falwell-PRC COOFEMTIORuThe scientific and comercial cooperation agreements
between France and the PRC. signed on 6 December in Beijing by Jean-Francois
Deniau. minister of foreign trade, will be conpleted on 28 February by a
protocol granting to Afnor (French Normalization Association) the right to
establish a Chinese Normalization Office using the French association as

its model. This document. which provides for sending French experts to
Beijing and for receiving Chinese [experts] in Paris, will be signed by
Francois Kosciusko-Horizet. the normalization co-issioner. The document
was drawn up by Bernard Vauceile. director of Afnor. [Text] [Paris

VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 26 Feb 79 p 15]

(:80: 3100
END

lo].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY