no: OFFICIAL us: ONLY

JPRS L/10399

18 March 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 17/82]

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI omen. USE ONLY
JPRs publications contain intonation primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

'lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

COPYRIQT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MEPSRIP OF
MTERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHLR‘JION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘L.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
(rono 17/32)

Coureurs
mm FORGE

UNITED HIGDOM

_ '80le TIMES' Urges Government To Abandon Trident

(mtoriu‘ mm! ms, 28 ’eb 82) .OOOOOIOOOOCOIOOOIOO 1
POLITICAL
mm REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
ImeMemn Reletions Since Schidt-nonecker Meeting Viewed
(Peter Jochen Schmidt; amen ARCHIV, 10 Feb 82) ............ 3
men '
Government Characteristics. Continuity, Conflicts Viewed
(Olivier Duhenel; Pomona, No 20, 1982) 11
Dissident Kincker Examines PCP Crisis, Future
(hmcoianincker‘ m, J“ 82) I.I0.0000DIOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO. 19
PBF Competence, Ability To Apply Policies Examined
_(R°mdm1;mm. J” 82) ceaseseeseeesessseoseevseesee 25
PC! Decline, Resources for Recovery Viewed
(J.mmd°u1n;muv°1a8, ”20, 1982) OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO 3|.
Kresucki Purpose: Reinforce cor, Vase PCP Atteck
(Frees-Olivier Oiesbert. Claude-hence“ Jullien; 1.! 1mm
WAN. 6F°b 82) 0000.00.00.00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOO . he
P8! Deputies' Factions, Geogrnphic Distribution Surveyed
(“Via Hm”; mm, "020. 1982) OOOIOCOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO h6
ITALY
DC's Piccoli on Party Clashes Over Bl selvedor
(Pleninio Piccoli Interview; LA MA. 16 Feb 82) .......... 5?
- n - [III - WI - 150 £000]

l-‘OIﬁFI’ICIAL USE ONLY
SPAIN

Meneuverings for Possible mD-AP (Sedition Described
mm“ s””qu“.; CWO 16’ arch 82) O'O'IOOOOIOVOOOIOOOO

P803 Bides It! Time in Midst of uco Defections
(thnsu‘uq‘lm; ”1°16. lreb 82) 0......CCUIODCQOUOII

mm
FRANCE

Defense Budget for 1982 Stresses hployuent, Equipment

(Am D'AUJOURD'HUI, Jen-Feb 82)

Generel Describes Air Region's Logistical,

leeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeseeeeot

Defense Functions

(Jeen ReJeu Interview; W D'AwOURD'mII. Jen-Feb 82) .....

Air Region's Role in Air Defense Operations Described
(Michel Omens; mm D'AUJOIBD'EUI, Jen-Rb 82) ..........

Terrain-Following deer Tested for Mirage 2000! Program

(An ET cosmos, 13 Feb 82)
mmmcnou

.eosoeellsstsssseeeesesese

Home Guard, Expanded Territorial Am Advocated
(Henry Stemwpe; m TDES, 1: Mar 82) .......................

Nott'e Announcenent on Reservists welcome,
(mm-1n; m mass, 5 Her 82) ..

mtllotEnough

59

68

72

79

83
'SUNDAY TMS' URGES GOVERNMENT TO mu TRIDM
M11527 London THE SUNDAY TIMES in hgliah 28 Feb 82 p 16

[Bditoriah "ﬂrong weapon, wrong Price"]

[Text] Very soon, the govern-ant will announce ita deciaion on the next
generation of the Britiah nuclear deterrent. In fact the decieion haa al-
ready been taken to buy the Trident 05. the neat powerful and upenaive
weapon the Anericana have ever begun to build. All that renaina ie for the
beat tame to be concluded. and for the cabinet and parlienent to agree.

we hope cabinet ninietere think eevetel tinee before accepting the caae which
the prine niniater and the defence aecretary are preparing to put to then.
Trident ia etrategically mound, financially beyond thia country'a reach.
and, within the total pattern of defence. a gravely uxbelancing element.

Poeaeaaing a nuclear deterrent now, Britain ehould not einply give it up.

This would nerve neither Britiah intereeta nor the cauee of world diaarlalent.
If Polaris/Chevaline, the preaent weapon. in ever eurrendered. it ehould be
in exchange for a eurrender on the other aide. But thie doee not mean that
Britain needs Trident. Trident ia deaiped to hit Moscow and penetrate Soviet
missile eiloa. It is a firat-atrike weapon. The 0.8. needa thia capacity,
but not Britain. If Britain ia in the deterrence bueineea. the capacity to
destroy a couple of Ruaaian citiea ia deterrent enough: to cut off an arm of
the bear, a General De Gaulle uaed to any. Leaeer weapone than Tridentuleea
vulnerable to conatant technological change and not nearly ao menaivenare
capable of doing that: or rather. which ie the point, of peeing a threat to
do so which the Rueaiana cannot be certain of eliminating.

Aa Lord Carver argued on thin page laet week, the concept of a truly "inde-
pendent" deterrent does not, in Britain'a circunetancea, etand up to aerioue~
examination. 3e contends that no aituetion eniate in which the threat to uae
it would be credible if the Anericana were not aleo ready to croae the

nuclear threshold. 0n thia analyaia. purcheae of ‘l'rident DS, coating perhape
l0,000 aillion pounds would increaae the firepower but reduce independence
still further. If independence in important, tine and may would be better
apent in the next few years uncoupling fron reliance on waahington for the
guidance eyetge. eatellite targetting and other technology critical to nieaile
operation.

POIOFHCIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trident has becone heavily favoured at the Ministry of Defence. It would
keep Britain in the super-league. To hear eons apologists, one night also
inagine it had no side-effects. Hr Nott seems to have persuaded hinself
that it has absolutely no comequences for the rest of the defence budget.
This is Whitehall casuistry at its nest tendentioue. Planning for Trident
already neans having a smaller navy, army and air force. All conventional
arms are being weakened to satisfy the eilplistic belief that "Moscow"
will be frightened by Trident nore than anything else.

If these argunents do not persvade a conservative cabinet minister, another
one should. Hitherto Britain's nuclear defence programs has been pursued
with bipartisan support. Labour's unilateraliets have not managed to over-
run the constituent of successive labour cabinets to the nuclear bonbere

and the Polaris submarine force. Sometimes this has been achieved by
questionable secret dealings. But it has at least meant that nuclear

decisions. with their long lead-tines, have survived changes of government.
Trident would not survive in the sane way. The SDP-Liberal Alliance
explicitly opposes it, as, of course, does the Labour Party. Linking Trident
to British jobs, as the government is now attempting to do, is unlikely to
change this. Unless the Tories win the nut two elections outright. there-
fore, it is impossible to see how Britain will ever take delivery of the
missiles. Yet a whole defence strategy will have been built around then.
There will be no fall-back position. Recovering the ships and tanks. not
to nention the strategic thinking, sacrificed to pay for Trident will be a
long, if not inposeible job. If they go along with Trident, the cabinet
may go down in history as the agents of a paradox: wholly pledged to
strengthening Britain's defence. they will have weakened it.

COPYRIGlT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

680: 3120/10 7

2
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mum-cm MODS SINCE WOW mm m

BonnmPAminGenln10hb82pp77-B4

[Ex-um by Peter Jochen swat. nenbes' or maximum um editorial
staff: "Inner-Gem Relations Since Schnidt-aoneohsr Meet

J The neeting between Chsncellcr Helmt Schmidt and the genersl «meaty -
ottheSEDsndohsdmnoftheGmcouncilcr stste Rrichﬁcneclser, uhichvss
finally smnged stter three tries and was held betveen 11 end 13 Decenber 1981
in the Schorfheide, northeast of Berlin, seens to hsve overcome the desdlock in
inner-Gems) relstions occasioned by the sudden cm chenge of policy visas-Iris
theMinOctober1980. 'meGIRIetitbeknownthstitwssprspsredtoretnrn
to the basic precepts of the treaty end nomlisstion policy between the two
Gerssn states snd st least for the present to drop the demand indirectly rsised
in Honecker's Gers speech of 13 October 19002 for s revision of the bssic tresty
dommnt.

he Joint cos-unique issued at the close of the Verbellinsse nesting3 ststed
that Schmidt and Honecker had agreed that the heels tresty of 21 December 1972
mvenssthesaesuntssndsrrsngenentsworkedoutsinahswlsidthegromd-
work for the solution or ontstsnding problems and crested the "conditions neces-
sary" for nutuslly advantageous end continually increasing ooopenticn. "Despite
continuing differences or opinion on hmdsnentsl issues," they underscored their
desire "to persist in their efforts to sttsin good-neiaxborly relstions." lJaney
further ststed their intention "to continue negotistions end conversations in
various fields. to ovsroone existing difficulties end to investigste possibili-
ties for mrthea: developing their tasty relations." A -

Arms Control-4 New Blemt

Overcoming the deadlock, however, does not nesn that relstions between Bonn and
East Berlin can start right up sgsin in esrly 1982 where they left or: in the
fall of 1980. The fact is that s new element has entered into the inner-Germs:
equation—that of ans control and dissmsnent. This "world policy" disensicn.

or its dialogue is particularly deer to the on. M thst setter, it hss to be.
itit doesnotvishtcsmnsethesuspicicns otthechietUnicn. InhisGers
speech. Honeoker had slresdy ends it clear thst the env- tresty policy with the
mismmtegrslpsrtotthepolicycoordinstedsmngthswsrsumm
to secure pesoe.‘ But seeming pesos, he ms. use sbove sll s politicsl issue

‘ calling for sessnree in direct wrsuit or solutions for the noet isportent pro-
blenotomtine—msndtothesrunoesnlsmeon‘bol. "Itissboveslltor
securing pesos thst the two Gerun ststes besr s {sir encunt or responsibility."4

3

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mesmgeneral semtaryrehmedtcthistheneinhisreporttothe 10thSEn
party congress inipril1981. 'Inourpolicw toward them, too, we mebcvs
all else counitted to serving peace and sewing it may," he said then.
"can thatwhidx serves thecanse otpesce isotegantegetopecpleinboth
Gem states and to all peoples on our continent. Then state-ante Ike it
clearthatﬂuGlB'e polioyvie-e—vieﬂiemmturnedintoeninstrnnento:
the Soviet Union's ”peace policy" almost entirely. It is the priority noel ct

thisSoviet policytcpreventﬂxestationingotnewhsricsnnsdius—rengem—
clear missiles in Weston amps.

Despite sealing itself or: toward the m, the 618 has nonetheless been consi-

stentlytryingeincethetallct1980todrswthelﬁintotalksaboutemson;-
trol and dim and about their Joint responsibility tor peace. Althouga the
mumm‘rellthatthetwoGernansteteearenotintheleaetoonpetentto
discussamccntrolanddisamentiasaesendthatthemmtwenminto

the
disennnent and area control issues. anbeseednr Friedrich Ruth. went to bet
Berlin on 3 July 1981 for talks with the cm diam expert, snbseeedcr mu
Krabatedn and on 4 Septenber 1981, icon Balm, chains: of the mm subcon-
nittee on disease-ant and arms controlmet with Kraut-oh in ﬂat Berlin as well
aswithﬁonecbrandwithﬁexunndnn, anenberctthel’olitbln'osndcentul con-
nittee secretary for intonation“ liaison.

The fact that the December meeting behoeen Schmidt and Honeclser t how-
ever, cannotbeternedaresultoftheM'spenittingtheGmtodnwi into
discussions about disamnmt and one control. nae decisive factor was that the
Soviet Union wished to have the meeting between the chlncellor and the 31-20 general
secretary take place immediately following the Bonn visit of Soviet party boss
chief. of state Brezhnev and prior to the dnmtic crisis in Poland which could
already be foreseen. As a target or Moscow's ”peace policy" the at; has played
important role all along as evidenced by the fact that Breahnev's first foreign

In his talks with Honeclner—as in the duncellor'e earlier meetings with Brezhnev-
eemity. am limitation and diam-lent problems played a proninent part. leng-
ﬂy passages of. the Joint omniqne rezoned to discussions about "topical inter-
national problem within a Mopeen and worldwide context." he commiqne's very
first paragraph states that Honecker and Schmidt voiced their tins resolve "that
warshmndneveragainstartoutiranemnsoﬂ"andtmtbothsidesareaware
of their great responsibility for sewing peace in Drape. "Fully conscious or

the fact that differing social systems exist in both states and that they belong

I;

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to two different alliances, they made known their desire actively to pro-ate the
process of detente and to contribute to seaming persenent peace and stability
in international affairs.”

1
IheShsdcwoftheDventsinPolsnd

Ithis "internationalization" of inner-Gm relations serves to strmgthen the
self-esteen ofvthe cm which feels that it has thus cone one step closer to m1
recognition by the rm. Such language also she it possible for the cm to in—
troduce international issues into the inner-Gem dialogue with water intensi-
tyﬂnnheretoforssndatszwtimmdthersbytodhtrsctattentimfrmW.
Gemsn issues whenever this seem advisable. In his toast at the guest house of
the council of state on the noellneee. Honecker said: 'Goodpneighborly relations
cannot thrive in the shadow of new 11.8. nuclear missiles. w. cannot disengage our-
selves from world politics.” The SED general secretary used even plainer language
insninterviewwithmxl§nm‘riwﬁmmhifewdegrsleter.8 "Ourtalksweredonina-
ted by the interrelationship—addwed to more than once before—between the bile--
teral and the international aspects of our relations. As we have said before,

they are of the utmost importance for peace and detente which far exceed the bi-
lateral aspects. 0n the other hand, neither of the two states can disengage it-
self from world politics. They would not win untouched, if there were a gene-
ral world crisis." ll‘his makes it plain that the 018's leeway in working for on
improvement in inner-German relations has virtually been reduced to sero and that
such improvement can some about only. if the "world situation" or the conduct of
the m pemit it—in Moscow's View.

In his article at year's end 1981/82, checloer said: "No one can the fact
that the deterioration of the world situation is casting its shadow." First of
all, there is the long Polish shadow. It fell on the inner-Goran relationship
evenss Sclmidtandﬁonoolosrwereleeting. Itwas onthe last daycfthe chen—
oellor's one visit that the Polish council of state declared martial law throng:-
out the country and that mm first secretary, General Jsruselsn, assumed dicta-
torial power in Poland as chairman of a uI'lilitsuzy email for National Salvation."
(hritics above all in the cm/csu said the chancellor should have broken off the
visit as soon as these developments became known. The chancellor did not but went

threw with his progren.

And so, Gemns intkwihstandintheweetwereable tosee thosencsbrepio-
tures on their television screens showing miforned and civilian ssmity forces
ofthecmutheyompiedtheﬂeoklanburgcitycfmestrcwwhich-deitnore
than plain Just how stable the relationship of trust between the on leadership
and the people is of which the BED has boasted so new tines. ‘nze Guestrow visit
inspite oftheeventsinPolendweenecesssryfcrthessheofthscitisemofthe
GER—end because of the meeting in (hasstrow cathedral between the chancellor and
Heinrich Rathke, the bishop of the evangelical-lam church for Hecklenhurg.
Throughout the chancellor's entire visit, the bishop was the only Germ fro-
theGDRabletospes-kfreelywithhin—withcutaotingcnﬁhaltcfthepsrtyor
thegmremment.1 "I, too.wouldlsvedcnethesuethingbecsusel, too, would
have feltthsttheGemsnsinhstBerlinsndtheGm, whowsremhappyenmlgi
about the trip being cancelled twice, would have failed to understand that he

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

would leave so abruptly without waiting to see whether this atteupt had a chance
of succeeding. These were the words used later by Richard ton Veissaeclosr (cm),
the lord mayor of Berlin, in support of the chancellor's decision not to break
of! the trip. 1 hxrther develoments in Poland will show in part what the poten-
tial consequences of the Herbellinsee nesting tum out to be.

kchange of Views But No Concrete Results

Mohancenormdthesmsmnluoretarydidmtmtnegctiationswhen
theynetbutdidengageinanexchsngeotviows, supportedbytheirrespective
delegations. Givenths type of nesting it was. coxwrste resultswers not tobs
imediatelyexpeoted. mtstartswerenndecnhowamberotdirtioultissues
might be brought closer to resolution. It is worth recalling what Bonecher said
inatoaststadinnerinthelmbermsstockmmtinglodee: 'Ietnsssvthatwe
mgedtouhewtoertainmuinminportantusuesatrectingthetmudzts
andenotionsofthecitizensbothottheMandtheGmWonwhichshouldbuild,
whereweshouldconeevenclossrendwhiohoonstitutearayoi’hopercramture
in peace and closer cooperation...I think that the exchange ofviews we had on
these issues will contribute in various ways to our achieving mum results
in the ﬁxture."12 These statenents and another point ads by Honeclssr in his
WWW interview~Wewiehto carrythe treaty policy withthem
anthem-"Aldo myvery well include the resolution at practical issues inwhich
theother sidehasexpnessedaninterest.'-uaybeternedsipalecradvsnoeno-
ticesaddressedtothecitizensortheGmthattheGmintendstoreadamrther
aoconodations withtheMrelatingtoaneasing otlumnhardships.

1980andthensxpsndedtoyctmgpeopleandretiredpsrscnsbytheniddle 011982.
‘Ihese twin measures have caused a sharp drop in visitors, with visits to Berlin
downbynorethanSOpercent.0neotthereascnsﬂxechanoellcrwenttoths
SchorfheH° was to arrest this trendand to get travel to the cm to increase
again. EVersinoethestai-t orthetreatypolioywiththed-poweraaeenent, the
aurency exchange minimum were declared to be an "internal affair" of the cm
and thus not an issue subject to treaty regulation. is a noose at mine the
316's wishes more palatable to the cm, Bonn caused to let the no-interest over»
draft (”swing") credit in inner-Gem trade ﬂuctuating to 311350 million

run beyond the 31 December 1981 deadline until 30 June 1962. Until that time,
both sides are to work out in negotiations whether and to what an extent the
"swing" credit should continue. Both the chancellor and the minister of eccnusics
who accompanied him impressed upon their cm counterparts that there exists a
"psychological-political relationship” between the extension or the "swing" cre-
dits and the reduction of tho minim exchange regulations. But they, too. know
that it is not only the son that is interested in the oontimation o.’ the no-
intereet overdraft credits but Vest German tires active in inner-Gem trade

as well, in view of economic conditions.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the discussions between the chancellor and the 331) general secretary the Bonn
sidealso triedtcaecerteinwhethertheGmreallyintendstonehethedemnds
raised by Honeclses: in his Gera speech a precondition for the contimatien of the
treaty policy: 5 the recognition of cm citisenship; the conversion of me pena-
nent missions in embassies 3 the firm establishment of the frontier along the Elbe
between Sclmskenlmrg and Lauenlmrg in the middle of the river, and the dissolution
of the central registration office of the Land Justice administration in Salzgit-
ter. The result was that the cm does not wish to do so. Althoug: Honecker spoke
to all four points at some length, he also said that the one was not setting aw
preconditions. These issues will rennin a part of the imam-Gem dialogue. is
far as the Elbe frontier and the Salaam: latter are concerned, the cm my be
hoping to achieve its sins in the long term.

is to the most important of the issues-citizenehip—that does not cone in for
nention in the Joint counnique at all. In the m MSW interview,
HonecIter took a guarded view. "For the am." he said, "citizenship is not a
matter for negotiation. The EEG should at law last wept this simple truth.
The one exists and in the whole world there is no state that does not have citi-
zens. What we expect of the m is that it respect Gm citizenship without reser-
vations." Respecting cm citizenship it a different utter from recognition of
it. The latter would neon restricting Germ citizenship-which binds all Ger-he
in the m, in the cm and in West Berlin together—to the inhabitants of the an
alone. But, according to the basic law and the constitutional court's opinion'on
that law, there can be no question of that. As for respecting cm citizenship,
that is shew being done by the PEG authorities. Gennsn citizenship, which all
one citizens possess according to our laws, entails no duties for then tut is a
privilege of which they any but do not have to avail themselves, if and when they
find themselves under the Jurisdiction of the basic law. The PEG camot give up
its claim to this particular aspect of the citizenship issue. "It is necessary...
to discontinue the issuance of teupcrary m travel documents to citizens of the
GDRonshort-termvisitsintheﬁﬁaswellsstheissmnceofMpsssportsto
citizens of the cm by m; embassies in third counties." Honecleer also said in
the interview. This issue as well as the demnd for conversion of the pennnent
missions into embassies lust be classified as "continuing utters of dispute on
midsnental questions" with treaty policy being purmed "irrespective" of the
differences.

Efforts to "Ease amen Hardships"

The Joint ccummiqus stated that efforts aimed at re-«miting families, litigating
hardship and resolving other tnmniterian issues would be "carried forward in a.
constructive spirit." In this field, however. there was no stusdstill or reversal
despite the sudden shift in GDR policy in October 1980. In fact, the lumber of
families re-united in 1981 was a good deal higher then in all previous years—or
rather the when of cm citizens below retiremnt age given penission to mine
alegalmovetotheFBGcrto,VsstBerlin.0necsncnlyhopethatths1981total
will be repeated in the years to come. In the Schorfheide. discussions were also
held on expending the cm oitisens' possibilities to travel to the West. But the
chancellor did not return from the cm with sore then the hope that am citizens'
travel on urgent family hasiness which has recently domed will rise sharply

0308 aged-De

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Continua Development of Relations

themaoi‘freedmfortheinhabitantsorthecm.Inconmtetene,tbnewse

gems..'1'he legal base for imam-Gem wade—which therebyhas becone a special
trade amusement between two different currency M laid by the "Berlin
Agreement" of 1951 which provides a lone-ten, stable fornication for trade rela-
tions between the two Gemniee. We legal fmmdaticn is sham once it is "sup-
plenented" by- an agreement between We states and not two different may
areas. Such a cooperation agreement would tun inner-Gem use. into foreign
trade. Mme, HeetBerlinweuldmvetobeineludedmthebasis otthe
Hank-Min fomla. According to the "Berlin Agreement,“ however, it is an in-

tea-alputotthemmmencyarea.

to havebeenpaidi‘orby the Gangotherthingsbysupplyingelec‘h'ioity to
west Berlin. But there is talk once again about the electrification project for

the nilmad transit mates between Berlin and the m.

concludingacultmlagreement, thenmnoohsneee orthsthsppening. Intbe
Joint communique then, Schmidt and Romans: stated their intention at extending
cultural ocopmtion as well as exchanges in other areas "within the framework
of existim possibilities." There are a mmber of possibilities in fact. One may
recallthepropoealmdebythefomerheadoftheFBGpemnentt-issioninmt
Berlin. Guenter Gaus, who used the forum of the Berlin SPD's Land party congress
in November 1981 to call for the establishment of a top-level inner-German com-
mission to arrange for the exchange of cultural hldings removed for safekeeping
during wartime—other than the collections which are part of the Prussian cultural
holdings foundation.14
There is no shortage of initiatives with the aim of furthering bilateral rela-
tions. Berlin. too, asked the chancellor to raise a number of issues at his meet-
ing with Honecker—like the inclusion of the (Em-operated S-Bahn in a West Berlin
mass transport system and the retention beyond 1984 of the Steaken border crossing
point to serve transit traffic to Hamburg, a point the cm wishes to discuss as
well. Both Schmidt and Honecker clearly indicated their good will with regard to
carrying the normalization process in Germny nurther. In that sense, the pro-
spects for Germany are less somber at the start or 1962 than they were in early
1981. But the express desire of both sides to improve relations does not offer a
guarantee of success. Sucoes will depend more on how the world situation develops.
WME

1. Cf Winters: East Berlin Policy (mange Via-ePVis Bonn, mom ARCHIV 1/1981,
p 31 ff

2. «was nmscsmun, 14 Nov so

5. Verbatim text on p D 79ft

4. REES DHJTSCHIAND, 14 Oct 80

5. Ham-Is Dwrscmn, 12 Apr 61

6. or Documents on Brezhnev Visit, mom meant 1/1982, p D 1!!

7. 15:11-33 DMSCHLAND, 14 Dec 81

8. Cf excerpts, p D 82$!

9. nan-B nmscnmmn, 31 Dec 31

1o. HAMMER mm, 19 Dec 81

11. Speech of lord Mayor at Ammal Dinner of Berlin Press Association on
14 Dec 81 in Berlin Land Press Service mm nan VOCHE, special edition
VI No 51, 18 Dec 01

12. ”WES DHJTSCELAND. 14 Dec 81

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. m agreement in question was signed on 17 Dec 81 in hot Berlin by the
head or the toner "trusteeship office for interacnal trade—the name of
which was changed to "tmsteeahip office for industry and trade" follow-
ing the Schmidt-41mm: meeting—end an official of the cm mum of
foreigz trade.

14. Gunter Guns: Peace Policy for Germany in mm STD”, supplement to
No 46. 12 Nov 81

COPYRIGHT: 198? Verne mar Internationale Politik Gum, Bonn

9478
030: 3103/2236

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
caveman CHARACTERISTICS. CONTINUITY. comrcrs VIEWED
Paris POINOIRS in French No 20. 1982 pp 127-135

[Article by Olivier Duhanul, professor of public law at the University of Tranche-
Coete and author of "La gauche et la V9 Republique." 19m. and "Bistoire des idees
politiques." 1982]

[Text] The winning of governnent power by the socialists in 1981 coepletes the
Fifth Republic. The Fifth Republic is finished.1 even if it still requires certain
nodulations and still poses certain problens.

l. The Legitimate Fifth Republic

This republic. the product of a swift maneuver and one which had been stabilized
by a mnber of violations of the letter of the constitution. is nore accepted then
ever by the asin political forces. Where the left wing is concerned. the 10 May
1981 presidential victory brings to its conclusion a long rallying process. which
was implemented, moreover. through successive presidential elections.2 It is defi-
nite evidence that the Fifth Republic allows alternation in power. which is not
reserved to the one faction more often than the other. As to the opposition. it

is difficult for it to challenge a regine which it founded. and one in which it
hopes again to hold power one day.

The roots sunk by the Fifth Republic are not solely the product of the consensus
which it enjoys where the political actors are concerned. but also its integration
with the people governed. Now and henceforth they pursue the najority logic (see
section 5 below), the characteristic of s new political culture. In expanding their
10 Hay presidential choice to the legislative realn on 14 June. the voters were

not only affected by the socialist "grace."3 but were also faithful to the logic

of the regime, and to that extent contributing to its survival.

2. The Useful Fifth Republic

Giving the lie to the political criticisms and couple: technical scenarios struc-
tured on the subject of the change in governmnts.‘ the winning of power by the
opposition came about practically without institutional probleea. Its adversaries
of yesterday have today become those who make use of it. and feel entirely confor-
table in so doing, beginning with P. Mitterrand. “The institutions were not de-
signed for my purposes. lbwever, they suit us well."5 '

11

m OHICIAL USE DULY
3. The Fully Utilized Fifth Republic

Procedures decried of old and not so long ago have been proved since 10 Hay to be
very helpful. The lack of concern with constitutionalism on the part of the left
wing has become total, confirming that constitutional concepts are dictated by the
distance from power.6 For example. the new president has nade full use of the re-
source of article 8. by appointing his sole choice of prime minister on 21 Hay
1981; those of article 69, paragraph 1. continuing the Gaullist interpretation to
the effect that the assunption of responsibility by a new prime minister is not
compuli wry; and those 0'. article 12, by dissolving the National Assemble, etc. on
21 May, pending recourse to a referendun when circunstances are favorable to it.
The socialist government announced that it would utilize article 38, at the end

of its first 6 months in office, making it possible to implenent neasures nomlly
within the purview of the law by ordinance. Daily it is implementing the provision
which the constitution and the assenbly regulations confer upon the government to
limit parliamentary authority. The socialist leaders have lost any parliuasntary
complex, because socialism takes the 10 Hay concepts. that is to say the "president-
people" pairing, as its basis.

«'0. The Monist Fifth Republic

As an extension to the reference to Carre de halberg.7 monies is reversed, such

that the parliament is only the agent of the president, through government inter-
position. F. Hitterrand implicitly endorsed this hierarchy in his first message

to the parliament on 8 July 1981. "The change I proposed to 'the cauntry during the
presidential campaign. which the men and women of France approved. which the majority
in the National Assembly has endorsed. will henceforth dictate your steps....Hy
commitments constitute the charter for governmental action. I would add, since
universal suffrage has be proclaimed a second time, that these co-itments have
become the charter for our legislative action."

‘lhe pyramid is clear and presidential supremacy confirmed. not only over the par-
liament, but over the ministers--for example. the comunists, as well. ”No one
in the cabinet, or elsewhere, is unaware that the president of the republic can
at any time ensure that his view, in the national interest, prevails" (interview
in LB nouns. 2 July 1981).

The continuity of the presidential-monist interpretation is also typical of the
relations between the president and the prime minister:

The responsibility of the president is "the outcome. that is to say the long-range
view and continuity" (deGaulle, "Memories of Hope," Vol II, 1971, p 68). The presi-
dent "concerns himself with the essentials" (Poupidou. 18 August 19%). His role
"is to concern himself with the long run" (v. ciacard d'Bstaing, press conference
on 21 November 1978). "I act or I intervene in what might be called the main guide-
lines, the major directions" (Hitterrand, BBC interview, 8 September 1981).

The prime minister, "the second in command, pursues the activities of the moment
and directs those who carry them out" (decaulle). Be "rows the boat" (Barre. -

5 March 1979). He may "act entirely as he wishes with regard to the problems of
daily life" (Mitterrand to the BBC). This overall distribution does not, however,
prevent occasional intervention by the president. of which no one learns except
when it comes too late.8

12

ms 0'":an use ONLY
Within this unchanged framework. shadings may occur. not only because of the person-
alities of the leaders, but also the rhythm imposed by the system on their 7-year
terms. In this connection, Pierre Avril detected "a typical fluctuation in presi-
dentisl practice"9 which one can extend to the entire Pifth Republic, and which
could be schematized as follows:

Phase 1-- Phase 2-- Phase 3—
Presidential Political Prime Lesa Active Balance Between
Term of Office Minister (President Prime Minister President -and
Less Active) (President Active) Prime Minister
De Gaulle
(1959-1969) Michel Debre Pompidou I Pompidou II and III
Pompidou
(1969—1973) J. Chaban-Delmas Messmer I and II )isssmar III
Giscard
(1974-1981) Jacques Chirac Barre I Barre II and III
Hitterrand
(1981. . .) Pierre Hauroy ? 'I

The paradox of the initial presidential hesitation is explained by the proximity

of the election. The new presidential legitimacy make his intervention unprofitable.
not to mention the fact that the relations between the two men have not yet had the
time to deteriorate with the exercise of power.

Thus the unequal dyarchy.10 or in reality monocracy,11 is perpetuated. It is the
more pronounced since the votes on _10 May and 14-21 June were homogeneous and gave
the president a clear and massive majority.

5. Majority Fifth Republic

The socialist victory brings us back to the nor: in the present French regime. in
other words a government unified by an identical policy on the part of the president.
the cabinet and the National Assembly. After the promulgation of the 1958 consti-
tution, it took 4 years, during which the strength of General de Gaullemas 'doa'inant.
with recourse to full powers. to article 16, to a referendum to the 1962 revision
and dissolution in order to establish the new majority regime. unprecedented in
France. This the period between 1958 and 1962 was not an exception. but a founda-
tion. And it was the' 7-year tern of Giscard d’Bstaing which was "abnormal." because
it began with a minority president with a parliamentary majority. interrupted by

the resignation of J. Chirac (August 1976). and it ended without a majority. This
anomaly underlay Giscard d'Bstaing's failure.

The error comes from another anomaly: the marvel of his election without a party
in 1974. The former president did not want to dissolve the assembly elected in
1973. he was not able to win the 1978 legislative elections clearly and personally.
lb either did not want to or could not create a large political party. Without

a party, and thus a fortiori with a dominant party, he lost government office.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sun vessuutu Uu- vat-s

Francois Kitterrand did the exact opposite:12

1. lie asserted his leadership over the noncouunist left wing through candidacy
in the presidential election (1965).

2. lie won over the Socialist Party, which was then gransformed intoa government
party, or more exactly, the party of the president.1

3. he won partial control 0.5 the government through the presidential election.
and with a presidential party.

lo. He gained total'control of the political power through the dissolution and the
absolute majority of the president's party.

Francois Hitterrand, by dint of remarkable persistence and by taking the risks that
imposed, assured himself of a dominant party. He did this like the first two presi-
dents of the Fifth Republic—like them, but in reverse order--first of all the cre-
ation and conquest of the party. and then the winning of power. And it is precisely
the reverse of that order which is likely to change the course of the Fifth Republic.

6. The Partisan Fifth Republic

The Fifth Republic is partisan in the sense in which political scientists use this
term (:r- Portuguese call "partisan" that which functions through a party). Indeed,
the cabinet does not represent the Socialist Party alone but includes members of
other parties, mainly the PC? (as in the past the m [llnion for the new Republic]
provided assistance to the Independent Republicans). and secondarily the MIG (as
during the presidency of G. Pompidou. when the csntriata of the CD? [Democratic

and Progress Center] conferred a tripartisan dimension upon the cabinet) and inde-
pendent personalities (as always within the presidentialist logic).1‘ Indeed. in
1981. the parliamentary majority included 64 coumist deputies. But it was abo'Ve
all made up of 285 socialist (or similar) deputies, representing 39 seats more than
the absolute majority needed. And 'the Socialist Party, if indeed it was profoundly
renewed by F. Mitterrand. existed before he came to head it in 1971. It has existed
since 1905 and will continue to exist after Hitterrand's 7-year term. Put in another
way. it is not merely a question of a president's party created ex nihilo by or

for a chief of state, as was the case with the am in 1958.

This unprecedented relationship between the president and his party. between the
party and its president, might to some extent weaken the rigidity of the monist
pyramid and lead to some friction. -

7. A Fifth Republic in Conflict

In 1981, the disagreements between the Socialist Party or the PCP and the regime

were much less ilportant than the conflict between the majority and the opposition.
These latter differences were not fully the product of the apprenticeship necessary
because of the new distribution of the roles between the majority and the opposition,15
but in a deeper sense from the election of government leaders with a determination

to change French society. Now reform is. at least when it is in progress, less

likely to involve a consensus than the pursuit of the established order.

1’;
“mere the strictly institutional level is concerned, it is nonetheless striking

to note that the’clashes on legitimacy (presidential or parliamentary, arbitral

or partisan. etc) have yielded to procedural conflicts. There are no longer any
clashes about who the cabinet members should be. but the majority and the opposition
insult each other on the subject of the twists in parliamentary procedure and the

subtler ies of obstruction .

It is entirely possible. therefore, that more serious conflicts will develop with
the two institutions which in the short run might function as counter-authorities“
the Senate and the Constitutional Council. But urgings to wisdom are not lacking.
on the one hand because the government leaders have no nonbrutal means of reforming
these institutions (the normal procedure according to article 89 allows the Senate
to block a constitutional revision). and on the other hand. because neither the
senators nor the members of the Constitutional Council have any interest subtle
opposition leading to the risk of their conversion (by the "extraordinary" referendu
procedure of article 11). 'ihe risks of a conflict are modified by the advantages
of "csapromiae and limited by the weight of the majority (see nuaber 5 above). But
when that no longer exists....

8. Toward an Unstructured Fifth Republic?

0n the institutional level with which we are concerned here, the French regime could
be profoundly altered by the adoption of proportional representation. The adoption
of this system has been a part of all the programs of the left wing-socialist.
conunist and joint-wince 1971. and is the model of the promises made by Francois
Hitterrsnd as a candidate.16 without any need to examine all of its effects. we
know that it would profoundly alter the articulation of authority between the presi-
dent and the parties. The chief of state would thus lose the majority premitm but
he would gain an unstructured assembly capable of yielding variable majorities.
Instead of the majority "puzzle." which can be shaped in only one single way. he
would have the proportional "erector set." which can be put together in various
ways. But everything really depends on the type of proportional representation
implemented. and the imagination of political economists in this field proves limit-
less. There is no reason not to think that if proportional representation is not-
postponed indefinitely,17 it will be conceived in such a way as to accomdate a
majority premium. Whatever comes of this undertaking, the French regime will pose
another difficulty when it comes to achieving the unity of authority between the
president and the assembly.

9. Ihe Semi-presidential Fifth Republic

The term suggested by Maurice Duverger is adopted here for the special problem

of the noncoincidence between the presidential and parliamentary terms of office

in a system in which the president is elected by the people. but the cabinet is
responsible to the parliament. Lacking a constitutional revision. always a difficult
matter because it is risky, only dissolution can offer' a solution—if we set aside
the improbable hypothesis of a presidential resignation and reelection. It may
indeed seem absurd to refer to dissolution when President Hitterrand has such an
imposing majority in the National Assembly. Let us recall, however. that dissolution
serves several fmctions. It is one of the possible methods of recourse to the
people in the event of political or social crisis (example. Hay 1968). It also
represents a sword of Damocles for resolving possible conflicts with the majority
party or parties. or better still. it reeains as a constant threat to limit them

15
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
at the source. Article 12. with its specifically presidential authority. functions
like s strike force—the less it is used. the better it works.

But dissolution is not a matter solely of the diseuasive logic so characteristic

of the Fifth Republic.. It also provides a way of atteugting to resolve the problem
of the lack of synchronization in the terns of office.1 It settled this natter

in June of 1981, entirely to the advantage of the president. but only telporarily.
If he does not turn to dissolution again in the course of his 7-year tern. the present
president will find hillqu in 1986 with an assembly. whatever the exact najority
within it may be. which has been elected for 5 years. while only 2 years of his
term renain--or in other words, reduced authority-4s was the case with V. Giscard.
d'Bstaing in 1978-1981. The situation night be quite different in the event of
dissolution at a favorable nonent. if one' such occurs (let us say toward 1983-1984).
The president wOuld then retain the neans for guaranteeing his supremacy. and ex-
erting control over who succeeds him. for example.

10. The Social-Monarchist Fifth Republic

Above and beyond the efficiency of the system and the fact that it is nore deno-
cratic than the preceding one, to the extent that unity of authority has its source
in the expression of the will of the voters and in respect 'for the choices they

nake as to the allocation of power. the Fifth Republic also has a nonarchiatic trait
in that it is the choice of a single nan by all to represent and caused them-
what La Boetie calls voluntary servitude in his book "Contr'lln."19 To go back' to
the current problens of the Fifth Republic.“lo the election of a chief of state by
the people for 7 years poses' the problem of his successor.

The choice if. candidates for the hishast post in the land is not rationalised in
France as it is in other countries. 1 Indeed. the election of the socialist presi-
dent changes little. to the extent that the Socialist Party is the only one to have
organized internal competition in order to select its presidential candidate. The
fact nonetheless reesins that the length of the presidential tern tend to accentuate
it monsrchiet nature while at the ease tine—an inverse effect—it alters the possi-
bility of reelection.22 The party. the cabinet. the prime minister or .ninisters
(inplicit heirs apparent by their functions. or who feel that they are) and all

the institutions are characterised by an obsession about the succession. particularly
since no juridical procedure regulates the choice from anong the few pretenders

to the highest post among when the voters nust choose. This process of filtering
toward the top is basic. Should it be entrusted to the party members. or to their
leaders? Should it be controlled more or less officially by the president in office?
Should it be influenced by polls? Should it be entrusted to the voters? These
questions obviously go beyond the frasework of a brief presentation of the current
characteristics of the Fifth Republic. But it is significant that it cannot be
coepleted without asking thee. to such an extent that the inadequacies in the French

system introduce the worn of succession into the fruit of a new election at the
outset.

moms

1. In the precise sense of the word--"to provide the last element necessary for
the full completion of a state or deed." rather than its second meaning. reserved
for individuals—"to deal the final blow (to someone)." Petit Robert.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.
be

5.
6'

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

1‘.

See Olivier Duhanel. "The left Wing and the Fifth Republic." PUP [University
Presses of France]. 1980. p 267 et seq.

One can note the co-nunist paradox: in self-criticise. its leaders accuse ther
selves of having proposed no candidate at all in 1975. while at the sane tine
they criticize the bipolarisation phenolenon and urge the casting of effective
votes in the presidential election.

See below. "Citronicle of Public Opinion," p 171 et seq.

See POWOIRS. llo l. "Alternation." 1977. new edition. 1981.
Interview in LB HONDE. 2 July 1981.

See "The Left Ring and the Fifth Republic." op cit. pp 568-552.

See "Contribution to the General Theory of the State." sirey. 1920. reissued
by the CNRS [National Center for Scientific Research]. in 2 volt-lea. 1962.

A typical exnple was the emption from the capital levy granted for works
of art on 29 October 1981. i.e.. after the approval of the draft law by the
Council of Kinisters and after the comittee discussion in the asseubly. The
minister delegate to the minister of economy and finance for budget and the
socialist deputies on the couittee were thus forced to support what they had
just previously firnly rejected. This was the reason for the disillusioned
consent by Hr Fabius: "I an only a minister."

Pierre Avril. "Hhat Has Changed in the Fifth Republic." POUVOIRS. No 9. "The
Giscard d'Bstaing Policy." 1979. p 58.

See Jean Gicquel. "Constitutional Law and Political Institutions." published
by Montchrestien. 7th ed. 1980. p 862. and for a less continuistic interpretation
of presidentialisl in the Hitterrand style. see "Addendu- to 30 July 1981, p 21.

In this sense. presidential Ionian can be viewed as a variant of what Maurice
Duverger calls f'the seeipresidential system." "Check to the King." Albin Michel.
1978. The terlinological quarrels have not been settled.

Concerning the logic governing the eysteas of popular election of the president.
seen Jean-Luc Parodi. "Effects and Noneffects of Presidential Election by Uni-
versal Direct Balloting." POUVOIRS. No 16. "To Elect a President." 1980.

p 5 et seq.

And Jacques Chirac himself also pursues a "Hitterrnnd-type" strategy. that is
to say within the.logic of the Fifth Republic.

Concerning this transformation. see Iluguu Portelli. "The Presidentialization
of the French Parties." POWOIRS. No 14. "To Elect a President." 1980. p 100
et seq. and "French Socialists as It Is Now." PUP. 1980. -

Another indicator is the presence of nonparlianentarians in the cabinet. The
proportion came to $ percent in the first Hauroy cabinet and' 23 percent in

the second. formed after the elections (Jobert. Boudy. Badinter. Cheyseon. Delors.
Dreyfus. Lang. lhnry. Dufoix and Piteman. the latter having been defeated in

the legislative elections).

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

21.

22.

--.. u.---—-—- a-.. ..-—-

Mentioned by P. Hitterrand on his return from Cancm on 25 October 1981. L3
HONDE. 27 October 1981.

See below, Jean Cicquel. "References and Docuaents." "Creteil Manifesto." Point 47.

For a presentation of the different types of proportional representation. see
Pierre Pactet. "Political Institutions—Constitutional Lav," mason. 5th printing.
1981. p 100 et seq.

Sec Jean-bus Parodi. "0n Several Institutional lessons in ﬁencb Style Alter-
nation in Power." 82V!!! POLITIQUE ET PWAJRB. No 892. lily-June 1981. p 47.

Written in 1548 under the title "Discourse on Voluntary Servitude" and publist
in 1574 under the title "Contr'Un," and rediscovered by Miguel Abensour in the

collection "Critique of Politics" (Payot. 1976. followed by analyses by Pierre
Claetres and Claude Lsfort).

Concerning the discussion of political ideas. see Francois Chatelet and Bvalyna
Pisier-Kouchner. "Political Concepts in the 20th Century." PUP. 1981. p 982

et seq. ”Tunis." See also Philippe Brand. "Universal Suffrage Against
Democracy." PUP, 1980.

For example. in the United Kingdom (designation of leaders by the parlis-entsry
group (conservatives) and the party (leboritee). or the United States (prinsriea
and conventions). See Marie-France ‘rounet. "The Designation of Presidential
Candidates in the United States." POUVOIRS. No 14. "To Elect a President." 1980.
pp 41-61.

Candidate Mitterrand's Hanifesto called for either the reduction of the presi-
dential term to 5 years or a ruling making a president who has served a 7-year
tern ineligible for reelection (see below. p 141). President Mitterrand opted
for a nonrensvsble 7-year tern (see interview in LB HONDB. 2 July 1981).

COPYRIGT: Presses Universitaires'de France, 1982

5157
CSO:

3100/ 349

18 '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'oxssmm arms mass to: CRISIS, rum
Paris PM in French Jan 82 pp 42-48

(Article by Prancois nincker. torner usher of the PCP Central Conittee and a
founding member of the dissident group Rencontres Committee”

[mt] The original title of this article ["The-Oouunist Party
at the Crossroads'] is the ante as that or Prancois Hincker's
book published by Albin Itichel in October 1981.

The French Ca-unist Party is in a paradoxical situation today. trance has four
Cmist ministers. and Coauunists are in senior government poets. Polls indicate
that the public widely agrees with ideas which for a long time were popularized
only by the Commute-along then the wealth tax and the nationalisations. The
open expression of anticonmisn has never been so verb-neither the government nor
the left has anything to gain fro- pursuing it, while the rightwing opposition and
the various brands of oonsmatisn are concentrating their criticisas on the gov-
ernment and the Socialist Party.

But the PCP has lost one-fourth of its voters. On 26 April and in even greater mn-
bers on 14 June. for the first time since 1945, nany sore voters voted Socialist

(40 percent) than Coluunist (28 percent). the PC! can play a role in governnent
and Parliament only to the extent that the Socialist Party is willing to pert-it it.
L'Wm is the only national newspaper that has not progressed since 10 may.
Co-unist posters. tracts. pastime. and newspaper veMors are becosting very rare.
Less perceptible from the standpoint of natarial indications, but even more serious,
the emist presence. Cmist ideas. and Communist speeches. which once aroused
as such hatred as enthusiasm and which in any case constituted unavoidable features
of. the French political landscape. are now earginal and trite. 0n the right, the
presidential camaign was less anticommist than simly acounmist. tor the first
tine since 1934, the future of Prence can be inagined without a Canunist Party.

since the autm of 1974, which was «en the so-called polsnics between the P8 and
the PC? began. and even lore strongly since the autunn or 1977 and the breaking off
of discussions on updating the Omen Program. the PCP had not stopped uphesizing
that it would be catastrophic for it and ”for the workers“ if the Socialist Party
became capable of reducing it to a secondary role. But that is what has happened.
me Communist strategy has therefor. failed.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lastly, despite the absence of figures provided by the PCP itselfv-if w- axcept the
information contained in the draft resolution on the congress, according to which
the party has lost cells in the firms—there'are many indications of a clear decline
in comunist Iilitancy. It is unbelievable that the PCP still has 700,000 numbers
when, from every direction, even the least critical members are reporting a drop in
membership in their cells and, even more, the low rate of participation in neetings.

In short. despite its organization and its resources, which are still unequaled,
despite its unequaled presence among the workers, whether directly or indirectly
(through the our [General Confederation of Workers” , and despite the municipal of-
fices it occupies, the PC? has been stricken with lifelessness.

Why? How are the Columnists reacting to this attack of languor? what future possi-
bilities can one foresee for the Pen Those questions will be, or should be. de-
bated during preparations for the next party congress. In any case, they are in the
minds of all Cos-Iunists.

How the Party Explains its "Decline"

The draft resolution in preparation for the next congress gives the party leader
ship's viewpoint on the causes of its electoral decline. I say electoral, because
the draft denies any political decline-wit denies the weakening of the PCP's abil-
ity to influence the balance of forces in trance. Its reasoning goes as follows:

For too long the PC? was faithful to a strategy whose two pillars were, first, non-
critical adherence to the Soviet nodel of revolution and socialism, and second, a
popular front or union of the left policy. The first was unsuited to French so-
ciety, and the second tended to do away with the party's identity. So when the
Cannon Program was signed, the PCP found itself cospletely exposed: that which was
proper to it repelled public opinion, and that which attracted public opinion-unity
and the reforms contained in the prewar-belonged to the PS as much as to the pa.
The draft adds that confusion of the two leftwing parties occurred at the deepest
level of awareness-precisely in the awareness that the Canon Program was already
quite a bit, while for the PCP, ”the battle for socialism” was the order of the day.
With the 226 Congress in l976--where the Soviet model was repudiated and the broad
outline of a trench path to 'denocratic socialists" was laid down-and the 23rd Con-
gress in 1979-where the Pcr's autonomy was stresseduthings were finally straight-
ened out. But it was too late to benefit from that at the ballot box. since the
election system acts as an inducement to making one's vote count, the French who
wanted to defeat the right at all costs voted for Francois Hitterrand and then for
Socialist deputies.

In its internal structure, and independently of the facts, that reasoning holds
water. But in reality, the facts contradict it.

Democratization, Then Retreat Iron Union

In the history of the PCP, the notion and practice of popular fronts and unions of
the left (1935-1938, 1943, 1947, and 1972-1977) have marked off periods when, re-
gardless of its loyalty to the USSR, the specific policy of the PC! was departing

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from the Soviet model so far as to contradict it and foreshadowing precisely the
”democratic socialise” of the 22d Congress: a reappropriation of denocratic and
national values. broad alliances (with intellectuals and believers) . and openness
to all social and national problens far removed frou the sole area of exploitation
of the workers. This was true of the period of the Canon Program in which the
PCP changed its type of propaganda and its talk (debating asseshlies. the "party
speaking frankly,“ and so on) , drew up an original theory of present-day trench so-
ciety (”state mopoly capitalise“), foruulated a great nmber of proposals of all
kinds—especially that for the democratization of society (the ”Charter of Freedoms"
in 1975 and the 1977 statement on self—magmnt)-and, lastly, adopted a point of
view that was clearly and seriously critical of the USSR.

On the other hand. the breaks in the union of the left have always provoked a sec-
tarian withdrawal by the PC! into a "class against class" strategy. a delimitation
of "camps" (the "ideological war”) that forbids broad alliances. an activisn cen-
tered essentially on economic and even labor union activity (it could legitimately
be said in 1979 that the PCP had become "a fifth central labor union") . and a rap-
prochement with the USSR (following the approval of Soviet intervention in Afghani-
stan. which occurred in the conditions known to everyone. all criticisms of the
existing socialism disappeared).

Has the PCP sore cot-\itted to the path of democratic socialise in 1977 than in 1980,
and did it appear to be? There can be no doubt about the answer. In 1977, the
PCP's political influence and its image were at their highest level. And the nu-
nicipal elections were proof of that. incidentally. The tidal wave of lists pre-
sented by the union of the left put Communists and Socialists into the town halls
without discrimination. Citadels of bourgeois France passed to the PCP—Rheins,
Saint-Etienne, Bourges. or Beziers--whi1e the old royalist country did not hesitate
to vote for lists that would give the PCP deputy mayors (In Angers and Rocheosur-
Yoni).

It is true that autonomous electoral influencr-neasurable in the legislative
electionr-did not follow, and from that standpoint. the official reasoning concern-
ing the "lag" is not without value. But then what can one say about the policy af-
ter 1977, which, supposedly to sake up for the lag, is now reuniting and pushing
concepts and practices to the point of caricature. even though they were in fact
what characterized that lag? Hhat can one say about the assessment of the state of
French society, which is correctly deer-ed to be advanced, developed. and democratic
and one to which it would be wrong not to propose a hard and uncouprouising revolu-
tionary program?

TheRealLaginthePC?

Between 1967 and 1979 (the European elections) . the PCP did not progress (1967:
22.5 percent) 1968: 20.5 percent; 1969: 21.5 percent; 1973: 21.5 percent; 1978:
20.5 percent) and 1979: 20.5 percent). but in 1981, and only in that year. it col-
lapsed. Until 1981. the Ps certainly progressed faster than the PCP, but in 1981
the PCP really lost. So something must necessarily have happened between 1979 and
1981.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The involution descrihed just now was prior to 1980, but it remained scarcely per-
ceptible to a columnist electorate whose relationship with the party differs in na-
ture from that of other voters to their partisan-e great deal is required to shake
it. On the other hand, the presidential campaign-~10: the- election that arouses
the nest public interest—brought the 90‘s new sectarian line sharply into focus
for everyone. That line was totally antiunitary and aimed solely at strengthening
the PCP. And the mist voters. because they are workers and the assess. and
because the cause people know that their only weapon is unity. are passionately
attached to that unity. In their eyes. the one who takes the initiative of break-
ing it is to be punished. It happened to the SPIO [trench Section of the Workers
International (French Socialist Party)! in 1969. and it happened to the PC? in 1981.

In the final analysis, the real question is this: how could the PC! leadership
imagine that such a thoroughly antiunitary policy would pay off? How could that
workers party nake such a frontal assault on the basic structure of the communist
people?

that it reveals is a dramatic break with the people the party is supposed to repre
seat. It also reveals what constitutes the PCP's real lag beyond the other legs.
The PC? has always judged and continues to judge the people's movement according

to its own inﬂuence and that of the car. matever it controls is good and in the
vanguard; whatever develops outside its control is dangerous and even a provocation.
And it is certainly true that since 1967, the class struggles have been entered by
types of workers, social categories. and regions where the PC! was involved in nie-
sion work: young workers fron rural areas or those with a snattering of schooling
through the technical education centers, clerical workers. working women. the
French Coupling Coapany in the west, or Lip in the east. It is also very true that
nany new themes of struggle (more “qualitative“ than economirr- feninisn. the quality
of life. andsoon) wereviewedwithnistrustby thePCPandtheCG'randrequired

a new approach to politics and new political practices.

So while historians and sociologists. but also the najority of the workers. view
the period of the Cannon Program as one of unequaled growth by the working class
movement. the PC? sees it as a period of stagnation and even of failure.

Party in Government

And that notion--I am coming to the Pcr's attitude in the situation following 10 Hay--
remains and has even grown stronger. The weakening of the PCP anounts to a vicious
circleuthe party knows that in the weakened state in which it finds itself, any
working class novenent today would benefit the PS even nore. That is why it is not
attenuating to promote them. and even less to seek union at the rank-and-file level.
although union theoretically exists at the very top-in the goverment. ‘l'het pas-
siveness is reinforced by the difficulty the party would experience in passing from
"struggles against" to ”struggles fork-even if it wanted ton-so that government
action would succeed, so that the experiment would lead as far as possible along
the path to democratic socialism. and so that the workers would take over as many
posts as possible. But does it want to? Wanting to would indicate PCP recognition
that "change” is possible under the Ps's leadership, that Irancois Hitterrand is
not the same thing as Giscard, and that the direction taken by its presidential
cmpaign was totally wrong.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
But the Columnists are participating in the goverment, the government is adopting
satisfactory measures, and quite obviously, the right and the employers do not at
all seem to feel that Prancois Hitters-and is governing from the right and that he,
Giscard, and Chirac form a single ."gang of three"-all of this leads party members
to wonder, despite everything, about the tightness of a policy that had assumed
the exact opposite.

Does this mean, as some comuntators think, that the PCP leadership is hoping that
the current government will fail and just waiting for an opportunity to pull its
ministers out of the government? Not at all. Per the PCP leadership, the Cos-u-
nist ministers are the only positive thing it can show the congress. Moreover, they
give the PCP modestuthe campaign about commist infiltration is ridiculous-«but
real positions of power, and those are always good things to accept. On a deeper
level, the PCP leadership feels that the party will be in difficulty for many years
to come. So it must do what every CP does in such cases: pull back to what is
solid--the apparatus-and wait for better days. I do not think itfeelsnat least
I hope it does not-«that those better days would come about through the failure of
the current government. he in Chile, that would be as disastrous for the PCP as
for the P5. But the historic hessianism that is more or less shared by every com-
munist may allow hope for a divine surprise. Meanwhile, the PCP leadership does
not want to harm the experiment. Neither does it want to support all of its pos-
sible developments. because the credit would go to the Ps. It is therefore empha-
sising that the PC? is not a government party but a party in the goverment and
that the government's program is not a column program (and it is in fact difficult
to maintain that the protocol of agreement signed by the PCP and the P8 in such
haste on 23 June has anything in cannon with the Cannon Program). As a result, the
PCP is not seeking to propose anything, but only to support and watch. While Com-
munist legislative bills used to rain down during legislatures in which there was
no chance of their being considered, there are practically none now, when they
might be. With all the more reason, the PC? is not taking any initiative in con-
nection with general conferences on working conditions, education, town planning,
and so on.

Crisis of Diversity

It would be surprising if the PCF's strategic and electoral defeat, the current in-
activity, the sharp changes in the party line, and certain instances of double talk
until just before 10 May had not provoked a serious crisis within the party. Syno-
toms had appeared as early as 1978, but those were limited to intellectual circles.
They disappeared in part because many party members, either because they respected
the traditional silence within communist parties or because they were discouraged,
or both, tiptoed away. But in 1979, the affair involving the Paris Federation--

the PCF's largest--showed that the crisis was widespread. It exploded in 1981.
Well-known Comunists dared to organise a permanent center for debate known as
Comunist Encounters. On being punished, they received considerable support, in-
cluding that from deputies, middle-rank cadres, and even party officials. They were
not cast away from the communist people into outer darkness--far from it--and that
is unprecedented. They were the visible portion of a vast iceberg of criticism.

The criticism was diversified: some blamed the current leadership for its sectarian-
ism after 1977, while others blamed it for its opportunism before 1977. But since

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the sane party leadership had presided over both the sectarianisn and the opportun-
ism, it was politically isolated, with the apparatus phenomenon partially masking
that isolation and delaying-what thereby aggravation-«he crisis point.

In those conditions, the only positive solution would be to redirect the PCP into
positive ”tier-participation in the government by Columnist ministers should help,
because governing means making choices, and before choosing, one must analyse, seek,
and discuss—and for the party to undertake an unconpromising examination of con-
science that would leave nothing covered. Exchange would then again be possible
among the various canponente of the columnist people, considering that their diver-
sity is an asset and a source of cohesion, while divisions develop in the shadow of
maninisn. It would be surprising if. in its formal proceedings. the congress it-
self were to give tangible signs of that double rectification. but it is not inpos-

sible that the ambient political conditions (within the party) night allow some hope
to survive.

the men on the left and those militant for change ought to hope so, because it is

not written anywhere that when the PCP's inheritance—a people's inheritance, an
inheritance of social liberation values, and an inheritance of the working class's
integration into the nation-is left without heirs, it can be taken up by others.
If. it could, everyone would be the loser.

COPYRIGHT: by CERAS, 15, rue Ranarcheron, 92170 Vanves. 1981

11798
C80: 3100/ 333

2h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P5? W, ABILH'Y 1'0 APPLY POLICE mum
Erie PROJBT in much Jan & pp 32-41

tArticle by Roland Gayrol. of the Nation]. mutilation for the Political Scienoeee
The Boot an! the Political Gonnieearn Six contradiction: with Reepect to the
Socialist Pam": passages encloeed in alantlinee printed in 1mm]

[out] The hour for smug has. to be me. not yet arrived for the Socialiet
Party. Six aonthe is too long a the to continue to be owned solely by the node
and emotion of those first days, but it ie too short a tine to lake a genuine

- unlyeie of an experilent.

Comment concerning the P3 has. in fact. been Iuted. The fiery pronounce-ante of
the "headhunters“ caved the party'e recent come at Valence fro- the indiffer-
ence of the Iajority of the intelleotmle, uhcuit appear-took refuse either in
the silence of a haughty ekeptician or in the eafety of conventional praise. It

is indeed difficult to do otherwieee there are ac new contradiction within the
P3. in the relation betueen the P3 and the soverment. an! Iithin the government
itself. that it is risky to pin one'e hopee today on a particular choice, on a '
particular node of evolution, or--in ehort--on aw particular Iethod for molution
of theee contradictiom rather than on aw other.

Unler these condition, the beet way to initiate a debate is perhap Ierely to try
to focus attention on cone of theee contradiction, an! to do so by challelgixg
certain ﬂame in our political eyetea who are eurmmlled by excessive reverence.
Ietuedaretodoao, totheertentthatveereable.

Iron the Conquest of Pom to the Rea-ciao of ﬂavor

As a party the is ie very eucceeeful at winning election to office, but how will
it perfor- at the hell of goveruent? This party-who” promos in term 0! votes,
eenhere and intellectual influence during the past decade is a rare phemnenon in a
developed country-actually welconed ite victories ct larJune 1981 as a God-given
eurpriee. Nerreadytocomuernevpceitionecfpover, themeaenotprepeiedtc
exercise that power: it had never been plued in the role of a "goverment party.”
In party cameos after party ootgreee. however. the 1'! had been hearing cone of
ite activiete declare that it should "raise the queetion of sovernnental power."
Today. it appeare clear that with feet exception what theae party leabere wanted
wee acre in the nature of a theoretical diecueeion of mrtlental potter than the
translation of party policy into tern of the exercise of that power.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here we find the first apparent contradiction that one night wish to point out
within the socialist experiences although arsed with mnemusnand authorita-
tive--tea:ts covering all sectors of social activity, the new socialist political

responsible for this lack of synchronisation between general discmsion and the
translation out that discussion into action. It is also true. however. that this
phenonenon relates hack to what can be regarded as a genuine shortening of the
Socialist Party during these past few years: msely. the party's tenienor-ws a
part of the opposition-~to cover over with an ideological veneer a gemine weakness
in sectorial analysis an! in the fornulation of precise proposals. ‘lhe B has been
lore successful at theorising about reforlisl than at perfectixg the basic trans-
work of refer-s.

Sons will say: "But what about all the Mom carried out during the past 6
nonths, the natiomlisations, the decentralisation? Let he be understood correctly:
it is not ny intention to dininish the real Ierits of the work eccenplished. I
have determined, however, that even with respect to those the-es that are a wholly
faniliar part of the socialist ritua‘lufor emple, the mtiomlisations and the
decentralization-~m precise plan had really been finalised before the party's
ascension to power: the technical and political debates did not arise within the
govern-em; and the ministerial offices until the moment it became necessary to
undertake concrete neasmes. Moreover. neither the literatmunor the structures--
of the PS were able at the tine to serve as operative references.

To this initial contradiction we lay add two probleu which are unquestionably
linked to it:

There, too. tine will also see to it that our novices are eniowed with experience,
and therefore with conpetence. Speakixu in lore general tem. however. there is
the problen of establishing the criteria for conpetence-onotahly economic coupe-
tence. Pierre Hauroy has on several occasions (at the Valence com-recs. snore

of criteria of the type found in Ray-om Dame's textbook on economics. Contrary
to one Jourmlist's recent assertion, it would appear not to be true that there is
“only one way to manage the economy.” Very well: but what exactly are these /cther/
criteria?

The question appears to be all the more serious because in law matters (the bud-
getary procedure, for example) the P3 cadres have poured the-selves without apper-

ent difficult into the molds itherited from the preceding governments. that.
then, would another logic/ be, in terns of the mange-em of the affairs of state?

26

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cause us to overlook the responsibility of its partners of the political and social
left. Take the case of the labor unions, for exasple. Hhen their advice was asked
(sonetiles for the first tine) about certain policies (on culture. for example ).
some large unions discovered that they had nothixg to pmpose, not just with mspec1
to setth of lanagelent (for that is assuredly not their role) but even with res-
pect to overall guidelines. me French Left is definitely havim difficulty being

The experinent of 1981 introduced (for the first tile, perhaps?) a distortion into
this pattern: what has happened is that the French socialists are intendiig to

is in part a doctrine that rejects the political practices of the social democrats.
In fact (and to the surprise of ram Center-Left voters who had voted for "change"
but did not expect that the socialist platfors would be inplelented) the socialist
government is coming out the reform proaised by the socialist candidate durirg
the presidential election oaspaigz and by the PS durirg the legislative election
campaign. 'lhere is genuine confidence snore the socialists that it is possible to
charge French society, to "charge the way of life": when soseone replies by citirg
the existence of obstacles that have stood in the way of other experilents. they
eagerly respond: "Yes, but we have the political will." For his part, the prise
minister unceasingly declares: "I'm a man who stands his ground.“ and "I'I a
fightcreaoe"

In short. the language of the P3 in power is a sinple language which basically
Here indeed is something new in European socialism which abundantly Justifies the
impassioned attention aroused in the ranks of the leftist socialist currents of
thought outside our borders.

Rot everythirg is necessarily so simple, however. and it is here that we find we
are riskirg a second contradiction. The fact is that while hopirg to break with

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the social desecratic "double talk,” the PS renaim today strongly conditioned by
certain factors that have served to explain the ”deviation" of other experiments
and the inability of these experisents to "hreak" with capitalise. He should like
here to nention only two of these factors.

Favorirg the institutional approach (the cysts: of elections. goverment. the
assemblies, the changes in procedtnes). the P3 has always felt a certain distmst
of a civilian society that would be too autononous vis-a-vis the world of politics.
Because it rejects the leftist doctrine of the ”creative spontaneity of the lessee."
because it fears the conunists' ability to seize certain controls in society, all).
because it fears that s. ”liberal-libertarian" alliance-and even the reactionary
Rightumy intrude into overlarge spaces opened up in freedoa. the PS does not
propose to have the sechanisss of social charge deviate oversuch from its plan.
The policy followed during the first 6 sonths in the conunicaticm sectors the
reticences with respect to the free rsdioin‘oadcastixg stations: the change in tone
toward the ecologists: and the strange procedure of dividiig the decentralisation
bill into two parts are good emples of this institutional approach. but does
this not therefore pose the danger of returning to the practices of the party-state
and of placing definitive linits on the contours of chute? He lust be careful not
to go so far as to hurl the accusation of "totalitarianisn." ani particularly not
in the direction of the only political sovesentudesocratic socialisnuthat has
never given birthralwwhere in the world. to a repressive state. One should relain
vigilant agaimt this inevitable tenptation-won the part of a majority party-~to
orient the nechanisss of CW exclusively toward its own profit and to restrict
change to the political aspect of society. One should also give thought to the
significance of J. P. axevemnent's address to the Valence courses. in which he
expressed the hope that greater efforts would be sade "so that the goverment will
truly be your governsent. so that this power will be your power, /so that this
state will be your state/" (the esphasis is nine).

One of the theses of "activist talk“ has tented to disappear fro- the official
socialist line since last May: the concept of self-namgenent. Us ate iretead
witnessing the reappearance. as a background these in new of the speeches. of the
old social demoratic concept according to which the party, the goverment, or the
administrative establish-out should carry out a “political tramlation" of the
aspirations of the noses and of the social stnugles. more. too. does not one
run the risk-without Ieanitg to--of renouncirg all dialectics of action that are
based on political action and reverting to the concept that since the government is
a governsent of the Left and therefore a "good" goverment in the service of the
workers. the workers need only /place their confidence/ in that goveruent so that
it 'can change things to their benefit? And in so doim, does one not only risk
eliaimting such of the incentive for sobdlisation but also. once again. risk
liniting the objectives of charge to the traditional sphere of the politician?
Does not a party that is largely doninated by teachers and Iiddle-level cadres run
the riskuby speakitg in the nose of the workers-wt deprdving the latter (without
wishing to do so) of certain benefits which they have expected from the charge? In
short. the socialists should be particularly vigilant in order not to fall again
into the familiar ruts of mevious socialist experiaents, even after having explic-
itly abandoned the practice of ”double talk."

. 28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pro- the Union of'the Popular Forces to the Socialist Goverment

One of the origiml features (and one of the virtues) of the P3 strategy during the

tiOyearshasbeenthe policyofaunited Left. lhealliancewiththel’c
Fig-mania Party] has at one and the ease time made possible the reintegration of
the couunists into French political life; anchored the P3 to the Left: helped the
P8 to break with the "social-centrist” practices: an! lads possible the election
victory of the entire Left (and thereby reduced the electoral influence of the PC).
Moreover, the inclusion of four ccnunist Iinisters in the governlent is undou -
edly destined to play a definite role with respect to the public inage of the P0
and thereby help to bring about change in l-‘rench politics. One of the unusual
aspects of the Valence congress was the fact that Michel Renard was the only speak-
er to include the communists' participation in the government alone the gains lads
durixg the recent period.

The alliance with the PC, however. has never been described by the socialists as a
nere electoral tactic. 0n the contrary: according to the PS texts the alliance is
part of a unitary strategy. and party activists aixi leaders alike have called for a
"new practice of unity." In the period leadiru up to the presidential election.
1". Hitterrand and the PS adopted the concept of a "union of the popular forces,”
including the P840 alliance within the framework of a broader arrange-em (both

social and political) for the purpose of playing a leading role in the transforma-
tion of French society.

The m-oblen posed here is one of knowirg what this "union of the popular forces"
can signiﬁnani what the tern "unitary strategy" can enconpass--no longer duriig a
period of winnirg election to public office but rather during a period when a
socialist-led govern-em is at the hell. The respome today appears to be sosewtnt
unclear. imsnuch as neither in the top echelons nor slam the rank and file have
the P048 discussions really been resused. Not only is there no Joint effort. or
joint action, by the two parties but the very pmoblea of the organisation of their
future relations (a question not taken up at the socialist congress) appears hardly
even to have been included on the agenda of the various sections and federatiom of
the PS. Hust we await the preparations for the municipal electiors in order to
reactivate unity for the electoral event?

_.__.—~-

The PS response vis-a-vis its other partners of the political and social Left does not
appear to be very clear either. with respect to the nature. and possible modalities,
of the relations between the dominant party and the small groups of the Center'bLeft
(the ma [Radical Leftist Movement] and the PSU [Unified Socialist Party] ( in other
words. the extreme left). one cannot say that either the ideas or the proposals

have fused since thy or June. With respect to the strategy for relations between
the party and the labor unions, or between the sovernsent and the labor unions.
there too (although this is not to be sure. the classic but strongly reinvigorated
practice of Joint social efforts the current response of the Socialist hrty is
hardly visible (even though sons observers believe they are witnessing the form.-
tion of a privileged ps-ccr [General confederation of Labor] axis.

In fact, this question concerning the fate of the union of the popular forces and
the unity of the Left bears on the questions that directly concern the P5 itself:
the P045 alliance (together with its variants) has helped greatly to give the
Socialist Party a sore precise lungs in the years since 1971. Depending on whether
it relains a dosinant party that conducts its experilent as it chooses, nintaining

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only obligatory relations with its minority partners in the goverment. or whether
instead it revives-mot only in official sectors but throxuhout the nation--a
policy of continuous (and possibly conflictual) relation with the other ”popular
forces.” the PS will impart an entirely different coloration to its own action on!
to those of the govermsnt.

Pro- a Collection of Tendencies to... a Collection of Terrlencies

hormone knows the importance, the essential character. of the role played by ideo-
logical "tendencies” within the P5 since the party's foundixg. Today. although
they have theoretically been dissolved. one is struck by the persistence of their
“pact.

In the forlation of the governsent. the different tendencies of the party were
represented on a more or less proportional basis. line may in which the intragov-
ennental temiom are sanaged inevitably resinds knowledgeable observers of the way
in which the resolutions connittees have functioned during the mtioml cormsses
of the P8.

These tendencies would seen to have disappeared. but it is unquestiombly on the
basis of these defunct groupings that P. Kitten-am am In Joepin subtly forsed the
party's new leadership and federal tea-s while singling out the Rosard faction and
dininishirg (as is well known) its influence by cesparison with the preceding
comress at Nets.

the "tendencies" have therefore been relegated to the background. but one cannot
converse for sore than half an hour with a usher of the forner laJority group
without his explaining that the influewe of the “Bacardiam' should be reduced
still further. or sore than half an hour with a nesber of the for-er Rocardian
group without his dreaming aloud of ways to stage a coneback.

The “ternlenoies' as such are no sore. but the party activists are so accmtoled to
findirg themselves in a. snail your: that their personal and affective fellow-
ships--fron the rank and file to the top echelomuare sore likely to consist of
“the com-ades of the group” than of "the cosrades of the party." Moreover. every-
one tries to preserve his own mgasine. his own bulletin. or his own headquarters
in order to perpetuateuimofar as possible--the spirit of the ancient chapels.
And to keep the flame alive.

'lhe terriencies are no longer in vogue. but everyone plats to use the government as
a base free which to promote the influence of the former group to which he once

belonged.

Having criticized the American left. Jean-Pierre Olevenelent. of Research. is now .
pointing an accueirg fixer at American sociology. He is happily rediscoVering a
proletarian science that would in tile replace bourgeois science. art! is attespt-
ing--by using the discredited devices introduced sole tine ago by A. Saunier-Seite"
to place on the board of directors of the CIIRS [htioml Center for Scientific
Research'l a lube:- of the _lditorial Committee of the mgazine NON. an organ fourded
by m [Center for (Socialist) Studies. Research and Education].

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the very outset. Francois Hitterrand installed "Hitterandists" of unquestioned
loyalty in the state apparatus. The list of his guests at the luncheom‘and
breakfasts in Elysee Palace attests Etc no om’s surprise) to the fact that the
interests of the majority "current" pardon as. the former majority current) of the
P8 are upper-lost in his aind.

with the support of Michel de la Fourniere and Robert Qupuis, Michel Rocard is
enieavoring to convince hisself that the best way to resurface (sole day, who
knows?) at the head of a tendency which would finally constitute a Iajority within
the party is to .subnerge hiaself in a "party of umninity.“ Space is lacking here
to discuss the question of what constitutes courage in politics, or whether it 'Ias
sore courageous-during the official preparation of the Valence congressnto
remain silent or to defend one's positions regardless of the price one might have
to pay durirg the short term.

So the tendencies are defunctubut are they? No, they are only asleep, thanks to a
peculiar arrange-sent made at the highest level. Or rather they are as if "freeze-
dried,” waiting for a little boiling water in order to live once again, fresher
than ever. One my either deplore this state of affairs or scoff at it, provided
one is outside the PS, but it is nevertheless quits understandable: strom politi-
cal and sentimental ties have existed for years, and one would have to be either a
fool or naive to imagine that they could suddenly be loosened.

This is undoubtedly not the important question, however. I believe instead that at
the present moment the host serious question faoim the njority party is the fact
that while the sublerged tendencies await their opportunity to resurface-whenever
one or the other of them believes conditions are favorablenthe political debate
concerning party orientations is ipso faoto buried, deep within a party that does
not know how to organise a confrontation that does not involve contests for posi-
tions of leadership in the party apparatus. Should not an authentically deno-
cratic and pluralistic party (as the P5 uncontestably is. sore so than any other in
France) be capable of debating in an open-~and. if necessary, adversarial--aanmr
the prizes and options or power? And if divergent policy lines unitest theaselves
with respect to these questiom of today and tenor-row, should not the party be able
to develop new internal currents of opinion. new "tendencies," rather than aerely
to reproduce, behind the scenes, the sale opposite views of the sans groups ani the
some personalities?

Pros the Culture of Activism to the Delights of Power

what, then, is the role of the socialist activists when their party is in power?
In the opinion of sons activists m- the rank an! file who spoke their minds at
Valence, the response is clear: they lust exercise surveillance over the coarade
sinisters, be the guardiam of the party line, become genuine political conissars
over those who are appointed to govern-ental office. In short, to quote one of
their numbers "The government must be the party's boot.”

One can imgine that this role would be moderately satisfactory to the comrade
Iinisters. They have often iniicateduhave, in fact, said in so saw words--that
they envisage things in another way. To quote lament F‘abiusu ”In this new situa-
tion we are induced...to develop a new fern of activiss, which I should like to
call an "activisa of explamticn".... Reality today. as you well know, is the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

activists in the marketplace. in the workplace. being assailed by requests, objec~
tiers and questions, to which they are as yet poorly equipped to reopen)...” This
is the task for the coming nonthst the 'activisl of explanation." Here we have-~
in my opinion-~the initial axis of dishes for the Forty." Then "'here is the faloue
quip of Jean-Pierre (hevenenentn ”It is perhaps easy to proclai- that the Socialist

Party is not a 'perty-boot.’ But, an dear oomdee, not everyone has the talent to
be a 'party-boot.‘ It's a fine. handsone piece of footgear."

The ease speaker added. however: I"l‘he problsa is to act in such a way that the
govern-ant and the party--in carryim out their activities-will be united in the
effort to anchor France to the left, to chew the way of life. to truly open the
way to socialise." This inieed appears to be the problem. These activists are
very often local elected officials who are in contact with the measures. the peti-
tions. the demands of the citisem, of the voters. How can they be nde naponsive

To be sure. the party committees have the role of formulating initiatives: a role
which is, loreover, not as simple as it see-s, for how can anyone be sure that
these cosnittees will not outbid each other with respect to the latitude of action
of the government, and how can anyom guarantee that these ooIIittees will not be
staffed by activists who are disappointed or esbittered at not havirg been snapped
up by the state apparatus? To be true, the party has the task of serving as a
transaission belt to the rank and file for presidential and govermental direc-
tives: the "activisn of explamtion' so dear to Iaurent' Fabius: and the team
headed by Lionel Jospin is skillfully busying itself to perforl that function.

This does not, however. fully satisfy a party in which the culture of activism has
always been valued highly. well. then? Then the party must specifically invent--
if no serious internal probless are created for the future and if no serious de-
uobilization is provoked in its rams-ways and leans for its followers to accom-
plish the tasks that Pierre Hauroy assigned to then at Valence: "A party in which
no one wishesnand, moreover, would be unable-~to serve as a docile spokeslan for
a. govern-entail decision. There are aore--and better-thugs to do. merever they
say be. the socialist activists nuat launch ideas and proposals, experilents am
initiatives. For to the extent that it is a structure of ideas, a great socialist
party should be a vehicle for action wherever there are socialists. Activists and
elected officials-«in your neighborhoods, your towns, your city halls, your depart-
aents and your regiom-dt is your responsibility to change the way of life." This

From mange to mpectation

The socialist activists have for years labored for political mange. Uithout

believing in on overnight utopia, they have hoped that victory at the polls would
bring extensive and illediate social and cultural charge. standing before that

everyday synbol--the sssll screen of a television set-~we can understand their
ﬁle can therefore understand why namr socialist experts have recourse to sectorial
manage-ant practicesupractices that are new for thee am. are, soreover. very tiss-
consunirc. One can also understand the disoolfort of intellectuals who are deeply
involved in the party, who are basically less at their ease than they were under
Giecard d'lzstaili; because in those days the cosprosises necessary for the open-
tion of the government did not concern then.

Its victory in Hay-June brought French socialism face to face with respomibilities
that are assuredly historic in nature. In the precedixg pages we have above all
raised questiom--a.n1 called attention to certain contradictions--that are not easy
to resolve. It seesed useful to state these question and contradiction in these
pages and to do so without aw reservations, in comideration of the fact that
political change has created too lamp-and too profouniuexpectations not to
attempt a continuing analysis of the ways and leans that have been put in place to
respond to then. his victory of the left (and first and fore-est the victory of
the P3) in Hay-June was a response to a present-day need for political change in a
situation of social and econosic crisis. It was also the result of a structural
charge in French society that has developed from the cosbined effects of urbanisa-
tion: the increasing transforsation of the middle class into salaried esployees and
wage earners: de-Oaristianisatiom the increasing youthfulness of the population:
and the "shock wave" of Hay 1968. The new goverment and the Socialist Party are
expected to responi to this structural challenge while at the same tile respording
to the inediate challenge of the present situationuthe challerge to resolve the
“13180 I

Under these conditions, it would appear essential to question the P8 on a continu-
its basis with respect to its contradiction and its limitations. and in this way

to participate in the indispensable debate concerning the political options of
French society.

COPYRIGHT: by ms. 15, rue R.-Harcheron, 92170 Yams. 1981

10992
cso: moo/332

33
l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFYICIAL US! OILY

POLITICAL FRANCE

PCP DECLINE, RESOURCES FOR RECOVERY VIBHED
Paris POUVOIRS in French No 20. 1982 pp 45-53

[Article by Jean Baudouin, professor of political science at the University of
Poitiers, and author of “Le PCP et 'le socialismeanazcouleurs de la France' -
1968-1978," thesis, 1978, Rennesx "The June 1981 Communist Failure: Electoral
Retreat or Hegemonic Crisis?"]

[Text] One can readily imagine the trauma suffered by the communists on hearing
the results of the June 1981 legislative election. Forced back to a level of elec-
toral influence comparable to that in 1936, it may have seemed to them that within
a span of two successive balloting sessions, the efforts of two militant genera-
tions to guarantee the unchallenged hegemony of the party over the French left
wing had been brutally reduced to nothing. Prior to examining the political pro-
cesses which led to this situation and the various responses the leaders of the
party are attempting to implement, it would perhaps be well to clarify further
this notion of failure which is at the heart of all the analyses.

1. The Problem of the Failure

No one disputes the June 1981 communist failure--neither the commentators on
political life who undertake to draft an exhaustive inventory of its immediate
evidences--electoral retreat, loss of membership, strategic chaos. identity
crisis, nor the leadership of the communist party which acknowledges the "serious
reverses" suffered and is trying to clarify the short and long-run reasons for the
phenomenon. There are however two ways of interpreting this setback:

Either one can presume that it is a question of a temporary retreat, substantial
indeed but not at all permanent and susceptible to being overcome eventually, com-
parable to that in June of 1958, with the socialist thrust serving in a reactive
capacity in this connection analogous to the Gaullist wave at that time. or

One can on the other hand presume that it is a matter of structural decline which
could be discerned as early as the preceding electoral consultations, confirming
the increasing failure of the organizational forms and systems of thought in-
herited from Stalinism to adapt to a national situation which had changed pro-
foundly in political decor and sociological profile.

The "lower" hypothesis of retreat is, naturally, that chosen by the PCP leader-
ship. If in fact one examines the main exegetic texts drafted since the elections,

3h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
I0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in particular the report by Georges Marcheis to the Central Committee on 28 and
29 June and the draft resolution approved by the Central Committee on 12 and
13 October, three kinds of explanations are provided:

The first is of an institutional nature. The aggressive trend toward presidential—
izing the regime resulting from the 1958 constitution. paralleled by the bipolar-
iting dynamics of elections by majority balloting in two rounds (advantage to the
dominant party, incentive for useful votes). gave an unrealistic advantage to the
socialist party. while at the same time penalizing the communist party. The de-
cline in the communist vote would therefore be more the product of a particularly
perverse electoral "technology" than a cutting rejection of a political line. "We
underestimated the serious threat which the new institutional mechanism posed for
our party.

The second paints a more traditional picture and derives more from "demonology"
than reasgn. The party was the victim of a "atmosphere of merciless ideological
warfare." cleverly orchestrated by the dominant powers. massively passed along

by the mass media, and subtly endorsed by the socialist leaders. The breaking wave
of anticommunism deflected thousands of potential voters from the party.

Finally. the third explanation is the most innovative to the extent that it
directly challenges the history of French communism: the party bears the cost of
the "strategic delay" accumulated following the 20th CPSU Congress. If the august
names of Maurice Thorez and Haldeck-Rochet are never mentioned, they are implicit-
ly reproached for "having reacted the traditional form of unity of which the
Popular Front remains the prestigious model. that is t3 say the search for a basic
overall political agreement with the socialist party.“

it would be unreasonable to deny the import of this last argument. It is not in
fact usual for a party in the Stalinist tradition to cast a critical look at its
own history and to excise from it. in abrupt fashion. a manifestation as decisive
as the strategy of a single front at the summit with the socialists. The party in-
terpretation does not however deviate significantly from the grand apologetic and
legitimising tradition of its hagiologies. In fact it offers the advantage of ex-
cusing the current leaders of the party and absolving the founding norms of the
system (authoritarian stateism. ideocratic temptation. internationalist solidar—
ity). A spotlight focused on the "individual errors" of the preceding leadership
groups is also an artifice making it possible to isolate a moment in the "pro-
cess." the better to preserve the inalteratle validity of the "project."

in truth. wnichever hypothesis is adopted, a politist cannot save time with an
overall interpretation of the contemporary development of the party. It is high
time to discard all of these "existentialist" concepts which have so thoroughly
muddled our understanding of the communist party in the course of these recent de-
cades. Just as it was absurd to pose the question "Has the communist party
changed" unceasingly. without previously establishing the elements in the commu-
nist system which must in fact be altered before one can conclude that there has
been a real change. it would also be extremely sterile to adhere to a situational
concept of the failure. to add together and assign a hierarchy to its immediate
evidences. for example, without integrating it in a general "pathology" of the

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

communist system which alone can make it possible to clarify its significance and
to measure its efficiency.

In this connection, it seems that the June 1981 electoral retreat provides spec-
tacular confirmation of a process which is certainly older but whose intensity was
modified by the exalting prospect of the joint program: the gradual transition

of French communism from an "organic epoch" characterized by the institutionaliza-
tion of a certain number of privileges within French society (in particular, a
quasi-monopoly on the representation of the least favored strata) toward a
"critical epoch," characterized precisely by the gradual dismantling of these
privileges. The communist institution is tending to move from the powerful and
Stable "countersociety" it was toward a peripheral and marginal society. There is
hardly any need to add that within the framework of a necessarily limited study,
we will limit ourselves to describing the strategic processes which led to this
deterioration and the responses which the communist leaders are planning to cope
with this r gemonic crisis.

2. The Development of the Crisis

If one studies the development of communist strategy between 1965 and 1981, one
can see that the leaders of the party tested the joint practices at the "summit"
and then "at the base." in both cases leading to failure, but constituting none—
theless a traditional parallel to the history of the party. hasn't its rhythm
since its origins been characterized by the alternation of so-called periods of
overture characterized by an effort to reach agreement with the socialists and so-
called periods of withdrawal, under the sign of denunciation of the social demo-
cratic betrayals? In truth, there are two factors which are inconsistent with this
description. 0n the one hand, the goal of a joint government program is something
unprecedented. 0n the other, the reestablishment of a powerful socialist party
finally rooted in the left emerged as the element which, at every stage in the
union, served as a catalyst for and deepened the retreat of the PCP.

The launching of a joint dynamics just after the death of Maurice Thorez seems
consistent at first glance with classic objectives. The issue was indeed to
develop new prospects for change by updating the alliance with the socialist party
at the summit again. it was a question above all of establishing political and
electoral hegemony in this alliance with a view to winning power under the most
favorable conditions. The long-term prospect called for making a decisive break-
through on the level of state power by winning the support of a vast public and
nationalized sector. However, when the party debits this joint research to a model
introduced in the era of the Popular Front, it erases the strictly heterodox
aspect of the joint program strategy. For the first time in -ts history, in fact,
the PCP is contemplating the long-term sharing of state power between the social—
ists alone and the communists alone with a view to advancing toward socialism,
whereas in 1936 it rallied to the formula of "support without participation," and
between 1965 and 1967 it participated in a reconstruction government which in-
cluded representatives of the "national bourgeoisie.“ Above all. at a time when
nowhere else in Europe would a communist party condescend to establish such favor-
able and such rich links with those hereditary enemies of communism, the social
democrats. The unprecedented scope of the joint program aims explain the two great
imperatives which the communists adopted for themselves as of 1972. On the one

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hand there was a "sociological" imperative designed to extend the traditional
audience of the party into the new wage-earning strata created_by the "scientific
and technical revolution." and on the other hand. a "political” imperative seeking
to design the contours of a “socialism of a French hue" and to modify its identity
on major points. Unlike the situation in 1936 and 1945, the party leadership is
willing to wager its candidacy far power on significant reforms: a loosening of
its links with the Soviet Union, abandonment of the concept of the dictatorship
of the proletariat, recognition of pluralistic socialism, reestablishment of a
climate of discussion within the party-partial, awkward and more or less sincere
reforms which would despite everything involve it in a process of moving away from
the Soviet Union, involving it almost despite itself in a Burocommunist approach.

"Bad luck" would have it that this move was paralleled in time by a spectacular
recovery for the socialist party, while the dynamics of unity benefitted more from
the modern and sincere "reformism" of the socialist party than from the stiff and
ambiguous "reformism" of the communist party. The contradiction which was already
visible at the conclusion of the June 1974 presidential election became fully
obvious during the negotiations in the summer of 1977 about the updating of the
joint program. The socialist party veto both of its institutional demands (not to
the "republican monarchy") and its economic conditions (more nationalizations and
more self-management by the rank and file) stripped it of the last "resources" it
could have hoped to mobilize in order to control the direction of the future
regime. Ill adapted to the presidential function, excluded from the key minis-
tries, ignored within the great technocratic structures of the state, the party

is very concretely faced with the scenario it fears the most: serving as the
workers' guarantee in a simple social democratic handling of the crisis. This is
the reason for the decision to abandon the union of the left. And it is as of this
moment that another great disappointment for the PCP takes shape. The return to

a strategy of isolation and insults toward the socialists (the thesis of the
"swing to the right"), the purpose of which was not only to reestablish party
unity on the classic foundations (allegiance to the Soviet Union, priority for the
poor and the oppressed, exaltation of the revolutionary party), but above all to
destroy the roots of socialist renewal and the various legitimacies it claimed—-
this frenetic isolationism turned against it again, nourishing a broad and endur-
ing dispute within the party, and outside it, further strengthening the reformist
credibility of the socialist party. The "perverse effects" of unity appeared in
all their "hideousncss" in May and June of 1981. Not only did the communist party
suffer unprecedented electoral reverses, but a powerful and triumphant social
democratic sector lurked within the state mechanisms conceived by General de
Gaulle.

Thus not everything in this communist exegesis linking the retreat of the party
with the culmination of a wrongful logic of unity with the socialist party at the
summit is necessarily false--with the basic reservation that one cannot draw
justification from such a modern development to explain the profound reasons for
the communist decline. The seriousness of the failure of the joint strategy (the
party's loss of stability in its traditional monopoly on the representation of the
workers class) enabled the communist leaders to invert the responsibility issue
and to blame rash "Eurocommunization" for a decline which was above all due to

the continuation within the party of systems of thought, organization and action
inherited from the Stalinist period.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. A Shift in the Stakes

The communist failure in June of 1981 was a sudden consolidation of the gradual
shift of the stakes involved in the socialist-communist rivalry since the signing
of the joint program:

Between 1972 and 1981, the primacy the PC? had enjoyed in the electoral field,
which enabled it to appear to be the "first party of the left," slipped away from
it, little by little;

In 1977 and in 1981, the disruption in the union of the left and the symbolic par-
ticipation in the regime illustrated, on obviously different levels, the same in-
capacity to establish a dominant influence on the level of the centers of power;
and

After the formation of the new government, the competition between the socialist
party and the PCP developed in a final sector--political and'ideological control
of the workers class, the exercise of the "tribunicial function."

Control of the Tribunicial Function

The PC? today has only two "resources" capable of contributing to a resumption of
its influence left--the solidity of its institutions, on the one hand, and the
density of its popular roots, on the other. The second factor is moreover the pre-
ponderant one insofar that it is true that an organization which is not implanted
in mass practice is in the medium time range doomed to schism. Now the triumph of
the socialist party, if it shatters the mythology of the “party of the workers
class," does not destroy the old exchange system linking the PCP with the "least
favored strata" society and in part explaining its enduring prosperity from top

to bottom.

0n the one hand, it remains the only national party which has incorporated in its
organic "genes" the messianic postulate of the primacy of the proletariat and
which vigorously stimulates the advancement of cadres of worker origin on all
levels of the organization.

0n the other hand, it continues on a permanent basis to structure the demands and
the expectations of major sectors of the workers class thanks to its dense and ex-
tensive network of "links" made up of the cells in enterprises and neighborhoods,
the municipalities controlled by the party, the popular and family associations
and the local sections of the COT [General Confederation of Labor].

Finally, one should not regard the enduring similarity between the daily adminisd
tration of the party and the opinions characteristic of the social strata they
claim to represent as a minor matter. Support of national values, the cult of
athletics and virility, a tendency toward "machismo" or racism (Vitry). an inflex-
ible campaign against immorality and pornography--the party, except for temporary
concessions to "fashion" ("we are the party of women's liberation"). carefully
cultivates this "traditionalism" which is inherent in a certain popular ethos.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it is precisely this tribunicial singularity, the main if not the exclusive source
ul its spread, which is today becoming the nodal point in the competition between
the communists and the socialists.

This is because, first of all, of "situational logic" almost impossible to change.
The coexistence within a given field of a powerful social democratic party and a
powerful communist party is not viable. The natural logic of the former leads to
seeking among the popular strata the support needed to expand its social base and
to justify itsademands for reformist administration of the system. The profound
logic of the latter leads to extension of its influence beyond the popular cate-
gories which it "staffs," with a view to supporting its proposed penetration of
state powers. Both sectors seek to harvest the same ground. In France at present
the socialist party cannot consolidate its position as a dominant party unless it
succeeds in guaranteeing itself majority control of the workers class, and thus
reducing the influence the communist party exercises over it through the COT in
significant fashion.

This is because, secondly, of "situational benefits" recently acquired by the
socialist party. The lasting conquest of state power finally provides it with an
opportunity to overcome its original handicaps and to correct its unfortunate lack
of presence in the enterprises. It is now in fact well situated to mobilize a
whole complex of "resources" (mastery of economic and social policy, initiative
in structural reforms, launching of an "anticapitalist" discourse) which will
allow it precisely to achieve from "above" what it has never been able to accom-
plish from "below"--imposing itself as the privileged translator of the demands
of the productive workers, confiscating for its own exclusive benefit a "tribuni-
cial function" of which it was constantly deprived in the past, whether it be by
anarchosyndicalism at the beginning of this century or by the communism of a
Leninist hue beginning in 1936.

There can be no doubt that the communist leaders are more than acutely aware of
the major danger which threatens them. what in fact will remain of their old
prolotarian legitimacy if the dominant sectors of the workers class move toward
the "reformist" parties and unions? "hat credibility would a party incapable of
representing the workers effectively with the public authorities have with those
veters? It is in order to block a process which in the end would lead to a mar-
ginal position of the Scandinavian type that the communist leaders are under-
taking. within the difficult post-Hay 1981 context. to set up a system of back-
fires.

The System of Backfires

Safeguarding the tribunicial privileges of a party threatened by social democratic
hegemony at all costs--that is the guideline making it possible to organize the
sometimes disparate segments of the communist strategy.

First of all, it clarifies the seeming paradox inherent in the decision to parti-
cipate in power. Is it not remarkable, in fact, that the PCP leadership renounced
leftist unity in August 1977 with the justification that it would no longer con-
trol the anticapitalist dynamics of the experiment? And that in June of 1981, that
same leadership engaged in feverish competition as a candidate for power when it
no longer had any guarantee at all of controlling its direction? In truth, even

a symbolic participation in the state regime was the only means available to the
party for conjuring the mortal threat that public opinion in the workers sector

39
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
would identify the socialist state with change, social democracy with social re-
form. The participation of four communist ministers at least gives credibility to
this idea that the party is also playing its part in the effort toward social re—
newal which Francois Hitterrand cannot set aside without reversing himself.

Furthermore, it explains the subtle dialectics of unity and autonomy which governs
the relations between the PCP and the state regime. 0n the governmental and
parliamentary levels the party manifests great loyalty, asserting its solidarity
with the advances made and maintaining a cautious silence when it comes to the
measures in contradiction with the communist program. On the tactical and propa-
ganda level, on the other hand, the party engages in discrete but firm one-upman-
ship with a view to pointing out the temporarizing of the socialists and identify-
ing the thresholds which must be crossed in order to move forward. The measures
initiated by the socialist regime both in the realm of taxing capital and financ-
ing social security have also been the subject of "unfavorable commentaries" by
the communist leaders. Finally, on the trade union and worker demand levels, the
CGT does not hesitate to place itself in the vanguard of a number of battles

and to radicalize certain demands. The existence of a government dominated by the
socialists is not of a sort as to hinder its activity, unlike the period immed-
iately after the war in which it represented strikes as the "weapon of the trusts"
and urged the workers to "roll up their sleeves." In the final analysis, the harsh
self-restraint which the communists impose upon themselves on the ministerial
level in no way prevents them from seizing every opportunity to appear as the
natural defenders of the poor and the oppressed.

This is not unrelated, finally, to this whole process of internal party consolida—
tion underway since the electoral "trauma" of June. The very limited maneuvering
room which the party has henceforth precludes any fantastic innovations in the
organizational realm. As a result, the current leadership is very faithfully
adhering to the organicist tradition inherited from the There: era, consistent
with which the unflagging unity of all the party institutions rallying around the
leading strata constitutes not only the key to future developments but also the
prerequisite for political renaissance. The party has been adamant with regard to
the critical movement with its nucleus within RENCONTRES COMMUNISTES and symbol-
ized by the former federal secretary for the Paris region, Henri Fiszbin. It has
taken care to isolate and exclude the opposition elements in the various CGT
structures, so that this great central workers organization will remain the privi-
leged spokesman for the party among the workers. Finally, during the Central
Committee meeting held on 8 and 9 October, it noted the disappearance of "hundreds
of enterprise cells" and decided to reactivate the party presence in the trade
union and associational movement as a whole.

FOOTNOTES
l. Draft Resolution, L'HUHANITE, 13 October 1981.
2. Ibid.

3. lbld.

hO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a. Concerning the limits of this relaxation, see our article "The PCF-A Return
to Archsism," REVUB POLITIQUB ET PARLEHENTAIRE. December 1980.

5. This expression was "immortalized" by Georges Lovsu, "Communism in France,"
CAHIERS OF THE 888?. 1968.

6. It was the Centrsl Committee which had the duty of stating at the 8 and
9 October 1981 session that "The founders of RBNCONTRBS COMMUNISTES are no
longer members of the party."

COPYRIGHT: Presses Universitaires de France, 1982

5157
080: 3100/345 “

hl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIMICMHWCIAI.USE(MHLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

KRASUCKI PURPOSE: RBINPORCB COT, "AGE PCP ATTACK
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 6 Feb 82 pp 22-23

[Article by Franz-Olivier Gieabert 8 Claude-Francois Jullien: “The Krasucki Offen-
sive"! '

[Text] The PCP is seriously ill? Then it is up to the.ccT to take
over. And the future secretary general shrinks from nothing in or-
der to restore combativeness to the old house.

Every day, the dispatches that fall onto the desk of Jean Auroux, minister of la-
bor, announce new social conflicts: "Strike Hardens at Renault-Haubeuge," Occupation
of Matte Ice Cream Factory in the Orne," "Customs-Officer conflict still at Im-
passe," etc. The 39-hour matter has'thus, in a few days, set on fire the France of
the factories--a matter that came just in time for the CGT.

A COT man himself, Jean Auroux is not taken in by the game in the rue La Fayette
central organization. Henri Krasucki, who suspects him of primary anti-CGT-ism,
even asked Pierre Hauroy for Auroux's head one day. Like the experts of Hatignon
or elsewhere, the minister of labor has understood that the COT is henceforth mak-
ing use of the discontent in order to strengthen its positions. On Thursday, Kra-
sucki again lit into him by name.

Is the CGT, for all that, in the process of going into dissent against the govern-
ment? Not really. Not yet. For the time being, Henri Kraaucki, a brooding threat
to the new regime, is content to issue a lot of "warnings." when he writes to the
prime minister, it is to tell him that the workers of Renault "have been deceived."
One day, he vituperates ”the leftist forces that want to manage the crisis." The
next day, he lights into the "bad ordinance" on reduction of work time. Andre
Sainjon, the young boss of the metallurgical workers of the COT, throws the ball
farther: "The government's decisions are too limited, indeed sometimes contrary to
change."

It is obviously not by chance that it is a man like Henri Krasucki who is taking
the reins of the No 1 workers' central organization today. It is being attacked on
all fronts. Hithin itself. first of all, by its dissidents who are challenging the
watchwords inspired directly by the PCP. Before the first round of the presiden-
tial election, the Confederation's anti-Mitterrand campaign had scandalized the
partisans of unity. The support for the Warsaw putschiats only aggravated the mal-
aise. Federations and departmental unions are on the verge of going over to inter-

h2
FIN!(HHHCLAL!1§E(NHLY
nnl opposition: thus it is in Seine-Maritime, or in the Pays de la Loire. The fu—
ture secretary general is trying to root out the movement by refusing, for example,
to renew the bad CGT members' cards for 1982. This amounts to de-facto expulsion.

Locking Up the Hachine

0n the outside, things are going no better for the COT leadership. In several oc-
cupational test-elections, it has lost points to the advantage of the GPDT, and
sometimes, the F0 [workers Force]. Thus, the drop was 7 percent at the Brest naval
yard and in the SNIAS [National Industrial Aerospace Co] of Toulouse, and 12 per-
cent at Renault-Billancourt. According to certain internal estimates, the CGT lost
between 10 and 20 percent of its members lest year. The organization's finances
are feeling the effect of this.

what can Krasucki do under these conditions? His mission is not to be agreeable
but rather to keep the house in blind obedience. For this purpose, he would have
to lock up the machine, of course, while at the same time making his organization
the most combative on the front of the struggles. The future of communism in
France is at stake. The leadership of the PC? is well aware of the fact that its
party has been sick for a long time. Thus it is up to the CGT to take over, to
"become the spearhead of the working class," as the hallowed expression puts it.

Georges Seguy, the trade-unionist of the PCP's political bureau, was naturally not
the man for the situation. A good soul. he had long dreamed of a more open and
more democratic union, encompassing more than 3 million members. henri Krasucki,
who is the party's man in the COT, will for his part know how to take drastic mess-
ures. He has already begun to do so, for that mattet--all the more easily in that
he is the true boss of the central organization. At the last executive-cosmdttee
meeting. Rene Buhl, the "unity critic," declared that he is ready to sign the lead-
ership's motion. But on one condition: that it call for the freeing of the trade-
unionists imprisoned in Poland. Seguy, who was chairing. seemed ready to accept
this. He turned toward Krasucki--and the answer was no.

It was not entirely of his own volition that Seguy quitstheleadership of the CGT.
What is involved was, of course, an eviction. It was the friends of "Krasu" who
spread the reports about the "health problems" of the secretary general in office.
Georges Seguy, for his part, does not explain his departure in terms of any fa-
tigue. To the leaders of the executive committee he explained last year, half—
heartedly, that it was necessary to "make room for the young." Smiles in the
ranks. Everyone in the trade union knows that Henri is 3 years older than

Georges. In his reply that day, Krasucki declared that Seguy had definitely "real-
ly deserved to leave."

The two men have several points in common. For example, it was in the middle of
their adolescent years that they went into the Resistance, before being deported.
But they do not have the same style. Georges Seguy, ruddy and lively, readily
serves whiskey on the rockes to his visitors. Krasucki, pale and austere, rumin-
ates day and night through his files, which he knows like a book. ”He is the best
negotiator," says Yvon Chotard, the No 2 of the CH?! [National Council of French
Employers].

Seguy and Krasucki are not on the same wavelength politically either. It is tradie
tional in any communist organization, of course, for roles to be divided and for

53
liﬂl¢ﬂﬂﬂ€iAl.USElﬂVLY
INJR OWIICJAI.USE(NNLY

the boss to appear to be an open person, at odds with the "hardliners." But this
time, the legend was true: Seguy, who urged unity of action with the CFDT, was cer-
tainly less firm than his "right-hand man." He is one of those communists who are
not very infatuated with the "Soviet model." At the congress of the Horld Trade-
Union Federation in Prague in 1978, Seguy was often caught in a clearly bad mood in
the corridors. "Someone read a message from Brezhnev," he laughed in a small,
fiendly group; "Interesting. Why not a message from Bokassa?" A quip--but it says
a lot. Later, he did not hesitate to meet with the Czech "charter 77" dissidents.
This is the kind of "provocation" that Krasucki has never relished.

"Sounding the Alarm with a Sleigh-Bell"

"Krasu," for his part, remains an unconditional supporter of the October Revolu-
tion. He has not understood the PCP's critical phase vis-a-vis the Soviet model.
In a recent book, "Synidcat et Unite" [Trade Union and Unity] (published by Edi-
tions Sociales), he warmly hails the "immense role"-that the Eastern countries "are
playing for the maintenance of peace, the support that they are giving to the work-
ers' movement." When you talk to him about the Polish tragedy, he shrugs his
shoulders: "Without the USSR, Poland would be nothing at all."

A "retro" communist is what Henri Krasucki is. More political than Georges Seguy,
he has also failed to make a career in the party. Thorez took note of him in the
1950's. He was made a political-bureau alternate in 1966. And since he thrives on
theory, he worked in the key sector of the intellectuals. But it was necessary to
prepare for someone to take over from Benoit Frachon, the trade-union patriarch.

At the time, it was inconceivable that a Polish immigrant, and a Jew to boot, could
become the boss of the No 1 French central workers organisation. But he was the
ideal factotum to back up the exuberant Seguy. And so he became.

Bis headquarters is a "worker's life" center, full of souvenirs of his trips to the
Eastern countries. He entrenches himself in it. The journalists of "the V0 [Vie
Ouvriere (worker's Life)!” never see him up close--except in the cafeteria, where
he often eats, apart, with members of the confederation bureau. He does not get
into "the V " because he shuttles between the headquarters of the COT, in rue La
Fayette, and that of the PCP, in place du Colonel-Fabien. Little by little, he has
taken control of all sectors of the central organization: the confederation press,
the federations, beginning with the biggest of them--metallurgy.

If this model apparatchik has been able to impose himself, it is doubtlessly also
because of his innate sense of formula. He loves to be striking: "One cannot sound
the alarm with a sleigh-bell." And he does not hesitate to speak gruffly. Last
year, to explain his central organization's reception of that Halesa whom he
spurns, he went so far as to say to the executive cosmittee: "In France, Solidarity
is us, the CST."

The government, in any case, does not take lightly the fine formulas or great dia-
tribes of "Krasu." The fact is that all of his words have been weighed. But there
is no need to read between the lines to understand the real reasons for the Kra-
sucki affair. The French Communists know that they will have to break with the So-
cialist group sooner or later if they want to exist. Since the VCF is paralyzed by
the governmental solidarity, the future secretary general of the COT gives himself
the responsibility of preparing the ground, with reliable people. In carrying on

hh
the battle forz‘ﬁiofound change." he is taking account of the impatience of the
working class and clamping down on the internal challenges. Three birds with one
stone.

The 39-hour matter is a windfall. "The governaent," says Krasucki, "is finding a
way to bring about a reduction of the work week under such conditions that the
workers are discontent." That is because everyone is finding some advantage in it;
The customs workers are angry: their supervisory authority has jumped at the oppor-
tunity of the 39-hour work week to cut down on the advantages they have already ac-
quired. One officer or another could include his travel time in the 40-hour work
week; but that is no longer the case with the 39-hour week, At Kodak, in Vin-
cennes, the "continuous process" workers were working 38 hours a week. henceforth
they will work only 37, but the manage-ent is taking advantage of this to reduce
their night-work allowances. Elsewhere, workers are feeling themselves robbed of
the 5th week of paid holidays. An employee of the Calories Lafayette who worked
underground enjoyed 2 days of vacation time because of his seniority and 3 extra

days for “fatigue." His bosses decided that the 5th week should cancel these saall
favors.

The CFDT is not at rest. After a neeting, described as "courteous," with Yvon Gat-
taz, the boss of the bosses, Ednond Maire denounced the "legalism" of certain con-
pany chiefs who strive to apply the law to the letter, all the better to betray its
spirit. But for his part. he refuses to challenge the government in the matter of
the 39-hour week: if anyone is guilty. it is the employers. and they alone.

Should one be afraid of Krasucki? His wheezy old machine should not be underesti-
mated. The COT still holds EDP [French Electric Power Company], the SEC? [French
National Railroads] and the RAT? [Independent Parisian Transport System]--a number
of strategic points, in other words. In the nationalized sector, in which the
trade unions are destined to exert more and more influence, it gets 53 percent of
the votes, on the average. In the private sector, only 38 percent. But it is
clear that the CGT hegemony is no longer what it was--far free it. "The future of
our central organization is not very rosy," says Pierre feuilly. 36. leader of the
Socialist dissidents. "Its threa“s are only blusters."

Perhaps. But it would be risky not to take Krasucki seriously.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "la Nouvel Observateur"

11267
cso: 3100/37a

us

IKIICIHNCIAI.USI(N‘LY
WK OFFICIAL Ubﬂ ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

PS? DBPUTIBS' FACTIONS, GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION SURVEYED
Paris POUVOIRS in French No 20, 1982 pp 55-66
[Article by David Henley]

[Textl The parliamentary faction produced by the election comprises 269 depu-
ties. An attempt will be made here to lake a closer study of those elected on

14 and 21.June 1981 (thus we will not concern ourselves with the alternates for
those elected who have become ministers. All this will perhaps change little as
to the basic data, it may perhaps do so on the level of factions, since these
alternates are not always of the same persuasion as these ministers). Despite
these limitations, we have chosen to undertake an analysis based on factions, for
the analyses of the deputies published to date have devoted little concern to
this dimension of the PS [Socialist Party], which is however essential if we are
to understand its internal functioning, and which confers upon this party a large
part of its uniqueness. If everyone knows that the PS representation has more than
doubled, and that its deputies are now and henceforth active more or less every-
where in France, with spectacular penetration in the east. west and center, and
that the bulk of the new parliamentarians are men in their forties, wage earners
in general in the intellectual professions in the broader sense (see the innumer-
able commentaries on the "professors' Republic), it appears that an analysis ba.ed
on this key factor might possibly contribute some modifications to this very
roughly sketched image. casting a little light in the process on the internal
mechanisms of this party which now, as Harold Wilson puts it, appears to be "the
natural party of the government."

The Factions“

The deputies have been classified on the basis of the motions they supported dur-
ing the indicative vote for the Met: Congress in 1979, and we have not excluded
any motions. For if category 0 reflects above all the existence of a serious
crisis within the Bouches-du-Rhone federation, and if category P did not achieve
the necessary five percent. both reflected a certain sensitivity. Of course, we
have been unable to take into account the factional changes which have occurred

in the meantime (this is the case for a certain number in the I category, in par-
ticular). It is also difficult to assess all of the nuances ("A certain individual
voted for c but feels close links with A"—-or the reverse). Tactical rallies.
wherein a deputy approved one motion out of a sense of duty or concern for the
future, are inevitably excluded as well. Thus our classifications reflect the Met:

h6

son onrcm. use omx.
choice in all its harsh reality, but perhaps this will give them a certain
indicative value.

Table 1--Ps Deputies by Faction, 1981

 

Absolute 1 of I of 1 of
Number of 1981 1978 Net:
1981 P8 P8 Seats
Faction Deputies Group Group (1980)
A (Hitterrand) 129 48 52.8 40.1
B (Hauroy) . 42 15.6 20.7 13.
C (Rocard) 45 16.7 16 20.6
D(Mfﬁrn) 5 lﬂ L9 7J
a (cents [Center for

Socialist Studies,
Research and Educa-

tion 36 13.6 6.6 14.4

P (Pierret) 11 6.1 1.9 3.2
Unclassifiable 1 0.h

Total 269 100 100 99.5

 

In comparing the percentage of deputies elected by each faction with its score in
the indicative vote for Hetz, we see that the Hitterrand faction benefitted the
most. with a gain of some eight percent. if the Hauroy faction also showed a
little gash, one might perhaps see therein the effect of a certain presidential
dynamics. The Rocard faction, in the minority at Nets, showed a loss, while the
CERES faction succeede for the first time in obtaining more or less the number
of deputies it merits. One is also struck by the persistence of the category P
differentiation (CERES dissidents, for the most part), despite the fact that this
faction does not officially exist. This doubtless reflects not only the weight of
certain strong personalities within their federation, but also real autonomy in
the choice of candidates by the section members. without a doubt Hitterrand was
well aware of the persistence of the catergory P preference when he appdfnted
Edmond Herve to his cabinet.

The Routes Followed

within the parliamentary group, one can distinguish several directions.7 Let us
take first of all the sudden "dropout" in the districts which. according to every
expectation. should have come back into the PS fold. There do not appear to be too
many such cases: we are thinking of the old battle comrades of the chief of state
such as R. Dumas (Dordogne 1) or G. Halimi (lsera a). In cases such as those of

V. Nelertz (Seine-Saint-Denis 5) or A. Belion (Alpes de Haute-Provence 2) are in
all probability less a matter of reward for services rendered in the past than an
investment in the future, with the obvious desire to put potential stars in place.
All of these examples, it should be mentioned, fall within category A.

1:7

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the old party baations where a renewal is in progress, the "cursus" of the new
group often seems to resemble that of its predecessor. For example in Ariege or
Haute-Garonne. the new deputies are men of a certain age with experience in
executing municipal or departmental responsibilities. Even when a younger man with
a Paris degree takes over (J. P. Balligand in Aisne. or A. Rodet in Limoges)
they have usually been well broken in previously in departmental life. If these
comments are valid above all for categories A and B, it is nonetheless possible

to say that the typical deputy has had extensive experience in municipal or county
government dating back to 1977 at least. and has made himself a reputation as a
capable and industrious administrator. Many of these deputies were candidates in
the 1978 legislative elections. and they are now harvesting the fruits of their
local labors and the effects of the change in opinion on the national level. This
is valid for all of the factions taken together: the success of the likes of R.
Carraz in Cote-d'Or or K. "eye in Gironde. both of them CERES mayors in working
class suburbs. is indeed very similar to that of men with the most classic of pro-

files. such as Mitterrand supporter L. Robin in Ain or G. Bonnemaison. of faction
B. in Epinay.

Hithin this category of local elected officials. it is possible to distinguish
various shadings. One can separate those who are truly native sons (for example

in the CERES. H.-J. Sublet in Rhone. or G. Benedetti in Card) from those who.
despite their local popularity. remain both in terms of their roots and their pro-
fessional activities Parisians. working from a distance. We are thinking of the
likes of J.—H. Belorgey in Allier or C. Goux in Var. It seems to us that this
phenomenon pertains above all to the Hitterrand faction.

There is also a certain polarity between the party and the locally elected
officials. If at least 25 of the new deputies were the "federal leaders" in their
department. and if the intraparty responsibilities are often interlinked with the
mayors' mandates. there is another profile which seems to be less directed towards
public life. This seems to us to be particularly true of the CERES. which has
among its deputies a number of individuals without other electoral mandates

(G. Toutain and J.-P. Planchou in Paris. J. Natiez in Nantes. A. Chepy in Marne).
These members are committed to making of the PS a serious political tool, con-
sistent with the CERES line. but in so doing. they_have bypassed local mandates.

One can also distinguish a certain number of elected officials who, although not
natives of their districts. settled there some years ago in order to establish (or
revive) the party and their faction there. At present they are seeing_their years
of effort well rewarded, and one might note among them in particular such CERES
figures as J.-P. Michel in Haute-Saone. J. Gatel in Orange or H. Suchod in
Dordogne (the latter was, it is true. elected to office during a partial election
at the end of 1980).

Refinéng the analysis of elected posts held by deputies according to faction some-
what. We see first of all that there are many deputies who do not seem to hold
any office. That having been said. the percentage of local elected officials
appears very high for category B. and very low for the CERES. Among the officials
in category B, moreover. half serve as mayors or county original councilors——an
indication of really remarkable local ties. and proof. if such be needed. of the

h8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
persistence of a type of municipal socialism which must indeed be associated with
the SPIO [French Section of the Workers International]. The CERES obviously pre-
fers a party with local responsibilities, since it is underrepresented in all the
categories in Table 2. Faction A is strong in all categories, and the Rocard
supporters are difficult to classify. There is a goodly number of deputies who
hold no elective posts and relatively few who are both mayors and county coun-
cilors. 0n the other hand, the:: is a goodly number of county councilors pure and
simple. Should we see therein a certain difficulty in gaining local power, or a
more deliberate rejection of the responsibilities of multiple posts? The same
question can be asked for those in category F, few though they be.

Geographic Distribution

The regional distribution of the deputies is also a rich source of information
(see Map 1). letting faction D aside as a purely regional phenomenon, we are
struck by the extreme splintering of faction F (except perhaps in Vosges, where

C. Pierret himself is an elected official). This suggests members holding solid
local elected offices (8. Vennin in Saint-Etienne, J. Osselin in the Lille
suburbs). In greater depth, this means that these deputies have had a certain
autonomy in relation to the Paris CERES even before their affiliation with it,
which enabled them to survive the breach in 1978-1979 better than was possible
elsewhere. This was certainly the case for the two elected officials mentioned.
since J. Osselin is a member of H. wolf's group, and B. Vennin headed an important
group of former PSU [Unified Socialist Party] members who joined the PS during the
Socialist Assises (197A). '

As to the CERES, it is harvesting the fruits of a decade of patient waiting and
effort. In the "missionary territory" in the east and west. where the PS has
finally broken through, it is in many cases the CERES which has headed the federa-
tion for a long time. If ever a national movement were to occur, this faction
would profit from it. Now that this has happened, the CERES is electing officials
in Narne, "auto-Marne, Roselle, Heurthe-et-Hoselle, “aute-Saone and--most
creditably--ﬂaut-Rhin. The same observation could be made-for Paris, long the
pride of the faction, where there has been a gain of from one to seven deputies.
1f the triumphant CERES are often party cadres in the east, it is on the contrary
local and departmental elected officials which carry it forward in the west. in
particular in Loire-Atlantique and llle-et—Vilaine. Elsewhere and above all to the
south of the Loire, it is a matter of isolated successes (A. Lejeune in Gueret),
often due also to previously established municipal influence. Generally speaking,
the CERES fits in much more comfortably in the "new" federations in the east and
the west. But it has left its mark more or less everywhere, and, by way of in-
teresting evidence of the spread of its influence, there are at least 18 deputies
in the other categories, including F, who were members of the CERES in the past.

The Rocard faction is strong in the Vest, particularly in Bretagne. where it bene-
fits from a whole CDT and leftist Catholic tradition of which a certain PSU group
has long been the embodiment. In the east, on the other hand, where it should a
priori have advanced, it finds itself limited by the other factions, except in
Hoselle and Heurthe-et-Hoselle. Hithout a doubt this reflects the influence of the
likes of Y. Tondon and also the weight of a CDT rank and file, in many cases
characterized by anticommunism. One can also find representation of the Rocard

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
al0—A'u hill. to .qlu hOU .IdII-uﬁ. 80.09..

I... .5 iota—u: no. as: Regain-‘23.. no: 2. 003.25.: 28 on 9:33: 3.: .3 9.3.1:: :33:- ... .8 .

NR OFFICIAL USE om

.Ieyuuou 3.3 3 .3238 .0 0-3308: I :3 :is tea—3A. - A: :31

3.8 8: 8. : 8. on 8. a R: 2 8. S 8. o: .33

Gun 3. «.2 « v.2 .: 8 . 9.2. 2 «.2 a e... 3 8:3 33.... o:

0.x . .6 . «a u . a... a . o; a . [Snuwnﬂu

. .3... .3033

.0332!
no no»- sue...—

. . ; a .3...-
n a a . a a _ o :83» .32:-

n n . o a UOAIII

. 2 3 u 2 a . 2 a 3 a o a ¢ 3 z a a :233 .38.: no
:33 3.. non-.-

. . . . o . uni-
. 8 8 a on .. . 3 o 3 a . :.. c. o a u . z 3 .338 2.58

. . . . . . vacant—av.
« c— o: — o — o n. n o 2 o o 3 o m an an .3 3x...

.6. on .6 _ 0.2 n o.- .. 2 s a; 2 2:3 :25
LO hiaIiI —-U.3°9 B’OP

III I’ l

.Uuqu

 

50

FOR OFFICIAL us; ONLY
action all along the eastern frontier, ranging from Doubs to the ﬂautes-Alpos.
ere again, it is a question of areas with a Catholic tradition in which the left
ing has had difficulty progressing. In the Paris area, there are strong sectors

n the west and south suburbs. that is to say in the relatively prosperous quar—
ers: is it that the Record line is mainly attractive to "white collar groups?"
'hus far, then. there is nothing very surprising where the modernist trend is con-
:erned, but what is more surprising is the rather good representation. all in all,
1or the Rocard faction in the southwest, in the old SFIO federations such as
iriege. Tarn, Lot-et—Caronne. Should we interpret this as a sign of a temporary
rally in connection with Beta or the dawning of a more profound renewal? Time

Ilone will tell.

The category B deputies are recruited above all in Nord-Pas-de-Caiais. They
account for 15 out of #2, with four others in the neighboring departments. "hat

to are seeing here is the whole legacy of a traditional municipal socialism. This
is equally true for the area south of the Loire. where the deputies in category

8. above all from Limousin, Puy—de-Dome and the coastal departments. 0n the other
hand, there are hardly any in the east or the west (except for Nantes). There is

a whole socialist sensitivity which doubtless cannot be transferred to the new
terrain. One cannot fail to stress the close links between the 8 category deputies
and the mayors of the large cities, particularly since it is known that the motive
forces of the B faCLion on the national level are none other than such deputies
serving as mayors as A. Chenard, J.-H. Boucheron, H. Sainte—Marie, etc. (and,

naturally, P. Mauroy).

Category A is found more or less everywhere, which gives it a certain strength
which goes beyond the simple presidential phenomenon. or even the unconditional
attitude where the former_first secretary is concerned. If in Nord-Paa-de-Caiais,
it sometime harvests the fruits of a pro—Hollet line which P. Mauroy has not en-
dorsed, it also shows real strength in Bratagne, so pro-Rocard by inclination.
while it has been able to arouse party patriotism well rooted in the old leftist
territories in the southwest. and its secularism is further echoed in the anti—
clerical departments in the center (for example Allier, Saone-et-Loire), it is
this faction too which predominates in the new departments won by the PS. often
in brilliant fashion, in the heart of France, and above all along the Loire.
indrc, lndre-et-Loire and Cher bear witness to this. A geographic treaty arranged
with the CERES in Paris provides the Mitterrand supporters with three more seats
in the northern part of the capital, since the CERES controls principally the sec-
tors in the east. Here we see the reward for a number of years of patient but
dedicated struggle to win the federation back for the CERES--a battle waged, as
we know, by L. Jospin and B. Delanoe. 1n the suburbs, the Mitterrand faction is
strong in the north and the east. The only corner of France where they are rela-
tively weak is the east, and here again one must not forget either the two depu-
ties elected from Heuse or the brilliant victory of J. Oehler in Strasbourg. Even
in the alpine departments, a priori so unpromising, category A is very strong in
lserc. The members of faction A will henceforth play a role in 68 of the 88 metro-
politan departments in which ghere is PS representation, which gives them a sub-

stantial base for the future.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Classic Criteria--0ccupation, Age and Sex

Within the factions, it seems difficult to establish differences very clearly
within the large mass of those elected who come from the wage earning petit bour~
geoisie, with that professorio preponderance which has so amazed the analysts.
However, let us stress the fact that in category A, the liberal professions
account for 15 percent, and in the CERES they account for more than 33 percent.

If we take note of the weight of a certain "radical" tradition in the former, this
rather high percentage is nonetheless somewhat surprising in the renewal trend.

In categories B and C, as we can see, the liberal professions are substantially
less well-represented. "here teachers are concerned, on the other hand, we see
underrepresentation in the CERES in relation to the average for the group, offset
by an excess of engineers and higher management cadres (since these two categories
account for 39 percent of the CERES total). The base for the CERES group seems to
be an alliance between technicians with practical knowledge and those with manage-
ment expertise. There is a high percentage of teachers in the Rocard faction, on
the other hand, with slightly fewer "Higher Technical Cadrcs" (only 22 percent).
In category B, the seven percent figure for teachers bears witness to the con-
tinuity of a long republican tradition. But we should probably not give too much
_importance to these internal shadings in the group, for these are people all of
whom have a certain cultural level. He can see that the two workers are dis-
tributed between categories A and c.

The Socialist Deputies

In terms of the age of the deputies, a glance at those newly elected10 shows hard-
ly any significant differences (see Table 4), the great renewal being from every
indication the achievement of those between 35 and 49 years of'age. This is par-
ticularly true of the Rocard and Hitterrand factions, but category 8 seems to have
more deputies in the age bracket above 50, which is quite consistent with the
rather distinguished profile of the pro-Hauroy deputy mentioned above. If it is
often suggested that the supporters of Rocard and the CERES are mainly younger
than the supporters of other factions, this is only partially accurate, at least
for the deputies, because categories A and E have a good proportion of men of a
certain age. This phenomenon suggests that experience and local reputation may be
assets as useful as ideological vigor or the level of militancy. Yet once again,
the members of the Hitterrand faction seem rather typical of the average.

As to feminine representation, it must be said Ek't equality remains in the
future. If one deputy out of la is now a woman, we can see that the factions
differ rather substantially. If category A is again very typical, we note that
there is only one woman in B and two in C (one of whom won an improbable victory
in a suburb where the influence of the PS remains very limited). A disparity be-
tween word and deed, one might say. On the other hand, the CERES can hold its head
realtively high, since one out of every six of its deputies is a woman. It is true
that within the alternate mechanism it was possible to increase feminine represen7
cation, but this was done in a somewhat clandestine fashion, behind the backs of.
the members (in the voters) "who would not understand...." It is always the male
star, a likely candidate to head a ministry, who has been put forward. Thus'one
can speak of an advance, but only a very small one, it seems to us.

52
won orrrcm. use our
Table 3-43 qullcs by Proloqun In IOII

——

 

PACHOI
A I C D I Y

“M (I) (u) I (u) (I (n) (I) (II) I u) I
allur-
I, Inn-gen J 2.3 2 6.0 2 ‘0
33--
mn I 0.1 “

II “.6 2 6.. 2 Mb 2 5.2

S 3.9 I 2.6 I 2.2 2 5.5
\htnl -
Illm I 0.. I 2.‘ I 2..
I" (“an
:Iol) I6 I2.6 2 MI II 2AA I O.) A
I (unwary
I ‘2 32.6 I. 62.9 It 3|.I I 22.2 2
n § LI 3 1.3 2 §.‘ 2 60 ‘ II.I
huge-In
I I6 I2.‘ 6 I6.6 I ".0 I 20 I0 27.. 2
I’ll O LI 2 ﬁt I 2.. 2
u Auuu 6 M1 I 2.‘ I 2.2
I i 3.1 J 7.3 I 2.2 I 2.0
In. I 0.8 I 2.‘ I 2.2 I 2.0
lump-um
I 2 I.6 2 t.‘ 2 5.5
"I”... I 0.. I 2.2 I 2..
[Int
n I 0.8 I 2.2
I
run"

I
lulu 1’ S.‘ I

A ‘ .
II 00 IN I00 I II

(I) - abuluc III-bu o! aqua“; (II)'- pore-It... 01 “you" In all. he“...
I’M '8 Deputies by no In I

ﬁﬁ———
o a

(i) (u) (n (m

 

6 2|
3 loo 11 $8
6 21
.,_“
"hat can we conclude on completing this brief overview? Hith‘n category B, a cer—
tain SFIO trend still survives and is even spreading. Its profile of distinction
should not be underestimated. The two renewal factions, modernist and Marxist, the
Rocard and CERES groups, have indeed carried the party to new terrain, but on the
level of political personnel there is less of a difference from the other factions
than one would expect. The CERES for its part has a predelection for an orienta-
tion within the party rather than in public life. As to the supporters of

F. Hitterrand, they remain--in terms of age as well as profession and geographic
distribution--rather typical of the average for the socialist group. Could they
then constitute a kind of lowest common denominator--those who, as has been said,
detest Rocard and fear the CERES? Or would they be very simply typical of the mass
of members and sympathizers, dedicated to bringing about pragmatic change in an
atmosphere of calm and efficiency? A reexamination in five years, or after the
next elections--and the party congress which will be held in the meantime--will
perhaps give us the answer.

FOOTNOTES

1. This figure included 266 deputy officials installed by the PS (254 in metro-
politan France, 1 in Reunion and l in Guadeloupe). we have seen fit to add to
these the two "dissidents" J. Giovanelli (Horbihan 6, Rocard faction) and ‘
R. Patriat (Cote-d'Or 3, Hitterrand faction). as well as Gisele Halimi (Isere
6). All three are in our opinion a part of the rising socialist tide, despite
some difficulties at present between their federation and the natural leader-
ship of the PS. On the other hand, we have excluded 6 various leftists, too
heterogeneous to be included in the framework of the analysis set forth here
(these are Messrs Castor, Cesaire, Dabezies, Hory, Pen and Pidjot).

2. See for example Gilles Fabre-Rosane and Alain Guede, "The Bourbon Palace
Swings Toward the Center," LB HATIN, 6 July, 1981, or the sociological
analysis by Roland Cayrol in LB HONDB, "The June 1981 Legislative Elections,"
p 86.

3. For an excellent overview of the gains of the PS, see LE MONDE, op sit,
pp 78-85.

a. We use this word rather than the better known but also more recent "trends."
This latter term, less forceful, in our opinion ignores the elements of compe-
tition in many cases fierce, characteristic of these groups within the party,
and which gives it much of its strength.

5. Curiously, the percentage of category A deputies in the group is slightly
lower than that for the last legislature. The absolute number (up 7a) is the
important figure.

6. Prior to 14 June 1981, the CERES had only seven deputies. It had 14 percent
of the seats at the Met: Congress. but only a quarter of those at Nantes.

T. The "dynastic" heritage situation (H. Hasse took over his father's seat in
Marseilles) appears unique in 1981, and doubtless has to do with the special
conditions which make the socialist sector in Bouches-du-Rhone so rich.

55
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
IUK 01'!th U§§ URL!

8. Our information is doubtless inadequate, because the majority of the elected
officials must be municipal council members, at least. What is important here
is that they have not chosen to make much of this responsibility (to the point
that LE HONDE would mention it in its descriptions of the candidates, for

example).

9. The other factions are represented in the departments as follows: 3 in 2a,
C in 32, B in 26 and F in 9.

lo. we do not have sufficiently accurate date on the ages of the outgoing
deputies to analyze the whole group, but we do not think this is likely to
alter the value of this analysis much.

11. Prior to lb June, the socialist group had two women (out of 106).

COPYRIGHT: Presses Universitaires de France, 1982

5157
680: 3100/366

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DC'S uccou ON PARTY CLASHES OVER 21. SALVAM

”1220963 ‘Durin IA SWA in Italian 16 Feb 82 pp 1, 2

[Interview with DC Secretary Planinio Piccoli in Bone by Luca Giurato: "Piccoli:
lhey Are Asking for a Stocktaking? Right, It lust Be Done I-ediately and Con-
prehensively"-date not given]

[Excerpt] none-[Question] You have always said that the stocktaking [of the
governnnt's record] should be carried out after the no Congress in Hey. You
now seen prepared for a rapid confrontation. why?

[Answer] For the sake of truth. it should be said that everybody, even the
prime minister, has been perplexed about the tiaing of the stocktaking. Re are

being accused of being responsible for the najority‘e difficulties, even in
foreign policy, because we are not prepared to take stock. 'lhat suggestion is
beconing a burden. Therefore let us say that we are not avoiding any discussion.
It worries us that a majority could collapse on a foreign policy issue, with the
risk of underlining an agreennt [between governnsnt parties] which still strikes
us as absolutely necessary. It is better to clarify the situation i-ediately
rather than allowing it to deteriorate.

[Question] l'he governnent has been defeated in Parliament on articles of asjor
legislation. The socialists have dissociated theaselves tron foreign policy

lines. Can Spadolini still count on the five-party majority or not?

[Answer] I think so. he can certainly count on our desire to continue and to
inrove collaboration. We are aware of the difficulties but we think that this

governnent has not coapleted its task. we are certain that a break would now be
a defeat as regards steering the country out of the crisis, which we all want,

and also a defeat in the sphere of the struggle against terrorism. which now
requires unity of the denocratic forces nore than ever before. [answer ends]

As regards DC policy on El Salvador, Piccoli has so: proposals which lark a
significant step forward on the problen which is now plaguing his party lost:
"We agree with Spadolini on not sending govern-ant observers to the elections;

lbwever, we propose to entrust the job of nonitoring the elections in El Salvador
to the United Nations. The United Nations has significant inartiality and the

strength to appoint a delegation which can express a clear and incontrovertible
' opinion. If that delegation decides that the elections are not honest then we
will all have to accept its reply. Ind first of all we will have to accept it."

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Many people are puzzled by the DC stance on El Salvador.

[Answer] In El Salvador an eaperinent is taking place mder the guidance of
Duarte. a man who was persecuted by the right in 1972. It is a deaocrat who,

to break the spiral of the reactionary rightwing ailitary, on the advice of
political experts, joined forces with the demcratic part of the arny. Us are

on the eve of elections, which, with the refers, constitute Duarte's pledge.
HenPiccoli explained—condean all atrocities, whichever side they are couitted
by, particularly those couitted by the am. however, we warn, and we realise
this free our nanory of history, that if this experiaent fails (end at the
present tine there is clearly a concerted desire on the part of the co-nist
parties and sons socialist parties to define the elections as a "farce") and if
these elections in El Salvador fail there will eventually be an intervention by
an army which has entirely returned to the old oolonialist, hegenonist and vio-

lent nethods. He nust renedaer that the United States is not prepared to
tolerate another Cuba. Hill it refuse to do so whatever the cost? We hope not,
that would be regrettable, but 0.8. policy has aajor and serious crude aspects.

[Question] Is there a change by the DC on this subject too?

[Answer] We just want to stress that anybody who hinders a final denocratic
atteapt in a tense country, perhaps the tensest of all, opens up a future full

of risks and dangers. We agree not to send a delegation of observers fron our
governaent. Re are, however, now sending a party delegation which will inforn
us of how things are going.

[Question] The Dc is isolated in that assess-ant. Does it realise that?

[Answer] Of course I realize it. Arousing popular feelings about things hap-
pening thousands of kilometers away fron here is the easiest thing in the world.

People have always painted one side all black and the other all white. Be well
roaster the case of Vietnan, but we also renedaer that the invasion of Kanpuchea

has been forgotten or virtually ignored. merefore I feel the strain of all
this, even if I an convinced that the Dc will not rennin isolated. The Social

Deaocrats have a different position-my aspects of the state-ent given by
Spadolini on this subject were accurate. and even the liberals are very careful.

In foreign policy the parties identify with their own respective positions and
the way in which you react to that policy requires truth and consistency.

[Question] Do you fear a 0.3. military intervention in 31 Salvador?

[Answer] I fear it if the hope that there is sons possibility of a fora of
deaocracy in that country is destroyed. I fear it and I condem it in advance.
But I fear it. You have to be capable of political realise. If that interven-
tion cones we will condemn it. We aust also recopise that things have happened
partly because an opportmity has been wasted to restore to a people like the

Salvadoran people their capacity to express the-selves in a free election. The
danger lies precisely in this: To define these elections as a "farce" in
advance strikes use as really arbitrary.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Editrice LA STAHPA s.p.A.

CSO: 3104/12?

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WINGS FOR POSSIBLE UCD-AP COALITION DESCRIBED
Hadird CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 8 Feb 82 pp 26-30
[Article by Antxon Sarasquets: "IJCD, Going After Frsga"]

[Text] The winter sun of the Costa del Sol and the calm horizon of the
Mediterranean were the setting for the Center's awakening against its politi-
cal sdversaries. The nightmare of the defections was behind them; the nost
important of which, after Francisco Fernandez Ordonez going over to the social“
democrats, was the departure of Higuel Herrero, a "wrecker" who had worked
within the “CD [Democratic Center Union] on behalf of Frags. "New Frags must
be confronted with his inconsistencies," the secretary general of the DOD.
Inigo Cavero, declared to CANDID 16, while his "noisy" counterpart in the AP
[Popular Alliance] was trying to nininize the matter, calling it "water over
the den," and offering "impartial support" to President Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo.

They were turning their minds toward the subject of agreeaents in the new
session of parliament, the last one before the general elections, which will
focus on the new electoral law. At least three reports concerning this
project are on the respective desire of three ninisters, according to inferna-
tion obtained by this nagazine.

"He will have to go to confrontation with Frags." That was how the secretary
general of the DOD, Inigo Cavero, suned up the state of mind of the centrist
leadership, which is convinced that the leader of Popular Alliance is under-
nining the stability of the party in power and of the governnent itself in
his far-reaching operations. That is not all: a certain colleague of
President Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo even told this magazine, in a sharp tone and
with a determined attitude, that "as long as I'll around, there will he no
agreement with Frags." .

The fact is that Calvo Sotelo has considered the leader of the most conserv7
etive faction of the Right to be more an adversary than a possible ally. Or
a dangerous ally, as Calvo Sotelo himself once pointed out in private, when
referring to Praga's behavior in sone agree-eat in parliament.

The reasons for this are conplicated, and convincing.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An alliance with Praga would kindle a tremendous controversy between the
Right and Left. destroying the Center, which today holds power and which
manifests it in its highest representative: Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo.

0n the government level, the "big Right" would abort the whole process
of consolidating democracy, which is now in the midst of developing its
basic standard, the Constitution (because the most progressive sector of
the 0CD. represented by Adolfo Suarez, the social democrats and some
liberals would certainly abandon the ship.)

It is clear that the political and social stability which was retrieved

after a critical situation at the time of the unsuccessful coup of a year
ago. has been based on the autonomy agreements between the government and the
majority opposition party and the National Agreement on Employment (ARE)
between the administration, the managerial CEO! [Spanish Confederation of

Business Organizations] and the socialist and communist unions around the
table.

0n the other hand, those who are interested in the elections appear to be
advising the current president of the government and of the UCD to stand up
to Praga's sector firmly, which would allow them to regain lost ground and
pick up votes. That strategy would help the president--when you think of
it--in getting hold of the ballots of that progressive center.

A distinguished government minister added, "Calvo Sotelo, besides having his
hands on the reins of power, is an undeniable liberal-conservative, who in
a close alliance with Praga would gain hardly any new adherents, but instead
would have many desertions from his following."

Fraga's Contradictions

Perhaps it was all this that node Cavern declare to this magazine, after
admitting that up until now the 000 had not tangled with Frags because they
needed his votes-helping to create the myth which surrounds the Villalba
politician--: "Now Praga must be confronted with his contradictions."

A Frags who, after being crushed by outside campaigns, his own errors, and
the ballot boxes came back as the great leader of the conservative Right,
while at the same time his greatest political foe, the then president Adolfo
Suarez, was beginning his decline.

The duke of today was then a president who was beginning to become estranged
from powerful forces (Church. Army, capital), and was being hounded by the
most conservative sectors of his party and the socialists; while Frags was

beginning to receive strong support from some sectors of the economy, asinly
from business.

The Frags "fever" reached its peak with his spectacular triumph in the
Galicia regional elections.

60
FIH!(NﬂﬂC1Al.USE¢)NLN
It was Frags himself who. days before that campaign began, made his first
warning to Calvo Sotelo in an interview with CAMBIO 16 at his Perbes seaside
estate, implying suspicion that the head of the government would make a far-
reaching agreement with the socialists. "Calvo Sotelo has more resources
than anyone to contribute to the natural majority (UCD-AP), and we will not
pardon him if he doens't do it," said Frags to representatives of this maga-
zine.

Alliance leader added: "As soon as that great moderate movement is formed--
the Democratic Right, or whatever we may want to call it-those problems
(of instability) will decrease. Everyone understands that."

These statements aretakingon importance today. In analyzing the "why"

of these Center-Alliance tensions and the defection of the centrist deputies
to the parliamentary group headed by Frags. the president of the AP is seeking
to secure his objectives by means of various coalition agreements with Calvo
Sotelo.

"The Wrecker"

”We have to know which way we're going," Fraga's voice almost thundered,

"it must not be like what happened in that famous incident in the history of
Spain where Admiral Aznar said on that election night of 13 April that he was
goint to go and read the "Rocambole," 'let it turn out as God wills'...look:
it's not going to be that way."

Days later, in his Corunna country house with the "Frags Hines" warehouse and
office that once belonged to the film producer Samuel Bronson, he was visited
by Miguel Herrera de ”inon, still spokesman of the centrist parliamentary
group, the moving api-it and one of the leaders of the "Moderate Platform,"
whose purpose was to defeat the Suarez apparatus of the DOD and Francisco
Fernandez Ordonez' social democrats.

Actually, the close political ties of Miguel Herrero and Frags had begun some
time ago. They both had already studied the political situation and the
prospects for the future during a parliamentary visit to Japan in the spring
of 1981.

In spite of these contacts, and his statement at the end of May 1981 at a
lunch with a group of journalists, that he favored a legislative agreement
with the Democratic Coalition--hinting moreover that a coalition with the
Frags group would be easier than one with the P803 [Spanish Socialist Workers
Party]--Miguel Herrera, after setting up the "Moderate Platform," asserted on
29 July just before the summer recess that that operation had nothing to do
with Frags. However. the whole coarse of events during the crisis of changing
the presidency of the UCD and the working out of the change of government

had a very negative effect on Herrera de Minon's confidence in his party

and its future.

"Miguel does not believe in the DOD, and was wrecking the party," concludes
a colleague of the president of the Cortes, Landelino Lavilla, who is in close
touch with the "rebel" centrist within the christian democratic family.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Miguel Herrera believes that the new centrist leadership. headed by Calvo
Sotelo. is "sacrificing” him as president of the parliamentary group, and

in exchange is offering him the Ministry of Culture. Sources from the
"Moderate Platform" who have worked together closely with Miguel Herrera
assured this magazine that Calvo Sotelo did not persuade him at the time they
offered him the past. because they did not give him guarantees of autonomy

or clear objectives. Moreover. the government was not about to come to an
agreement on a parliamentary majority with Frags; rather, the social democrats
who were loyal to the president would strengthen their positions in spite of
the departure of Ordanez. ‘

The dissatisfaction of Miguel Herrera and the other 060 parliamentarians
began to blossom last December. Miguel Herrera made the decision to go over
to the Frags group. And this idea was communicatedv-despite his denials-oto
another of the "moderate" leaders, the christian democrat Oscar Alrags.

Miguel Herrera has adopted an overly belligerent position favoring a policy of
understanding with Frags and a conservative slant, and he fears he will be
dumped by the centrist leadership in view of the coming general elections.

Sources close to Inigo Cavero assured this magazine that Miguel Herrera had,
in a last-ditch attempt, asked the secretary general of the van and President
Calva Sotela for sufficient guarantee of appearing in a favorable spot on -
the electoral slate, which would assure him a seat.

Alzaga Stopped It

That account had been passed an to the members of the centrist executive
secretariat, with the addition that the leadership was prepared to offer him
certain guarantees in writing of keeping the seat. This letter. it appears,
did not satisfy Miguel Herrera as a definitive guarantee.

Miguel Herrera's negotiations with the AP were already too far advanced by
then. More delegates were going to follow him indefectingto the Democratic
Coalition group, as Jorge Vestringe himself, the secretary general of the AP
explained. The list included Jose Manuel Otero Eaves, Jose Luis Meilsn,

and others-with christian democratic leanings. Some of them, like those
mentioned, emphatically denied that they had anything to do with the operation.
In the end there were only three defections: Miguel Herrera, Francisco Soler
and Ricardo de la Cierva. The one who first gave impetus to the "critical"
sector, and later to the "Moderate Platform" which neutralized the main part
of the maneuver, according to very reliable sources, was none other than his
old companion in the operation.

"It was Oscar Alzaga who played a decisive role in controlling the blood-
letting." said a high official in the Moncloa who had followed the course of

events step by step}

Veatringe confirmed this when CAMBIO l6 asked him why the changes that had
been announced by him had not taken place: "Because it appears that pressure
has been put on those people. and they have,reconsidered their position."

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fraga's moderate statements on his return from his trip through Latin
America, and the abrupt halt in the campaign of statements by his secretary
general were steps which involved a conciliatory turn toward Calvo Sotelo.

Althcugh Vestringe admits in his statements to this magazine that Praga'e
hope. that he had last summer regarding Calvo Sotelo have not been fulfilled.
he affirms that "there is still probably time to turn the situation around."
After calling the defection of deputies "water over the dam," Vestringe
stated that as the Andalusia election begins, CD [Democratic Coalition]

will continue to offer its "impartial ass‘stance" to Calvo Sotelo in solving
problems of national interest. In parliamentary terms they explain it this
way: ”David isn't playing David anymore, but is being a friend of Goliath,“

recalling that as far as numbers go, there are 13 CD deputies as opposed to
the approximately 150 in the UCD.

Thus the new 1982 session of the Cortes is beginning with a relationship
between the forces "supportive of" the Calvo Sotelo government, despite the

political and tactical differences within the groups of the party in power
and of the opposition themselves.

Coalition deputies Jose Maria de Areilza and Antonio de Senillosa had been
on the point of going over to the UCD. The temptation to do so was great at
first, because of strong pressures from the centrists, but the element of
"responsibility" won out over other interests, and both deputies refused to
make a spectacle of themselves in parliamentary switchovers which would have

been unedifying to the democratic faithful. One thing is clear: there is
guaranteed support for the Calvo Sotelo government.

This does not come as a surprise, because, as Areilza himself admitted to
this magazine. he--together with Senillosa and also Pio Cabanillas-was in
on the operation of the center at its beginning, and ever since Calvo Sotelo
assumed power he has been closer to the chief executive than to 'taga. His
formal incorporation into the election operation which Calvo Sonclo will head
is only a question of time and of method. Cavern believes that all the prob-
lems resulting from the changes in the parliamentary group are caused "by
something which is very difficult to put before the public": the problem of
appearing on the ballot with any chance of being elected in the coming elec-
tions. To reaffirm his theory, the secretary general wondered: "If this is
not the case, why are the conflicts mostly arising in the parliamentary
group, and not in the infrastructure of the party or in the government? he
that as it may, in view of the many upsetting events during the final stretch
of the legislature which will usher in the general elections, it is certain
that reform of the electoral law has become one of the key issues which both
the government and the opposition unquestionably must face.

The P308 and the AP are calling for it, considering it a top priority consti-
tutional necessity. 'The government and the DOD say yes, but...there is not
enough time. And what tine does remain is unfavorable, because it is so

near the elections. On this Calvo Sotelo and Inigo Cavern agree.

63
FOR.0U1HCJAI.USEZ(NVLY
Cavern insists that there has been some talk on the highest level with the
socialists about setting up-as a provisional formula-a mandatory ruling
obliging the new government which emerges from the elections to introduce a
law of this type for approval within a period of 6 months after appointment
of the new executive.

The centrists, like the rest of the majority parites, including the leader
of Popular Alliance, Manuel Frags, are in favor of eliminating the present
system of closed slates, replacing it with another using open slates, and
even direct election by electoral district, so as to achieve a more direct
deputy-voter relationship.

However, there is some initial fear being felt-especially by the centrist
forces, which also hides their own fears-that the Spanish voters would be
confused by a more open election system, and that it is better to wait a
longer time before proceeding on this course. In the middle of this week
sources from the socialist executive board denied to this magazine that there
was any agreement with the government to determine the date for and the
general provisions of the new electoral law, although they asserted that
contacts and negotiations on this subject were impending and inevitable.

Calvo Sotelo admitted in Torremolinos that his government already had a plan
concerning a new electoral law, and CAHBIO l6 later confirmed that at least
three ministers have drawn up their respective reports on the law: political
Vice President Rodolfo Martin Villa, Minister of the Interior Juan Jose Roson,
and Minister of Justice Pio Cabanillas.

With important debates in parliament approaching, with such decisive votes
coming up as those on the new regulations for the Cortes, the LOAPA [Organic
Law for Harmonization of the Autonomies Process] LAU [Law for University
Autonomy] et esters, and at the very time when the trials of the coupists of
23 February are going on, political matters are getting into complicated
entanglements which are very complex and difficult to predict. Although

at this late stage the government has its majority guaranteed for reasons of
stability. and is ruling out prospective general elections.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8131
C30: 3110/80

6h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

PSOB BIDES ITS TIME IN HIDST 0? BC!) DEFECTIONS
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 1 Feb 82 p 210
[Article by Antxon Sarasqueta: "Election Haneuvers"]

[Text] With the uproar of the Andalusia and Catalonia regional congresses,
the ruling party is again having to contend with the "defection syndroee".
This attrition is being engineered from the ranks of Manual Praga's Alliance.
and is furthered by the wide-open race for seats which the insecure deputies
of the 061) [Daaocratic Center Union] have thrown themselves into.

The era-pie of the social denocrats, who followed for-er Minister Francisco
Fernandez Ordonez in departing from the 00!), was recurring now on the Right,
with the announcement of a string of defections by the nest staunch conserv-
atives, beginning with Herrera de Minon.

And, as if to prove that anything is still possible in the 06!), the centrist
deputy from Almeria, Francisco Soler Valera, who was aligned with Fernandez
Ordonez and the social denocrats throughout alnost the whole legislative
session, was also negotiating his going over to the Daocratic Coalition, on
the condition that they guarantee his: the seat and autonony like that enjoyed
by Antonio de Senilloss and Jose Maria de Areilra.

In the context of this surrealist comedy, where what is really at stake
behind the scenes is the guarantee of a seat in the next legislature, it was
still surprising that nan like Jose Luis Heilan and Jose Manuel Otero Novas,
who had stayed in the "CD as long as they held powerful positions (the presi-
dency of a bank or the head of a ninistry)—-even if it was at the side of

the Adolfo Suarez they reviled—should flee now that Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo
occupies the Honcloa, just as Ricardo de la Ciarva did previously.

These regrettable noves are only to be expected as the result of a party
being created from power. and for it. and where the "sense of party" is
unknown.

These destabilizing d- Fections make us think about the possibility of future
general elections, which the Calvo Sotelo gourmet is opposed to, as is the
main opposition party, which Felipe Gonzalezt secretary general of the P80!
[Spanish Socialist Workers Party], hinself confirned. The one who would

65
ms omcut us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

benefit nost from any future ele’ tions produced by instability would be the
Alliance man, Manuel l'raga. Both felipe Gonzalez and Frags are involved in
weakening the Calvo Sotelo government in the context of the defections from
the Center to the Left and Right; but the socialists see greater advantages
in holding elections in a climate of stability, and there is not enough time
to achieve this after the trials of the 23 February coupists. The reaffirms-
tion of the autonomy agreements between the government and P808, which took

place in the Honcloa at the highest level. tend toward achieving that stabil-
ity until the end of the legislature.

Difficult Consensus

However, the fact that 1982 will be a year in which the parties and the

government cone face to face in a key election makes it unlikely that a line

of general consensus will recur in the parliamentary session that begins in
February. '

The P803 also needs time to reinforce its election front with a band of
"independents," who cone from the Center and from the renewers who are desert-
ing the PCB. At the same time they are publicly distancing themselves from
Santiago Carrillo's comunists, despite the municipal agreasents which
formalized the unity of the Left on a national level. These initial breaking
of these agrealents in a place of such national importance as the capital of
Spain and province, although in theory it came about for technical reasons,
has helped to confirm the flight of the Carrillo followers.

Caught in the middle of the "sandwich" of Socialists and Alliance members, -
the government and the 00!) were trying to establish their strategy regarding.
first, the Andalusian elections slated for 23 Hay, and sore importantly,

the general elections.

Thus it was that Calvo Sotelo, after lashing out at the irresponsible deserters.
was singing the praises of moderation and liberalism, and amounting his
candidacy for leading the Center in the coming general elections.

In the "(30's "renewal from within" operation. the president of the Congress of
Deputies, deputy from Jean and leader with presidential aspirations, Landelino
Lavilla, was under strong pressure this week to decide to try for the regional
presidency of the Andalusia DCD before the name of Soledad Becerril came up.

"There cone times in politics when a leader has to get down into the arena
and be knocked over, and this is the role that Landelino has to play now
in Andalusia," a minister who is politically close to the president of the
Cortes told CAMBIO 16.

It was Marcelino Oreja who first played that role; and the next step,
motivated by the "critics," was to put up Lavilla and the minister of educa-
tion, Federico Mayor Zaragoza, for the presidency of the Catalonia centrists.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The spirit of defeatisn which has spread throughout the 1161) must be overcoae,"
a close colleague of Calvo Sotelo told this nagazine. He cited as an example
the case of Marcelino Oreja, who heads an election platform in the Basque
Country. with support that goes beyond the strict orbit of the U60. Calvo
Sotelo hinself, and the new leaders of the UCD, intend to apply this alterna-
tive to the rest of Spain. In view of the low level of acceptance which UCD
is encountering in society--according to polls which are being carried out,
and which in the case of Andalusia have caused "alarm" on the highest levels
of the party and the financial sectors which support it—the centrist leaders
are looking for solutions which will allow greater diffusion and differentia-
tion of that political force.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Information y Revistas, S.A.

e131
cso: 3110/80

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIIICHﬂﬂCJAl.1EﬂB(HULY

MILITARY FRANCE

DEFENSE BUDGET FOR 1982 STRESSES EMPLOYMENT, EQUIPMEIT

Paris ARHEBS D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Jan-Feb 82 pp 8-9
[Article: "The Defense Budget for 1982"]

[Text] The 1982 budget for defense and the armed forces-prsasnted
to the National Assembly on 14 November 1981 and to the Senate on
5 December l981--tota1s Pr 122.855 billion, up 17.63 percent over
the 1981 budget.

-A Growing Budget

The 1982 defense budget totals Pr 122.855 billion, not counting pensions, which be-
for 1977 were put into the common-charges budget. This is a 17.63-percent increase
over the 1981 budget, which was Pr 106.643 billion.

since the programing law of 19 June 1976, relative to military expenditures and
armed-forces equipment for the years 1977 to 1982, could not be totally implemented
during its term, the government has decided to give itself an additional year for
fulfilling the objectives set. This budget will not be separated from the one for
1983. The dates of these two fiscal years will align with those of the interim
plan. They will be followed by a military planning law extending over the 5 years
from 1984 to 1988.

In 1982, the defense budget will represent 3.895 percent of the gross domestic pro-
duct minus services (P183).

Percentage of Plan Devoted to Defense

3.39 3.55 3.63 3.62 3.67 3.85 3.895
1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982

Priority to Expenditures Having an Impact on Employment

This budget favors those expenditures that have an immediate impact on employment,
with the equipment expenditures at the top of the list. They are going up faster
than the operating expenditures. so as to make it possible to: '

--naintain the priority assigned to the nuclear forces;
--continue to equip the armed forces with modern materiel;
--bolster the research effort.

68
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE¢NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The equipment expenditures represent Fr 56.302 billion. or 45.8 percent of the bud-
get, which corresponds to an 18.16-percent increase in payment credits over 1981.
The program authorizations increase only 12.5 percent, with the major programs pro-
vided for by the programming law coming to a conclusion.

Operating Expenditures (Title III)

The Title 111 operating expenditures come to Fr 66.553 billion, or 54.1 percent of
the defense budget.’ They are up 17.18 percent over 1981.

The pay and social-charges credits. which represent 66.48 percent of Title III and
36 percent of the defense budget, are up 16.66 percent.

In addition to the pay increases, they make it possible to finance certain measures
in favor of the military and civilian personnel-in particular:
--increasing the enlisted man's pay to Fr 11.5 per day;

--sca1ing of enlisted men's pay in order to encourage draftees to take on responsi-
bilities;

--the awarding of a field-service bonus to draftees: set at Pr 6.5 per day;

--for draftees serving the in FFA [French Forces in the ERG], same advantages in-
tended to compensate for the effects of service far from home: free travel on the
PRC railways, an allowance intended to alleviate the disadvantages connected with
variation of the deutsche mark;

--creation of 16,81 active-army jobs, in addition to the 1,000 jobs created by the
rectifying finance law of July 1981.

These 1,681 jobs break down as follows:

--900 jobs for active-army personnel, including 225 women for the Gendarmerie;

--408 jobs for the Navy, for preparing for the outfitting of the public-services
ships and the launching of the sixth missile-launching nuclear submarine in 1986;

--3 jobs for active-army physicians, in the industrial-medicine category, for the
establishments of the General Delegation for Armament;

--200 jobs for workers, for the Air Force, to enable it to free up the personnel
needed for reinforcing protection of the air bases;

--112 jobsfornurse's aides and head nurses for the Medical Corps;

--10 social-assistant jobs for the Gendarmerie;

--48 jobs in miscellaneous services.

As regards the staffing, the budget provides for assignment of state-worker status

to 11,589 "temporary" or unaffiliated workers and integration of #96 081 (indirect-
management workers) with the state-worker personnel.

Along with these creations of jobs, the budget also includes some measures for spe-
cific categories, such as the 50-percent upgrading of the patrol aflowance given to
the crews of the missile-launching nuclear submarines and the increase in the
amount of the qualification bonuses granted to qualified-specialist officers.

69
IIIICHNHC1A1.1EHBCHULY
FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(MVLY

The credits devoted to armed-forces activity, impeded by the price rises for petro-
leum products, will make it possible:

--for the Army, to do 100 days of field exercises away from quarters. including 47
days with limited-potential (armored) materiel for the combat units and 30 days'
field exercises for the command and service units;

--for the Air Force, to reach total annual activity on the order of 620,000 hours;

--for the Navy. to ensure to all combat vessels activity close to 100 sea days and
15 hours of flying time per month for each pilot of the Naval Air Force.

A variation of the dollar exchange rate and the price of crude oil-estimated at
Pr 5.5 and $43 per barrel, respectively--will more or less influence the quantities
of fuel allocated.

Finally, the appropriations of credits for operating purposes and the everyday
life of the armed forces are going up at a rate equivalent to that of the defense
budget. They will nake it possible to continue with the renovation of the bar-
racks, particularly those of the French Forces in the PRC.

The Equipment Expenditures (Title V)

They total Fr 56.302 in payment credits (up 17.72 percent over 1981) and Pr 72.298
billion in program authorizations (up 12.5 percent). These credits will make it
possible to:

--maintain the priority assigned to the nuclear forces--30.0b percent of the Title
payment credits are devoted to them, as well as 20.6 percent of the program author-
izations. They will make it possible to continue with development of the "-6 mis-
sile so that it will be operational in 1985 on board the sixth SNLB [missile-
launching nuclear submarine], the "Inflexible"; the equipping of the second Albion
Plateau launching unit with 8-3 missiles; and continuation of the adaptation of the
medium-range air-to-ground missile (ASH?) to the Mirage IV;

-bolster our research effort, to which defense will devote Fr 19.571 billion, in-
cluding 4 billion for basic research, which grows by 18.8 percent over 1981.

The principal research programs for the Army will involve the main combat vehicle
to succeed the aux-30, the antitank helicopter, and the engineers' armored vehicle.

The Air Force will concentrate its efforts on development of the Mirage 2000, the
armament for it, the laser-guided bombing systems, and the “-88 engine project.

As for the Navy. it will continue with development of the SNA's [nuclear attack
submarines], the antiaircraft and antisubmarine corvettea and their weapons sys-
tems.

--continue the equipping of the armed forces with modern materiel.

The Army will receive credits that will enable it to ensure continuation of the
major ordering programs provided for by the programming law. Thus, 50 AHx-BZ
tanks, 47 AHX-lOP's, 2,400 wheeled tactical vehicles, 270 VAB's [Forward-Area Ar-
mored Vehicles], 30 AU-Pl 155-nm cannons (with high rate of fire), 6 tractor-drawn
1551mm cannons, 21 Roland antiaircraft batteries, 18 SA 341/43 helicopters, Hot
antitank firing stations. lZO-nm mortars, and 63.000 Pamas rifles will be ordered.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIHRCHHHCLALIINECHNLY

In 1982 the Air Force will order 25 Mirage 2000's, which will be added to the b8
ordered previously; 30 Epsilon training planes; 10 light helicopters; and for pro-
tection of its bases. 56 20-mm antiaircraft batteries. At the same time, 28 con-

crete airplane shelters and ll underground PC' s [Command Posts] will be built with
infrastructure credits.

For the Navy, the emphasis is on the credits devoted to the modern combat and pub-
lic-service ships. nine ships will be ordered. two antisubmarine corvettes, one
nuclear attack submarine, two antinine ships, two patrol boats, and two 300-ton
public-service ships.

The Gendarmerie, in conclusion, will be able to continue its program of replacement
of automotive and armored vehicles, development of its communications, purchase of
four light helicopters, and construction of housing for its personnel. Finally,

subsidies are provided for to aid the self-financing effort of the local collectiv-
ities building Gendarmerie barracks.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces armees francaises "Armees d'Aujourd'hui"

11267
C80: 3100/366

71
FKHR(MNICIA1.USI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HILITARY m

cm nsscntns an actor's IDGISTICAL, nmss rune-nous
Paris was n'waounn'uiu in French Jan-Feb 82 pp 30-33

[Interview with Lt Gen Jean Bajau, French Air Force, Co-nding General. 3d Air Region.
by editorial staff; date and place not specified]

[Text] [Question] General, you are the comnder of an air region (BA). Can you
briefly describe for u this territorial organization you head?

[Answer] Quite obviously I can knowingly discuss only the 3d RA. the air region with
which I an very familiar.

First of all. its geographical aspect. The 3d 3A covers 20 departments spread over
four sdniniatretive regions, Aquitaine. Southern Pyrenees, Poitou-Gnarentes, and
Linousin. Within this territory, the air force has 13 bases. including five najor
air bases (Bordeaux, Casaux, lbnt-de-Harsan. Toulouse, and Cognac), two technical
training and school bases (Rochefort. and Saintes), four service and supply bases
(Li-ages. Rocamdour, Herignac-Beausejour, and Toulouse-l'nera, an adninistrative
base). one comications base (Ocean), and one support base (Bordeaux l'aucher).

A total, therefore, of 13 bases plus sons shared installations. air force infatuation
offices. and the air force detach-eat supporting the Airborne Troops School at Pau.

As for the region's personnel and their distribution throughout the various bases and
stations. a distinction should be made between those troops organic to the 3d RA and '
the other air force troops belonging to such specialised nsjor con-ands as the Air
Defense Coulend (DA), the Strategic Air Force (PAS), or the Military Air Transport
Co-and (COMM).

The 3d RA "is" southwest France. a southwest reaote fro. the ener which in the past
has traditionally cone froe the north or east. These historical reasons are what
proepted the concentration in the southwest of schools (Iechanica and pilots),
depots, firing ranges, and test centers. The region does, of course. have soee
operational units. but they are less nmerous than in the northern and eastern
regions. These units consist Iainly of Jaguar aircraft based at Merimac, strategic
bonbers based at Hont-de-Hsrsan. Casaux, and Bordeaux. plus transport aircraft at
Toulouse.

Air force personnel stationed in the region total approxinately 21.000 nan, 9,000 of
who- are organic to the region. Pro- a nsnpower standpoint, this places the air
region on a par with a aajor co-and like, for example, the Air Defense Co-and.

72 ‘
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The region's 9.000 nen include about 500 officers, 3,000 nonconissioned officers,

a little nore than 5.000 draftees, plus 500 civilians. I should point out that there
is a sharply higher percentage of draftees in the air regions than in the major
cos-ands because the regional protection, security, and transportation tasks require
a great deal of nanpower.

[Question] "hat is the air region's role?

[Answer] I think the ainplest way of explaining the RA's role is to proceed by

subtracting fron everything the air force least do to accomplish its nission. Broadly
speaking, the air force has to train its air crews, it has to have aircraft available
and arsed. it has to protect its bases, it has to feed. transport, clothe. house, pay.
and care for its personnel. it has to instruct then, supervise then. supply then with

necessary equipnent, etc.

Briefly stated, a specialized najor cousnd with troops stationed in the region strives
essentially to bring its units to the highest possible level of operational

readiness. This entails the assignnent of personnel with highly specialized skills,
mainly pilots, engineers. nechanics, and controllers. ‘lhis entails supplying units

with equipnent (aircraft, radars, airborne weapons, etc.) and providing adequately
for its effective naintenance.

So what then is the region's role? Hell it is everything else, in other words. an
exceptionally varied spectrun of tasks ranging from public relations to defense of
bases. and including couunications, social welfare services, antiaircreft artillery,
transportation, food, pay, etc.

That is, in ny opinion. the nest convenient way of defining the region's prinary
mission. Yet the air region also has an inportant operational role in oonnection'with
missions that nay properly be called national. By decentralisation, the region has
been delegated certain responsibilities of specialised major co-snds whose
jurisdiction covers the entire national territory.

[Question] Can you describe sons of the fields in which this decentralization applies?

[Answer] The first field in which there has been such delegation is air defense.
The CAFDA (Air (Io-and [component] of the Air Defense Forces) has, in fact, delegated
considerable authority to the air region conander. To exercise this authority, the
region coriander has a general officer assigned to hin as his deputy for operations.
It night seen that this officer's dual col-sand authority greatly complicates his
task. In practice, however. such is not the case. because the division of
responsibilities is acconplished very logically.

Given the speed of attacking aircraft and the operating range of fighter-interceptors,
it is evident that air defense can only be broadly national in scope. All inforaation
on the air eneny is isnediately relayed via data transniaaion facilities from one
region to another, but najor decisions on the overall defensive courses of action

are nade by a single unified co-and.

At the sane tine, however, m-erous neesures are taken at regional level. Specifically,
the air defense of bases is a decentralized responsibility as concerns the alerting
of units and the engagenent control of Crotale [surface-to-air] nissiles, antiaircraft

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

guns. and soon, very-short-range surface-tonair nissiles. The Co-snding General,
Air Defense Co-and at Taverny is responsible for overall air defense operations and
does not handle local situations. Consequently, while the division and interpenetration

of all these responsibilities my seen conplicated, they can, in actual fact, function
flexibly and effectively.

Things work about the seas way between regional airfield air traffic control centers
and the large surveillance and control radars. Air traffic control involves
particularly air restricted areas, such as controlled firing areas or airborne
training drop zones. These setters have a regional aspect that out take into accomt
a large nuaber of local or national factors, such as the overlapping of airmys,
population centers overflown, low-altitude flight paths, etc. Hence it has been left

to the air regions to settle these questions themselves or recs-end solutions
thereto.

Of course, at the national level. the DIRCAH (Military Air Traffic Directorate)

approves, negotiates, and coordinates solutions with the civil authorities, test
centers, adjacent countries, etc.

The sane process is followed in the very diffused field of communications. This is a
difficult entity to grasp and direct instantaneously at national level, and for this
purpose we have a major cor-land, the CTAA (Air Force (Jo-Inications Cos-and).

As is the case for air defense, the region conander is assigned a colonel who "wears
two hats," one as regional conunications officer, the other as CTAA representative.
Commications personnel have difficult and coaplicated schedules. They are often
stationed in isolated locations and operate highly specialized equipnent. A
well-devised and thoroughly understood decentralization enables action to be taken
efficiently and rapidly, thereby ensuring reliable operation of a service of prine
importance to the air force.

In an altogether different connection. the region comander nay be called upon to use
the troops stationed within his territory—whether they be his own organic personnel
or those of the specialized major co-ands-in providing general assistance to public
authorities. He does this by order of his higher headquarters or with their approval.
In the event of a najor disaster. it is obvious that for the public good we will
assign personnel and equipment froa certain units: schools. tests centers, etc. to
relief work. -

[Question] Isn't there also soae delegation of authority within the air region itself?

[Mmr] Certainly, and in this respect I must nention the air base (mi-sanders.
They are the fabric, the web, the franework of the air force, the structure on which
everything rests. I have 13 base cos-lenders under my cor-and, 12 colonels and one
general. They are my nost valuable subordinates on which everything hinges. They
receive orders from both me and the specialized njor con-ands having units stationed
on their bases. The air force‘s organizational structure gives then considerable
authority. I ask then to keep as infer-ed about everything that happens in their
area and field of activity, and to report any measures they take or request measures
to be taken by ac. The air force has assigned its nost brillant officers to these
cal-sand positions. If I had to venture a conparison, I would say it has placed then
in the position of "the captain of a ship at sea." In my view, this is an excellent
thing. It constitutes that decentralisation desired by the air force.

710
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Hhat is the region's aission in natters of Territorial Operational '
Defense (001')?

[Answer] In DO! matters. the air region participates in the overall defensive action
taken by the araed forces. First of all, by defending the air bases, particularly
air force key points. and then other points whose protection a plan has assigned as
an air region responsibility. Naturally. the air region aaintains close liaison with
arey units participating in the DOT mission. It also participates. in frequent nor
regional exercises.

[Question] Can you tell us about the decentralization neasures taken in a crisis
situation?

[Answer] That's an important point. . In fact, regulations provide that the region
col-ander is delegated all powers of the central authority over the territory he
connends whenever communications with that authority an interrupted. This delegation
does not include enploynent of nuclear forces. It is a very broad delegation of
powers, however, and the air region co-ander, in close cooperation with stay and
naval oo-Ianders of the ease area, will fora: an integrated force capable of continuing
conbat operations under the authority of the defense area oo-snder, in spite of the
outage of cos-micstions with the central authorities.

[Question] "ill you please discuss general military discipline?

[Answer] The air region is charged with enforcing the rules of ailitary discipline
with regard to all personnel stationed within its territory. It handles sanctions.
that is to say penalties as well as rewards, co-endations, and decorations.

The region has its own air police—nearly 200 Ien in the 3d RA—organired into air
base detachments. (Jo-ended by a field grade officer of the National Gender-aria.
the air police are responsible for air base security. the prevention of violations or
the apprehension of violators which, fortunately, are very few in masher. In this
respect, we realize that. conpared with the army which does not have its own police
force, we are lucky indeed to have an air police organization which renders us such
yeoean service.

The region also has a defense protection and security section which is active not only
in the region's own units but also participates in providing security for defense
industries.

[Question] And what about the rest. general?

[Answer] There is a great deal sore. The region furnishes short-haul transportation
service for the air bases. and long-haul transportation by rail, truck. occasionally

by boat. of materiel for the depots or personnel and equipment transiting our region.
The region also operates air force firing or gmery ranges with all their attendant

safety problems.

It also aanages the air force's real estate. ‘lhis is "big business" when you consider
the surface areas and nuaber of buildings involved. M air base frequently covers

300 to ‘00 hectares and has any buildings and other structures. The region buys and
sells real estate according to detailed procedures and with the approval of Air

Force Headquarters. Lastly, it builds facilities required by the air forces.

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All medical services are a regional responsibility. They are handled by the region's
Director of Medical Services. huerous physicians. approximately five or six per
base. dentists. veterinarians. and pharmacists look after the good health of the troops
and the high quality of their food. All medical personnel belong to the Armed Isrces
Central Medical Service Directorate but are directly attached for duty to the air
regions. Furthermore, inasluch as these physicians specialize in aviation medicine
[flight surgeons], thay also serve in regional organizations known as CEMPh's (Medical
Evaluation Center for Flight Personnel) where they determine whether civilian and
military flight personnel are fit for duty.

The air force must be present everywhere. hence it has to participate in various
ceremonies. celebrations, and festivals. This participation may include delegations.
the regional air force band which has great public appeal. parades and demonstrations.
The air force nmst project the most favorable image possible so as to entrench itself
in the nation's mind. This is done through multiple contacts with local political.
professional, and religious leaders.

Lastly. there is recruitment and public information. In this field too, the main
activity is directed by a central agency, the SIBPA-AIR [Armed Forces Information and
Public Relations Service-Air Section]. This section attends to the air forces
distinctive public image. and as a corollary, to the quality of its recruitment.

This is an effort of great importance to the region commander because it demands
extensive regionalization and excellent insertion into the national fabric. Recruiting
is a matter that takes a long while to produce a favorable outcome. It demands'
constant work and one has to work a long time before obtaining results. Yet when a
reputation is established when trust sets in, it lasts a long while. He traditionally
recruit in certain regions for variable reasons that need to be understood and have to
be cultivated.

Concurrently with the recruitment of volunteers there is the induction of draftees.
Every 2 months, sone 1,000 airmen are inducted at various bases in the region.
They are processed, given aptitude tests, classified. divided into groups and given
5 weeks of instruction. They are then assigned to units on the basis of air force
requirements and their individual qualifications.

[QuestiOn] Moreover. general, there are the reserves and nobilization.

[Answer] Yes indeed. mobilization is a vital matter in the air force. If we want to
double our personnel strength. which is our goal, we must have a very sound and
sustained reserve policy. This is another of the region's tasks. Us need well-trained
highly motivated personnel that can be assigned to positions very. very rapidly.
Manning combat stations round-the-clock requires a great deal of manpower. It is not
easy to watch and rennin alert in a gun site so as to be prepared for an engagement
that will last but a few seconds. The gunner and the gun crew have to be constantly
on the lookout. sharp‘eyed at all times, never relaxing their vigilance.

There are also the ground observer teams along our borders. This likewise is a
manpower-consuming mission. Thus protection of our bases, our antiaircraft defenses,
and our border ground observer organisation can be effective only with numerous and
competent personnel which only a well-trained reserve air force can furnish.

16
FOR OI-TICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And besides, above and beyond the utter of inediste effectiveness, there is the
tremendous fellowship of those who have served in the air force, fellowship that is
strikingly demonstrated at all meetings and conventions of our reservists. All those
who have served in our air force have remained extremely loyal to us and are often
our ambassadors to the general public.

[Question] Today, supersonic aircraft can fly over France in 20 minutes. Today,
"telematics" permits i-ediate centralization of data on events, stocks, and other
information scattered throughout the territory. Under these conditions, is there
still justification for having an air region?

[Answer] At a time when everyone is talking about decentralizing, should we question
the validity of one decentralization effort which in my opinion, because I am one of
its principal operators, is a total success? I think it would be a big mistake.

I consider this decentralization to be successful because Air Force Headquarters allows
its region co-enders who, in turn, allow their base couanders, freedom of action
comensurate with the field of activity they have to cover. My higher headquarters
assigns me specific missions coupled with appropriate guidelines. It also gives me
the means to carry out these missions: means in the form of personnel: officers,
noncommissioned officers, and pilots with different military occupational specialities;
means also in the form of equipment, aircraft, radars, weapons, a variety of
vehicles—300 to 600 per base--, all sorts of accessories and instruentation. plus
countless shelters. Lastly, it gives me money in the form of fuel for aircraft and
motor vehicles, and in the form of funds with which to feed, clothe, house, and pay
troops, build and maintain our installations.

But once the frmaework is established, once the means have been supplied, it allows
me the broadest initiative in actually carrying out its orders. Of course, what I do
is carefully reviewed, inspected, and monitored ex post facto. Yet who can take
umbrage at that? The quid pro quo for the freedom given so must inevitably be an
ultimate rigorous review of my actions. In like manner, I review what the air bases
do, but without thereby interfering with the way my orders are being carried out.

I have tests and inspections made to evaluate each base's operational, technical, and
administrative capabilities.

In short, I do try to behave toward my air force troops the same way Air Force
Headquarters acts toward me. In other words, I avoid any meddlesome centralism and
endeavor to make the best possible use of each individual's abilities.

Admittedly modern aircraft do fly estrasely fast. He must, therefore, be fully
cognizant of what is happening within a radius of 300-400 kilometers around us because
we have very little reaction time. We Int also be informed of what is happening near
each "air" key point and these two interests are not compatible.

Telematica is, of course, a valuable tool. For personnel administration, the region
has an inquiry station, i.e. data terminal equipment for inquiry into the air force's
personnel data processing center. Regional stock control and movement of spare parts
are handled by telematics. The region also receives air defense data by telematics
and can take appropriate preparatory measures. Above all, however, there are the
physical realities of men and equipment, realities that can trulybe perceived only
at the local level. An air region is a coherent unit to which present means of
comaunication provide ready access. All installations in the region are within easy
travel distmace. No base is more than an hour away from my headquarters. Whenever

a major problem develops, as soon as a base co-snder calls me and I have to determine

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

personally what nust be done, I can be on site very quickly and give hin important
help by immediately ordering resources brought in from other installations. Then

there is the life style, the geographical context. the nilitary mission. all of which
vary from one air region to another.

Hence the air region, with its mission or "calling" often dictated by history, with
the style and temperament of the people assigned to it, is a coherent geographical
and military unit. Within the flexible and trustful style developed by the air
force in its chain of cot-land, the air region concept is fully justifiable. Our
decentralization is a success. He nuat be very careful not to change it in any way.

OOPYRICH‘I‘: 1982 Revue des forces ameaa francaises "Ar-sea d'Aujourd'hni”

801.1
680: 3100/ 370

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-UK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

AIR REGIW'S ROLE IN AIR DEFENSE OPERATICNS DESCRIBED
Pairs MES D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Jan-Feb 82 pp 36-35
[Article by Lt Col Michel Garrelis, French Air Force: "One Quarter of Blue Sky"]

[Text] Supervision rnd coordination of air defense operations and declaration of an
air defense emergency denand centralized infatuation. This is the mission of the
Headquarters, Air Defense Co-snd (DA) in Taverny north of Paris. But the French
Air Force has chosen to decentralize at air region (BA) level responsibility for
directing the air battle and nanaging air defense resources.

Pursuant to instructions issued in June 1970 by Air Force Headquarters, the Go-anding
General,-Air Defense Co—snd and the Oomanding General, CAFDA (Air Col-land
[Component] of the Air Defense Forces) have delegated to each air region comsnder

the responsibility for operational readiness of flight units and control and

reporting units stationed within each RA's territory, and likewise for control and
coordination of Military Operational Traffic (CG!) within each RA's area of
jurisdiction. In addition. an RA comander's authority covers all military air
traffic natters, whether it be traffic around the airfielda (regional responsibility)
or flights conducted under the control of air defense radar stations.

Moreover, an RA cousander must ensure that these air defense units receive the
logistic support needed to maintain their operational readiness.

Lastly, he is responsible for the training, control, operational readiness, and
employment of the region's surface-to-air weapons defense units.
To enable each air region col-sander to discharge his assigned duties, netropoliN-a
France is divided into four air defense areas (ZAD) whose boundaries were design-ad
to correspond as closely as possible to boundaries of the [four] air regions.

Each ZAD is comanded by a general officer who also serves as the air region .
cosmander's deputy for operations.

Bach air region has a special staff section, the air defense sect'on (DVDA). The
WDA is usually headed by a field-grade air force officer. For routine letters, it
is under the operations division of the air region general staff, but on any matters
it reports directly to the region's deputy for operations who is also the

Comanding General, ZAD. The DVDA actually serves the latter as a sort of standing
working group.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The DVDA is generally organised into four branches whose titles clearly indicate
their functions: control branch (handles radar stations), air traffic branch.
surface-to-air weapons branch, and field exercises and maneuvers branch.

The chief of the MA is directly responsible for natters relating to the fighter
wings.

The Comsnding General, DA and the demanding General, CAFDA issue operation plans
and orders to RA cot-sanders. as well as directives covering the enployment of air
defense units stationed within their area of responsibility.

RA cousnders have these plans. orders, and directives executed by their deputy for
operations. the Col-landing General. ZAD. who is also chairman of the Joint Regional
Military Air Traffic Oomittee: coordination of the activities of units responsible
to the Ministry of Defense: DGA (General Directorate for Armament), Naval Aviation,
ALAT (Ar-y Light Aviation), and the Air Force. The ZAD co-snder is also co-chairman
of the (:30 (Regional Manage-lent Co-ittee), a civilian-ailitary body responsible for
airspace organization and management at regional level.

From the foregoing remarks we can define the duties and functions of the RA deputy
for operations and Conanding General, ZDA in peacetime and wartiae.

Peacetine

In maintaining units operationally ready, the ZAD consnder's main task is to ensure
that instruction and training is conducted in compliance with standing instructional
and training procedures (CPI) established by CAFDA.

In perforning this task. the ZAD conander personally conducts frequent inspections
or has them made by DVDA officers. He also periodically holds meetings with all
unit coumsnders. He is authorized to take at his level all necessary measures to
remedy deficiencies or correct mistakes, while reporting such deficiencies, mistakes,
and corrective neasures to CAPDA.

The ZAD comasnder appoints officers from the mm to assist CAFDA team conducting
operational readiness tests. as participates in these evaluations in the nanner
prescribed by standing field exercise procedures published by CAFDA.

He issues special orders for air defense exercises applicable solely to his area of
responsibility, whether the exercise or maneuver is organized by CAF'DA or the 2A1).

Pursuant to specific CAFDA orders and instructions. he participates at his level in
the execution of the following tasks: military operational air traffic control,
rescue operations, and providing ninima civil air traffic control service as
required when so ordered by the governnent.

Lastly. he gives special attention to flight safety problens in combat units as
well as control units. In this connection, all incidents are thoroughly investigated

and analyzed, and all possible innediste-action neasures are taken to inprove
equipment or procedures.

80

F09 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Cat-sanding General, ZAD exercises authority over:
a. Flight units (fighter wings);
b. Surface-to-air (gun and missile) mite;

c. Control units and stations: control and reporting Centers (CDC). military
coordination detachments (me). etc;

(1. Units of the other services (army or navy) then attached to hia col-land.

To assist him in discharging his responsibilities, the air region co-Iender'a deputy
for operations and ZAD consumer has:

a. A DVDA (described above);

b. An area operations center (C02) whose functions in the operational chain of
comand lies between the air defense control center at Taverny and the ZDA units;

c. An air defense control center located with the 002 and activated and manned by

DVDA personnel during exercises and naneuvers. in periods of crisis. and in
wartime.

The ZAD comnder also ensures that all logistic support measures are taken as
required for effective performance of air defense missions.

wartime

Pursuant to general orders and special directives issued by CAPDA, the 2A!) co-ander
conducts air defense operations within his area. In so doing. he directs the air
defense battle and controls all air traffic.

The scope of the duties and functions of the contending generalsof an air region and
his deputy for operations, the ZAD commander. and the diversity of the forces under
their col-and, are indicative of the importance of the air defense role assigned to
each air region. '

The volume of airspace allotted to each region and the presence of necessary logistic
support facilities within its territory thus give the Air Defense Comnd a suitable,
flexible, and efficient organizational structure. -

AIR DWSB
Echelon Normal Chain of Coman_d QErational Chain of Comnd
Air Force Hq CG, CAFDA nigh Air Defense Authority at
air defense control center
Air Region cc. 2A1) Area air controller
Air Base (fighters) 00, Fighter wing Plight operations officer
Fighter aircraft
Air Base (radars) 00. Control and Reporting Chief Controller
Center Control consoles
81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Author

Lieutenant Colonel Michel Garrelis, the author of the above article, entered the
Air Force Academy in 1956. After graduation. he served as an air defense controller
in different air force radar stations. After having comnded the control and
reporting center at Cinq-Hars-la-Pile, he served on the 2d Air Region staff. He is
currently assistant officer-in-charge of the Northern Air Defense Area's operations
center.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue dea forces arnees francaises "Arnees d'anjourd'hui.

8041
CSO: 3100/ 369

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

mummwnm am TESTED FOR MIRAGE 20008. PW

Paris AIR ET 003308 in French 13 Feb 82 p 17

[Article: "Tests of Antilope 5 Radar on Vautour Aircraft")

[Text] The Flight Test Cantu (on) has begun testing the flight control ayeten
that will enable the Mirage 2000N--penatration version--to fly at extremely low level
while avoiding terrain obstacles.

This eysten is based on the Antilope 5 radar developed jointly by Serge Dassault
Electronics and Thonson-(SP. This terrain-following radar is designed to enable the
aircraft to automatically follow the terrain at mini-um safe altitude. Hence the
requirement to obtain a good image of the terrain, analyze it, deternine therefrom-
consistent with the aircraft's dynanics--the ideal flight path, and generate flight
path control signals to be transmitted to control surfaces via the aircraft's
autopilot. This entire sequence obviously has to be perforned in real time, thus
requiring use of high-speed, high-capacity counters.

For its current tests of this systen, the CEV is using the Vautour No 358, a utility
twin-jet aircraft designed for the Mirage 2000M's Antilope radar development tests.
Last year, this aircraft was nodified at the Clernont-Perrand Aeronautical
Industrial Plant to pernit installation of the entire terrain-following conponent of
the Mirage 2000!! navigation system. A very conplete set of neasuring instruments
was also mounted in the Vautour. Lastly, the entirely new forward part of the
fuselage was fitted with a cylindrrconical section ("detachable collar"), thus
giving the Vautour's. fuselage the shape of the forward nose section of the Mirage
2000!! and providing space for the conditioning unitneeded to cool the radar.

Evaluation of the Mirage ZOOON's very low-altitude flight control systen recently
began at the Istres night Sinulation Center. The system generates the radar image
of the terrain, image on which flight control oo-ands are based. In addition, a
micro-video canera relays to the pilot inside the Mirage 2000!! simulator cockpit

the picture it obtains by "flying over" a terrain nodel board, the flight path flown
by the nicro-camera being sinilar to the one generated by the simulator. '

clernont Ferrand Aeronautical Industrial Plant

Since 1976, this facility has completed nodifications and adaptations for the Mirage
2000!! program on the following aircraft used as test beds: Mirage 33 No 202 for

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

autopilot teats; Vautour no 377 for teats of the m [Doppler multifunction] radar;
Vautour No 307 for teats of the an! [Doppler] radar and the lount for the Hatra
Super 530 missile; Hyatere 20 No 79 for RBI radar tests; Hyatere 33 No 23$ for teats

of the air data conputer and the inertial platform and Myatere 20 No 126 for teats
of the electronic countermaauraa ayaten.

cannon: A 8 C 1982.

8061
680: 3100/3171

8’:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIL ITARY “NH-K1800)“

BOMB GUARD, EXPANDED TERRITORIAL ma ADVOCATED
M41513 London THE TIMES in English 1. Mar 82 p 1
[Report by Henry Stanhope: "Bonn Guard ls Revived: Forces To Train Teenagers"]

[Text] The government is to create a new home guard to protect some of
Britain’s more vital parts fro: crack Russian troops in wartime. A pilot
scheme will start in four areas of the country next September.

Details were disclosed yesterday by Mr John Nott, secretary of state for
defence. who also announced apansion plans for the territorial arty,
including 12 new TA centres, and an adventure training schme that will be
run for young people by the Ministry of Defence.

The new reserve, foreshadowed last year in ‘11!!! TIMES, will be called the Bone

Service Force (ESP) and, if the pilot scheme is successful, will include
about 10,500 volunteers.

The army is looking for people aged between 18 and 59 who will probably have
to assewle for four or five weekends a year. Because the training periods
will be few it is hoping to attract former servicemen, regulars or reserves,
or policemen, who would already know solething about "drill and teal-work."

Ideally the army would like young men in their twenties who might not be
able to spare the tine for the territorials. They will be paid and will
wear a khaki uniform, but the details have yet to be decided.

A senior officer said last night: ”Re have not yet decided what weapons
they will~carry, but they will have something better than pitchforks."

The need for such a force was decided on after a survey which listed about
1.000 key points, such as telephone exchanges. power stations. electrical

transmitters, or even railway stations, that would need to be guarded in
wartine.

The threat cones from the large Soviet special purpose forces. many of whose
troops would be expected to be deployed against Britain in a future war.
They could be parachuted into Britain or landed by ship, charged with the
task of sabotaging conunications and power supplies.

is
roe omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new force would free regular and reserve troops for more mobile defence
work. Sources said last night that the cost of the pilot scheme would be
"peanuts."

The four pilot companies, each of which will have 95 members, will be centered
on Perth, Birmingham, Bury St Bhunds, and on Reading, Portsmouth and
Maidenhead in the south-east. They will use TA centres and facilities.

The TA expansion cones in the wake of last year's announcement of 'a phased
increase in its strength from 70,000 to 86,000. Sone units will be allowed

to recruit above their establishments and the nder of training days is
being raised to 42.

New units will include the equivalent to two royal engineer regiments and

one extra company for the Royal Irish Rangers, the 51st Highland Volunteers,
and the Royal Regiment of Hales. The emphasis will be on home defence.

In some areas TA centres will be improved and new ones will be built at
Bangor (Northern Ireland), Redford, Sutton Coldfield, Telford. York, Colby,
Newhan, (South Teeside), Nalsall, Colchester, Bath, Hidnes, Aintree and
Alnwich.

The adventure training schene will provide outdoor courses of two or three
weeks for young people with the services, starting next month. They will be
available for up to 7,000 teenagers aged between 16 and 18 who can start

applying to their local service career and information offices from March 29.
The scheme will cost 1.5 n pounds, funded from the defence budget.

The ARY scheme will be run from Fort George in Scotland under Lieutenant- '
Colonel John Blashford-Snell; the navy,will take boys to EMS Raleigh, the
jmior training establishment at Plymouth: and the RAP will organize its

contribution at Cosford in the Heat Midlands and at Catterick, North
Yorkshire.

Ministry of Defence officials said yesterday: "It is not backdoor conscrip-
tion. He are not looking for recruits."

It will not be exclusively for the unemployed; priority will be given to

applicants from cadet forces. Travelling expenses, food, and accommodation
will be free.

The courses will offer training "outward bound" style under the care of some
of the services' best instructors.

COPYRlGﬂT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

C80: 3120/47

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY UNITED KMDOH

HO'IT'S momcm OH RBSERVISTS mum, BUT M ENOUGH
M51613 London THE TIMES in Ehglish S liar 82 p 13

[Editorial: "Swords and Ploughshares"l

[Text] Mr John Nott's annomcenent about increasing the reservists and
providing adventure training for a few thousand unemployed youngsters is
to be welcomed, as far as it goes; but it does not go very far. Last June
he said that the government was determined to give greater emphasis to the
reserve forces, and this has now resulted in an increase of 16,000 men

in the territorial army. No increase, however small. should be decried,
but Mr Nott has failed to go to the heart of the question of reserve
nilitary power, and he should try again.

Britain's strategic defence policy is based on the principle of nuclear
deterrence. However, since the abolition of conscription, all govements
have found it convenient to hide behind that policy we need. on the ground
that the only danger we face is of a total breakdown of deterrence rather
than a partial one. Hence we only need a nuclear bomb. with a small number
of volunteer arned forces, backed up by even fewer reservists.

This goes against the whole principle of reserve power, which should be
based on the view that—in peacetime, or relative peacetime such as we have--
one's standing force should only be allowed to contract if the reserve

forces correspondingly expand. In that way the nation preserves machinery
for military expansion to meet a whole range of future anergancies, not just
the too-narrowly defined contingency of a breakdown in nuclear deterrence.
The bankruptcy of this policy was fully apparent only a few years ago when
the strain of law enforcement in Northern Ireland virtually incapacitated the
any for any other purpose, in spite of its continuing pretence to Ieet

NATO and global comitnents.

Hr Nott's new reservists. therefore. will provide some temporary palliative
to the regular army. But, if even Northern Ireland can incapacitate us, any
future emergency will reveal much more starkly how gravely the chiefs of
staff have neglected their duty to provide Britain with appropriate machinery
for expansion of the services to neet unexpected emergencies.

8?

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The proposal for adventure training is also an attractive one, but incomplete.
Mr Nott said that the very low embers leaving the armed services, and the
consequential reduction in re: ruitment, had produced sone spare capacity
in the training c 'ablishnents of all three services. That training capa-
city should not be frittered away providing canoe trips and such like.

It is the seed corn of the country's future military potential. But it

is more than this, since military trade training improves the quality of
those who pass through the machine in a social as well as a military sense.
Social and military qualities are not necessarily incompatible. There is
more to military training now than learning to [word indistinct]. There
is more to it even than gunnery, tactics or fieldcraft. It is noticeable
that four out of every five recruits enlist because they wish to learn a
trade which would be valuable to than later as civilian.

The national value of this training machine is thus not only that it trains
servicanen with technical skills. that of those skills are as relevant to
industry. as they are to the military. There is much emchange of information
and experience between service training establishments and their counter-
parts in industry, particularly in junior management and trade training.
When the economy picks up we will again need more skilled manpower than
exists. We should harness the military training machine to this future
industrial and economic requirement, by using its spare capacity now to turn
out young nee and women trained in modern techniques. In peacetime there is
always pressure to turn swords into ploughshares. But we should not forget
the service training machine's ability to turn out swordsmen who are plough-
men too: and the better for it.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited. 1982

cso: 3120/47 END

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY