FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10007
23 September 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 48/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(F000 48/81)

Courems

THEATER FORCES

ITALY

Defense Minis ter on Libysn Threats , Cruise Bsses
(wmlm pm 83“. 3, asep 81) OOOOCOOIOIOOOOOOOOIOOO

Threats Discounted. by Dino ?rescobs1di
Cosimo Missile lsse, Lelio Legorio Interview
TERRORISM
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

'Hediterrsnesn Dossier' Revesls Internstionsl Terrorist Ties
(Corrsdo Incerti; PANORAMA. 26 Aug 81) ..................
POLITICAL
FRANCE
PS Decentralizstion Policy: Responsibility, Responeiveness
(Gsston Defferre Interview; Ll HOOVEL OBSERVATEUR,
lB-Zk Jul 81) ...........................................
ITALY

Ressons for Increase in Tension Between PSI, PCI
(Psbrizio Coisson; PAIOBAHA. 17 Aug 81) .................

- s - [III - W! - 150

FOI¢NHHCJAL.USE(NVLY
UNITED KINGDOM

Hori. Poll: Liboral,SDP Alliance Could "in Next Election
(Robert Horceoter; ‘1'!!! TIMES. 16 Sep 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

GENERAL
FRANCE

New Government's Structural Changes in Police Force
(Philippe Krasnopolski; vmuns muss, 24 Aug 81) .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCES ITALY

DEFENSE MINISTER 0N LIBYAN THREATS, CRUISE BASES

Threats Discounted
PH071150 Milan CORRIERB DELLA SERA in Italian 3 Sep 81 p 1

[Report by Dino Prescobaldi: "Italy Demands Explanation From al-Qadhdhafi of
Threats to Attack Sicily"]

[Excerpts] Rome-Ve asked Defense Minister Lelio Lagorio about the real chance:
of al-Qadhdhafi's Libya putting its threats into practice.

"Let us start with the political aspect," the minister said. "The most important
part of al-Qadhdhafi's remarks concerns the possibility of abandoning his policy
of neutrality. In that case it would be useful to know the Soviet Union's view-
point. too." Summing up the defense minister's thoughts, we shall have to see
whether Moscow will in turn be willing to "cover” a possible future ally as
unpredictable as the Libyan colonel. For one thing, the Krenlin cannot accept
Tripoli's vaunted claim to extend the limits of its territorial waters 200 miles
into the Mediterranean. If such a claim were to spread and be taken up by other
Hediterranean countries, it would become a "closed sea" inaccessible to the
fleets of nonlittoral countries. including the Soviet fleet.

"we know." Lagorio said, "that in the past certain Libyan requests for increased
military aid presented to Moscow by both Jallud and al-Qadhdhafi have already
been received with acne degree of coolness. It is true that Moscow may one day
find it convenient to establish one or more bases in Libya, though this is some-
thing that sl-Qadhdhafi has hitherto refused to grant. But sn,h a concession on
the Libyans' part would undoubtedly have negative repercussions on the other Arab
countries, including the ones whose positions are close to Tripoli's. Moreover,
it lust not be forgotten that al-Qadhdhafi is keen to Iaintain his nonaligned
image in the eyes of the African world.

"In fact the GAO conference should be meeting in the Libyan capital next year.
After that al-Qadhdhafi would hold the chairmanship for a year. Is the colonel
willing to give up this plan by abandoning neutrality."

we pointed out to the Iinister that all this presupposes a logic in his policy.
But it is well known that events often get out of hand, especially in the case
of dictators, so that one must consider the possibility of al-Qadhdhafi carrying

1
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out his threats, feeling cornered. But does he have the practical resources to
do so? The minister said: "From the technical military viewpoint, he does not
have any great potential for reprisals. The military strength available to him
does not in fact enable him to assume very much with regard to Italy and the other
countries threatened. such as Greece and Turkey."

In this connection Lagorio pointed out that Libya has no nuclear weaponry and that
even a conventional bombardment "would not cause a nuclear chain reaction because
explosives are always kept separate from detonators." So the threat of a nuclear
apocalypse brandished by the fiery colonel can only inpress a Libyan audience.
Furthermore, examining the matter in detail, it is known that Libyan aircraft--and
even the MiG-25's, which are the most advanced model in al-Qadhdhafi's arsena1--can
at most reach Italy's islands or southern regions and then return to Libya only
by flying at the highest altitude, where as is known. fuel consumption is lower.
That would mean that they would be identified by both Italian and NATO radar.

Does this all mean that we should not attach too much importance to al-Qadhdhafi?
The minister replied: "That is not what I said. Al-Qadhdhafi may perhaps carry
out a few co-nando demonstrations. Indeed, it seems that special groups of
saboteurs are being trained in Libya. It seems that each Libyan battalion includes
a component of so-called 'special forces.' As for the Tripoli navy, it can use
eight Soviet-made patrol boats for fast sea transport. However, I do not need to
point out that NATO has already taken the necessary precautions for every eventu-
ality. He too have strengthened our security measures. Italy," Lagorio concluded,

"could defend itself even from a more treacherous and less conventional form of
attack."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editorials del "Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.

Cosimo Missile Base
PMl01236 Milan CORRIBRB DELLA SBRA in Italian 8 Sep 81 p 6

[Interview with Italian Defense Minister Lelio Lagorio by Gianfranco Simone:
”Lagorio Describes Comiso Military Map"]

[Text] Rome-~The Italian general staff is planning to strengthen the southern
regions; Italian arms supplied to Libya are about to come to an end; in the event
of an attack, trucks mounted with cruise launchers would not leave Sicily, though
they would leave Comiso, surveillance of which will be entrusted to 200 specialized
caribinieri, among others. Last, there will probably be a revision of the proce-
dures of the "dual key" system to prevent a launching of the cruise missile without
agreement between the Italian and 0.5. Governments. This is what emerges from
Defense Minister Lagorio's interview with CORRIBRB and from a conversation with

a general staff colonel.

The minister wanted to make the following two points before answering our questions:

l-Now that the preparation of the bases has been started. every effort must be
directed toward making East-Rest negotiations possible. with the following objec-
tive: "We will not deploy the cruise missiles if the Soviets withdraw the SS 20's
that have been targeted on Italy since 1978."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2--The preparation of the base is no obstacle to negotiations: This belief stems
from statements by high-level Soviet sources. In practice during the Brezhnev-
Brandt meeting. the former said: "He understand that the Americans must produce
the missiles and that you must prepare the launch areas. But do not deploy the
missiles until negotiations have settled all the disputes."

I asked whether the choice of Sicily, only 500 km from the Libyan coast. was due
to the need to point a deterrent southward too.

whereas the general staff officer explained that only an agreement among all the
NATO nations would make it possible to use the cruise missiles against Libya and
thatthiswould only be envisaged if Soviet missiles were deployed there and targeted
on Italy, Lagorio replied: "The cruise and Pershing II program originated in 1978
to reduce an imbalance in the European theater. Indeed we also examined plans for
bases in the north. 80 Africa does not come into it."

[Question] Even following al-Qadhdhafi's recent statements?

[Answer] The issue must not be viewed solely in connection with al-Qadhdhafi's
arguments, but also bearing in mind what kind of reaction the Soviet Union might
take. '

[Question] what might the USSR's reaction be?

[Answer] It is difficult to imagine the present Soviet leadership group intending
to create further destabilizing elements on the European chessboard. Moreover,
there are the aspects of the Libyan military threat announced by al-Qadhdhafi
though subsequently qualified by the Libyan ambassador in Rome. Theoretically it
is possible, though it is more difficult to put into practice. Our job is to
create a situation whereby a Libyan attack would prove particularly burdensome,
difficult and unprofitable for the Libyan government and therefore to have a
defense system that will discourage the planning of an offensive.

[Question] Is the possibility not being considered of stopping supplies of
Italian weapons, such as the Lion tanks (simplified and Leopard tanks) produced
by OTO-Helara?

[Answer] A rapid procedure is in progress to dry up the sources of Italian arms
for Libya.

[Question] th was Puglia not chosen instead of Sicily?

[Answer] Yes. the Puglia region was considered, but finally Comiso was chosen
because of the existence of an airport, state-owned land and a suitable road
system [Congrua Viabilita].

[Question] So the choice based partly on reasons of viability confirms that the
missiles will not be taken out of Sicily.

[Answer] Yes. The choice reflects a national option because it is fairly clear
that in ".8. eyes a base located elsewhere would have involved less expenditure
and would have been preferred by the 0.5. Government.

3
FORIHHHCJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Hould it have cost less in Puglia?
[Answer] Anywhere else [but Sicily]. [answer ends]

The inference is, partly also on the basis of other statements that the Americans
would have preferred to deploy the lissiles in one of their existing bases (Aviano
or Camp Derby, near Leghorn) or in an operational Italian base, such as Istrana
or Gioia del Colle. Perhaps the rumors circulating earlier this year in Brussels,
naming these bases, were designed to force our government's hand. They would have
been chosen erroneously from a nilitary viewpoint because as targets they are too
valuable: At a strike it would have been possible to destroy an entire army
brigade, a fighter-bomber airfield and the cruise base, as well as densely popu-
lated and industrialized areas, which are all equally important targets. The
negotiations undoubtedly continued several months longer than envisaged: In June

1980 NATO Secretary Lune told us that a decision on the Italian bases was expected
that year.

"We have had tough but excellent relations with the Americans," the colonel said.
"He reached a perfect, though hard-won, agreement,"

[Question] Hr Minister, who would defend Comiso in the event of a commando or
paratroop raid? The 200 Italian troops responsible for external surveillance
belong to the air force's military 'airport vigilance,‘ a poorly armed group, not
very well trained, often deactivated and recruited on a regional basis? Nor would
the army he in a position to act in time, with a single motorized brigade split

up among the island's main cities. How will Comiso be defended?

[Answer] We are preparing a quick strike nilitary force with a civil intervention
capability, which will cost 650 billion lire through 1983. in accordance with the
finance law. In a few months' time Parliament will be informed of further details.
Still with regard to the south, the main guideline is to rapidly strengthen our
radar network for continuous monitoring of low-flying aircraft.

As for surveillance of Comiso, the plan is not to use the military airport vigi-
lance but to use 200 highly qualified carabineri and 200 Americans. The mobile
escort squad will be Italian. There are increased surveillance and security
measures at our military bases, a strengthening of the air force squadrons in the
south and a plan for air, land and sea exercises in Sicily and the Ionian Sea so
as to keep our military units operationally efficient. He will be discussing this
again in a few weeks' time. [answer ends]

It seems that a group of 12-18 starfighters will be replacing the squadron of

four aircraft stationed in Trapani on a rotational basis from the other bases.

The carabinieri night belong to the same units, equipped with German shepherds.
which guard the other Italian bases, in very small groups of about a dozen men.

As for the intervention force, its basic model is the Second Governolo Light
Infantry Battalion of the Legnano Brigade, Centauro Division, trained particularly
well for this task since 1979. Other similar units will be established.

[Question] Hr Minister. the "dual key" system is unconvincing. Whereas groups
of air force PlOé's fighter bombers or the Aquileia missiles brigade. both of which

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are equipped with nuclear devices kept at 0.5. bases. could refuse to use the
nuclear weapon without orders from our government because the aircraft and launch
systems are operated by the Italians, on the other hand in the case of the cruise
missiles, even the delivery vehicles are in 0.5. hands. Even officers belonging
to those units are expressing doubts about the existence of a credible "dual key"
if the entire system was conceived by the Americans and is, moreover, secret.

Who will guarantee us that our "key" is not useless and that there is no copy held

by the "locksmith" who made it? were the PRC and Britain more realistic in leaving
both "keys" to the Americans?

[Answer] I can only give you a political reply, namely that the Italian government
does not accept that the use of nuclear weapons from its own territory should be
decided without express and prior consent from the Italian authorities. However.

the technical realization of this point, which we consider essential, must remain
classified information. [answer ends]

He can combine the minister's reply with the reply from the above-mentioned officer:
"As far as Germany and Britain are concerned. it is by no means certain that that

is how things stand. 0n the other hand, with regard to our direct relations with
the Americans, there is a bilateral agreement which defends our sovereignty. How-
ever, since we are dealing with systems some aspects of which are new, it will

probably be necessary to view the implementation of the agreements precisely in
relation to the newness of these weapons."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Editoriale del "Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.

CSO: 3105/372

5
roe omnu usr. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

'HEDITBRRANEAN DOSSIBR' REVEALS INTERNATIONAL TERRORIST TIES
Milan PANORAMA 24 Aug 81 PP 36-37
[Article by Corrado Incerti]

[Text] French President Mitterand has evidence of terrorism's
international ties linking the elusive Carlos with a
gang of Palestinians, Soviet intelligence, and the Red
Brigades (BR) with the Italian neofascists and with
Licio Gelli's Freemasons. A document from France
reveals an insidious network of terror.

"The holy War has reached Pinerolo in the Piedmont. It has since cros-
sed the Alps, and now has sent down deep roots in Paris. This is the
threat of the future: today it is busy with the propaganda phase, but
tomorrow it will shift into action.“ At the French Interior Ministry
on the Place Beauveau, they are worried: for almost a year, now, the
Holy War launched by Iran's holy man, the Ayatolla Khomeyni, has had

a beachead in Europe, carrying with it its explosive destabilizing po-
tential. Here is the evidence gathered by French President Francois
Mitterand's security forces, collected in a thick 'Kediterranean‘nos-
sier' crammed full of documents and testimony on the destabilization of
Europe, beginning to the South. The latest confirmation comes from an
Islamic periodical which has its corporate headquarters and editorial
offices somewhere beyond Postoffice Box 160 in the Piedmont town of
Pinerolo.

The name of the magazine, printed in an Italian and a French edition by
its publisher, Oggero, at Carmagnola, a small town outside Turin, is
JIHAD, which in Arabic means ”holy war." The editorial staff consists
of five people, apparently all Arabs: Rudollah Idris, Umar Amin, Abb
A1 Qadir, Mujahid Abd a1 ﬂaqq, Hossein. Even so, French intelligence
people are certain that these are all assumed names cloaking the iden-
tities of Italians, Germans, and French nationals active on the extreme
right. One of them has been identified: "Umar Amin is Professor Claudio
Mutti, who was converted to Islam several years ago,” the French file
avers. Mutti was in the past a known neofascist (a member of the group
calling itself Giovane Europa [Young EuropeJ), a nazimaoist (he headed
the People's Struggle organization), and a propagandist for Libya's
leader, Hus-mar Qaddhafi (he founded the Italy-Libya League); he was

6
FOR1ﬁWK1ALI£ﬂEONLY
The front cover of the maiden (October 1980) issue of JIHAD has a lot
to say about its political line: it shows Amin el Husseini, the Grand
Mufti of Jerusalem, anvIslamic religious leader, smiling in a 1944 shot
of Hitler's Berlin. As to the content of the magazine, the French in-
telligence note pulls no punches: "This periodical disseminates a pro-
Islamic ideology with elements of antisemitism, fascism, and phony anti-
imperialism. It is a confused ideology, in which extreme right-wing
and equally extreme left-wing talk is blended inextricably." Attached
to the magazine is a membership application form put out by a nascent
Europe-Islam Association. "Underlying it is the conviction that it is
possible to revive in Islam the principles that could inspire a Euro-
pean renaissance," comments the report.

The file labeled "Islamic Holy War - European Fascists" is not the only
one among those in the French Interior Ministry's "Mediterranean Dossier'
that documents tight connections with Italy. In two more files, one on
the Palestinians and the other on secret societies, there are frighten"

Ramirez Sanchez, a.k.a. Carlos, on the Palestinian extremists of the
rejectionist front ("No to any negotiations with Israel“), itself obe-
dient to political orders from the Soviet Union. Carlos has put his

ted his action with the Basque terrorists in the ETA, with the Irish in
the IRA, with the Germans, and with the Italians in the Red Brigades
(all of it documented in the "Mediterranean Dossier."

nich, and in Paris (at the synagogue on the Rue Copernicus) may stem
from the same source: the Rejection Front Palestinians.

The whole story grew out of the investigation into the attack on the
synagogue on Rue Copernicus. Suspicion fell initially on the French
fascist groups, but for months there was no shred of specific proof.

Suzuki motorcycle which was blown apart by the bomb it carried. He
had shown a Cypriot passport made out to Alexander Panadryu. The pass-
port was false, but the French intelligence investigators managed to
piece together every move the terrorist had made. Panadryu had come to
France on 7 September of the previous year. He had taken a room at the
Hotel Celtic, on the Rue Balzac, a hotel which of recent years has

been a haunt for a good many Italian fascists. He had bought the

7
FOR(MW“JALUSEONLY
FOR ()FFK‘IAI. I'Sl’. ()Nl.\'

motorcycle and rented a yellow Citroen GS. He had met and often visited
an Italian prostitute. 0n 3 October, immediately after the attack on
the synagogue, he had taken a plane to Rome, where he had dropped out

of sight.

It was a "coincidence"reported to the French by Palestinians in the
Palestine Liberation Organization opposed to the Rejection Front's
pro-Soviet line, that provided the vital clue in the investogation of
the synagogue attack: Carlos the terrorist, the hit-mmaforthe pro-S)-
viets, who provided would-be revolutionaries from every nation, be they
of the Black or Red persuasion, with fake Cypriot passports, had been
busy throughout the whole month of August on Cyprus, recruiting young-
sters for a training camp set up on the island of Socotra, in South
Yemen. Furthermore, the Italian prostitute Panadryu had patronized in
Paris had told police that the attacker had told her that he was circum-
cised because he was an Arab. The French are sure that the terrorist
belongs to the Black October gang, the newest and most mysterious of
the Palestinian extremist organizations.

The Secret Society

"I am convinced that the terrorism and arms traffic in the Mediterranean
played a central role in the Auriol killings," a friend from Marseille
told French Interior Minister Gaston Defferre.

The inquiry into the massacre uncovered the existence of a secret Maso-
nic group which was infiltrated by arms dealers and fascist terrorists:
it was known as the Sovereign and Military Order of the Temple of Jeru-
salem, commonly referred to as the Templars.

The first person to mention the Templars, or rather those who had infil-
trated them -- in France they are known as the negative Templars ("But
we have them in Italy b00,"'report Maria Lo Mastro and Rocco Zingaro,
who head the Italian Order) was Dominique Calzi, a 007 agent who has
worked for several European intelligence agencies. In a book about the
way they operate in secret, he revealed kidnapings, drug trafficking,
and links with terrorism. Most important of all, though, was their
heavy traffickingin weapons, most of it on behalf of terrorist groups.

Calzi, whose charges were borne out by the Marseille inquiry, maintains
that the Templars are not the only secret society tilling this parti-
cular field in Europe. And he talks of several deliveries of diploma—
tic documents in Rome to French fascists by the Hospitalers of the 0r-
der of St. John of Jerusalem, the Knights of Malta.

The Mediterranean Dossier ordered by the new-direction French government
under Francois Mitterand is waxing still fatter with the results of in-
quiries into the activities of these secret societies, too, not to men-
tion reports of their ties with Licio Gelli's P2, which used to meet
with the Templars in Marseille.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnoldo Mondadori Editore, S.p.A.

6182
cso: 3104/367

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL rm

PS DECENTRALIZATIW POLICY: RESPONSIBILITY, IBSPONSIVENBSS
Paris LB NOUVBL 0383mm in french 18-24 Jul Bl pp 24-27

[Interview with Gaston Defferre, sinister of state for interior and decentralization,
by Josette Alia and Georges Many, date and place not specifieg7

[1'er Decentralization: What the New France Hill Be

It is a quiet revolution, but it is nevertheless a revolution:
as of 15 July the way l'rance looks is goingtochange. The
reign of tentacled Paris, of Paris as absolute saster in the
French wilderness, is over. The regions are regaining power
and recovering their freedom. In order for this to occur it
took the stubborn determination of one an, Gaston Defferre,
sinister of state for interior and decentralization, who with
great effort has just gotten a body of seasures adopted in
the Council of Ministers preparing for decentralization and
devolution in France for the first tine, a fine double victory.
Local elected officials, freed fro. the neddlesoue supervision
of Paris, will be masters in their own houses. But as a fair
exchange they will also be held responsible and will be able
to be punished in the event of a serious mistake. Freedo- is
winning out. As for prefects, they will no longer be the
executory agents of excessive central governnnt but they will
find an indispensable role to play at the departnent level in
monitoring and coordinating: the facade of government admin-
istration is splitting up. In short, 'Jacobin' France, which
has been in place for centuries, is beginning to fade away
before the reewakening of the former provinces. This is a
great watershed which has just begun. Gaston Defferre
received Josette Alia and Georges Many this week in his
Marseille mayor's office; he conjured up the new prospects
opening up and also tackled sose hotly debated subjects:
Corsica, the Basque country, the police, and 'cases" left in
abeyance by the previous governsent.

[Ousstioﬂhre you in such a rush to decentralize? You have the political assets

and you have tine ahead of you. Then why this haste to have irreversible pieces of
legislation voted on as early as the next parliamentary session?

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL PSI-i 0AM

[inswe57 Ehperience has taught me that right after an election and the formation of a
government, for a fairly short time period, it is possible to get really innovative
pieces of legislation through parliament. Once that period of time is over everything
becomes more difficult. Now then,the legislative texts I am proposing are going to
change a lot of things. In short, it is a matter of taking power from where it is at
present--in ministries in Paris which decide everything--and transferring it to the
communes where they are affected, to the departments, and to the regions. This is a
revolution and like any revolution it implies an end to the exercise of some powers:
for example, the Paris offices of ministries are going to see their jurisdictions cut
down. How will they accept this? To be sure, the new ministers supported decen-
tralization during the election campaign. Decentralization has even proven to be
very popular. But as time passes and ministers get settled into their agencies. I
am starting to feel the beginning of resistance, which is quite a normal development.
Agencies have explained to their ministers: "You cannot do that: they will take
away your funds from you!" In these conditions, if decentralization is not done now,
it will be more difficult to do it in a few months: that is the first point. The
second point is that we are coming to power as a government carried by a real popular
current. If we let the enthusiasm die out without our acting, we run the risk of
sinking and being jeopardized. 0n the contrary, if we act quickly, we will create a
favorable political and social climate. There are three successive and important
pieces of legislation to get passed. If the first does not pass now, the other two
will not follow within the anticipated deadlines.

[6nestiog7 The first piece of legislation involves the transfer of powers. what
does that mean exactly?

[ﬁnswe57 The transfer of powers has two aspects. Number one: There is no more super~
vision over local authorities. Communes, departments and regions deliberate and make
decisions without a prefect or minister having to step in. So the decision will be
operative without prefectorial or ministerial approval. Local elected officials will
be completely free. Number two: However, since they are free, they must also be
responsible. I lay stress on this because it is a very new idea. Decisions made by
local authorities can be contested after the fact by the representative of the
national government (for that he will rely on the Court of Accounts' examinations
which will take place each year). If the mayor, the chairman of the general council
or the chairman of the regional council has violated the law, if he has committed a
serious error, the decision which he made can be voided. In addition there will be

a penalty which can go up to dismissal from office which can be invoked against the
deliberative assembly and, if need be, against the mayor or chairman.

(Question? On a personal basis?

[Inswe57 On a personal basis. Freedom must be accompanied by political and personal
responsibility. Otherwise people sink into carelessness, disorder and ineffectiveness.

[5uestiog7 But this penalty will come too late: The decision will already be implemented.

[Inswe57 It is true that the national government's recourse will not involve post-
ponement. So the decision will be implemented while awaiting the outcome of legal
proceedings. For example, if it is a question of building a tunnel, then studies or
even actual construction will be carried on.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[ﬁnestioﬂ What happens then if this decision is subsequently voided by the state?

[anweg It is the municipality or the department or the region which suffers the
political and financial consequences. -

@uestiog That will be expensive.

[Insweg No, because I do not believe that mayors or elected officials will put them-
selves in that situation. Let us take an exwle: In my capacity as mayor, I
decide, along with my municipal council, to build a subway line in Marseille. This
decision is challenged by the national government. At this point I have two possi-
bilities, either to say to myself, "Too bad, I will just keep at it,“ or to ask
myself, "It is challenged: why?“ I believe that in this case a responsible politician
will ask himself questions. I believe also that before taking important steps a
responsible man does some censultation. If in spite of everything the alarm bell
rings and the government's representative says, 'Hatch out, you are not abiding by
the law,‘ what mayor, elected Officeholder, or official is going to persist and
continue on without asking questions?

[6uestiog7 Are you not thinking too much about the big cities? There are also some
pretty small cosqunes. Do you believe that elected officials will all be capable of
facing up to their new responsibilities? will they have sufficient competence, and
are they not running the risk of being paralyzed at times?

[Knew-57 I believe that the mayors of small conunes are competent. And then perhaps
those mayors more than others will be influenced by the observations which the govern-
ment's representative might make to them. But it is true that one must consider what
their situation is. When the mayor of a small cumune works out a plan he does not
have services at his disposal for conceiving and executing it like they do in large
cities. what does he do? He turns to either the installation people or the agricul-
tural engineers, which is to say he turns to a government agency which will advise
him just as it has always done. From now on the decision is up to him but he will
make it after consultation with representatives of the national government. Therefore
there is little risk that he will make an enormous mistake.

[Guestioﬂ But is that not indirectly a form of supervision?

[ﬁnsweg Yes, it is. True freedom presupposes that studies not be carried out by
those who were the supervisors up to now. That is why we are searching for another
system. For examle, some intercomnal research agencies might be devised which are
answerable only to mayors, like the ones which already exist in large cities except
that they would group together several small consumes.

@uestiog Then there would be a political risk. You are well aware that in certain
large municipalities the research agencies are in the hands of political parties....

[Knsweg Perhaps. But I believe it is inortant to settle on a formula which will
ensure both the independence of calmunes and the effectiveness of the work.

[Guestiog7 All the same the prefect was useful. When something was not going well,
people went to demonstrate in front of the prefect's office. “here will they go
"W? In front of the mayor's house? Are you not afraid of an extreme politicisation
of the local scene? '

11
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MI! OFFICIAL USP. ()Nl.\

[Enswe57 It must not be thought that the prefect is no longer of any use. Quite the
contrary. What exactly is his role these days? In order to find out I looked at

how things went on in the field in my own department. What was to be seen? All the
ministries--installation, public health, agriculture, youth and sports, cultural
affairs, and others--all have their department-level management personnel tied in
directly to the Paris offices and they are not responsible to the prefect. The
department-level management sometimes work in collaboration with the prefect, but when
they are not in agreement with him, off they go and telephone, turn up in Paris, and
settle the matter in Paris. Not to mention the interministerial missions sent for 6
months--we have the Pos group mission and the Berre pond mission here--which are still
there 10 years later. So much so that there is a tangle of government operations in
the departments which totally eludes the prefects. That is what we are going to
change. All these operations are going to be under the command of the prefect who
will represent the state, which will be the gurantor of national unity. Matters will

no longer be able to be sent up to Paris by bypassing prefects. The key to the reform
is there.

[Unestiog7 In sum, prefect: will be Paris local-style.

[Inswe57 Yes.

[ﬁuestiog7 Is not this a purely theoretical view?

[Knswe57 Not at all. It is in fact the only way to arrive at genuine decentrali-
zation--since power is going to be handed back to elected officials--and also to
arrive at genuine devolution--since the ministry offices will no longer be answerable
to the Paris ministries. So the prefect on the spot will have extensive respon-
sibilities and will make decisions which did not fall to him previously. He will no
longer be the representative of only the interior minister but of all the ministries.
You see that his role is not diminished. Quite the opposite.

Aﬁuestiog? Do you not foresee great difficulties in implementation when you cut the
ministries off from their regional offices?

[Knswe57 Yes indeed. But that is reform.

[ﬁnestiog7 In the end what will be left in the central government if everything is
decentralized in this fashion? very little.

[Inswe57 A great deal will be left. There can be no confusion or difficulty within
the division of powers between the central government and regional authorities: the
jurisdictions are clearly established and they will not change. Communes take care
of street lighting, refuse disposal, traffic, etc. Hospitals for general medical
treatment and for surgery come under the municipalities, mental hospitals come under
the departments, and welfare system expenditures come under the general council. All
of that is very clear. Mayors will take action but will always do it within the con-
text of the law and their jurisdictional competence.

[Question7 Then the problem of standards for public health, sanitation safety, urban

development, etc. will arise. According to which criteria is action to be taken?
Criteria set in Paris? In that case nothing will have changed.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MW (“V-1"“ U'V' ﬂ\| \

[insweg Yes it will because it is the prefect who will be saying on the spot at

the department level I'apply these or those standards.“ Obviously the ideal would be
to sake these standards regional. What is unsupportable for us local elected officials
is Paris' arbitrariness which iwoses an administrative supervision on us which is

not of a legal nature (is the decision to build such-and-such day care center or school
legal or illegal?) but with regard to appropriateness (your day care center must

have 15 beds, your grass area is too big, you have to do this rather than that), that
is to say that we are being substituted for in the appreciation of the needs of our
cities. The first hospital that I had built in Marseille. which is a very fine
hospital, has rooms so small that you cannot put a table in them. I fought in
numerous counittees in Paris and I told them, “That's insane.‘l It was no good.
Fortunately I like ships. I had folding tables put into the hospital roams like the
ones you have in the navy: a board with a hinge held up by a leg. When you raise the
board the leg collapses. However, you will admit that this business really takes the
cake. Not to sention the day care center standards which have been forced on tee. with
more bathtubs than there are children when one employee per bathtub is required, all
of this without any operating subsidy of course. Bverything is like that. Well. from
now on of course the government will lay down the general system of regulation but
implementation and carrying things out will be decided on the spot by local elected
officials; and I am convinced that everything will run better.

[Question] So there will remain a vast area within the national sphere.

[Ensweg Of course there will! The next battle in the National Assembly, I am
positive, will be concerned with that. The right is going to maintain that we are
dividing up France. They will do this by pretending to believe that we are going to
give mayors. general council chairmen and regional council chairsen jurisdictional
areas of the central government, areas which are not theirs. Now then, there is no
question of doing that.

[Question] That means that education, defense, the police, treasury operations....

[Knswegndire remaining within the jurisdiction of the national goverment.
Furthermore, all of that will be clearly laid down in the legislation. The first

law up for passage will deal with the elimination of administrative supervision over
local authorities and the transfer of responsibilities to local elected officials.
The second piece of legislation up for passage will define all of the procedures,

the directives and the jurisdictions. A third law. without a doubt the most difficnlt
one to set in notion, will deal with the transfer of certain national government funds
to the local ccmunities. For there is no freedaa without financial resources. Now
then, in France at present the national government collects 81 percent of tax

receipts, and local calamities collect only 19 percent as against 25 to 30 percent
in most industrial countries. So this or that funding allocation will have to be taken
away fro. the ministries in order to allocate them directly to the local munities.

@uestiop] will certain taxes be collected directly by the local connunities?

/Knswer7 Yes. It is conceivable that suda-and-such tax may go to canunes and such-

;nd such tax to departments. In addition, the local tax system, professional taxes,
and property taxes on residences have to be canpletely transformed. since the regions

do not all have the same resources, a tax to feed into an equalization fund, for

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR OFFICIAL l'Sl’I 0S!)

example, will have to be provided for. This is a matter of legislation and imagi-
nation. Il‘he main thing is for the local communities to have their own funds, for
there no longer to be a need to 'ring the doorbell' in Paris, and for subsidies to
disappear. Prcm the time you receive a subsidy you are under administrative super-
vision, you are dependent, and you are no longer free. Believe me, as soon as elected
officials have the power in their own hands to make decisions they are also going to
clamor for financial liberty, which is to say for modification of the tax system. In

this area as well we will have changed the mood and demonstrated movement by going
forward.

@uestiog7 But in the event of dispute, who will decide? Say that two neighboring
cities each want to build an airport: Which one is chosen? Say somebody wants to
set up a factory in either one region or another: where will it be of the most use?

[Knsweg If the airport is of national or international magnitude, the national
government makes the choice. If it is an airport for tourism or light aircraft the
arbitration can be done by the region. If the factory is a private sector factory,
it will make the choice itself to set up where in its view conditions seem best. If
it is a nationalized factory, the national government will decide after having com-
pared advantages and possibilities. It is always possible to determine which
authority has the jurisdiction to make the decision.

@uestioy The fact remains that in spite of everything all of this will have to be
made to fit into the framework of the plan, which under a socialist government ought

to regain all of its powers. How is a fervent sense of responsibility to the plan
to be reconciled with local freedoms?

[Knsweﬂ Planning, which as you know socialists have defended right from the start,
is all the more important in a decentralized system. In practice there will be two
plans, in keeping with each other of course: a regional plan and a national plan.
Communes which have work projects to undertake will have to find a spot either in the
regional plan or (when it is a question of large projects like the Harseille subway
or the purification station) in the natimal plan.

[Questioy Nevertheless, at that point there is encroachment on the freedom of the
local government.

[insweg Yes, but the freedom of each one is limited by the freedom of all. He
local elected officials will be working in the framework of national guidance, and
this will be all the easier and less burdensome since we will be free in other
respects.

@uestioﬂ However, in the explanatory preamble of your first law, you really go
quite far: thus, it says there that the municipal council ”will take necessary
measures for the protection of the econanic and social interests of the people of
the col-rune.” Hill the connune, for example, have to rescue businesses which are in

trouble? That is what the Court of Accounts has just reproached you for having done
in Marseille....

(Ensweg I do not disown anything about what I have done in Marseille. What I did
was, I believe, useful. what has taken place? The Titan-Coder many, a very large
truck trailer building and railway repair company, which enployed 800 workers, was

1h
son omen/u. use ONLY
FOR ()FFIl'IAI. I'SF 0N! \

going to close down. I had the land, buildings and equipment bought up by a joint
venture company combining the City of Harseille and the Caisse des Depots peposits
Officg (so it was without private sector participation). And we rented the whole
thing to a manufacturer who got the business going again thus avoiding a wave of dis-
missals. Has not this exactly the part for the local connunity to play? was it not
necessary to rescue Coder? The same thing applies to the Turin Ship Repair Germany.
When 'l‘errin stopped making payments, you saw industrialists from all over Europe
arriving to buy up its ultramodern equipment at low prices. I called a meeting of
the municipal council and we decided to put in a bid in the event the property was
sold off. In this fashion I was able to block sales which would be threatening to
harseille's economy. Following this, the liquidation agent for Terrin gradually
resold to companies who had decided to put the workshops back in operation. and once
the crisis of this ship repair activity was over, the industry was back in operation
in Marseille. A few days ago a C6? [General Confederation of Labog trade unionist
from among the ship repair activity's workers told me on the telephone that the ship-
yards are bustling with activity, so much so that one of the owners, after having
threatened to file for bankruptcy. has ”wonderful morale'I because his business is so
prosperous. Did ‘l'errin have to be broken up? Who can block or prevent business
failures better than the mayor in his own comune, in the event that is possible at

all? This must not prevent him from saying no when he is asked to do so in a dead-end
situation.

[Guestiorj If you follow this course you are going to be obliged to start helping all
lame ducks.

[anweg No. because the mayor is responsible for his budget. Now then, a municipal
budget must be balanced, which rules out risky ventures. In municipalities we do not
have any 'money—printing presses.‘

ﬁuestioﬂ But tell me: Is not being mayor going to become a full-time job?
[anweg No more than it is now.

[auestioﬂ There will be many more responsibilities. will mayors not have to devote
themselves entirely to their office as mayor? How will they be paid?

Linens] It will probably be necessary to work out an elected officials statute and
provide for a salary.

[ﬁnestion] By professionalizing the functions of mayor and general council or regional
council chairman this way. does one not run the risk of creating a class of professional
local politicians?

[insurer] Even if that risk exists it is worth taking in order to gain our freedom.
But I do not believe there is such a danger. In France the penalty in politics,
especially at the time of municipal elections, is a direct function of the results of
management. Demagoguery does not pay. Certain mayors are always reelected. even by
raising taxes. because people know that they are making good use of public moneys.
Other mayors who go in for very low tax rates but who accomplish little get beaten in

elections. The peoples' penalty in politics exists. m voters are rarely wrong.

@uestiog And what about Paris?

15
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I'SF 031 \

[inswe57 I hadthetambition of doing everything, Paris and the provinces, right from
the first bill. But when I saw how complicated the pieces of legislation for the
capital were, I had to agree that we would never get through them this July. It was
impossible in practice. But that was not a political choice at all. It will be

done as quickly as possible. And Ile-de-Prance is one of the regions affected by the
first set of measures.

[Questiog7 And what about Corsica?

[ﬁhswe57 I am going to go to Corsica to explain to the Corsicans myself what the
special status will consist of which they will receive. You saw that the Corsican
movements decided to extend the truce. At the time I said that I was ready to engage
in dialogue: with all democratic organizations. And since above all I do not want
everything to start up again and the cycle of violent acts to begin again, I am struck
by the political need to move quickly. The decentralization reform must therefore be
implemented in Corsica before it comes into effect on the mainland.

Aﬂuestiog7 What will this status be?

Aﬁnswe£7 The main thing is that it is a matter of setting up an assembly endowed with

wider powers than those of the other regional assemblies. I explained these proposals
in Corsica during the legislative election campaign. They were well received. But I

also expect various forms of resistance.

[ﬁuestiog7 What about the Basque region? Is there still a question of creating a new
department?

[inswe57 Not for the time being? The tragedy of the Basque country, in my opinion,

is that there is no solution but a political one. Now then, if the Spanish Government
one day agrees'to grant special status to the Basque country, would the 150,000 French
Basques, who are not even all grouped together, agree at that time to be absorbed by
the 2,300,000 Spanish Basques? I doubt it. In any case, for the moment difficulties

with the Spanish Government on the subject of Basque terrorists compel us to be
cautious.

[Guestion7 Are you going to extradite the prosecuted Spanish Basques?

[inswe57 No. Perhaps because I have experienced clandestine resistance, I feel very
strongly that to extradite is contrary to all France's traditions, especially when it
is a matter, as in this case, of a political combat. I will go to Madrid soon to
meet with the Spanish interior minister. I will explain to him what we are doing; but
extradition--no, that is not possible.

[Questiog7 And what about your police force? Is it war? with you? with the police
hierarchy?

[Insweg7 No! Absolutely not. I saw Bernard Deleplace (secretary general of the
Autonomous Federation of Police Unions) for a long time last week. No, it is not war.
But we find ourselves faced with a very understandable two-sided phenomenon. For years
the police force was under the authority of rightist governments which entrusted it
with basically repressive tasks, directed against the left, the far left, occupied fac-
tories, strikers, immigrants, etc. Bad habits catch on all too quickly. I undertook

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WNW-U l‘Sl‘ 0V! \

to change that, first of all by renewing dialogue with the unions. At that point,
these unions demanded ”some heads.“ I responded that I would not be the cause of
“heads rolling." Everyone has his part to play. Besides, as far as I am concerned,
it is not my nature to knuckle under to demands. Changes will doubtless have to
occur, whether it is because certain persons were too zealous in the past or because
others were unjustly penalized for their opinions. But that can only be done in
peace and quiet and away from any pressure or any demand.

Aﬁuestiog7 But can you achieve a change of atmosphere in the police force?

[ﬁnswer7 I had the top men inthepolice come to see me and I told them: 'Going after
Arabs is over. Racism is over. Antisemitism is over. Here are written instructions:
go after people who commit crimes and the far right with all the energy that is needed
and as effectively as you can, but with other methods." I even said to them, I'lf

at the end of a trail you find a very important politician, I promise you that you
will be completely protected." They asked me why I was saying this. I answered.
"Because, since the security services of certain politicians, and by no means minor
ones, were picked by these far right groups, it is not impossible that one day you
will run up against one of them.“ But for this to get down to the rank and file is
another matter. I have been able to verify it in Marseille. and a few days ago it was
reflected by a reordering of that local police force. Perhaps via this example

others will begin to understand. But you cannot change the bad habits of 20 years in
1 month.

[Unestiog7 Are you going to bring out some old buried files again?

[Inswe57 Well, about those "old files." I am in the process of having them completely
investigated in order to hand them over to the Evaluation Committee.

[5uestiog7 The committee chaired by Francois Bloch-Laine?

[Inswe57 Yes, it is that committee which is also responsible for setting up ethical
evaluation. The chief of state and prime minister have given me their assent. The
Broglie case, the Curiel case, the Goldman case, the Delpey one, etc. They must all
be examined. Do you know that the file on far right factions in the police, which the
examining judge asked the previous government for, had never been handed over? Then,
since evaluation is being set up, I myself wish that the chairman of or the spokesman
for the Evaluation Committee might be able to assess-all these strange cases,
including those which, like the attack on Copernic Street, are still in the hands of
the judicial system.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 ‘Le Nouvel Observateur'

9631
C50: 3100/865

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

REASONS FOR INCREASE IN TENSION BETWEEN PSI, PCI
Milan PANORAHA in Italian 17 Aug 81 pp 30-32
[Article by Pabrizio Caisson]

[Text] Discredit Cards: Suspicions surrounding PSI finances
involve Cali and P2. Suspicious floating around some
fringe Reds who wound up in the PCI (the USSR is in-
volved there). These and other tales of money, deals,
politics and judges bid fair to poison relations on
the left. Caught between the feuding parties: the DC.

Here is a story the communists tell. It is about Roberto Calvi and the
PSI. It is a matter the banker revealed to the Milanese court of in-
quiry during questioning: Umberto Ortolani, one of the biggest wheels
in Masonic Lodge P2, had long been pushing to get a foreign bank ac-
tount opened in the name "of a party." Acceding to his repeated re-
quests, Calvi opened the account (and that account reportedly swelled
in short order to $20 million); immediately thereafter he received
telephone calls "from top socialist leaders" thanking him. All this

is down in the verbatim procedings, and protected by the cloak of se-
crecy surrounding such inquiries. ~

The socialists tell another story. It has to do with Deputy State Pro-
secutor for Milan Guido Viola. As the P2 scandal was breaking, Viola
went to the mayor of Milan, Carlo Tognoli, a socialist, to tell him
something like this: "Look, this is really something big; the leaders
of your party are involved; the only way to get out of it is to get
rid of Craxi.“ Tognoli lost no time in reporting that conversation

to the heads of the PSI.

Whispers in the corridors, rumors spread (in strict confidence) about
these stories (along with others recounting unsavory tales of deals,
money, politics, and police investigations) may well send relations on
the left into a perilous spiral of attack and reprisal. There was the
war of words between Enrico Berlinguer and Bettino Craxi, between the

PCI and the PSI, and that it was bitter, tough, and occasionally contemp-
tuous in tone, was an old story by then, one everybody knew. But the
clash was contained -- with some exertions -- within the realm of poli-
tics, far away from that war of the files, of revelations, of sensational

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FK’IAI. I'M“ ON”

disclosures that had almost always been a monopoly of the internecine
battles within the DC (occasionally, perhaps, with the involvement of

Milanese courts in the Calvi-P2 case. It had bedn none other than
Craxi, at the last minute, who decided not to send the report, and to
hold the bloodshed inside the political arena for a while longer. But
in fact he had slipped the charges against the prosecutors into the
text of his speech in the Chamber, during the debate on the vote of
confidence for thd.Spadolini government. "A fine way to calm the wa~
ters," was the reaction in the PCI.

Not even Calvi's release from durance vile was enough to soften the
shrill tone of polemics. 0n the contrary, rumors about what the banker
had actually told the court during the investigation simply fed the
smouldering fires of suspicion. "I do not answer questions of that
kind," was Calvi's terse reply to Enzo Biagi, who asked him in an inter-
view for LA REPUBBLICA about some "mysterious financing that had tra-
veled via America-and Germany to wind up with an Italian party." ‘

"So far as we know,n say the socialist leaders soothingly, "Calvi did
indeed speak of the PSI, but in these terms: that in various quarters
and in several circles there had been a lot of talk about the need for
giving the PSI a practical hand, to help speed Craxi's new course." But
no secret financing ever materialized, they say. "Quite the contrary,
early this year Calvi was pressing for repayment of at least part of
the PSI's line of credit with the Dance Ambrosiano," protested Claudio

And so it came to pass that, shortly before the Palermo party congress,
two payments of 400 million lire each went to the Banco Ambrosiana,
thereby reducing the debt to around 11 billion lire: the biggest part
of the official PSI budget deficit, which comes to 27 billion lire in all
Of this, one-tenth had been inherited from the stewardship of Francesco
De Martino. In the 5 years of Craxi's management, in short, 17 or 18
billion lire of indebtedness has somehow managed to build up. "You do
have to consider the interest, though, plus the fact that since he took
over there has not been a single year without elections," say the PSI's
administrators, certain, even so, that they can clear up the debt when
the Party‘s government subsidy is doubled.

As for that money from America and Germany, Craxi's managers swear that
there were a lot of promises, but very little money ever actually mate-
rialized. By way of example, they tell about something that happened

on the eve of the 1979 political and European elections. After repeated
assurances of help, some money actually arrived from Germany: 120 mil-
lion lire. "Chickenfeed, not boxcars full of gold!" Furious, Craxi

l9
FOR(WFN]ALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fired off a telegram to the German leaders: "We are endorsing your
contribution, and adding a matching sum, to a foundation for the de-

particularly now that they have finished questioning Calvi, do not seem
thoroughly convinced that it is. with the matter of the "Protection"
account apparently shelved-(pinned, on the basis of some detailed state—
ments by Licio Gelli, to Bettino Craxi's right-hand man, Claudio Mar-
telli), they are now looking for the holder of another account, opened

compared with the DC in his denunciation of the corruption of the party
system in Italy. In other words, Berlinguer was asking the many doubt—
ing Thomases in the PCI: how can you conceive of an alliance with a
leadership crew like the socialist one which might at any moment be
swamped with a flood of indictments?

guer's latest interview; after that is delivered, he will be leaving
for America with his wife and son, to travel across the United States
in a camper, coast-to-coast). "It would really be dreadful if the PCI
were to decide to start playing politics with the files and the prose-
cutors,ll insists Luigi Covatta, a socialist from Lombardy. "On other
occasions it has leaned in that direction, but that's a losing game."
"To put it simply, that is not the way we work. We leave that kind of
behavior to others," was the retort at the Botteghe 0scure,,"unless the
socialists’ concerns really turn out to have something to do with the

Down on the Via del Corso, though, the top PSI brass are battening the
hatches for what might turn out to be an all-out war, with no quarter
given. Meanwhile, they are stockpiling records on deliveries of Soviet
methane, with some 15 billion lire in "undocumented expenditures" au-
thorized, beginning in 1973, by the Foreign Trade Ministry. Whose ad-
dress was on that particular slice of pie?

According to IL SETTIMANALE, it was addressed to the Communist Party
(and the communists are convinced that IL SETTIMANALE got the informa~
tion from some Socialist Party leak or other).

socialists warn, as they toss into the pot both the companies active
in trade with the Eastern bloc countries, and the farms in the Coopera-
tive League. ("There are socialists in those outfits, too," they point

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! (ll-111'“! I'SF 0N! \

out, "but the socialists have very little to say in matters of control
or decision-making.“

If politics is really destined to yield the floor to the battle of the
files, more or less explosive, more or less documented, relations be-
tween the two parties on the left would run the very serious risk, when
business resumes in September, of a permanent rupture. "If that were
to happen, you can bet that the DC would move for elections right away,
even ahead of time." That is a prediction you can hear, despite all
the other quarrels, from socialists and communists alike.

COPYRIGT: 1981 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore S.p.A.

6182
cso: 3104/366

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR10FTWCJAI.USE1ONLY

POLITICAL UNITED KINGDOH

HORI POLL: LIEElAL,SDP ALLIANCE COULD “I“ NEXT ELECTION
PH141323 London THE TIMES in English 16 Sep 81 p 2

[Unattributed report of Robert Uorcester analysis: "Conservatives Stay in Opinion
Poll Doldrums"]

[Excerpts] Five months since the launching of the Social Democratic Party, the
Conservatives show no sign of recovery in public support, according to a Mari poll
conducted exclusively for THE TIMES.

In a neasure of spontaneous voting intention ("if there were a general election
tonorrow“), Labour leads the Conservatives by 9 percent, an 8 percent swing from
the ConservativestoLabour since the election (Table l).

The Conservatives have suffered a long, slow slide in public support, dipping to
28 percent last March and settling for the last two nontha at 30 percent, figures
that have not been reached by either big party, in or out of government, since

Labour's Nadir in November, 1976, at the tine of the International Monetary Fund

crisis.

Interestingly, the launching of the Social Delocratic Party made no dent in Liberal
Barty support until Harrington, when, as the graph shows, spontaneous support for
the SDP overtook that for the Liberals; there has been only a slight, statistically
insignificant, drop in SD? support over the period since the Harrington by~election
on July 16.

Hhen prompted with the idea of an alliance between the Liberals and the SDP,
public support again rises dramatically to 61 percent, considerably sore than the
29 percent achieved by the two parties separately. Labour supporters are somewhat
more likely to shift to the Alliance than are Conservatives, as the table shows.

Changes in part support since the general elections are set out in Table 2, which
shows:

-Conservatives losing proportionally among all classes.
--Labour gaining slightly among working-class electors..

-Both the Conservatives and Labour losing support among trade unionists to the SUP.

22

FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Liberals staying roughly the same, apparently unaffected by the emergence of
the SDP.

The importance of achieving an alliance between the Liberals and the 801’ is under-
scored by the findings in Table 3, which shows how much stronger the whole
(Alliance) would be than the sum of its parts (the Liberals and SD? separately).

The Liberals on the one hand are stronger with women, younger electors (although

not first-time voters), unskilled working-class (DB) voters, and people in the
southern area of the country.

The SDP, on the other hand. is weaker with women, older voters (especially pen-
sioners) and working-class people, and is evenly balanced geographically.

Put them together in an alliance, and they become alnost equally strong among all

sexes, ages, classes and regions of the country, with their only important weakness
being with those aged over 65.

One notable finding from the study is the considerable strength the 8!)? has with
trade unionists, apparently sophoning off former conservative trade union support.

An alliance, according to these figures, would come first among all sectors of
the population except working-class, where Labour would narrowly win, by 3 percent,
and in the north of England and Scotland, where Labour would win by 2 percent.

Ninety-three percent of Liberals in the poll said they would support an alliance
at the general election, as did 96 percent of (spontaneous) SDP supporters. Among
trade unionists. the 80? would come one point ahead of Labour, 1:2 to 61 percent.

Other finds from the Hori poll are that 26 percent now think economic conditions
in the country will improve the next 12 months. Although still nearly half (46
percent) expect things to get worse. That is a marked improvement in earlier

Mori findings: In July, 56 percent expected things to get worse, as did 61 percent
of the public last March.

beast optimistic about the future are the young, working-class respondents. and
people living in the north.

Unemployment is still. overwhelmingly, though to be the most ilportant issue facing
Britain today. Two-thirds (67 percent) of the public say that, which compares
with 10 percent who thought so at the time of the last election. In February,
1979, (during the "winter of discontent"), just over the electorate said strikes
and trade unions were the most important issue; only three percent think that
today.

This issue has been at or near the bottom of public concerns since last September.
It compares with 14 percent who say that prices and inflation are the most iaportant

issue. while law and order, the BBC and northern Ireland are most important to
only f ive, two, and two percent respectively (Table 6).

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Technical note: This survey was carried out by Market & Opinion Research Inter—
national (Mori) for THE TIMES by personal interviews along a quota sasple of

1,775 adults. aged over 18, selected to the representative of the adult population
Fieldwork was conducted
between August 20 and Septeaber 2, 1981, in 153 sampling points throughout Britain.

of Great Britain by sex, age. social class and region.

Table l/SDP/Liberal Alliance

(A) "How would you vote if there were a general election toaorrow?"

(B) "If there was a general election tomorrow and the Social Democratic Party
election, which of the

and the Liberal Party for-ed an alliance to fight this

parties on this card would you vote for?"

(1979 Election) Spontaneous

(A)

0/0 0/0

Con (45) 30
Lab (38) 39
Lib (lb) 13

29 (Lib/$0?)

SDP (-) 16
Other (3) 2

61 (Alliance)

Prompted

(B)
0/0

25
31

3

Base: A11 adults giving voting intentions (excluding "don't knows").

Table 2/Change in Party Support

All

Con
Lab
Lib
SDP
Other
Middle Class (A301)
Con
Lab
Lib
SDP
Other

May, 1979

0/0

65
38
16

3

59
26
15

2

2h

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Now

0/0

39
13
16

44
20
13
22

Change

0/0

Minus
Plus
Minus
Plus
Minus

Minus
Minus
Minus

Plus
Minus

15
1
1

16
1

15

22

Net Gain

0/0

Minus 5
Minus 8

Plus 12

Plus 1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050057-0

NOR ("WIN \| {'SF OVI \

Table 2 Continued

All Hay. 1979 Nov
Skilled Working Class (C2)
Con 61 23
Lab 61 68
_ Lib 15 13
SD? - 11.
Other 3 2
Unskilled Horking Class (DE)
Con 36 19
Lab 69 S3
Lib 13 15
SDP - 10
Other lo 2
Trade Unionists
Con 33 19
Lab 51 48
Lib 13 12
SDP - 18
Other 3 3

Table 3/Profile of Party Supporters

Electorate Con Lab Lib

A11 (100) (30) (39) (13)

0/0 0/0 0/0 010
Men 68 102 50 38
"omen 52 58 SO 62
18-21. 13 11 17 10
25-31. 20 16 19 22
35-64 19 16 17 26
65-54 14 12 15 13
55-66 17 27 16 12
65 Plus 17 27 16 17

25

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050067-0
Electorate Con Lab Lib 8!)? (Alliance)

AB 16 27 l. 17 23 18
Cl 23 29 15 19 30 25
C2 33 25 39 30 27 28
DB 28 20 lol 34 20 29
TU Member 28 18 3!» 25 32 28
North (Incl Scot) 37 27 lol 31 36 33
Midlands 25 26 29 20 26 26
South 38 46 30 69 38 42
Rose Owner 59 73 61 62 68 63
Concil 35 19 55 32 26 30
Telephone 73 83 60 76 83 76
No 'phone 27 17 no 26 17 26

Table lo/Most Inportant Issue (Trends)
Hhat would you say is the loot isportant issue facing britain today?

Feb 79 Peb 80 Sep 80 Dec 80 Jun 81 Jul 81 Aug 81
(All figures in percentage)

Unemployment 10 16 57 59 68 70 67
Prices/ Inf lat ion 30 38 23 23 18 12 14
Trade Unions

Strikes/Industrial

Disputes 51 25 3 6 3 2 3
Law and Order 3 lo 2 3 3 6 5
Cons-on Market 2 lo 5 2 2 l 2
Northern Ireland 1 2 x 2 2 l 2
Imigration 1 1 2 l 2 3 3
Housing/Rates/Renta l 1 l 1 1 1 x
Schools/Education 1 2 2 x 1 1 1
Pensions l l l x 1 l 3
National Health Service 1 1 1 x 1 x x

Base: A11 18 plus
COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1981

C50: 3120/68

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

@NERAL FRANCE

NEH GOVERNniNT'S SPRUCTURAL CHANGES IN POLICE FORCE
Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 24 Aug 81 pp 13-15
[Article by Philippe Krasnopolski: "The Defferre Line"]

[Text] The police are not being spared the "change."
But the structural reforms prepared by Mr Defferre
are being well received by them.

Meetings in the police stations to denounce "despotic chiefsz" this is one of the
projects of the new session of the Autonymous Federation of Police Unions (FASP).

FASP, which has close ties with the Socialist Party, includes a little over 50 per-
cent of uniforaed and civilian police. It was founded in 1969 and until 1975 was
directed by Gerard Monate, a peace officer who entered the "big house" and unionism

in 1946. Today he is one of the closest advisers of Gaston Defferre. the minister of
Interior, on police questions.

On 23 June. at its congress held in Rouen, FASP asked that sanctions be taken against
certain highly-placed officials "to get the police out of the crisis into which it
was plunged by the ministers and leaders of the former regime."

Mr Defferre then rejected any "witch hunt:"

"The unions have asked no for heads. I an not going to lake heads roll. The pres-
ent hierarchy has followed the dictates of the preceding governments, which were e-
lected nor-ally. It was their duty and it was the sense of the state."

Half laughing and half troubled, a highly-placed official of the national police ex-
plains, however:

"Mr Defferre is trying to reassure the hierarchy. But his words are ambiguous. So
not teach cones of it. No question of initiatives. The work suffers because of it."

Actually, speaking of "those who have done too mch with it, who have exceeded their
role and who by their behavior have done in the pronotion of some who did not think

as they did," Mr Defferre, after his installation in the Place Beauvau, undertook to
reorganize the police depart-ants.

MWWONLY
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

'ﬂb change the spirit you have to change the men," he asserts.

Change has chiefly hit the men who denounced the FASP: Pierre Somveille, the pre-
fect of police in Paris, was replaced by Jean Perier, who had been until then the
prefect in Ille-et-Vilaine; Maurice Lambert, the director of the National Police, by
Bernard Couzier, until now prefect at large. Mr Lambert, it is true, becomes direc-
tor general of administration in the Interior Ministry.

Another appointment: Mr Bouhin, the former prefect of Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, has
just become the head of the Public Security Board, a service that was dissolved in
1978, which will bring together the supervision of the urban police and the CRS [Re-
publican Security Companies].

Other "heads" wanted by FASP: Maurice Bouvier, the central director of the Criminal
Investigation Department; Michel Guyot, the director of the Paris PJ [Criminal In-
vestigation Department]; Marcel Chalet, head of the DST [Directorate of Territorial
Surveillance]; Roger Chain, director of the Urban Police; Roger Pinaud, director of
the CRS; Philippe Massoui, Technical Services director and former adviser to
Raymond Barre on police affairs; Robert Broussard and Marcel Leclerc, who are re-
spectively head of the Antigang Brigade and head of the Criminal Brigade. "The 10
key persons of the police promoted by the former regime, " the unionists emphasize.

PASP also wants to "moralize the profession." At least, that is what its secretary
general, Bernard Deleplace, says:

"we have to get rid'of the black sheep, involved in the rackets, procuring, in low-
er-police operations or in missions that sometines imperil deaocracy."

These words call up this observation by a police commissioner:

"Moralization is only an excuse for those who are incapable to get rid of those who
are better. You can see it in the Ayme-Blanc affair."

Lucien Ayme-Blanc is the head of the Central Office for the Repression of uric.
(OCRB) and one of the most effective of French policemen. Today he is criticized for
his relations with a crook who had been sought since October 1980 and was arrested
last 23 July by the police of the International Information Bureau (BRI).

The whole problem of infiltration and use of informers is raised again here.

The FASP is the only union to ask for "purging." The leaders of the Independent Na-

tional Police Union (SNIP), the second largest uniformed police union, are content
to ask for "reforms."

Shortly after the second round of the presidential election, Francois Mitterrand ex—
plained in a letter to the police union organizations:

"We must return to techniques of prevention, protection and aid to the population,
that is to say to walking the beat. The use of the troops will be reviewed."

"That is the only way to rehabilitate the profession. Twenty-five years ago the

'cop' was respected because people knew him," a SNIP aember declared with satisfac-
tion.

28
FIN!(HHN(1A1.USB¢JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here and now, patrolling the beat exists as an experiment in Rennes and in the
Hauts-de-Seine, notably in Boulogne-Billancourt. The Mobile Security Units (UMS),
which were created by Christian Bonnet, should be dissolved soon.

Mr Defferre put Mr Monate and Maurice Grimaud in charge of preparing the police re-
form. Mr Grimaud was prefect of police in Paris in 1968; at that time he was hostile
to any brutal repression of the student demonstrations.

The two men have worked together before. In 1980 they published a work reflecting on
the mission of the police. In opposition to the idea of "maintaining order" they
suggest the idea of prevention. The book calls for abolishing the special brigades,
reform of the General Inspectorate of the Services (165) and the General Inspectorate
of the National Police (IGPN), the "police of the police forces."

These reforms are in progress. Thus it was decided to decentralize the CR5 and take
away from them the mission of maintaining order, and give them prevention tasks (on
the roads, in the mountains, etc.). Under the direct authority of the minister of

the Interior, the CRS will be responsible to the director of the urban police forces.
It is said in the Place Beauvau:

"Gone is the day when the Marseilles CRS went up to Lille to put down the Steelwork-

ers. The Marseilles members of the CRS will work in the Bouches-du-Rhone. the Lille
members in the North.

Sole reforms, however, are stirring up protests. Thus it was decided to abolish the
Central Company for Parisian Metro Security (CCSM), which was accused of "ratonner"
[translation unknown] in order to give the neighborhood police stations the job of
surveillance of the metro stations. That decision was to take effect on 1 August.
The manager of the RATP [Independent Parisian Transport System] (who is now

Claude Quin, a Communist) obtained from the government a postponement of that deci-

sion by emphasizing the lowering of the crime rate in the metro, which is due to the
CCSM.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "Valeurs actuelles"

8946
C50: 3100/928 END

29
INJR¢OIWﬂCJAI.l£5l:(HVLY