FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10518

14 May 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 31/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
JPBS publications contain intonation prinrily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- Bnglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Test]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfaniliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or name preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Titles within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGH’ [ANS AND REGULATIONS MINING ““8851? OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT

(rouo 31/82)

CONTENTS

ENERGY noonomcs

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Prospects , Advantages of Nationwide District Heating Weighed
(Sebastian Knauer; STERN, 18 Mar 82) ...................

toouomc
FRANCE

Aron, Senator Discuss Econo-y Versus Social Benefits
(Various sources. various dates)...

Aron Sees Contradiction, by Ray-and Aron
Senator Urges Defense of Franc, by

Hichel Haurice-Boksnovski

ITALY

Text of Bill on Severance Pay
(IL SOLE-2’0 0K3, 13 “It 82) ossaasssssaosoosssoasstosses

Outlook for Inflation. Balance of Payuents, Uneuploynent
(IL SOLE-2t. on, 110 Mar 82) ............................

POLITICAL

NETIIEMANDS

Activities of Extrene Rightist Parties Viewed
(Hans Suits; VRIJ mm. 3 Apr 82) ................

-a- [III-WE-ISO

FOR OFI'IOAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm

FRANCE

3mm: Photo of Arisne Solid Propsllsnt Booster Released
(Ala ET mm, lomaz) 0.000......0;..OOOOOOCOOOOOOI

ITALY

Profiles of Pro-inent Con-mist Indus trislists
(Davide Psolini; 1!. mm. 12 list 82) ...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mans! mes mm REPUBLIC 0? GERMANY

PROSPECTS. ADVANTAGES OF NATIWIDB DISTRICT mm WEIGHED
Hamburg STERN in German 18 Mar 82 pp 90, 92, 9‘

[Article by Sebastian Knauer: “Wasted Energy for Millions; Apart-onto, not the
Countryside, Should Be Heated“)

[Text] It is possible to tap heat for the living more from
power stations and industrial plants. Alnost half of the
PRC could be supplied in this way. Is district heating a
magic weapon against increased oil bills and greater
pollution of the environ-ent?

Pros: the depths cones a hissing whistling. .Brightly shining cylinders push
3.60-neter-dianeter concrete pipes into the soil hydraulically. Centimeter by
centimeter the giant worn eats its way horizontally under the railroad yards of
Hannhein's nain railroad station. After 350 esters the pipe hits the target
shaft with the accuracy of a hand's breadth.

The engineers' brilliant coup is not for a subway line but for construction of
district heating. Steel pipes are laid through the underground tunnel to conduct
heat to apartments. The 130° Centigrade hot water for the radiators cones fro.
a large power plant. By the mid-1980s the coal colossus on the Mannheim Rhine
bank. together with an additional 800 negawatt unit. is to becone the largest
power plant in the Western world. The new plant will produce 50 percent electric
current and 50 percent district heat.

And what the operators of nuclear power plants can only dream about actually
happened here: the giant program was approved in three-quarters of a year with-
out Inajor protests from the population.

As in hardly any other area of energy policyfpoliticians. ecologists and
econonists are equally in favor of heat from the pipes. According to Federal
Research Minister Andreas von Buelow, it is to be I'built up nasaively.’ The
Environmental Council of Experts terns it a I'decisive opportunity.‘ And even
the Association of Electric Current Producers assigns 'a large significance to
district heating through coupling heat and power as well as industrial waste
heat."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Up to now, energy with which sillions of households could be heated has been
wasted from the stacks of power stations and factories. In a cawentional power
plant, coal is utilized to only one-third, and in a nuclear power plant urarius
to only 1 percent. The reaainder goes as 'waste heat“ into the atmosphere or
into rivers. Bach year, a cooling water stress with the sedian water level of
the Moselle flows through a 1,300 megawatt nuclear plant like the one in Biolis.
Federal Transportation uinister Volker Hauff says: 'hpartnents, not the country-
side, should be heated.‘

District heating is considered a hot tip not only for a sure energy supply but
also for increased prosperity and mic growth:

"The‘FRG's dependence on petroleum would be reduced through construction of a
district heating grid. Each year, 27 Iillion metric tons of petroleun and thus
on 13 billion in foreign exchange could be saved. In no other area is it pos-
sible to save as such petroleu as in heating, where the black gold can be
exchanged for hot water.

«The environment benefits fro. district heating, and not only because of the
lower tesperature load exerted by the power plants. By taking individual
heating installations which fire oil or coal out of service, the snog over the
cities will be reduced. with the introduction of district heating in Cologne.
poisonous sulfur dioxide was reduced 27 percent; in mnich. 30 percent. In the
Ruhr area 100,000 setric tons less of harsful substances will probably trickle
down after construction of the district heating grid. Renewed environ-ental
pollution by additional coal heat power plants is avoided by sodern filtration
processes.

"uploynent will receive a strong iQetus. More than 200,000 jobs for steel
construction workers. sheet aetal workers, erectors, engineers and construction
workers are supposed to be assured for 15 years. Nevertheless, in the teoy-
aent progran currently being passed by the Federal Govern-ent, district heating
is not taken into account.

The security of supply for coal power plants is assured until well beyond the
year 2000. worldwide, 83 percent of fuel reserves are coal, 1‘ percent are
petroleua and only 3 percent are gas. Europe has the largest aaount of coal
after the United States, the Soviet Union and China.

Is district heating a magic weapon? Not entirely. Up to now, extension of the
6,385-kiloneter-long heat coil throughout the me has been econouical only for
short distances. However, the drastically increased prices of oil and gas in
the aeantise have made district heating in conurbations attractive for distances
greater than 30 kilometers, too.

Only in the countryside does the construction of expensive supply lines spec an
obstacle. A kilometer of pipe grid in the no costs half a aillion, and every
connection to a house costs on 4.000. The fact that it can be different is
shown by the Scandinavians, world champions of district heating: By scans of
sin-pie, inexpensive piping systems even thinly settled belts of land are sup-
plied with district heat.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1971, the Pederal Government sounded out future possibilities for district
heating in a lZ-volume report. According to the report, up to the year 1990 at
most 33 percent (today it is 7 percent) of ’low temperature heat' is to come from
the pipe: for space heat, hot water supply in apartments, schools, administration
buildings and factory buildings.

ﬂowever, the figures are already out of date. Through increased construction of
small, decentralized heat power plants it is possible to form so-called supply
islands with their own grids. By tying these grids together, 40 percent of all
energy users can receive heat.

No other fuel--neither gas from Siberia nor oil from the Emirates nor electric
current from domestic nuclear plants--is cheaper than recovered energy. Industry
has shown for a long time how money can be made from hot steam. Excess waste
heat is reutilized in their own heat recirculation loops by chemical plants and
refineries, steel plants and smelters. Moreover, industry produces as much
electricity in heat power plants each year as is produced in five large nuclear
power plants.

On the lower Rhine, the district heating track for 150,000 apartments is supplied
by industrial enterprises. In Duisburg, a Thyssen blast furnace supplies heat
for 9,000, a sulfuric acid plant for 15,000 and a steel plant for 26,000 apart-
ments of 70 square meters each.

In Mannheim, the inhabitants also heat apartments with their own trash. More
than 180,000 tons of trash a year are converted to heat energy in a trash incin-
eration plant. Even at Ochsenturt on the Main, far from the large power plants,
a sugar plant sells waste heat. And in Stade on the lower Elbe, a nuclear power
station is expected to supply its excess steam to a commercial enterprise 2
years from now, for the first time.

The petroleum age is approaching its end. Although even today almost one-half
of all apartments are heated with expensive petroleum, wherever rickety oil
burners have to be scrapped, district heating is particularly indicated.
According to Hans Peter Hinkens of the Frankfurt District seating Association,
“It took only 20 years for oil to be accented in the heating market, and its
rejection will not take any longer.”

A hard fight is on over the loo-billion market for heating the living room.

with the concept “heat 2000,‘ electric current producers want to make night-
storage heating and electrically operated heat pumps palatable. During
recessions, it is thus possible to sell excess electric current to consumers at
high prices, including current from nuclear power plants. However, heat from
the wall outlet is a wasteful solution because three times as much energy has to
be made available to produce 1 kilowatt of electric current. Valuable electric
current is necessary above all for illumination and for driving machinery.

The strongest competitor for the lucrative heat market, however, is gas, because
where natural gas lines already go to the consumer, the chances for district
heating are slight.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And this is particularly the case of the conurbations suited for district heating.
The gas lobby is shooting full blast at the expensive duplication of supply lines;
it argues that “the present wave of enthusiasm for district heating will give way
to a more sober way of looking at things.‘

The street fight among heat vendors is most often decided in local government
offices. According to Manfred Ito-eel, president of the German Association of
Municipalities, ”the rivalry between district heating and gas should be brought
to an end as soon as possible.“

however, municipal supply enterprises show little inaginatim in converting to
the casing energy supply.

No wonder, because the manager of a gas plant jeopardizes his own job by deciding
on district heating. In Plensburg, after rapid construction of district heating
in April of this year, the gas plant will be shut down. Today more than 90 per-
cent of all households are connected to the district heating grid, although as
recently as 1970 the city was classified by the Federal Government as 'unsuited'
for district heating. City plant nanager Wolfgang Prinz col-ents: 'At that

tine they laughed at us."

In the neantisie, consumers have stopped laughing wherever district heating fell
by the wayside and gas was propagated. Shocked bythe price increases for oil,
and lured by the sales slogans of natural gas vendors ('convenient energy“),
hundreds of thousands of households have converted to gas heat in the past
decade. The gas share of heat energy rose fro. 1 percent in 19“ to 17 percent
today. However, once the gas burners were installed prices also roar-since
1978 alone, by sore than 100 percent. And the gas aonopoly enterprises regularly
send polite letters asking that price increases be agreed to or supply contracts
will be canceled.

Nothing will change the price dictate because natural gas is still scarcer than
petroleum. Exploitation of the colorless fuel, which since the recent natural
gas pipeline deal with Russia, also has a political price, is controlled by the
same raw-material multinationals as petroleur-ﬂobile, Bsso, shell and BP. The
hoodwinked natural gas consumer now hesitates from bitter experience to change
course to the district heating extolled. As Hans Neuffer of the Association for
District Heating says, 'who wants to be taken advantage of twice?“

Price will decide the race of the heating systens in the end. In the strongholds
of district heating, the Steag as [hard Coal, Inc] of Essen calculated a clear
lead for pipe heat. Annual heating costs per square meter in a multifamily
house are: for heating oil on 23.82, for electric current on 21.69, for gas

on 19.51 and for district heating on 17.91.

For the present. however, local residents will have to put up with the dirt

and noise of underground construction at their front doors. In Cologne, to be
sure, laying the heat pipe below ground was cabined with construction of the
subway. And in order to break down opposition to district heating, according to
the SUDDEUTSCBB ZBITUNG, cables for the controversial cable television can be
laid at the same time.

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

District heating will bring bad luck only to the luck-bringing chi-hey sweeps,
because millions of private chimneys will have stopped sacking.

 

A 6,385-Kiloneter Long neat Coil Today Supplies 7 Percent of m Citizens

The FRG as a district heating country. At Mannheim the largest coal-fired heat
power plant of the Western world is coming into being. Conduits with hot water
are brought above ground to the consumers. As shown on the map, about 40 percent
of the population could be supplied with heat iron the pipe. Construction of
the district heating network often falls through because gas line laying has

just been completed at great expense. Natural gas, however, is scarcer than
petroleum and almost as expensive.

Key: 1. Pull pipe. District heating for apartnents and offices in the M.
2. The actual extent of district heating grids in conurbations is this
small.
3. The potential for an economical district heat supply is this large.
4. Conventional power stations which can be tapped for district heating.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 5 Co.

5586
C80: 3103/382

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC m

ARON, SNNR DISCUSS ECONOMY VERSUS SOCIAL BENEFITS
Aron Sees Cantradiction

Paris L'EXPRESS in French 19-25 Feb 82 pp 96-97

[Article by Raymond Aron: "France in the Crisis”!

[Text] The day after the elections, in' keeping with his campaign promises.
Francois Hitterrand created a comittee to draw up an assessnent of the pre-
ceding 7—year tern, an inventory of France on the eve of the Socialist experi-
ment. The new majority did not use the outline of the report which was pre-
sented in Septedier. I shall not use the whole report, which too often ap-
pears to be indictment.

Between 1970 and 1980, individual purchasing power continued to rise. In
1970. sone 57 percent of all households had a washing nachine; in 1980, it was
79.6 percent; and the percentages for automobiles rose from 57.6 to 70 percent.
During that same period the average workweek (for workers and elployees) de-
clined from 65.7 to 60.7 hours. In other words. without any action by the
public authorities the workweek declined by about 10 percent. However, these
figures can be interpreted in various ways. Although the rise in purchasing
power has slowed down since 1973, purchasing power has nevertheless continued
to rise. This is enough to contradict the critics who inveigh against aus-
terity and seek to find the secret of prosperity in the increase in individual
incones. 0n the other hand, one night wonder if inflation and unaployment
are not at least the partial consequences of an incomes policy (or a lack
thereof) which, in the last analysis, favored consurption at the expense of
investment.

In the publication ECONOHIE ET SIATISTIQUB by Insee [National Institute of
Statistics and Economic Studies] I read about the trend in rates of annual
volume growth of the Gross Donestic Product [GDP]. The French rate was 5.3
between 1960 and 1973. and 2.9 between 1973 and 1980. The two rates are
higher than the United Kingdon's (2.9 and 1); close to the rates for Italy
(5.3 and 2.6) and for the PRO (6.3 for 1960-1970; 3.9 for 1970-1973; and 2.6
for 1973-1980). They are less than the corresponding rates for Japan (10.3
for 1960-1970; 7.9 for 1970-1973; and 10.5 for 1973-1980).

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other statistics bring out France's relative successes and failures during
these recent years. The CD? grew by 21.1 percent between 1970 and 1980, com-
pared with 19.7 for Italy, 17.2 for the F30. 16.7 for the United States, 5.2
for the United Kingdom. but 33 for Japan. The dislocations following the oil
crisis have brought the rate of GDP growth down to 1.3 in 1980. The 1981
elections coincide with a recession combined with the decline in growth rate
which characterizes the whole period.

At the same time France followed a very conservative policy in public expendi-
tures. The budget deficit was barely more than 1 percent of the GDP, while
the deficit reached 11 percent in Italy, 6.8 percent in the Netherlands, and
3.5 percent in the United Kingdom. As a result, the burden of the public debt
(in percentage of GDP) reached 16.7 percent at the end of 1980, as opposed to
58.1 percent in Italy, 28.6 in Japan and 22.6 in the 988.

On the other hand, from March 1980 to March 1981, the retail price index rose
by an average of 12.5 [points] compared to 20.1 for Italy. 5.5 for the P86.
6.6 for the Netherlands and 7.6 for Belgium. It is striking that there ap-
pears to be no correlation between the rats of price increases and the strict-
ness of budgetary or monetary control. Despite enormous budgetary deficits

(9 percent of the GDP), Belgium keeps its prices in check better than France.

As for unemployment, France occupies an in-between position: 7.6 percent of
its labor force at the end of March 1981; less than Belgium (10.5) and the
United Kingdom (9.5). yet considerably more than the P36. however. between
1980 and 1981 the increase in unemployment was faster in the countries that
lad previously been spared, namely, the ERG and the Netherlands.

Before 1973 the government did not comprehend the signs heralding a change in
the economic climate-many signs (slowdown in growth, beginning of unemploy-
ment. and acceleration of inflation). Valery Giscard d'Bstaing, after his
election in 1974, immediately took the initiative of preparing a stabilization
plan, which was obviously needed, and which caused the 1975 recession. It ap-
pears that those in charge did not become aware of the gravity of the crisis,
or rather of the deep causes of a prolonged phase of slackening of the econ-
omy. From the end of 1975, a revival plan was applied which aggravated infla-
tion and brought about a deficit in current accounts. Raymond Barre replaced
Jacques Chirac in the fall of 1976 and defined the principles of his adminis-

tration. These were maintained, along general lines, until the Socialist
victory in May-June 1981.

Raymond Barre had reestablished equilibrium in the current accounts by 1978-
1979, before the second oil crisis. The latter crisis brought about a new
deficit in current accOunts; a surplus of Pr 19.208 billion on account of in-
visible transactions, reducing the trade deficit by Fr $2.310 billion.

Taking only these overall figures into account. and stopping at the spring of
1981, an overall judgment could be formed along the following lines: A pru-
dent management left the Socialist government considerable foreign exchange
holdings (Fr 363.601 billion). a small internal public debt and a positive

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

balance in foreign credits and debts. But the positive balance is somewhat
illusory since a certain number of our outstanding credits are uncertain, to
say the least. The picture is darkened by inflation continuing at around

10 percent during the good years, and increasing to around 16-15 percent after
the second oil crisis.

Of course, in the eyes of the public, the rise in unemployment is much more
important than the rate of inflation. But Raymond Barre was, or so I believe,
even more disappointed by the inflation figures than by the unemployment fig-
ures. The latter almost inevitably resulted from the recession and the inter-
national situation. But the budgetary and monetary stringency could and
should have produced better results. He himself is wondering aboutthecauses:
the French people's inflationary reactions? Commercial trade networks? 0r
excessive wage increases?

Stagnation in investment also characterized this period. That is easily ex-
plained. The gross added value of private enterprises increased less than
wages. From 1976 to 1980 it increased (in volume) at the rate of 3.3 percent,
while wages rose at the rate of 4.6 percent; employer social insurance con-
tributions rose at the rate of 7.9 percent; and salaries, at the rate of 4.6
percent. Companies' gross disposable income (undistributed profits and re-
serves for depreciation) only increased at the annual rate of 0.3 percent.
In 1973 the gross disposable income of companies. on which investments are
drawn, constituted 12.7 percent of the value added; in 1980, only 10.3. The
financial situation of companies improved in 1978 and 1979 (11.2 and 11.8
percent); it worsened anew in 1980, following the second oil crisis. The
greatest increase was in social insurance contributions. In 7 years they
rose from 16.6 percent to 18.3 percent of the value added.

Overall statistics show us only one part of the picture. One's judgment of
the strength of the French economy in a changed international econoaic c11-
mate depends on the place of French production and exports in the world.

Let us begin with a success. Anyone glancing OVer the statistics on current
accounts cannot help being struck by the size of the surplus under "services,"
sometimes called "invisibles." The positive balance under services reaches
more than Fr 35 billion for the year 1980, and more than 22 billion for the
first three quarters of 1981. The amount is the more surprising since the
balance under invisibles [services] shows a deficit from 1970 to 1976. The
change can be attributed to services, since in the meantime the amount for
unilateral transfers (foreign workers' remittances) increased. Research and
development projects, large-scale construction work, and services connected
with exports occupy top positions under services. 0300 economists have
calculated various countries' share in the world market for services.
France's share rose from 7.7 percent in 1970 to 10 percent in 1979. This is
a recent market conquest; if maintained, it could make a substantial contri-

bution to balancing current accounts.

0n the other hand. the foreign trade figures are not satisfactory. above all
those for the last 2 years, 1980 and 1981. Surplus sectors show diminishing

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢Nﬂﬁ€1Al.USE(NVLY

surpluses. Deficit sectors show increased deficits, with the exception of
agriculture and foodstuffs which continued their growth in 1980. The reserve
ratio of 97.7 percent in 1979 dropped to 89 in 1980. One can conclude that
as a normal consequence of an inflation rate that is higher than most of our
competitors, French products have become less competitive.

commentators note that we have trade deficits with the principal industri-
alized countries (PR6, United States, Belgium. the Netherlands), with the ex-
ception of Italy and Great Britain. It would, in fact, be preferable if our
products were able to compete where competition is strongest. but market se-
lection [l'effort de la differentiation des marches] also responds to needs.

The relatively large contribution made by two sectors. automobile and agri-
cultural and food products, which contributed around two-thirds of the total
surplus in all surplus sectors, can be interpreted in various ways. Spe-
cialization responds to constraints that no industrial country can elude.
Agriculture and food products industries should find an expanding market. On
the other hand, the automobile industry will probably come up against the so-
called newly industrialized countries.

Until 1978-1979 it appeared that France had kept its place in the world. The
results of 1980-1981, following after the second oil crisis and too much in-
flation, cause concern. Trade surpluses in the electricity materials sector
have diminished. Has France fallen behind in the various forms of the elec-
tronics sector, the sector which sets the pace of the new industrial revolu-
tion? Can it catch up? The trade deficit for the whole of the year 1981
scarcely differs from that of 1980 (Fr 59 billion against 62) but the deficit
in December (8 billion) demonstrates the effects of the French recovery,
which lags behind the economic situation in other countries of the EEC. Once
again the GDP growth seems to have caused a stronger rise in imports. and
hence a trade deficit.

The high dollar exchange rate offers France an advantage for 1982: American
products become less competitive. It also offers a disadvantage: Imports
purchased in dollars cost more. The deficit in current accounts is likely to
becoae worse during the course of the next year without a recovery in the
Mark bloc.

Whatever the responses to these problems may be, one cannot help noting the
contradiction between the dominant ideas of the Socialist government and the
conclusions suggested by the statistics. The former, so-called rightist gov-
ernment wished to spare the French people the consequences of the increase

in prices of petroleum products. Consumption increased. company resources
for inVestnent diminished. However, the men in power today promise to raise
salaries through a fifth week of vacation, by reduction in hours of work, and
to increase employer social insurance contributions. These measures are obvi-
ously contrary to the needs of the French economy, since it is involved in a
formidable competition. Once more the economy must pay the price of good in-
tentions in the social field.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 3.3. Groupe Express
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Senator Urges Defense of Franc
Paris LE FIGARO in French 22 Feb 82 p 2

[Article by Michel Haurice-Bokanowski, Senator-Mayor of Asnieres: "The Franc
in Danger")

[Text] The history of the principal western countries is linked to the ups
and downs of their currencies. No great country has escaped monetary problems.
France. no more than any other. On the contrary, the fragility of our indus-
trial fabric, the special character of our savings, and our dependence on for-
eign energy force us to participate in the international monetary world.

Since taking power the Socialists have constantly leaned toward, and now seen
to have been taken in by, the monetary pitfall of devaluations, excessive
taxes. considerable increases in unproductive public expenditures and promises
of utopian social measures that cannot be fulfilled. Moreover, the European
monetary system presupposes a minimum of convergence of the economic policies
of the different member countries. However. France is practically at an im-
passe over inflation, stimulating budgetary activity and increasing public
expenditures while Germany is doing just the opposite.

Public expenditures of the German Government have increased 4 percent over
1981; those of the French Government, 28 percent.

Also, since the last devaluation, the health of our money has not improved.
Our energy, paid for in dollars, will be more expensive, and as a result our
production costs will increase, canceling the early effects of devaluation
on our competitivity.

Let us look around us. which countries have thus far best weathered the
crisis? Germany. Japan, Switzerland, and, for the present, the United States
-the countries with strong currencies. which are the countries that have
experienced the most difficulties? Italy, Great Britain--the countries with
weak currencies.

Until Hay 1981, France had succeeded in remaining competitive and in even
improving its record. thanks to a strong currency which held down inflation

and the energy bill. But in a few months our country has experienced a seri—
ous monetary setback which is going to increase inflation yet further, and.

in consequence, unemployment.

How can the Bank of France reserves designed to support our threatened cur-
rency. reserves which have melted away by more than 70 billion since the be-
ginning of this 7-year administration, be reconstituted?

The Political Climate

The real solution to our problems, at least those of an economic nature.

would nevertheless be quite classic since they take into account the require-
ments of our tines and the material and noral interests of the French people.

10

FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The real solution is to produce in order to assure expansion and full enploy-
nent in order and stability. Thus the currency can be strengthened by restor-
ing confidence.

Let the state show great discipline in Innaging itself; let it strive to pro-
note generous but realistic reforms. let it nethodically inforn the citizenry
about econonic and social problems, than worry would disappear before clearly
expressed truth and clearly defined objectives.

Behind the economic program and the best financial fornulas there is the so-
cial and political cliute which always determines success or failure. The
battle of the franc will take place above all on this terrain. It has begun
badly.

There. to remind us, is the ”scenario" of the Popular Front: After Laval's
and Flandin's stringent austerity and deflation policy, unenploynent increased,
production stagnated, borders were closed to Ierchandise and capital, taxes
rained down.... And on 3 Hay 1936, the Popular Rout won the elections.

Then strikes and factory occupations broke out fron 11 May. Renault cane on
the scene on 28 Hay. Leon Blun called in the CG! and the General Confedera-
tion of Reach Production on 7 June. Talks resulted in the Hatignon accord:
It provided for collective agreements, trade union rights, a 12 percent in-
crease in wages and a loo-hour week instead of a 68-hour week. Little by lit-

tle, caln was restored.

But the blow was too heavy for the French economy... In a few months wages
once more lost the benefit of the raises which had been gained. The wage-
price spiral began, prices roared upward, capital fled. Leon 31m was forced
to devaluate. It was to be 25 percent on 25 Septelber 1936. But that rate
was not enough and the Popular Front did not inspire confidence, quite the
contrary. Prices continued to climb. They increased 28 percent fron Septee—
ber 1936 to January 1937. The rest is well known. History never repeats
itself, but, in the nonths to cone, how can our franc, shaken so badly since
10 May 1981, not risk a collapse as a result of econonic causes that are dif-

ficult to analyze?
Toward the Social Explosion

As of now, all French persons should be concerned about defending the franc.
the national syrbol of independence and prosperity.

Such a union for the franc was an action undertaken by a small group of clear-
sighted Frencth in 1926, following the policies of the "Cartel des Gauches”
[cartel of leftist groups] and it aroused the conscience of many citizens suf-
ficiently to bring back Raymond Poincare, in 1926, and save the country fron

bankruptcy .

Let us face it! Confronted with the discontent of all categories of the popu-
lation, its own incapacity to satisfy both its electoral base and the denands

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a modern «may, in the colitis maths the governnent will see a social
explosion which will make my 1968 look like a joke.

As of now we must again reunite, outside of political parties, to save our
franc, the instrulent of our strength and our influence in the world.

9772
(:50: 3100/1068

12
3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WWMY

BCWOKIC ITALY

TEXT OF 311.1. 01! SMILE“ PAY
Milan IL SOLE-24 083 in Italian 13 Mar 82 P 13

[Text of the outline for a bill concerning the regulation of severance pay ap-

proved yesterday by the Council of Ministers which will be presented to Par-
lianent for approval]

[Text] Title 1
Regulation of Severance Pay
Article 1 (Severance Pay)

In every case of cessation of enploynent, the enployee has the right to sever-
ance pay. This severance pay is calculated by adding, for each year of enloy-
nent, 1 nonth's salary, equal to, and in any case not are then, the anount of
payment owed for the year divided by 13.5.

‘lhe ebove-nntioned nonth's compensation is proportionately reduced for frat.»
tions of a year; fractions of a nonth over 15 days are coated as an entire
month.

Seniority compensation that would he owed to single enployees in case of ces-
sation of euploynent at the moment that this 1.: goes into effect is calculated

according to the present regulations up to that nonent, and all its provisions
are owed to the new regulations outlined in this law.

Article 2 (Yearly Earnings)

Except for different provision in collective contracts, yearly earnings, for
use in the preceding Article 1, include provisions, production bonuses. shar-
ing in profits or products, the equivalent of roo- and board and to an en-
ployee. and of any other compensation of a continuetive nature with the ex-
clusion of the snount corresponding to reidaursenent for expenses.

Article 3 (Reevaluetion Index)

Severance pay referred to in Article 1, with the exclusion of the nonth'a pay
accruing each year, is increased according to the following coapoeite basis:

13
summon“
MMWONLY

on 31 neceaber, of each year, through the application of an index that con-
siats of a 1.5 percent fixed rate and of 75 percent of the increase in the con-
suaer price index {CPI} for blue- and white-collar fadlies, certified by the
Central Statistics Imtitute, with respect to the month of Decenber of the pre-

ceding year.

when the reevaluation index explained in the preceding paragraph is applied to
fractions of a year, the increase of the Central Statistics Institute Index is
that which is certified for the month of cessation of work with respect to the
nonth of December of the preceding year. Fractions of are than 1.5 days are
computed as an entire month.

Article 4 (Advances)

An euloyce with at least 8 years of service may ask, if the work relation-
ship is continuous, for an advance of not more than 60 percent of the sever-
ance pay to which he would be entitled in the case of cessation of work on
the date of the request.

The request must be justified by the necessity for:

(a) possible health-related expenses for extraordinary therapies and surgery
recognized by competent public structures;

(b) acquisition of a first hone for residence of the employee or the em-
ployee's children, documnted by a notarised statennt.

The advance nay be obtained only once during enploysent, and is subtracted,
with no exceptions, fron the severance pay.

“me hypothesis referred to in Article 2122 of the Civil Code, the as. ad-
vance is subtracted from the cowensation foreseen by the same norm.

More favorable conditions may be muted in collective contracts or in indi- '
viduel agreements.

'lhe provisions of this article are not applicable to companies declared in
crisis by the law of 12 August, 1977, No 675, and its successive modifica-
tions.

Article 5 (Secondary Claina on Fixed Property)
Article 2776 of the civil Code is replaced by the following:

"Debts relative to severance pay, as well as the compensation referred to in
Article 2118 of the Civil Code, are claimed secondarily, in the case of non-

payment, on the price of fixed property, with preference given to unsecured
debts.

1b
”WWW”
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

"Debts indicated by Articles 2751 and 2751s of the Civil Code, and successive
mdifications, for the execution of those indicated in the preceding para-
graph, and debts for contributions owed to institutes, agencies or special
funds, including those which are substitutive or integrative, which control
forns of obligatory disability, old age, and survivor insurence, referred to
in Article 2753 of the Civil Code, are clained secondarily in the case of
nonpayment, on the price of fixed property, with preference given to unsecured
debts, but after the debts indicated in the preceding paragraph.

In case of failure to replay, government credits referred to in Paragraph 3
of Article 2752 of the Civil Code are based on personal property or real es-
tate, with preference given to unsecured credits, with the exception of those
profits indicated in the preceding paragraph.

Article 6 (Co-putation of Compensation Without Prior Notice)

Article 2121 of the Civil Code is replaced by the following:

"The compensation referred to in Article 2118 of the Civil Code nust be cal-
culated by conputing the provisions, production bonuses, sharing in profits

or products. or other conpensation of a continuous nature, with the exclusion of
of reimburse-ant for expenses.

"If the euployee is paid totally or in part through conissiom or profit-
sharing, the aforenentioned conpenaation is determined by the average of the
earnings of the last 3 years of euploylsent or of the least anount of time of
services rendered.

"The equivalent for roon and board owed to the enployee is also part of this
compensation.”

Article 7 (Seanen)

Coupensation referred to in Articles 351, 352, 919, and 920 of the Navigation
Code approved with Royal Decree 30 lurch 1962, No 327, are replaced by the
severance pay regulations indicated in the present lav.

"hen, according to Part IV of Title IV of the Navigation Code approved with
Royal Decree 30 March 1962, No 327, severance pay or other conpemation is pro-

portional to earnings, this is intended as being determined and regulated by
collective labor contracts.

Article 8 (Applicability)

The provisions of the present lav apply to all relationships involving sub-
ordinate vork for which forms of seniority pay, severance pay, severance pay

delineated in any fashion and from ay source legally considered responsible
under the law are applied.

Laws regarding severance pay for civil service enployees renain the sane.

15
summon“
M OFFIOAI. use ONLY

Title II
Final and Transitory Regulations
Article 9 (Computation for the Earning of Acquired Contingency Points)

In partial abrogation of Article 2 of the present law, increases in the con-
tingency coapeneation or earninge of like nature, accrued fro- 1 February 1977
thrOugh 1 Hay 1982, are couputed in the annualreal earnings in the following
manner and with the following due datee:

--25 points beginning iron 1 January 1983

-25 more points beginning iron 1 July 1983

--25 more points beginning froa 1 January 1981.
-25 acre points beginning froa 1 July 1984

«25 sore points beginning iron 1 January 1985
"25 nore points beginning iron 1 July 1985
-renaining points beginning iron 1 January 1986
Article 10 (Parity)

Until 31 Dace-bar 1989. and except for are favorable collective contracts,

for employees who. at the tenant that the present law goes into effect have

the right to seniority pay that ie less than that indicated in the law of

18 December 1960. No 1561, the aaesures expreesed in hours or days indicated
by the collective contracts for seniority pay are evaluated proportionately

to the anount of earninge for each year divided by 13.5.

By that date, all categoriee of workers aust be guaranteed the right to the
treataent Outlined in the present law.

Article 11 (Abolition of the Fund for Employee Co-peneetion)

The fund referred to in Article 3 of the Royal Draft Bill of 8 January 1962,
No 5, converted, with aodificatione to the law of 2 October 1942, No 1251, is
declared null and void.

the aeaete of the fund referred to in the preceding paragraph are passed on to
the employers who have this right proportionate to the reserves put aside ac-
cording to the law. The aodalities for the liquidation of the aforesaid as-
sets are established by decree of the Labor Ministry and Social Security to-
gether with the Treasury Hinietry.

16
mammal!“
MWLUSEONLY

Article 12 (horas for Abrogstion)

Articles 1 and la of the Draft Lav of 1 February 1977 No 12, converted, with
modification to the law of 31 March 1977. No 91. and Article 2120 of the
Civil Code are abrogated.

All other norms of laws or nor-s having the force of law which concern the

foras of seniority pay, severance pay. and severance pay delineated in any
fashion, are abrogated.

All clauses of collective contracts regulating the aforesentioned subjects
are null, and are replaced legally by the norm of the present law.

In cases in which the norms of law or none having the force of law or
clauses of collective contracts which refer to institutes indicated in the

second paragraph or to their regulatory funds, the referral lust be considered
as a referral to severance pay indicated in the present lav.

Article 13 (Application Date)

The present law will be valid the day after its publication in the OFFICIAL
GAZETTE and will be applied free 1 June 1982.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Editrice 11 Sole-2b Ore s.r.l.

9941
050: 3106/1633

17

mmmmv
”09’0“.”le

36030116 I'ULY

OUTLOOK FOR nmmou, BALANCE 0? rm, mwmm
H110 II. SOLE-26 033 in Italian 16 In! 82 p 13

[Article by B. 3.: "Three Alternative Scenarios for the Italian Icons-y
l982-1983”]

[Text] The beginning of 1982 finds the Italian econow in the midst of a re-
cessive cycle that has lasted for a year end a half, even if the situation has
inproved during the nost recent period. For the first tine in 3 years here,
external factors are operating favorably. attenuating inflationary pressures.
Increases in oil and rev-asterial prices are not expected. nor are exchange
aovenents equal to those of preceding years. For the Italian econony, there-
fore, 1982 is a year of possibilities end risks.

Possibilities end risks, prospects end alternative involutions are clearly
seen in the first of six annual reports fron the Burspeen'Center for Research,
edited by Heuririo Pals. Antonino Pedons, Giorgio luffolo, Luigi Spavente,
Franco Sartori, Nicole Scelsini, Salvatore Tutino.

The year 1982 is one in which inflation will depend almst exclusively on
internal behavior, without the possibility for shifting responsibility to
international factors beyond our control. 'lhe results of analyses carried
out indicate the difficulty of bringing the inflationary process mder con-
trol rapidly and eliainsting the internal end external inbalances without
suffering too such d-ege in taras of incone and inflation. The writers of

the report have, therefore. put three scenarios before us. one inertial, one
governmental. one trade union. '

The conclusions reached by the group of experts fro. Mops Research are out-
lined in a well-articulated, international franevork of the econony. tor the
08C!) countries. the gross product growth rate should be 1.5 percent in the
second half of 1982. and rise to 3 percent in the first half of 1983. Only
Japan would consolidate higher development rates (5 percent in the first part
of 1983). Uneqloynent will continue to rise to 8 percent in the first half
of 1982, involving particularly the young labor force. Inflation will tend
to decrease on the international level. reflecting the decrease in the price
of basic rev asteriels and foodstuffs, as well as the prospect of more con-
tained salary raises due to are widespresd unaaployunt. The current deficit
of the (301) countries should rennin the seas. though there will be great

18
"WWMY
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

disparities from country to country. Economic policies will continue to have
a tendentially restrictive character, while monetary policies will consent to
narrow paths toward recovery.

The following hypotheses were made concerning world demand and prices for the
construction of the three scenarios. World demand expressed by the weighed
index of products manufactured in the principle industrialized nations cu-
peting with Italy will increase by 6.5 percent in 1983 and by 7 percent in
1983. Exports of OPEC will increase more than 10 percent. The price of
crude oil will increase 5 percent in l982 and 8 percent in 1983. The prices
of other raw materials and foodstuffs should show a slow recovery in 1982,
more consistent in 1983. Prices of nanufactuted products in dollars should
increase 8.6 percent in 1982 and 8 percent in 1983. The lira-dollar exchange
rate should remain at about the level of the end of 1981 (1,200 lira), while
the exchange rate with the mark should register a devaluation of the lira of
13 percent in 1982 and 5 percent in 1983.

The aspect which differentiates the basic scenario from the other two dis-
cussed in this report is represented by the hypotheses pertaining to the be-
havior of state enterprise concerning income taxes and salary dynamics. The
basic assumptions are: the inflation-adjustment scale will continue un-
modified, and salary increases are such as to conserve after-tax buying power
for salaried workers in 1982 and 1983; thus fiscal drainage which weighs on
salaried workers will operate totally on the basis of progressivity. These
hypotheses mark an inertial picture in the sense that each of the principle
economic agents goes its own way: the government is allied with the dictates
of financial laws, union leaders attenpt to maintain after-tax salaries.
Stagnation is predicted in this basic scenario: the P11. [Gross Domestic
Product] reaains practically on the sane level as that of 1982 (+0.3 percent),
and registers a less than moderate increase in 1983 (+1.5 percent). Total em-
ployment would decline slightly during the 3-year period 1981-83, but given
the predictable increase in the labor force, the unenploynent rate would rise
rapidly, going from 7.6 percent in 1980 to 11 percent in 1983. Frivate con-
sumption would undergo a decrease of 1 percent and slight recovery in 1983
(+0.6 percent). The increase in nominal earnings, (slightly less than 2!. and
20 percent in 1982 and 1983), would allow, in the 2 years a gross increase of
3.3 and 2.7 percent, which, because of the effect of fiscal drainage, would
set net earnings at the same values as those of 1981. The available "real"
income would undergo a decrease of 0.8 percent in 1982 and an increase of 1.8
percent in 1983. Investments would show negative rates in both years with a
drastic decrease (-12.7 percent) in real terms in 1982.

Exports will continue to represent the most dynamic part of the combined de-
nand in the presence, as well, of a reduction in the market quota. A negative
sign would be the influence of the evolution of prices with respect to those
of competitors. Because of reports on the predictions concerning exchange
relations of the lira and the still heavy inflation, a gradual deterioration
of our competitivity would occur, causing a loss in market quota, increased
importations, with an increasing quantity from 1.5 to 3.5 percent, a drastic
change of the parity of the lira in the sun. ‘me current debt would be re-
duced to about 2.7 tr '.llion liras, then transforned into a positive balance of

19
“WIND!!!”
maomanmowtv

about 3 trillion liras in 1983. Re are dealing with a fragile and costly
equilibriun, because it would be the expression of adjust-ants despite the
worsening in conpetitiveness of our products. Prices in liras would rise,

in this scenario, to a rate over 19 percent and 16 percent in 1983. he quota
of available incone fron dependent work on the added value of the private
sector would increase again by 1 percent in 1982, to decrease by 0.6 percent
in 1983, so that the gross nargine of comedies would decrease.

the quota of the net debt on the gross donestic product should be about 2
points less than that of 1981. A sore narked inprovenent should take place
concerning the currency deficit, whose quota a: the P11. should fall fron 5.0
to 3.4 percent. The quota on the PI]. of the total need of the widened public
sector, finally, should be reduced to 10.3 percent for 1983 (cowared to 12.8
percent for 1981).

With respect to inports, first of all, a further increase in fiscal pressure
should be registered, which, in 1983, should be about 60.3 percent, with an
increase of about 2 points with respect to 1981. the net dynanic coqonent
would continue to be represented by direct taxes, and, in this sense, by the
IRPBP [tax on fanily incone]. The withholding at the source for salaried
workers should show, free 1981 to 1983 a total increase near 80 percent de-
spite the hypothesis adopted concerning tax deducations.

Current expenditures for the P11. should renain at about 65.5 percent.

The scenario that we now outline clarifies the comequuces that would cone
about in reaching the objective of a 16 percent inflation rate fixed by the
govern-eat. without paying any price to obtain it. Thus, a hypothetical
scenario. The 1’11. could grow by 1.8 percent in 1982 and by 3 percent in 1983,
and total aployaent would register a nodest total growth only in 1983. Total
denand would increase by only 2.1 percent in 1982 and 3.7 percent in 1983,
with a large contribution coning fron inventories for both years, consuqtion
would increase less than 1 percent. heal incone would increase 1 percent and
2.6 percent. Gross fixed invest-eats would register a aodest increase. The
current balance of payments deficit would settle at about 5.5 trillion liras
in 1982, to show a positive balance of 1.7 trillion liras in 1983. The
noeinal incrennt in earnings after indexing would be 16 percent, with a net
decrease of 2.2 percent in 1982 and an increase of 0.5 percent in 1983. In
terns of public financing, a worsening of the deficit in 1982, but a net in-
crease in 1983: the present deficit would be lowered fro. 20 to 15 trillion
liras. In real terns, the reversal results as still nore sharp, with a half
point reduction in 1983. Fiscal pressure increases by a snell anount in rela-
tion to the P11. (+0.6 percent for 1981-83). Current expenditures are reduced
with respect to the P11. by 1.8 percent free 1981-83 thanks, chiefly, to the
reduction of interest on the national debt.

The recovery outlined in this scemrio is not epheneral because it is based
on the renewal of the denand for investments and the increased coapetitive-
ness of exports. There would, in any case, be an increased cost in terns of
compression of real after-tax earnings and stapation of enploymnt.

20
Three Scenarios for the Italian Economy Conant:

Scenario A Scenario 3
1982 1983 1982 1983
PH. 0.3 1.5 1.8 3.3
Imports 1.5 3.5 3.6 5.6
Gonnuption -0.3 0.8 0.7 0.9
Gross Inventunto -6.6 -1.7 4.6 1.9
Exports 4.2 5.2 7.0 11.0

Current Balance* -2, 700 3,035 --5 ,lox 1, 731
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

The third scenario is that of the unions; it is based on two directives:

union acceptance of the moderation of real after-tax earning requests, and
govern-ental elimination of the fiscal drain on incomes. In terms of employ-
ment and growth, the results would not be dissinilar to those comprised in the
government scenario, and the social cost of a reduction in real income of
workers wOuld be eliminated. Yet other costs would be seen: a worsening of
the national debt and a worsening in the balance of payments that would sig-
nify imbalances in exchange and higher inflation. In this scenario, the m
would increase appreciably, from 1.8 percent in 1982 to 3 percent in 1983, with
an increase in industrial production of 2.8 and 5.6 percent. Global demand
would register an expansion of 2 and 3.4 percent, sustained significantly by
foreign components. Private consuptian would grow 0.9 percent in 1982 and
1.6 percent in 1983. Investnents would diminish by 6.7 percent, and would re-
main more or less unchanged in 1983.

The balance of pay-eats world go into the red by 6.2 trillion liras in 1982
and 1.6 trillion liras in 1983. Inflation, thong: decelerating, would be at
higher levels than than of the government (17.2 percent in 1982 and 13.2 per-
cent in 1983). Barnings increase would be 18.5 and 16 percent. Earnings in-
crease after the inflation adjuetrent scale would be 13.2 and 10.1 percent.
The cost of labor per unit produced wOuld grow 16.2 percent in 1982 and 10 per-
cent in 1983. Industrial productivity would register an increase of 6.3 per-
cent in 1982 and 4.7 percent in 1983. Gross margins pushed by industry on

the costs of work per unit produced would grow by about 2 points in 1982 and
3.8 points in 1983. with a change unfavorable to dependent workers, a certain
recovery in conditions of profitability in industrial enterprises could be in-
dicated. The union proposal, aside from the reduction of input due to declin-
ing prices, will bring about a further reduction of imports due to the elimi-
nation of fiscal drain. The deceleration of eapsnditures does not, however,
evade the strong increase in the present deficit of the P.A. [Public Adminis-
tration] order of lo trillion liras in 1982 and of another 2 trillion liras in
1983. The present expense for the PIL decreases from 65.5 to “.5 percent be-
cause interest payments increase by only 6.5 points, contributing halfway to
the reduction of the quota on the gross product of the total current expendi-
ture.

The union proposal would attain positive results both in terms of the reduc-
tion of the inflation rate and in the creation of conditions for moderating
earnings requests in nominal terms. However, it would aggravate inequalities
in the balance of payments and in public financing. In this sense, conditions

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Editrice II Sole-216 Ore s.r.1.

9941
C50: 3104/1623

22
”WNW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL NETHERLANDS

ACTIVITIES OP EXTREME RIGHTIST PARTIES VIEWED

Amsterdam VRIJ NBDERLAND in Dutch 3 Apr 82 p 17

girticle by correspondent Hans Suits: "Extreme Right in the Large
1

'tiesﬂ]

[Text7 One out of three qualified voters stayed
home during the states elections. That is a
national average. For in some districts in the
large cities more than half stayed at home--
sometimes two out of three qualified voters.

what is striking is that those figures were re-
corded precisely in districts where extreme
rightist parties such as the Center Party (”crime
is continually more widespread”) and the Peoples
Union usually score high in their campaigns:

The Schilder District in The Hague and the Indo-
nesian neighborhood in Amsterdam. This is a
study of the extreme Right's propaganda and prov-
ocation.

On 12 November 1981, the Second Chamber approved a number of consti-
tutional amendments. Among these was the article which regulates
foreigners' right to vote for city councils and the like. Yet, we

;xpect and we actually have a government of Ali Baba and the Forty
hieves.

A report from the winter issue of VIJ NEDERLAND, a publication of the
NVU [Butch People's Union7 declares:

”If all goes according to plan, foreigners will soon get the right to
vote. You begin to think like this: The politicians in The Hague

arc neglecting nothing to set their own population against each other.
If they are so fond of foreigners, the solution is sim le: bring

14 million of them in and vote the Netherlands away! hey are already
nicely busy with that: for the minorities have almost four times as-
many children as the Dutch."

23
FOR(WFKJALI£HEONLY
FOR(H$KJALIS£4MNLV

This is a quotation from a pamphlet with which the Center Party an-
nounces itself for the coming city council elections of 2 June.

And still both parties seem to strike a somewhat moderate tone to try
to benefit all the more in the council elections from the dormant and
here and there even obvious racism in cities where many ethnic minor-
ities are housed. No bloodcurdling exaggeration, as, for example,
in the pamphlet which the Viking Youth distributed in Amsterdam as -
a reaction to the peace demonstration of 21 November 1981: "However,
do you know that we have a bacteriological bomb in our midst, which
is much more dangerous than all nuclear weapons together? This bac-
teriological bomb is contamination with Mussulmanitis." That pamphlet
asserted that the Musselmen have only one goal, to avenge the defeat
which their ancestors had to swallow before the gates of Vienna:
”Consequently, they like to doll themselves up to pick up western
{omen in cafes, discos, yes even on the street, and convert them to
slam.

The Center Party is now appealing to "Tom, Dick and Harry" who must
pay for the Dutch government's population and immigration policy with
their goods and chattels, and with their enjoyment of life: ”In the
ordinary neighborhoods, the situation is becoming intolerable. Dif-
ferent people with separate cultures are packed close together. That
leads to tensions and conflicts. But the Dutch must adjust and swal-
low everything, for otherwise they are discriminating. A dispersion
policy only means that it is now the turn of the next neighborhoods."

The Center Party emphasizes that you do not recognize our country
anymore, because the Netherlands is no longer only for the Dutch.
Vhile the government really should have,in the first placa.the obli-
gation of standing up for its own population.

Such texts, in combination with facile slogans about energy policy
(”the government sells gas at a ridiculously low price abroad. Ve
must pay high for gas in our own coun r , while it comes out of the
ground in Groningen"), income policy " e must save everything we
have, while the government throws money around"), security ("Crime
increases continually, the unishments for criminals are less and
less") and social benefits "Even there the government wants to con-
tinue to meddle. We have certainly paid premiums for them, but that
is nothing to it) are characteristic of the way in which Bans
Janmaat, the chairman of the Center Party, former XV? [Catholic
People's Partg7 member, exploits fear and insecurity.

Imitators
In the December issue of the party newspaper MIDDENUEG,Janmaat empha-

sized especially the neglect of the average Dutchmen. The present
cabinet allegedly favors the "other population groups“ in housing,

2“
FORIFTKJALUSE(»ﬂN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

education, employment and social benefits. A form of racism which
aims at "the discrimination against its own people.”

The XVU is also seeking a course which is less offensive than in
recent years, When Joop Glimmerveen set the tone. Glimmerveen, who
will participate in the city council elections in The Hague with his
own slate, left the NVU last year, after he first resigned as chair-
man. In an interview with the HAACSE P03? (12 Sept 1981) he connected
his resignation with the election result ('if we had succeeded, then

I would not have resigned”) and with quarrels about Hrs Best van
Tonningen (the widow of the N88 [Rational Socialist Novemenﬁ7 leader),
who as a NVU member could have been extremely useful to the Center
Party: "Imitators who are trying in an underhanded way to exploit
what we have tried to achieve in 10 years by making sacrifices." “is
third reason for resigning from the NVU was, according to Glimmerveen:
"Someone, who is married to a Jewess,is now on the NVU Executive
Committee."

On that occasion, Glimmerveen displayed even more antisemitism with
his statement that the head of a city such as Amsterdam should not
be a Jewish mayor, ”for they can never feel attached to our people."
The fact that the Amsterdam Public Prosecutor, doctor of laws, V.G.C.
Hijnssen refused to bring an action against Glimmerveen requested by
the Amsterdam Initiative Against Pascism, Racism and Antisemitism,

is a very questionable decision. Mijnssen considered the statements
were discriminating enough to bring a criminal action, but thought
that an interview is somewhat different than “public statements.’

The NVU dxecutive Committee member, when Glimmerveen had referred to,
is the present chairman, H.J. Barendregt, Glimmerveen's successor
since 17 October 1981. This geneologist (family tree investigator)
appeared to be also at the time of his appointment a member of the
VVD [feeple's Party of Freedom and Democracy7 and a sponsor of the
Former Combatants Legion. He considers himself 'a moderate conserva-
tive with an appreciation of social needs which exist in spite of the
welfare state." During his introduction in his own circle, Barendregt
expressly declared that he disassociates himself from emery form of
racial discrimination: “We condemn dictatorship in any form whatso-
ever." The question was brought up in the NVU whether the Odal runic
letter as an identification, formerly also used as such by a 53 sec-
tion, still should be preserved from a tactical standpoint, ”in view

of the more moderate course."

He in the Netherlands speak about the growth of the VVD and the CDA

[Christian Democratic Appeal7: "The great advantage of this develop-
meut is that we now have been able to strengthen the intelligentsia
in the party. we were looked down upon because we were only a group
of dumb workers.” Moreover,the NVU Executive Committee has decided

that exchanges of abusive language must be a thing of the past:

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI(NTKJALLBE(RHN

"When we reject a multiracial or multicultural society, this is be-
cause of the fact that diverse cultures, far apart from each other,
cannot go forward without creating tension. We have a Dutch culture
in our country, which has proved its value through the centuries.
That culture is to be preserved for us."

An Atmosphere

The Center Party and the NVU have both chosen as their main goal: the
Netherlands for the Dutchmen. It is a definite effort to prevent a
repetition of a ban or exclusion because of public racism or fascism.
There is all the more reason to keep a close check on these parties.
In the past, the-ﬁuestion could be asked if it made any sense to pay
attention to neo azi and neo-Fascist groups which did not succeed in
gaining a foothold, now other factors play a role. The economic re-
cession, rapidly increasing unemployment, the increase of relative
poverty, the threat of more economies at the expense of the lowest
paid and benefit recipients and the growing criticism of the presence
of Surinamers, Netherlands Antilleans, Turks and Horoccans create an
atmosphere in which the Center Party and the NVU should be able to
thrive.

In the book 'Old and New Pascisd'published by the Anne Prank Founda-
tion at Van Gennep, Joke Iniesmeyer writes that the danger of the
NVU and the Center Party does not lie in the large number of people
which they can recruit: ”The truth forces us to say that both have

a difficult life as an organization. They have not managed in recent
years to hold a public meeting undisturbed.“

According to Joke Kniesmeyer it is more dangerous that many ideas
which the neo-Nazis are spreading are getting a hearing among broader
strata of the the populationx'perhaps isolated, and not in the same
ideological context, but they exist: The idea of a strong leader who
makes an end to all that colossal blundering in The Hague, the idea
that it is a shame for a woman to work when a man is unemployed, the
idea that everything would be better if large groups of foreigners,
could be removed from the Netherlands, if not willingly, then unwill-
ingly.“ To that is added, writes Joke Kniesmeyor, that with an in-
creasing deterioration of future prospects, many will be ready to
advocate more radical solutions for social problems, ”something which
the extreme right will try to take advantage of.”

The NVU and the Center Party will participate in the city council
elections in many cities. Both parties also participated in the
chamber elections last year. There appeared then no alternative for
the Farmer's Party, which was completely swept away and which this
time was called the Rirhtist People's Party. The NVU obtained 10,522
votes (0.12 percent) and the center Party 12,189 votes (0.14 percent).
This scant success was influenced to a great extent by the fact that

26
FOIlﬂwﬂﬂALlEEIRﬂJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

both parties could not compete in all electoral districts. The NVU
was not allowed to participate in North and South Holland, Zeeland
and Drenthe. The Center Party was excluded in the Haarlem, Leiden,
Dordrecht and Rotterdam electoral districts. In South Holland and
Drenthe the NVU lists were declared invalid because a number of the
25 signatures required per voter were obtained under false pretenses.
In the provinces of North Holland and Zeeland objections to the NVU
and the Center Party were declared to be based on an appeal to the
European Treaty for the Protection of Human Rights.

The Center Party obtained the best results in Amsterdam (1 percent)
and The Hague (1 percent), the NVU obtained 0.7 percent in Utrecht.

In the 1977 Chamber elections, the NVU obtained over 33,000 votes

(0.4 percent) with exceptions in some reconstructed districts in the
urban circle. “here the NVU had appealed to the original residents
of old working class districts with problems about relations with
Surinamers, Netherlands Antilleans and foreign workers, there the
percentages were the highest. The Station Neighborhood (3.2 percent)
and the Schilder District (3.1 percent) in The Hague stood at the top.
The Rotterdam Kruiskade and environs gave the NVU 2.1 percent, in
Amsterdam, this party obtained 1.7 percent in Old East.

The cities of The Hague (1.35 percent), Amsterdam (1.24 percent) and
Rotterdam (1.06 percent) showed a rather limited but still alarming
tendency to honor racist propaganda. That had already ap cared in
The Hague in the city council elections of 1974 when the leader,
Glimmerveen, with 4 000 votes, lost for the city council by the very
narrowest margin. Shortly before the 1978 city council elections,
the NVU was declared a banned organisation and consequently excluded
from participation. But after a Supreme Court decision in 1979 the
way was clear for the NVU, although with the competition of the
Center Party.

The Center Party will certainly participate in the city council elec-
tions in Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Utrecht and The Hague and the NVU, in
Rotterdam and The Hague. In the latter city, the Glimmerveen slate
is also allowed. In the States elections last Vednesday in Amsterdam,
Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht over 600,000 voters stayed at home.
In the Schilder district in The Hague, the turnout was only 34 per-
cent. The turnout was below 40 percent even in the station and
Transvaal districts. In Amsterdam the turnout in the Indonesian

neighborhood was less than 50 percent.

The picture was comparable in all problem districts in the large
cities: a big loss for the PvdA [Iabor Party7, a gain for the VVD and
the small leftist parties, but above all an aversion to the estab-
lished political parties.

27
FOI(NWKJALUSE(RHX
FOU¢N¥KJAL£E£¢HHN

Peer and Insecurity

Joke Kniesneyer seys: 'Beceuse confidence in the his politicel per-
ties is declining, e vecuul is developin which the enter Perty end
the NVU are trying to fill. The Center arty especielly is dengerous.
Barendregt of the NVU is ettelpting to introduce it es e genuine
rightist party. There ere enough of then. The Center Perty exploits
much more estutely the feer of further surrender and insecurity ebout
the future. Pescisn hes no chence without feer end insecurity."

Still Joke Kniesneyer is not so pessimistic: “hen you see whet hep-
pened in Englend where foreigners are heressed in orgenised feshion
to get then to leeve, when you see how neny people with e Nesi pest
join in the discussions in the PEG ebout the foreign workers. When
you see how neny signs ere displeyed there in Belgium to publicly
keep out foreigners, then it ell is still not so bed in the Nether-
lands. But we must be on our guerd.

Joke Kniesneyer tekes es en exe-ple, e teecher fron Zeelend who hed
subscribed to the Center Party's newspeper HIDDENVBG. He wented to
get a lesson about neo-Pescisn. The teecher received the newspeper
with e mistake in his nene. He received unsolicited, with the sene
mistake in his neme, the newspeper RBVOLTB cf the Plenish Outpost,
which elso ennounces itself in the Netherlends es e netionel revolu-
tionery movement I'with the return of the foreign workers to their
honelend,‘ es its most inportent goel.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 VN/BV Veekbledpers

8490
cso: 3105/165

28

FOI¢HTKJALLSE¢HHJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6mm MOE

ERMT'O‘H: The following is a corrected version of an item
originally published on page 32 of JPIS L/10507 of 11 by 1982.
F000 29/82 of this series. The photograph vaa omitted in

the earlier version.

WOPARIANESOLIDPIOPEWWW
Paris All! 81' 008108 in French 10 Apr 82 p 43
[Article: "Ariane 3 Solid Propellsnt Booster"]

[Text] Aeronpatiale has just published the first photo of one of the solid
propellant boosters for the future European Ariane 3 launch vehicle scheduled
to becone operational in 1983. This booster was produced by the Italian

fin Aeritalin. Its erection container was built by m of France. This
container vill be used to raise the boosters to an upright position for their
attachment to the launcher's first stage. Integration of these Ariane 3
boosters is accoupliahed in Aerospatisle's plant at Les Huruux near Paris.

 

COPYRIGBT: A. 6 C. 1982

8061
C50: 3100/5610

29
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLMONLY

ITALY

PROFILES 01’ mm MIST mnmrsrs
Milan II. IDIIDO in Italian 12 Her 82 pp 98-105
[Article by Davide Paolini. "Co-rue hose"]

[Text] He has modership in both the PC! and
Confindustria. At hone in PC]: headquarters, yet he
clashes with the mions on his coepany prenises. who
are the red industrialists? 11. mo has drawn up a
list of then.

At their nost recent conference on 5 Beecher, the agenda covered three sub-
jects: the consequences of the credit squeeze; the reforn of easy credits:
end the plight of Confabi as a result of the internal split among the regional
associations over the renewal of the national emit.

Although the 20 industrialists suI-oned to the meeting can from various
regions and cities. they convened punctuslly at the scheduled hour on the

fifth floor of PCI headquarters on the Via delle Bottedle Oscure. Ron.
Awaiting them as always were the men in charge of the middle class division,
Guido Cappelloni. Gisﬁattists Podesta and deputy Federico Frini. director of
031W! won, a PCI nonthly dedicated to small and .diun business .
operations. During previous conferences the participate often met also with
Gerardo China-ante, in charge of the PCI's scone-ins division, ad Gianfranco
horghini, head of the industrial division, with whoa they remain in close con-
“ct.

hhat do they do, these 20 captains of industry, when they convene periodically
at PCI headquarters? “hot topics do they discuss? And do they represent a
linited water of econonic higshots close to the party or possibly a wide-
spread phenonenon of industrialists with strong co-nist sylpathies?

How the group of 20 cans into existence

1he 20 are part of a working co-ittee concerned with prohle. affecting snll
and mediu- husinesses in the niddle class sector. Set up on the Via delle
Botteghe Oscure, at first the group functioned on a purely formal basis; with

ties, however, the “er of participating nsdaers not. and their meetings
proceeded with actuating intensity. The impetu that led to the (creation of

30

”WNW”
FOIOFHCIALISEONLY

the mines was taken up by the party's national direction after various
peripheral eeperieents had been made, the lost inportant in Turin. There
2 years ago, note than $0 snall and nediun industrialist were of the POI-
nost of thee unionists who had lost their jobs during the l9SOs-oorganised
an autonomus working group to concentrate exclusively on issues involving

stall and nedius enterprises (it is the only one that exists on a federation
basis).

The Thrin experinent

The group's ongoing progra- (its leaders are the industrailists Lorenzo Ionian,
Bruno Pittatore and Ettore Durbiano) is still very active. pronoting
discussions with bankers on credits with nonco-unist industrialists, with
local adninistrstors. union officers and politicians. ”So-stiles." says Bruno
Pittatore, "we have nanaged to involve approxinately 300 Turin industrialists
in our efforts. Useless to deny it, we have also had sons very heated argu-
ments with those of our own colleagues whose ideas differ fron ours."

The Turin conittee instituted two research projects. One is a questionnaire
distributed anong 1,000 snall operators, asking for detailed inforaation on
their businesses end their relations with the local authorities and the
unions. "This undertaking was so successful," Pittatore adds, "that ORIENT-
AHENTI MINI now wants to repeat the experieent on the national scale."
Together with the miversity, Turin's co-znist industrialists are currently
conducting an inmtigation into the dynanics of the actor car industry. The
group's co-itnents are not restricted, however, to business. muting the
national elections of June 1980, lb industrialhthalerio Avogadro, Enso
Baiardi, Secondino Boero, Lorenzo lonino, Antonio Delucchi. Ittore Durbiano.
Eugenios castaldo, Seconds Grmnti, Giovanni Latilla, Sergio Morello, Santa
Peronato, Bruno Pittators, Gastone Scura and Cesare Valenari—rsn as candi-
dates on the P01 slate. They opened their electoral caspaign by distributing
a letter-program along all their indmtrial colleagues.

The success achieved by the Turin cousin» and a second effort ends in Milan
to draw the industrialists around 03mm MINI (located in lillan and
restricted to the hoistdy region until the end of 1978) inspired the PCI
leaders to establish a national group of red indistrialists. But how to choose
the right nen for it? The criteria adopted for selecting than were:
inclusion of all productive sectors (natal and chemical products, plastics,
bionedics. clothing textiles, building construction and shoes); the size of
each noninee's operation (no fewer than 50 eqloyees); and geographical loca-
tion (eaters cons fron alnoet every region of Italy). The co-ittee has put
forth various proposals subsequently endorsed by the Pct, such as organizing
special regional agencies to supply aid to seall and sodiu- businesses
(financing. narheting, studies, research and proeotion abroad). It was this
co-ittee, too, that conceived the idea for a bill to cowensate credits be-
tween the state and business.

A nap of mi» industrialis-

Although the 20 co-ittee letters chosen by cos-mist headquarters (see box)
and the nusrous Turin PCI industrialists represent the elite of left

30a
summon“
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

industrialisn, they are by no leans an isolated phenomenon. Indeed, in
almost every region of Italy one will find a healthy group of col-mist indus-
trailists or simply PCI constituents, as demonstrated in an appeal signed by
some 70 of then, which was published in UNIIA after the electoral returns of
3-6 June 1980.

‘lhe foremost nuceli of red industrialists are located in Many (anong the
best known are Mauro Paolanti, Hsuro Puliti, Luciano Cungi, Guido Galli,
Alessandro Cecchini and Piero Bimchini, in norms, and Oddino lhncini della
Vittoria in Castelfiorentini), but even more prominent are those in bilia-
Bomma (Monica Perrante, of Salise in Par-e; Calro Villani, of Anderson, Paras;
Gianfranco Dacci, Harri, Sasso Marconi; Rance Perina, Zola, Presalgrande;
Vando Veroni, Hissdeanna; Luciano Bertolini, Pontecchiele, Hontecchio; Carlo
Tadurini. River and Rocca, Lugs di Romans; Sergio and Gianpaola Bonetti,
Fins, Bologna, Perdiano Bortolotti, Go‘s, Sasso Harconi, Sergio and Carlo
Portuui, Calderara). In hilia, moreover, some of these industrialists
campaigned for public office on the PCI platform. Such was the case of Livia
Pornaciari, proprietor of Comet in Baguio Emilia, who ran for a seat in the
Parliament of Europe, likewise of Luigi Cantagalli, owner of Arti grafiche
reggiane (Reggio Graphic Arts), nember of Confindustria and a candidate in the
national elections.

Even in the South, the nudper of red induutrialists has been rising over the
past several years, particularly in the Abmsai (in the province or ‘reramo
and in Pescara there are Renato Saveni, Luciano Honaco, Giuseppe Aloisi,
Antonio Rietti and Giovanni Stante) and in Apulia Federico Piro (Bari), in
charge of the niddle class division, who has exerted every effort to close
ranks with snall and nediua business. Yrobably the most musual case in
Apulia has to do with wally Valeri, a wens: building constructor of Poggia,
erstwhile vice president of Confindustria's young membership group, and a
candidate for the Foggia provincial council on the left independent ticket on
the «mist slate (she was not elected, but came in 13th). In Sicily

there are others, although fewer. In Palermo, for enmple, apart from Amoroso,
one of the 20, there is only Alcudio Praeca Polara, owner of San Lorenzo,

one of the aost successful technological fires in Sicily, brother of Giorgio,
UNITA journalist and press office chief for Nilde Iotti, president of the
Chamber.

In the South, however. the PCI has encountered both satisfactions and
aversities in its relations with the local industrialists. For imtance,
Antonio Tons, one of the 20, was obliged to interrupt his activities became
the courts pronounced his business a failure. And about one year ago, Bari
saw the misfortunes of Hermes, a textile mill in Bitonto, owned (with
another firm, the Th) by Antonio Liaci, former co-nist deputy nyor of
Bitonto. During one night. all the Hernanas fira's equip-ant was spirited
away and 400 dependents lost their jobs. The comany was declared bankrupt
and Liaci. a lawyer. was expelled free the PCI as an unworthy exponent of
commism.

Identikit of the red industrialist

31
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
”WISE”?

In his work, what is the red industrialist like? Bow does he differ, if he
differs at all. fron his nonco-unist peers? II. W's enquiry shows that
in point of fact, there are no substantial contrasts between~then and
industrialists of other political persuasions: indeed. nost of the mists
belong to Confindustria but are still affiliated with Confabi. lorenso
Basins and Drum Pittatore. both ‘Durinese and neither enrolled in any
association, declare that "Between the two organisations we find no great
differences. Actually, in lurin. Confindustris seals the more advanced,
whereas Confabi clings to 19th century practices, just like ncn who owned
iron works i: the past. lender that their ideologiat is Luigi lossi di
nontelera...

Sonething else is even sore surprising: red business barons do not nurture
the least synpathy for the mions. "Every nan nust fend for hisself,"
declare all the interviewees [in substance]. "Let the unions pursue their
own ends, but they any not question what we do or how we perforn our func-
tions." The result: on their premises the words "self manage-ant" and
"consnagessnt" are never uttered. Only in isolated cases (Boards Elli,
Guido Vicario) does anyone speak of ”infomtional exchanges on invest-ants"
but no sore about natters which are now consecrated in national labor con-
tracts. In fact. the red industrialists' objections to the positions taken
by the mions' equalization policy, in force over the lest few years. 3110
Cecchini. building constructor and one of the 20, told a PC! neeting on
econonics. "You cannot fail to criticise the distorting effects of the wage
structure law. which counters the need for professionalisn in develop-ant
and obstructs the expamion of productivity by penalizing individuals who
asks innovative contributions. Horeover. its so-called sgalitarianisn is
debatable: it is not egalitarian because it detracts free the valorisation
of individual potentialities."

The complaints against the unions involve another problen. the question of
nobility. "I an convinced." says Cecchini, "that nobility does not contradict
real econosic-industrial denocracy. indeed it is an indispensable presupposi-
tion because nobility plus the acquisition of professionalisn in both a
hypothetical industrial order and technological developaent are essential."

All co-mist industrialists agree on still another point: the need to
revise the enploynent statute. "‘lhe law in force,” naintains the mrin
conittee, "constitutes one of the worst hindrances to the proper functioning
of industry.”

But if the red econonic leaders aggressively oppose the unions. they are

also openly critical of certain PCI econonic policies. "0n the issue of
credits." says Mauro Prilli. of Siena. "ny party spouts fine theories. but
when it cones down to brass tacks. it accosplishes precious little. take
what is happening in Messy, for examle. Although we now have authoritative
exponents of co-unisn on the boards of the Race Ioscana and the lines del
nonte dei Paschi. still the policies of these two institutions have not
changed in the slightest.”

‘me cos-mist industrialists. however, are neat critical of their party on
still another comt: the PCI's lack of any decisive opening to the niddle

32
mammal“
MWLWONLY

class. "ﬁle labor class." says Hillia- Lugli of Emilia. “will always be
numerically inferior in inortanco. Given the introduction of new technologies,
within a few years you will have nore people qloyed in the tertiary sector
than workers in industry. the PCI nust be nore alert to this developasnt

and therefore follow the niddle class and its problem are closely."

“hat the red Ids are like

Sons of then are forasr workers who, having been fired, went on to becou
industrialists because they could not find jobs; other inherited their
enterprises froe fathers or grandfathers. All of then are savoring their
success without suffering any guilt cowlens, without hasitating to denome
the unions. and without entertaining any doubts about their activities con-
flicting with their political ideas or Iilitancy—this is the identikit of
the industrial captain who feel altogether colfortﬁlo with the PCI. I].
norm herewith profiles ll of then.

Agostini the turncoat

”Hy worst problem I've had with ny bourgeois friends; any of then still
consider at a traitor to ay class. But perhaps this is typical of a city
like Genoa, where industrialists face the fact of life with very little
courage. 0n the other hand, I have good relations with ny eo-nnist workers.
hone of then has ever thrown ay double position, so to speak. in -y face. I
have nade what Giorgio Ansndola has called a choice of life-and within the
party. which is part of it. In fact, I have participated in dozens of
rallies before stovedores and other workers without any adverse consequucas.”
This co-ent was ado by Renata Agostini. liilaneso by birth but Ganoese by
adoption. proprietor of a fire in Genoa which enloys 40 persons to produce
aechanical converters mch appreciated in Italy and abroad (they are exported
to Ger-any). She is an atypical figure in the city's restricted bourgeois
industrial world. Enrolled in the PCI since 1963. lanata Agostini has held
variom public posts. first as provincial concillor. then co-nnal councillor
(mtil the last elections) in Genoa. Ber conpny. which has hired as any
as 250 hands, was fomded by her father in 1935 in Cornigliano, near the
Italsidor works. Elpidio Agostini originally produced lathes and nachinsry,
nuch in denand in Ger-any and still asked for, althoud: no longer in produc-
tion. Hith tins the fire changed its orientation. but still specialises in
precision instru-snts, a sector which had not previously existed in Genoa.
with the death of her father in I962, Renata assu-d control of the eolpany.

Anoroso the sntinsfioso

lie has run one of the oldest building construction outfits in Palorno since
19b9, the year he took his diploes in engineering. Franco Anoroso. in fact,
owns the coapany that bears his na. (50 pan-lent enployees). founded sons
80 years ago by his grandfather. by tradition his conpr builds private
dwellings. but recently it has extended its operation to include public
structures (law 25). financed by collective corporate invest-ants or by
federal or regional subsidies. Apart fron construction. Aaoroso also controls

33

”WISCONIN
”MISSONLY

a unit of 26 dependents. which produces donastic fixtures in netal ad wood
for the hones he erects—an mdertaking he established sons 20 years ago.

(he of the very few Sicilian industrialists to declare his synpathy for the
POI, he is the only one on the island su-oned to join the PCI national
directior's working group on the problem of snail and nediu business.
”Almond: I an not enrolled," he declares, "I feel close to the col-nist
party because of the decisions it has taken on econonic policies over the
past several years—its policies concerning the South, for example. In fact,
I fully share the PCI‘s preference for interventions in conpany structures
and infrastructures over the other politicnl parties' progran of incentives
and econoaic corner cutting. The PCI's stand is not finding my proselytes
because it does not pronise to pay off i-ediately; instead it anticipates
well equipped areas and new nethods of trading. wheres the najority of indus-
trialists want easy loans." .

President of the local useciation for snall business (API). he is an
inlacable ens-y of the nafia and its aethods. when Piersanti hattarella,

Christian Denocratic president of the regional council, was assassinated, he
had no doubts about the perpetrators of the cries. ”They murdered hattarella,"

he affiras. "to intiaidate others because he was differ-mt tron lost of the
island's politicians. Ila never had his hand in the sack..."

The erstwhile Mayor Angelini

In 1966 at a very young age, he was called to join the central cornittee of
FGCI (Italian Co-nnist Youth Federation), then he was elected nayor of
Bellante, a town in the province of Tera-o. and thereafter becane chief of

the PCI provincial comcil for Tera-o. By all indications it looked as if he
would rise rapidly in his political career. but an obstacle unexpectedly
blocked the way: the lure of industrialist "My conradas didn't under-
stand." he explains. "nor did they consider it advisable for us to be both

an industrialist and a nilitant. All the ease. I've gone on in politics but
without taking on any official duties. even though I belong to a working group.
on the problens of snail and Indiu- business."

This latent politician is Antonio Angelini, 52, proprietor of Lian di hereto
(Tera-o). a knitted goods plant. vice president of API Term, and fornerly
Abrueai correspondent for UNI‘I'A and PABSB sm. Following his journalistic
and political co-itaents. for two years he represented a fire selling bar
equip-eat. inheriting this aetier fron his father upon the latter's death.

"But I disliked hawking other people's wares." he says, "so after working as
a clothing salesnan and having acquired the necessary know-how for producing
clothing. I decided to strike out on ay own. In 1962 he went into business
for hiuelf and established Lian di Nereto. In 1981 his sales totaled 2.5
billion lire, 60 percent of it for export to the United States, USSR,
Belgiun. France, and the Ivory Coast.

Today Angelini enploys 25 persons to style his products and adainister the
operation. his knitted goods are produced sainly (over 70 percent) by
tertiary workers in the Abruzzi. This is a classical example of decentraliza-
tion. any cases of which the unions know about but lack representation in

.y.. 3!.

museum!
FOROFFIGALUSEONLY

the plants because they hire fewer than the minimum number of personnel
required for unionization. Nevertheless, "I have a good relationship with
the unions," Angelini declares. "You have to face up to them and collaborate
with them, but always keeping the two roles clearly distinct."

Good (Bonino) but gutsy

lie embarked on his industrial vocation after an abrupt dismissal from his job
in 1962 because, although a section chief (in practice one of the heads of

the small company where he worked), he staged a one-man strike after organising
the firm's first union.

Lorenzo Bonino was one of many Turin workers who became industrialists after
the fierce union battles of the 1950s and l960s. Like the majority of ‘rurin's
new production managers, he began his independent project selling supplies

to Fiat. "It wasn't easy to find a job after my troubles with the unions,"
he explains, "therefore I went into a business partnership with my brogher-in-
law. At first ours was a typical small industry, but gradually we took on
more workers, and 581. (Printing, Stamping and Laminiating) now has 35
employees working in advanced technologies. The potential for such output
today is considerable."

His company was still a small one when he was named national president of mu
(National Federation of Artisan Metalworkers), allied with DNA (National
Artisan Confederation).

A co-unist from the outset, Bonino has assumed various political duties,
among them counnal councillor in Turin for 10 years, concerned with decen-
tralization and ecological problem.

Controversial and gutsy like many old unionists, Bonino has a gift for con-
vincing others with his logic. lle spares no one his barbs, including the
union sun-its, which he rebukes especially for the obstacles they put in the
way of employment. Says he, "The hiring of specialised manpower should be
guaranteed to manufacturers because not only professionalism is a question of
fundamental importance but also the need to trust your specialists' abilities."
llis discourse changes when the subject of conversation shifts to his workers
and the union representation in his plant. "There are no conflicts in 851.,"
he points out, "because I am still looked upon not as an adversary but as one
of them. In fact, whenever a worker has problems, he comes to talk them over
with me and ask for my advice."

Shot by Cecchini

"The less you come around the better. I don't want any bosses here." This

is how building constructor Ilio Cecchini is regularly greeted by his one-
time switchboard operator, now on pension, when he shows up at the PCI federa-
tion in Pisa, of which he has been a neuter for decades. Son of a railroad
worker, former partisan commander and renowned throughout mscany for his
exploits during World War II, Cecchini duly accepts the man's injunction.

35
”OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Here than an industrialist," he says, "I am a party mater. But evidently
there are many militants in the party who cannot understand how a comrade
could own an industry."

This Pisan is the owner of Bdilcostruzione, with 30 permanent workers (he

has hired as my as 80 in the past) specializing in prefabricated building
(by private investment and government subsidies). A geometrist in a construc-
tion cooperative inediately after the war, Cecchini took his degree in
business and economics, then founded his own construction company, famous in
Tuscany for its output, including laboratories for the University of Pisa and,
in 1968, the stadium. built in only 100 days.

“he controversies over Cecchini. which are the order of the day, extend in
every direction. For exaaple. on various occasions he has fought the unions
on the matter of leveling salaries. But his arrows are not reserved only
for the union: he is always ready to attack local and regional administra-
tions. which he deems woefully inept. "My protests," he explains, "are not
directed only against the m's inefficiency in local government but in some
cases also against local and regional administrations rm by the Left."

Despite various "ifs" and a few reservations, Cecchini still professes to be
a convinced nilitant co-unist. "Some years ago," he says, "I was asked to
join the Association of Constructors (MIC!) of Confindustria, but I turned
down the invitation. I knew that part of Confindustria's funds were earmarked
to fund parties of the Digit."

Durbiano and the API

"The Turin association of industrials affiliated with Confindustria follows

a political line, supported by the majority, with which I cannot agree in
everything. although the positions I object to are certainly not reactionary.
One thing I cannot accept, for example, is the 'Nrin API's positions which

are still anchored in the 19th century." has speaks Ettore nurbiano of

Turin. one of the animators of the Turin co-nunist federation's committee on
small and Indium industry. Henber of the industrialists' association,
Durbiano heads an old, established company founded by his grandfather back in
1920 to process wood and produce industrial crating supplies. His organiza-
tion leads the sector with 50 employees and a gross of 2 billion lire, of
which 15 percent represents exports to European countries. In the past.

his major client was Fist, but he has since lengthened his roster of clients.
"To survive the crisis," he says. "we had to find customers other than males
Fiat." Descended from a traditionally liberal fanily, Durbiano was politically
active during his university years and then joined the PCI in 1968. "At the
time. I had thougat of remaining within the university (political) structure,"
he explains. ”because I thought of industry as a negative factor that exploited
labor. but then I modified my views in various respects and quit the university.
Now I think I am functioning in a socially positive way as an industrialist."
An attentive reader of the PCI central committee's documents, Durbiano has
written several essays for ORIENTAMENTI NUOVI and won a sizeable following,
particularly with an article (December 1979) on the labor hegemony and the
role of industry. He contends that the industrial class is a key factor in

36
FOROFHCMLUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

planning for the reconstruction and reorganization of production structures
and social relations, which the workers' movement must—and indeed wished to
—further in the current stange of development.

Blmi's models

His ascent was meteoric. Hired in 1966 as a technician, after 10 years he
was nased to the top post in his colpany, which by then had becone a couples
manufacturing plastic materials on the European scale. This is Bdoerdo Blmi
of Bologna, director genteel, administrative delegate, and shareholder in the
Caleppio group of Hilan.

Until 1968, Elsi was engaged in production, but after a period in the United
States to study the problematics of marketing plastic materials. he moved into
marketing until 1975, when he was appointed to the group's sum-it. "At that
time, things were not going very well in our sector," he recalls, "and when
the board appointed as deputy administrator, it was probably to involve ne
nore deeply." The society heading-the Caleppioogroup-om'hillion lire in
revenues and 600 employees--controls five plants: Caleppiovinili, Csleppio
Gia, Caleppio Gmbh in Germny, Caleppio France, and Carrel Italians. Its
branches are located in Settali (Hilan), specializing in rolled steel;
‘l‘ribiano (Milan), laminated thernoplastics; Pucine di Cesane. laninated thermo-
plastics; Sulnona, durable robe: products and catering equip-ant; Veil am
Rhein, Germany. specializing in various do-it-yourself items; and Vittenheil,
France, to which all products are shipped for distribution in France. The
strategy Elsi wanted was a planning center in Milan and diverse production
points in various parts of Italy, with a preference for the Abrusei. ”It

is an optisal area in Italy, well supplied with discreet infrastructures." he
says. "Our Sulmona branch, in which Pm (Financiarie hridionale) owns a

20 percent participation, has already begun to pay out dividends. It is
probably one of only a very few investments that has yielded m a profit at
the end of the year."

In his dealings with the unions, his password is "clarity." "Vs do not ask
the unions to accept inpossible terms," he says, "as sons industrialists
persist in doing. In fact, we have stipulated a company cos-itment to main-
tain enploynent on the national level. You mst be clear if you want to have
a constructive dialogue with the unions, and to do this it is essential to
keep then informed; and never confront then with an accosplished feet. And
then, you met honor your agreements. If that is how you treat them, you
will see your workers take their distance from the absentees—and so they do
in some of our plants." Although he is not a card carrier, Elmi'e political
point of reference has always been the PCI; Berlinguer's docusent on a third
way fully satisfies him.

Hhat Frilli distills

"Profit is the due and proper remuneration for putting production facilities
to good purpose. It is the unrenounceable reward in a social reality that
entails risk. Having exported to countries with centralized economies for
years. I an positive that the society I belong to is the beat." Decisive.

37
MWMONLY
MMLUSEONLY

given to speaking his nind openly with his collaborators. the unions and his
coerades in the PCI, in which he has been registered for any years, Mauro
Frilli of Siene typifies e felily which has run an industry for generations:
the Frilli fire was founded by his grandfathers in 1916. At first it special-
iced in distilling the residue of pressed grapes and contracting copper
equip-eat for distilling it. Today Prilli ranks enng the lost technologically
advanced nsnufacturers of rsady-to-use equipnsnt for distilling and rectifying
grape residue, sugar cane and whatever other letter that can be converted

into alcohol.

Sons of the installations developed by Prilli is exported (about 30 percent if
the entire output in 1981, for a value of sons 10 billion lire) to South

Aaerican countries, the Sudan. Ethiopia, Angola end Libya, .where_a plant for
extracting alcohol fron dates for pharlaceutical purposes is being readied.

In this respect. however, the project closest to Mauro Prilli's heart is the
production of alcohol capable of powering notor cars. "ﬁle have already
developed sons equip-ant," he says. "and we hope that very soon in Italy we
will be able to realise a product called sweet sorghum. typical of the
Mediterranean basin. By a process we have prefected. it will be possible to
convert sweet sorghun into carburetor fuel as well as products for zootechnicel
uses. Moreover, froa the residue, it will actually be possible to extract
wood for burning in furnaces."

In addition to constructing distillation plants, Prilli has set up another
enterprise to lake bathroon furniture, turning out a high quality line,
designed by well known nsles.

Loporchio the tough

He began his political career in high school as e adlitant in the ranks of
young socialists. Then, as he likes to recount. he was persuaded to transfer
his loyalties to the PCI by the logic of neppe Vacca, co-Inist philosopher
and recognized leader of the Bari school; of Federico Pirro, currently in
charge of the federation's aiddle class policies; and of young leftist uni-
versity professors he frequented. Once in the PCI he dedicated hilself un-
sparingly to the party. In 1975 he was elected to the co-unel council of
'i‘rsni (and reelected in the last local elections) after a bad experience with
the Republicans in 1970, a subject he prefers not to talk about. This is
Paola Loporchio, 36, harried with two children, proprietor of Confhevente in
'i‘rani (Bari), which nenufactures shirtings and knitted weer. His fire (80
enployees, mostly very young girls) racked up revenues of 3 billion lire in
1981, 2 billion in export trade mainly to Ger-any and the 88 nations. is
initiated his operation early in the 1970's. producing knitted goods in e
snell laboratory in Coreto (Bari), but in 1975 he took over his father‘s
plant, which was then earning hundreds of Iillions with a personnel of 30.
The two units were then nerged into Conflavente in l‘rani, where boporchio
turns out his own brand as well as lines for other inortant clothing pro-
ducers, enong then Caesars.

Lugli of the platfora trucks

38
ZCIALUEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"1 am not active in PCI affairs nor do I participate in Confabi union activ-
ities although I belong to the association. The reason is very simple:
they're always talking in vague, futile terms. It is just a waste of time.
Anyway, as industrialist can pursue his politics through more congenial
channels, that is by constant discussions with his factory mions." Hilliam
bugli, 310, is deputy adainistretor of the firm that bears his name and pro-
duces platform trucks with diesel or electric motors at Carpi, near llodena.
Earning 21 billion, almost all in the domestic market. Lugli gives work to
230 persons. Extremely young when he was obliged to take col-and of the
business-obs was still a student in university—after his father died, Hilliam
Lugli is a third generation industrialist. His paternal grandfather, a black-
smith in a town near Carpi. began manufacturing tractors after the war,
equipping them with salvaged parts of English diesel motors. Prom rudimentary
tractors to platform trucks was a short step; the idea was conceived by
William's father. who sparked the family's industrial rise. Along with an
industrial tradition, the Luglis have maintained a tradition of political
militancy in the PCI. the father as a partisan and nilitant. the son as a
party member from the beginning. ”In my youth I took part in many 00-min
manifestations-«he UNI'IA festivals in Italy. for one thing, and youth
festivals abroad. I recall with pleasure the 1968 festival in Sofia. It was
on that occasion that I realised the mucus difference between the really
bureaucratic socialism you find in the East European countries and the
socialism peonoted by the Italian co-Iuniste. Yes. I am still registered in
the party, but with many reservations. but when I scan the electoral slates.
I have no doubts..."

Vicario and ASTRU

A student of physiology at the University of Milan, be determined to become an
industrialist when the means were handed to him like a gift. The means "ware
five test tubes. two of them broken, kept in an old wooden container. Ine-
diately it occurred to me that in Italy it would be possible to achieve a lot
in the field of scientific instruments. American fires in that sector were

a thousand light years ahead of ours.” And indeed, Guido Vacatio. Milanese.
student of the renowned physiologist Rodolfo hargaria. soon left the univer-
sity to go into industry. Hithin a few years he became deputy administrator
of the Blvi Lagos colpany (150 workers), with seven plants in Bari, haples,
Rome. Florence, mrin, Padua. and Bologna. Today one of the top eight Italian
producers of biomedics, Blvi Lagos earns approximately 8 billion lire, in-
cluding a 30 percent export trade to ‘6 countries. These seven Elvi establish-
ments (Lagos is the marketing division) manufacture biomedical instruments
and, analyses reagents for hospitals, pollution research centers and univer-
sities. Apart from his work. Vicerio is couitted to the political aid
associative front; in fact, he is one of the founders-and for many years
president--of ASTRU, an association of biomedical production firms, which
remains independent of both Confindustria and Confabi. Among other matters.
the A511!!! industrialists were consulted during the preparation of Law 675 for
industrial reconstruction and reconversion on the aspect of research. "It was
a good provision, and the PCI made a notable contribution to it; too bad that
it was boycotted politically in its development stage." According to Vicario.
who often chairs PCI meetings, the col-unists merit high praise for being the
most attentive to the problems that beset small and medium enterprises.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWMY

In hie relations with tho mioua. the Kilauea. induatrialiata favora
utilising the maxi-ll intonation on hia my'a plans and «dotting
abunteeiu. "It ia mutant.” he aaya, “for the union. to attack ahaantae-
in or, at leaat. not to support the ahaantau. I not adlit that our planta
havealvayahadahardti-o-thankototheunioua."

A11 axiaranonta' a 20

‘Ihe induatrialiata who cowou the P61 direction'a wrung group no: lanata
Ago-uni (Agustin. Genoa); ﬁasco Anoroao (hot-ow. Palm); Antonio
Angelini (Lian di larto. rat-am); Lorenzo lonino (881.. hora-to 'roriueae);
Blio Catchini (ldilcoatrusioui. Pita); Ettore nurhiauo (Industria Lavoraaioui
Leno. Rivoii); Bdoardo m (Caimio. Sattalu. near lulu); Lidia Pomciari
(Co-t. logic hilia); Mauro Irilli (mm. Pouihonai, mar Siana); lhno
Gaataldo (Gaotaldo Prefabbricati, Ma); "1111‘ Lusli (Lush. Platfor-
‘rruchl, Carpi. near W); Sergio Piauti (Gruppo 'l'aaaila, Prato); Paola
Quarci (tutu-oceanica liontamrlo. Romeo); Guido Riva (Sam. holosna):

Ugo Sala (Paahion Clan. Carpi); Giuaoppe Sardana (Scantor, Peder-no Dunno.
near mm); Ariatida Stadarini (Stadarini. Inna): Giaeolo Stradaioli (mile.
Aprilia. near Latina); Antonio but (to... Lotto); and Guido Vicario (nu.
Milan .

COPYRIGHT: 11. mo 1982

9653
650: 3104/1“ m