FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10401

9 March 1982

West Europe Report

[FOUO 18/82]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NYE

Jns publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were rat clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGl’l' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING Will? 01"
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED BEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
01’ T1118 PUBLICATION BB RESTRICT- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(P000 18/82)

CONTENTS
POLITICAL
FRANCE
\

Relations of P8P Deputies, President, Party Examined
(Pierre Avril; POUVOIRS, No 20, 1982) ..................

Leftist Author on U.S., French. Soviet Third ‘dorld Policy

(Cornelius Castorisdis Interview; LB mum. ossnmszus.
2-8 Jan 82) IIIIOOOOOCCOOCOOGO0.0000000000IOIOOIOOOIOOO.

lam
FRAICE

Sales, Production Statistics for Military Aircraft Updated
(Am ml comm, 20 Feb 82) 00.0000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOIOO

Production, Sales, Plans for lieu Naval Missiles Detailed
(Pierre Langereux; AIR ET COSMOS, 20 Feb 82) ...........

Aerospatisle Sells Record labor of Tactical Missiles
(Pierre Langereux; AIR Er (DEEDS, 20 Feb 82) ............

Briefs

Ramjet Engine for Missile

-s- [III-WB-ISO

mo "WHO! nes- ﬂLf‘lV
FOR(NWKJALIBE(MHN

POLITICAL FRANCE

RELASIONS 0? P8P DEPUTIES, PRESIDENT, PARTY BXAHINED
Paris POUVOIRS in French. No 20, 1982 pp 115-126

Airticle by Pierre Avril, professor of public law and political
science at the University of Paris I: author of 'Le Regime Politique
de la V° Republique,” 6 ed., 19897

[rex37 Born again like the Baptists, the Pifth Republic emerges from
the second ballot of Hsthune 1981 not quite the same, nor quite dif-
ferent, which creates bewilderment and sometimes frensy: the politi-
cal collection of tales is enriched with an expression, l'ancien
regime,1 whose absurdity has no doubt a function of exorcism. The
stage of readjustment which the regime was undergoing since 1974 has
just ended in conformity with the institutional logic which was sum-
marized as follows 3 years ago: I"I‘he return to universal suffrage

by the combined effect of the presidential election and dissolution
directs actions towards this formation of a majority." The spring
balloting offered a striking illustration of it and in this connec-
tion the Giscardian episode is ended,2 since the majority nature of
the regime is reestablished and with it presidential dominance, "key-
stone' of the institution, is confirmed more than ever. But the
Fifth Republic's return to orthodoxy took place through a new phe-
nomenon: a real party. There is,no doubt,the main novelty of the
Septennate, emphasised moreover, by ’rancois Mitterrand himself:

"It is the first time in the history of the republic that a party
itself has an absolute majority of the seats in the National
Assembly.‘3

A Not Very Secret Chief

Por the semiparliamentary, semipresidential structure of the Fifth
Republic to maintain itself, the majority of the deputies must sup-
port the policy and even the person of the chief of state. “Presi—
dent of all the French,” as Francois Mitterrand defines it in his
message to the congress members in Valence, ”he could not be the man
of a party;' but he maintains, with those who support it, a relation-
ship which, because it is semiofficial, is no less decisive.

General de Gaulie, who had refused to see for a long time in this
bond, anything but a sort of subjective coincidence,4 ended up by

FOI(HWKJALlEE(”ﬂJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

admit in the need for it in his ress conference of 27 No ember
67,3 wgen he greeted the UNR Ngion for the New Repubngj .. um

emocratic union of Labog7 Congress in Lille. The message to the
socialist congress summarises history to a certain extent.

This bond results first from a situation: The majority candidates
presented themselves to the voters as the president's candidates.

The Socialist Party, reorganized in 1971, developed afterwards around
its first secretary and Mitterrand's victory brought in its wake that
of his comrades (additionally, the rescue of the survivors of the com-
munist group). The effect of the enthusiasm which is the origin of
the new majority creates a somewhat unique solidarity of its members
with their leader. It is found again in all the elections since
l963--with the exception of 1978. But the novelty of 1981 is due to
the fact that this solidarity shows, in addition, an objective
nature. The meaningless allegiance to which it was reduced until
then was replaced by joint membership in an organization and support
of the presidential promises expressed in the form of a contract made
by the president with the French people which elected him, but also
by the deputies who made use of his name. Francois Hitterrand re-
minded the latter of it, in a significant way, in his message to
parliament on 8 July 1981:

"I have said several times that my promises are the charter of
government operation. I will add, since universal suffrage was ex-
pressed twice, that they have become the charter of your legislative
action...The prime minister will ask of you the powers which the
national legislature has at it? disposal, so that the contract which
binds us to the French people, since last 10 Hay and 21 June, may be
faithfully executed."

Thus there are justified in advance the measures through which the
President of the Republic will demand of the deputies that they re-
spect the ”contract which they have supported but which they did

not write. This political restriction on parliamentary autonomy is
not without an analogy in the "reserved domain” of the past: If it

does not show its value of exclusion it limits the assembl '33 field
of initiative and preserves presidential freedom as the cal to order

made to the council of ministers on 23 September 1981 suggests:
"Regarding my promises, it is my duty to see that they are carried
out, more particularly regarding the schedule for their execution.“

Nevertheless, the B see does not have institutional relations now
with the assemblies : Consequently a leadership as distant needs

reserves and, from this point of view, the leadership of this secret
chief is exercised in a manner which is both conventional and
creative.

First, the liaison is insured by men when the president trusts and
who make up an inner circle analogous, if not similar, to that which

2
FOICWFKJALlBE(NﬂN
FOR¢MHWCUH.USE(NVLY

Jean Charlot had examined in the UNR; the most influential of them
enjoy a status which One would be tempted to compare with that of

the barons" of Gaullism, since it is based mainly on a loyalty shown
all during the wandering in the wilderness of the Fifth Republic,

the seniority of the trade guild can, nevertheless, be made up for

by the promotion of new talents through the party branches whose
organization supplies an instrument for selection which hardly ex-
isted before. The PS organization, divided into factions, creates a
network for recruitment of holders of responsible positions, based

on membership standards and one has thus observed that th) important
positions in the Palais-Bourbon were occupied mainly by members of
faction A, that is to say, of “the followers of Mitterrand” (the chief
of state does not like the adjective, but he did not completely re-
ject it in his press conference of 24 September 1981): the chairman-
ship of the assembly, that of the group, the chairmanships of the
committees, or, in lieu of them, the assistant chairmanship charged
with political responsibility insuring 'organizational” loyalty in
the control of the parliamentary machine.

0n the other hand, it is well known that the chief of state is very
vigilant about the party whose leadership he has conveyed to the suc-
cessor chosen by him. Mr Jospin is a regular visitor to the Elysee,
whose attendance was observed, for example, at the breakfast which
brought together on 15 September the president and the rime minister
just before the latter's declaration to the assembly. n this re-
spect, it should be pointed out that with Pierre Mauroy not belonging
to faction A, the majority P8 leadership protects what General

de Gaulle called the Fifth Republic'slo "lack of armor" by insuring
the chief of state against the independent whims of a prime minister
who would attempt to rely on the socialist deputies.

Consequently the P8 is an instrument of power, Hitterrand watches
over its development and the control of its apparatus: he declaredi
"the P8 is a remarkable reserve which can intervene at any time."1
The relations which he maintains with his leaders reproduce, on
another level, those of the president of the republic with the prime
minister and show an almost constitutional parallel which helps to
shore up the written constitution: the makeup of the leading organiza-
tions, executive committee and secretariat has it not been resolved
at the Elysee with the first secretary in the same way the govern-
ment's composition had been decided in agreement with the prime
minister12

As for the rest, that is regular political discussion, he lets it
continue within the limits he has fixed, assuring himself that they
are respected: is he not elected for 7 years, as he reminded emphati-
cally on 24 September 1981? Having at his disposal the term and the
means, he does not hurry to govern systematically like his prede-
cessors, anxious to control everything and even in detail, because

FOR<HWﬂJALlEECRﬂN
I'UK Ul'l’lkMI. U§£ UNIJ

they did not have the same guarantees...That without prejudice to
specific interventions and sovereign removals.13

"Play the Parliamentary Game Pully’

The chief of state, whose dominance is well established, intends to
”put each institution in its place'l‘ and thus assure an institu-
tional functioning more in conformity with the constitution, as he
conceives it. This implies in particular that one strives to “play
fully the parliamentary game."1

The first result of this concern is observed in the intense activity
of the assemblies; it corresponds to the legislative implementation
of the presidential promises,but also expresses the interest in
associating the national representation more closely with the govern-
ment's effort: the new resort to a vote of confidence on a articular
aspect of this policy, energy (6 October) is symptomatic. ¥he enthu-
siasm of a newly elected majority was thus able to give itself free
rein and win the satisfaction of going a little bit further than the

government imagined, even than the Elysee wantedlé; the executive
id not impose its point of view any onger systematically, it even

resigned itself to some drafts which did not quite satisfy it, pro-
vided the essential was preserved: the assembly is henceforth freer
regarding government bills, since the only restriction imposed on it
is outlined by the presidential promises (but the latter are evalu-
ated without appeal by the chief of state, as mentioned above.)

When the threshhold is reached, the government regains control of
things, gets the group to conform and as was the case regarding the
free radios 24 September and once again, energy on 6 October. In
these two circumstances, however, the governmental positions included
serious ”inflexibilities' regarding the candidate‘s llO proposals.17

But the more active participation of the national representation
mainly concerns the assembly, while the Senate finds itself again in
its position before 1974; it risks again experiencing "adversity,"
according to Jacques Georgel's expression and one can expect to see
the deputies make the decisions more often by virtue of Article 45,
paragraph 4. In the assembly itself the beneficiary is the social-
ist group because of its hegemony. institutional continuity has in-
volved in this respect a spectacular change of roles, with the new
majority adapting quite naturally the behavior of the old one, es-
pecially when the new opposition discovers the delights of procedure.
moreover, this continuity is combined with a political schism which
irresistably evokes the beginnings of the Fifth Republic: the ingen-
uous Hanichaeism of the “newly elected,“ then-aggressiveness. their
tactlessness all this recalls 1959 and activist core of the dNRl9
”rangers." éuch a situation obviously does not favor the expansion
of minority rights, despite the good intentions proclaimed. You
might as well say that they turned sharply and among the latter, the

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

main innovation (which, moreover, was not new, since the same sce-
nario has repeated itself since 1973 at the beginning of each legis-
lature) consisting in sharing the chairmanships of the committees:

it collided with political reality.20 under the pressure of the
socialist group, strong in its big battalions, one even went back on
equal sharing of time for questions to the government, which had been
set up in 1974 and the incident indicates perhaps the new trends. In
the Anglo-Saxon concept of majority parliamentarianism, the majority
expresses itself through the cabinet s vote, since it governs; but
this model had never been completely adopted in the Palais-Bourbon
because the institutional structure of the Pifth Republic maintains

a separation which is not only legal but physical between the govern-
ment and the deputies, although the majority, while supporting it,
did not identify absolutely with the presidential executive. Hence-
forth the majority will demand an autonomy which it asserts with re-
spect to the ministers, but which it mobilises once again against

the opposition.

The socialist group is, in fact, relieving the government in the con-
duct of the parliamentary battle; all during the summer debates, we
have seen the chairman of the socialist group replace the minister
responsible for relations with parliament to direct tactics, speed
up the examination of documents, organise the development of the
meeting and if Mr Defferre was anxious to be the assiduous spokesman
of the deputies in the discussion of the decentralization proposal,
it is the chairman and recorder of the committee who bore, with the
support of Mr Joxe, the brunt of the burden of nationalizations.
This reserve allowed the executive to let the relationship of forces
shift in the chamber while wielding his constitutional weapons; thus
he was not able to deny too fast the diatribes made against the ob-
structed vote and against Article 49, Paragraph 3, avoid Sasorting
to it in his turn (but will he be able to do it for long? a) and he
takes cheap credit for respecting parliamentary procedure.

However, this practice has some drawbacks because if the government
refrains from using, under its responsibility, its constitutional
prerogatives, the clarity of the discussion suffers from it and the
majority is especially tempted to replace them with other restrictive
procedures: thus for the first time, it seems, since the beginning

of the Fifth Republic, cloture of the discussion of an article was

applied (Article 57 of the regulation)21.

Consequently the plan which is outlined is based on a controlled

autonomy of parliament; the deputies are no longer as strictly sub-
jected to government tutelage and their agitation can superficially
recall the Fourth Republic, but the function of leadership and con—
trol, in conformity with majority logic, appear mainly returned to
the group: This sort of devolution is conceivable because there is

the party behind the group.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFNJALIEEUONLY

”The Link"

The socialist party seems to have the mission of maintaining the
cutting edge of the ideological cleavages which the exercise of power
tends to blunt. Par from seeking appeasement in the symbolic debates
like that on nationalisations, its deputies in emulously referring

to the class struggle and "schism“ are playing a dual role.

They help, on one hand, to keep the communist party in the humiliated
status it has known since 10 hay, in pressing it in its field (the
socialist deputies could not expose themselves to the charge of
moderation or compromise with the right, without 0 ening a breech in
which the communist party would charge immediately and in looking

it in the dilemma of submission to majority discipline or solitary
adventure (its defection would have no effect on parliamentary arith-
metic): that is it for the left.

They have, on the other hand, a role in the presidential arrangement
in mimicking the image of 'radicalisation' offered by Hitterrand as
the only alternative to his policy and as the inevitable consequence
of his failure: That is it for the right.

Freed from these burdens, the executive can then maintain its posi-
tion and preserve the language of consensus (mystifying word with a
dreadful hypocrisy before 10 May...). At Valence, the orators de-

voted themselves to a happening with a background of cut off heads22

while the prime minister reassured a somewhat disconcerted opinion
and on the next day it was the president of the republic who recalled

on his return from Cancun ”the right measure“: "it is necessary that
all the French, whatever they think, whether they are for or agaégst
my policy, feel really secure in the framework of the republic."

Consequently the Preach can ask the question? It is not tery easy to

reconcile the policy about which the chief of state said in his press
conference of 4 September that it was “based on the union of the

French" and the celebration of the class struggle. But these, after

all, are onlx the two faces of a Janus olicy and this Chasing of
roles which eneral de Gaulle had ract ced with Debre regarding

Algeria is probably due less to a eliberate scenario than to the
logic of situations. The novelty is that it puts on the stage an
actor who has been absent until now in the distribution of the main

roles: the party.

The reception of this phenomenon by the institutions of the Fifth
Republic poses a problem, both for the administration as well as for
the P8, as Jospin declared at Valence: "I hear it constantly said
that the party must swing between the state-P8-it then becomes

a coloniser-or the hobnailed boot partyb-it then becomes colonised.
Let us not create confusion between the party and institutions."

6
FORCWVKJALIBEIHHN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The warning is not unnecessary. Article 4 of the constitution
assigns the function to the parties of contributing to the expression
of suffrage, which neans that their constitutional role is essen-
tially electoral and that consequently they must not, as such, inter-
fere in the activity of public authorities: it was a deliberate break
with the practice before 1958 which considered the parliamentarians
and even the members of government, as the representatives of their
parties, subordinate in this capacity to the decisions of the leading
organisations of the latter. Moreover, this concept did not proceed
without disagreements and we know that the repeated conflicts which
it created between the parliamentary group and the SPIO rench Sec-
tion of the Workers Internationa Executive Committee 2 . As for
the government, the chief of sta e settled thiggs as early as the
first council of ministers of his 7-year term , but there is a
temptation for the deputies, indicated by the initiative of the PS
Executive Committee on the occasion of the discussion of the draft
bill on immigrants. The executive committee had ordered a deputy
from the North, Derosier to amend the text to bring it "as close as
possible to party positions" from which it considered the bill too
distant; the minister had to negotiate not only with the reporter

and the deputies, but also with the party executive committee. It is
true that after this display of doctrinal vigilance, the latter
adopted a draft acceptable to Defferre, but the fact remains that in
interfering in the government's relations with the assembly, it had
demanded a role which the constitution did not grant it 2 .

No doubt, it will be objected that it is a question there of a quite
juridical evaluation and that this point of view is based on fiction:
does not everyone know hat the parties are the decisive variable in
arliamenta regimes 2 ? Membership in the latter determines the
ehavior of he actorg it takes into account their solidarity--and
also their rivalries 9. But the objection is not relevant for it
ignores the significance of what it treats as fiction; the distinc-
tion which the law makes between the public authorities and the free
associations which are the parties (“the P3 is not a cogwheel of the
state, it belongs to society, Jospin observed quite rightly), does
not aspire to describe all the facts, no more than it does not claim
to deny an obvious solidarity between the participants: while reserv-
ing to constitutional procedures and organs the approval of this
solidarity, it merely excludes confusion of types.

To explain the problems of the majority party in the institutions of
the Fifth Republic, we must no doubt go back once again to origins,
to the period where Mr Chalandon assured the inpatient Gaullist mili-
tants that the UNR would play the role of a 'link.".30 It does not
matter that the image was based more on a wish than reality: the
intention will be resumed with more probability and authority by
Mitterrand in the message to the members of the congress at alence
where he stated clearly the P 's mission 31.

T
FOR<WFKJALIEE¢RHX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As ”guardian of the program,” in the words of its first secretary,
the PS occupies with respect to the government and the parliamen-
tarians the position of an ideological ressure group32. In pro-
viding the deputies with the reference or the program, it exorcises
the specter of the 'hobnail boot"33 since their activity takes place
within a broader perspective than the mere execution of presidential
promises: Their role is not reduced to being the agents of a purely
instrumental officialdom, it is connected with a joint enterprise of
which the party is in some way the witness and the guarantee. Its
existence justifies the legitimate questioning of an authority which
they do not identify with,even if they are bound up with it, so that
these deputies reproduce in their relationships with the government
the relation typical of mass parties, of members with elected members.
Reassuring for their convictions, this situation has, however, a
centrifugal potentiality which brings up all the more keenly the
question of authority in the party.

As an organization, the P8 is an instrument for the mobilization of
the deputies it includes as members and whose discipline it approves
as elected members. Parliamentary performance and the votes of each
elected member ”are answerable to the group, the executive committee
and the national convention,“ states Article 52 of the by-laws,

while Article 17 of the group‘s internal regulation provides that
"every member of the group who will have broken voting unity will be
referred to competent PS authorities." And the first secretary re-
minded that if he did not claim to play the role of an arbitrator
between the deputies and the government, the group chairman could
appeal to the executive committee "in case of a problem among the
parliamentarians“ (see note 27). Since then, the strategic factor
has been control of the apparatus. The 'Hitterrand supporters“ domi-
nate it completely, so much so that the demarcation between the

field of the party and the public authorities, which places the
former outside the latter, is practically erased by the sort of "per-
sonal agreement" which is effected by the presence on the administra-
tive committee of the secretary general and the assistant secretary
general of the Elysee, as well as 14 government members and on the
executive committee that of the chairman of the National Assembly and

the group chairman.

The existence of a genuine majority party is going to create an in-
flexibility in the operation of the Fifth Republic whose extent is
not yet foreseeable. This presence will contribute not only to pre-
serving, but also to reinforcing the main variables in the regime;
however, it introduces an element of uncertainty which states the
dilemma of Mr Jospinx "State-P8 or hobnailed boot party." Between
the two which tendency will win the day? It could be that they will
mutually strengthen each other, popular support and democratization
of a political discussion restricted until then, characterised by the
practice of the spoils system and institutionalised clientelism; it

8

FOR(NWHJALIEE(RHJ'
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

finally depends on presidential arbitration provided for in Article 5
of the constitution whether the price to pay to establish this new
phenomenon and complete the political modernization of the system re-
mains within the limits of "the right measure'-—if not of the golden
mean.

Footnotes

1. The expression even escaped a chairman of the meeting and one had
him observe that ”we are still within the framework of the con—
stitution of the Fifth Republic,“ Hr Nucci agreed with good grace:
"Iou will excuse the old history profe sor, which I am, for having
made this slip” (AN [National Assemhl debates, 29 July 1981,

p 485). A deputy of the new majority even went so far as to speak
of the "decadent regime!” (same, 27 October 1981, p 2633).

2. It is not very fashionable to crush the vanquished. Let us re-
peat then what was observed in this same No 9, namely that
Giscard d'Estaing's 7 year term leaves a positive institutional
heritage with respect to law and freedoms,with the innovation of
the control of the constitutional council by the minority and the
considerable development of the control of constitutionality
which results from it, thanks in particular to the initiatives
of the socialist roup (see Mr Charasse, control the constitu-
tional council, P30VOIRS, No 13). Hay one wish that on this
point it does not involve an 'episode 7

3. "Gamhettn and de Gaulle, he added, had carried away and covered
with their name and their prestige, what, in reality, was a co-
alition of parties,” LE HONDE, 2 July 1981.

4. "But (...) if I am no longer among you, in the arty, I remain
with you, with our ideas and our hopes," LE MAT N, 2 July 1931.

5. This is why Chalandon, then UNR secretary general, described
General de Gaulle as our I'secret chief,” LE MONDE 19 May 1959.

6. Speeches and Messages, V, Plon, 1970 p 247.

7. AN p 46. On this idea of "contract“ see remarks of Mr
de Laubadere, who publishes the text of "110 progosals for France"
adopted by the Congress of Creteil 24 January 19 l, AJDA [Expan-
sion unknowﬁ7, 1981 p 419.

8. "If it was necessary to go further than the commitments made,
the message of 8 July continued, it could only be after the peo-
ple, consulted again, had said the last word. In short, ex-
cesses and higher offers are excluded.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.
ll.
12.
l3.

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

FORCWTKJALUSE(»HN

Its distinguished from the preceding presidency, there isynever-
theless, at the secretariat an adviser, assisted by two asso-

ciates, who has relations with parliament among his responsi-
bilities.

Quoted by A Peyrefitte, the French Sickness, Plan, 1976, p 355.
LB MONDE 13 October 1981
NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR 31 October 1981

For example, regarding the large scale Parisian city planning
operations, the ”striking residential move" cancelling the
defense vanguard project ( MONDB, 19 September 1981), or the
taxing of works of art (same, 31 October).

Press conference of 24 September 1981: 'I would like to put
each institution in its place again: the government governs,
the parliament legislates and participates in discussion, with-
out restraint of any kind."

The idea is Hitterrand's on returning from Cancun, quoted by
LE QUOTIDIEN de Paris of 26 October 1981.

Thus the Pierret amendment on giftsésharesson 16 July, the-
Suchod amendment of the amnesty bill on the 29th. Contrary to
a discipline of amendment, the government upheld the elimina-
tion of the student quorum in the university elections,
although the text adopted by the Senate would have offered it
the opportunity to correct an innovation considered unwise in
the Elysee (16 September and "last word” on 2 October); it
finally negotiated with difficulty the regulations about ex-
pulsion of foreigners on 30 September.

The term is Jospin's. LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR 17 October 1981.

The chairman of the communist group, Mr Lajoinie, complained
several times about the privileged relations between the
socialist group and the government: such an "arrangement" is
”a not very recommendable and unconstitutional practice"

(LE MATIN 2 October 1981); we must avoid "limiting dialogue to
a single group," LE MONDE 15 October 1981.

The reconciliation was made by Georges Many, LE NOUVEL
OBSERVATEUR 31 October 1981.

The committees prepare the legislative decision which is set
down in a policy; when the ideological positions are strongly
opposed, it is hardly practical to entrust to the minority the

10
FORCWFKJALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

duty of directing the work of the majority and the German ex-

ample which is always invoked, is both exceptional and irrele-

vant, with nine-tenths of the laws develo ed under these con-

ditions being adopted unanimously by the undestag (Hr Fremont,

POUVOIRS, No 16, p 148): Only such a consensus allows the

:ssociation of the minority with the responsibility of legisla-
ion.

20;. This article was drawn up before recourse to the regulations of
Article 38.

21. :3 October 1981: see the ”French Constitutional Chronicle" fol-
owing.

22. 'I will not take any action, I will not take any initiative which
may threaten our national community,“ asserts Mauroy, LB MONDE,
27 October 1981.

23. LE QUOTIDIEN DE PARIS 26 October 1981.

24. On an embodiment of our traditional schizophrenia which Valdeck-
Rousseau already observed: "we have two brains: one (...) very

bold, very adventurous. Ye have another one, very reflective,
very calculating" (speech of Saint-Etienne, 11 March 1895).

25. See the LE JOURNAL DU SEPTENNAT of VLAuriol, A.Colin, 1949,
p 349 and 388

26. Constitutional Chronicle, POUVOIRS No 19, p 183.

'27. LE HONDE, l and 2 October 1981. Jospin had to correct fire by
declaring that the party executive committee does not act as an
arbiter between the parliamentary group and the government. It
is not resorted to by the chairman of the group, except in case
of a problem between the parliamentarians. Then it is the
executive committee which decides. The PS is not a co eel of
the state, it belongs to society..., LE NOUVBL OBSERTA

17 October 1981.
28. J.-Cl. Colliard, Contemporary Parliamentary Regimes, PFNSP, 1978.

29. Including within a same group: one knows about the deals between
the PS factions, which the formation of committees has given
rise to in the assembly in July 1981 and the ordeal to which it
has subjected the arbitration authority of the group chairman.
Moreover, the cleavages are reflected in the government with the
conferring of the title of secretary of state on the leaders of
these factions (without forgetting the PCP representative).

30. LE MONDE 14 February 1959.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
31.

32.

33.

FOR(nWﬂJALLE£1NVLY

"Main force of change, it must be capable of explaining, clari-
fying the government's decisions and convincing. But it also
must convey to the government the message it receives from the
social classes where it has been able to establish its roots,
express their demands, their fears, their hopes. It must
finally mobilize the popular masses so that they all take their
place in the movement,” LE MATIN 26 October 1981.

And sometimes corporative: the first secrets confirmed that
the P3 was zﬁposed to the note for UNEDIC expansion unknown]
officials, NOUVEL OBSEB ATBUR 17 October 1981.

”The hobnail boot is a fine and good shoe.” Chevenenent ob-
served however at Valence, in comparing it with I'dancing shoes,"
LE MiriN 26 October 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Presses Universitaires de France, 1982

8490
080:

3100/348

12

FOItﬂTKJALUSE(nﬂX
FIHI(HﬂﬂClALIJ§E(ﬂ§LY

POLITICAL FRANCE

LEFTIST AUTHOR OR 0.8., FRENCH, SOVIBT THIRD HORLD POLICY
Paris LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR in French 2-8 Jan 82 pp 16-19

[Interview by Louis~Bernard Robitaille with Cornelius Castoriadis, author of "De-
vant ls guerre"; date and place not specified]

[Text] The day after this interview took place, General Jarnsel-
aki'; tanks fanned out over Harssw--an extremely caricatural il-
lustration of the theses of Cornelius Castoriadis. In his view,
indeed, the party is an historical cadaver in the Soviet empire:
it is the army that holds both the reality of power and its ideo-
logical extension. One can easily imagine that such thinking is
far from unanimity on the left. But Castoriadis is used to being
a lone rider: in 1945 as today, he has asserted himself as a rev-
olutionary intellectual and has denounced the bureaucratic total-
itarianism of the 0888. The review that he subsequently founded
with Claude Lefort bears a name that is famous today: SOCIALISHE
OU BARBARIE. K philosopher, psychoanalyst, economist and director
of studies at the Practical School of higher Studies. he has just
published a book with a provocative title: "Devant la Guerre"
[Before the war] (Volume I. Payard), in which he analyses the
"stratocracy," the enormous military machine that aims at nothing
less than "domination of the world." he explained to Louis-Bernard
Robitaille the political extensions of his analyses.

[Question] Y0u have just published a book with the title "Devant la Guerre." A
bit alarmist, isn't it?

[Answer] I started from a very important and quite real fact: the invasion of Af-
ghanistan at the end of 1979, following shortly after the collapse of the shah's
regime in Iran, all of this manifesting a nearly totsl breakdown of American policy
on the world scene. I began by writing an article for the review LIBRB, which pro-
voked violent discussion in the committee and caused stoppage of publication. But
the thinking I had begun with regard to that article led me to go back over all the
analysis I had done on the USSR for long years, since I started working on the Rus-
sian question in 1944. I have always considered that it is the key to understand-
ing of contemporary'h1gtory, How could a revolution that began as a socialist revo-
lution have engendered this regime that I call total and totalitarian bureaucratic
capitalism? And also: how does it happen that such a regine can perpetuate itself?

[Question] In what way did the invasion of Afghanistan radically change the pic-
ture?

13
llﬂl(ﬂlﬂK1Al.U§E(NNLY
FtMI(HFFICIAI.IIBE¢0hﬂUY

[Answer] It brought to light, in a striking manner, not only the So:iet Union's
military capacities but also its political-strategic capacities. It brought to the
forefront this phenomenon: that this country that showed such power on the military
level was the same one that had not managed to solve, on the domestic level, some
basic problems which, more or less, some countries so poor at the outset and

so poorly run as Greece or Spain have nearly solved. how, then, can this country
produce enormous ultramodern equipment capable of rivaling that of the world's No 1
industrial power, the United States?

[Question] That is to say: how does it happen that there is a shortage of butter
in Moscow, the tractors are always breaking down onthekolkhozes, etc, but the USSR
produces and can put into operation ultrasophisticated military materiel?

[Answer] Exactly. It is also astonishing that the thousands of official Sovieto-
logists paid by the taxpayers of the West have practically never raised the ques-
tion.

[Question] But the reason is probably that great quantities are involved. There
is enormous waste in production.

[Answer] I reject the wastage theory--in other words, that they make 10 computers,
throw away 9 of them and keep 1. If you apply this thinking to Russian armament,
it is really a lot, and it would have to exceed the world's production of steel.
That is not possible. It is therefore necessary that in the military-production
sector there be a productivity, an output, on standards totally different from what
one finds in the other sectors. Which led me to go back over my entire analysis of
Russia, in the economic and sociological aress--snd, for example, to examine this
phenomenon, known but passed over in silence by the Sovietologists: that of the
closed, secret enterprises, placed under the control of the army. There are two
distinct economies: the first, incapable of producing enough wheat or shoes of ac-
ceptable quality; and the second, mass-producing ultrasophisticated materiel, the
hundreds of thousands of spare parts necessary, the high-precision machine-tools,
etc. Hhich presupposes, upstream and in parallel, a veritable military society
that has its privileged and motivated workers, its own technicians and scientists.
Which leads me to speak of stretocracy.

[Question] You mean to say that behind a thin facade, that of the Columnist Party,
the army has finally taken over power in the USSR?

[Answer] No, it involves a new phenomenon. The USSR is truly a new historical an-
imal. In effect, this military society--employing perhaps some 25 million persons
--has a dominant position in a country in which the party has become an historical
cadaver. Since the demise of Khrushchev, that last deluded illusionist, the party
has had no more to say, nothing to propose to society. Not about achieving the
earthly paradise or even about "outstripping capitalism," as Khrushchev proclaimed.
The only ideology that can still be proposed to the populations--or rather the only
imaginary one that survives--is nationalism, incarnated precisely by the army. The
aim of power, of world domination. Under cover of the "triumph of socialism," of
course.

[Question] Your second major observation is the fact that world policy will be
dominated in the coming years by the Soviet-American confrontation. That does not
seem a particularly new phenomenon.

1h
F03!"ﬂﬂ€1Al.U§E¢HVLY
[Answer] of course not. In l949, in SOCIALISHE OU BARBARIE, we were already ana-
lyzing this reality and we evoked the possibility of a world war between the two
systems of exploitation. At bottom, we were right. Also as regards the liberation
struggles that followed in the Third Horld--confiscated, for the most part, by the
Russians. Also as regards the great social movements in the Rest. These phenomena
that for a time helped to mask the essential fact of this confrontation. But here
it is again today, and at a far higher level. This perspective shapes all the rert
today. To such an extent that the entire problem of the Third world, as monstrous
as it is, is annexed by it. becomes a subsidiary, a chapter of this confrontation.
This is an observation of the first importance, and one which apparently is not
self-evident--at least to the people who are close to me, who have a leftist past,
who continue to take the point of view of a radical transformation of society.

They are swimming in a soup of illusions concerning the countries of the East and
Russia in particular. They refuse to see that we have before us a new social-his-
torical formation, a new historical animal. They are still trying to analyze in
the light of the past: worker state degenerated by the Trotskyites, state capital-
ism, etc. Or else they stay with the "classical" concept of totalitarianism, which
is entirely inadequate for understanding the Russia of today. 0thers--libersls,
for example-~are counting on a flexibilization, a "moderniazation" of Soviet soci-
ety through trade and economic exchanges. This has absolutely not proved out. It
is for that public that I wrote my book. And unfortunately, I fear that it remains
completely deaf.

[Question] why?

[Answer] Because even when it has been granted, for the sake of conversation, that
the USSR is not socialism, there is difficulty in conceiving that it is a regime of
domination such as has never before existed in the history of humanity. For the
first time in history, there is a regime without faith or law, not even for its own
citizens or subjects. This has never been seen before. The Mongols doubtlessly
did not have either faith or law when they invaded, pillaged, occupied foreign
countries. But for themselves, they had their religion, or rather they had lb suc-
cessive ones. All conquerors have always said "woe to the vanquished!" But for
themselves, they preserved a faith and a law. From this point of view, Russia con-
stitutes a new historical phenomenon.

[Question] Should lack of imagination be quite simply added, then, to ill-digested
deception?

[Answer] Yes, but there is another factor, one that makes the moral atmosphere
heavy and that is probably the most decisive one. The people who view themselves
as militant, lucid, continue to function in a theological-Stalinist mode. They are
not interested in knowing whether /that/ is a pack of cigarettes; they begin by
looking around and they say to themselves: if one grants that [that/ is a pack of
cigarettes, one comes to that conclusion. But /that/ conclusion is very disagree-
able to us and we do not want any of it. It is not that it is false; it is that we
do not want it. Therefore: it is not a pack of cigarettes but a degenerate work-
ers' state! God knows but that such reasoning has had a hard life. If you say
that God does not exist, then anything is permitted. Intolerable! Therefore, it
is necessary for God to exist.

15

IIIICHWﬂCLALIJSE(H‘LY
I'UK Ul‘l'lLMl- U3! UNLY

Another example: one does not like the idea of a Third world War. And the entire
left is disarmed by that question; and if it were true? what position would one
have to take? The people of the left have nothing to say on the subject. The only
thing that enables them to go on prattling is to say that there is an American in-
perialism, warmongering, and furthermore that it is the strongest, that the Rus-
sians are in a defensive position, etc. Which frees them of the obligation to face
up to the actual situation.

[Question] There is refusal to see this new animal--a rather maleficent one, you
say. Which means: at bottom. things were much better when the United States had
absolute supremacy in this world-scale confrontation. I conclude from this that in
the present debate, you believe that the United States, the Rest, should rearm in
the face of the Soviets.

[Answer] I have never said, I will never say that the Rest should rearm. First of
all, it is not my role to say to the capitalist governments what they should or
should not do. with that point made, no one ever thought, when the United States
had absolute supremacy on the nuclear level--for some 20 years--that it was going
to nuclearize Russia "before it was too late." No one ever thought so, and rightly
--except for a few bizarre personages, of course, who urged it and had no chance of
being listened to. Why? Not because one attributes superior moral qualities to
the Pentagon. Quite simply--and this is where traditional Marxism becomes a fan-
tastic machine for wrong thinking-~because the United States is not simply a cap-
italist and imperialist country. I call it a liberal oligarchy. That means some-
thing: it means that there are controls, a budget, a public procedure, a public
opinion, actions and reactions by the population. It means that those who govern
cannot do just anything at any time. One forgets a little too quickly what stopped
the Vietnam war: it was public opinion, the American people, the students, the sol-
diers who chucked grenades into the officers' messes. This situation is still
there, in the United States--as in West Europe. But it absolutely does not exist
in Russia. The decision whether or not to unleash a preventive nuclear attack is
entirely in the hands of some 10 or 20 persons who run the Russian establishment,
who do not have to account to anyone and who fear nothing domestically.

[Question] In short, as between the Soviet "stratocracy" and the American "oli-
garchy," the former is the more dangerous.

[Answer] Most people of the "left" are dominated by the Marxist theorization by
which a regime is defined essentially by its economy. That is: the Western coun-
tries are only capitalist; everything that might happen on the political level is
secondary, it is decoration, sauce, mayonnaise. There is a class structure, there-
fore these regimes are to be fought unconditionally. This position is a false one.

what is the reality? From the point of view of political theory, these regimes are
effectively oligarchies. But if one speaks of the societies, one has to admit that
they are not capitalist societi 1 pure and simple. If they were truly capitalist,
this would be the world of Chll'.: Chaplin's "Modern Times," it would be a totali-
tarian regime inherent in the organisation of the capitalist factory, extended to
the whole of society. But this is false. why? Because these societies are his-
torical bastards, generated both by the development of capitalism and by all the
liberation, emancipation movements that were already beginning in the European
cities in the lhth century and that took on all the forms that we know of, includ-

16

IKHICINWCIAI.IEIB(MILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ing the form of religious movements. There were the revolutions--Bnglish, French,
American--and the workers' movements; there has been the great revolutionary demo-
cratic movement that is lasting for centuries and that means that these societies

have not been able to become simply what their economies were leading them toward.

They have not been able to be purely capitalist societies, which would have meant
totalitarian societies.

[Question] You say, on the contrary, that there are two or more logics operating.

[Answer] Precisely. There is on the one hand the logic of the capitalist economic
institution of society, and on another hand, the logic of the revolutionary demo-
cratic movement that has always been there.

[Question] Furthermore, it is this contradiction that creates the weakness of
these societies.

[Answer] Ah! Of course, if for these societies it were a matter of waging a war
against a regime which for its part is purely and simply totalitarian-bureaucratic.
it is obvious that that would creat: a situation that is not a simple one. These
countries have found themselves, since the end of the last war, in a phase of de-
composition, progressive and accelerated. It happens, for example, that these
"oligarchies" are incapable of defining a rational and coherent policy-~even from
the strict point of view of their long-term interests. This is a phenomenon that
the Marxists, here again, refuse to recognize, for they are living in the mythology
of a rational capital that pulls all the strings, which would be perfectly ration-
al. In fact, there is a fantastic incoherence--at the level of relations between
states, for example, or in the so-called Atlantic Alliance, which is anything but
an alliance, or at the level of American armaments policy, which is also of a fan—
tastic incoherence. It is made up of fits and starts, under the various pressures
of the military-industrial lobbies, without its corresponding to any military and
strategic rationality.

The western societies are like thick soups in which swim some pieces that are a
little thicker than the others: in particular, the lobbies. The official "work-
ers'" movement, the institutionalized "workers'" movement, is itself one lobby
among others, without any overall political platform.

[Question] At what moment--let's speak of the United States--do you place this
process of decomposition?

[Answer] The point of cleavage is in the 1960's, with the considerable ambiguity
of the results of the great social movement (blacks, young people, women, etc), but
one that was not followed through all the way. That movement modified the Western
societies. it shook them. But in subsiding, it left them in this state of decompo-
sition, without any real sequel. Today there is no longer any movement going for-
ward and wanting to transform society. The movement of the 1960's shook the domin-
ant point of view without managing to impose its own.

[Question] In situating the problems at so high a level-~or in diving so deep-~you
you do not make it possible to perceive much in the way of solutions.

[Answer] But it is because the question is really difficult. One has to see that
there is no reason to defend these Uestern regimes. But there are not only the re-

17
IIHICNWHCJA1.USE(NVLY
PUI‘UftﬂJAL.U§£1NVLY

gimes, there are also the societies, and they contain what remains of the great
democratic and revolutionary tradition of transformation of society, and that is no
small thing, and it does not go without saying. One does not know whether this
tradition continues, in an underground way, to exist in Russia. Therefore, entire-
ly independent of Reagan, the question of the defense of these societies against
the Russian stratocracy could arise. In a sense, it has arisen. It is a moment of
reasoning which, of course, the Marxists and others will object to, crying “Sacri-
lege!" This is a point that has to be given close attention: first of all, it is
not true that there is no choice to be made between the western societies and a
Russian-type regime.

[Question] Between two gangs, then. one must in effect choose the lesser....

[Answer] No, it is no longer a matter of gangs but of societies. Let us note in
passing the hypocrisy of all these people: I see no one applying for a visa to emi-
grate to Russia. I've never seen such a thing! But the question is that, on the
one hand, this isnot the role of the people who presume to give advice to the gen-
eral staffs, still less to Reagan, who takes the bread from the mouths of old women
in order to make weapons which, for that matter, serve no useful purpose. And on
the other hand, that the societies are not alone in the world. There is the whole
Third world, and to begin with, the Third world where the Russians have not yet en-
tered.

[Question] In your judgment, is that where the game is being played, andcrucially?

[Answer] Yes, that is the main arena of the confrontation. And what is happening
there? Many of those countries are under the direct influence of the Western coun-
tries, the United States in particular. And what is the 0.5. policy? To support,
in practically all cases, the most reactionary, the nest authoritarian regimes. We
note in passing Mrs Kirkpatrick‘s subtle distinction between totalitarian regimes
and authoritarian regimes: actually, it is not false. Indeed, the regimes of the
Third world are rather "authoritarian" than "totalitarian." And so? Is that a
reason for aligning with governments that support all the dictatorships of Latin
America wherever they exist, who train torturers in the CIA camps in the united
States and who now are doing what they are doing in El Salvador? Hho not only are
incapable of solving the problems of the Third World countries but are also system-
atically supporting regimes of authoritarian dectatorship?

[Question] But what strategy for the West, then? what had to be done, what has to
be done, in Nicaragua, in El Salvador?

[Answer] The idea of the third way, as it is presently being advocated in France,
is illusory. These are pious wishes, in the present state of affairs. For it is
not by chance that the United States has this irrational policy, from the point of
view, properly understood, of the American imperialist interests themselves. While
it is not entirely true that the Americans pushed Cuba into the arms of the Rus-
sians, it is true that they are in the process of pushing Nicaragua into their
arms. This is not by chance; it is the very result of this decomposition of Ameri-
can society. There is no body in the American regime capable of rising up against
what a Marxist called the point of view of the general interests of the dominant
system.

18

FOI(MHHK1AI.USE¢NNLY
I!HRIJFF1C1AI.[EHE(MWLY

Uhat prevails is United Fruit, it is the military lobbies that sell airplanes,
train colonels, etc. It is this or that company, it is the various CIA clans who
each have their preferred dictator, etc. Take South Africa--S million whites, and
18 million blacks kept practically in a state of slavery. A sort of immense con-
centration camp for the blacks. There is a black movement, that has its ups and
downs but seems to be getting more important. One day or another, these blacks
will rise up--at least one has to hope so, desire so. they will rise up. The
whites are armed to the teeth and more. These blacks will need weapons. Who will
supply them? The American administration is aligned with the Pretoria government
more than ever. What will happen? The blacks will ask for weapons from the Rus-
sians, who will be delighted to supply them. The Cape as a Russian military base--
now that is worth something in the relationship of world forces! When that moment
comes, we will be asked, in the name of defense of democracy and liberty, to sup-
port the Pretoria regime against the blacks because they have Russian weapons.

This is one of the reasons why I refuse to go into the question of whether an abso-
lute war effort by the Heat has to be supported.- Contemporary war is a total phe-
nomenon: what does that mean? For example, in France, for a logical military lead-
ership. it means indexing #0 percent of the population. Because about 60 percent
of the French have at one time or another been members of the Communist Party, or
their wives or sons have.

This would mean, in a series of European countries (Spain, Italy, etc), transform-
ing them into semitotalitarian regimes, with a foreign policy to suit, in order to
fight another totalitarian regime. This is absolutely absurd, untenable, unaccept-
able.

[Question] Don't you have a tendency to pose the dilemma or impasse in an absolute
way? Couldn't there quite simply be, for the Heat. a technical response that would
consist, on the level of hardware, in filling in the most obvious gaps in the rela-
tionship of military forces--and first of all, the question of the SS-ZO's in Eu-
rope? We are a long way away from an all-out war effort.

[Answer] But here again, the confrontation is not going to evolve in the conven—
tional way. The Americans had already managed to learn nothing in Vietnam. As if
they had never heard of the Algerian war. They made war in Vietnam as if they were
doing ultratechnologized maneuvers on the great plains of the Middle West, but in
the Vietnamese jungle where one couldn't see 2 meters in front of oneself.

[Question] Could--or should--things have happened differently in Vietnam?

[Answer] 1 don't know. That is not my problem. They could not in any way hold
Vietnam. And what were they getting their noses into in Vietnam? what I want to
say is that the Americans thought it was possible and intelligent to carry on an
industrial war in Vietnam, by massive injections of materiel and dollars. And to-
day they think it is sufficient to pass budgets, produce new tons of hardware,
whereas the confrontation is essentially social-political. Hardware will not make
war, but rather people and societies--with, for the Third World, the national in-
gredient.

[Question] And communist ideology.

19
IN)! OFIWCJAl.lEﬂi(HULY
I'UI WI‘ILIAI. USP. ONLY

[Answer] Yes. This communist ideology, which is completely bankrupt in Russia,
which no one believes in for a second, this ideology, at the same time that the or-
ganizational model of the militariaed party, the great creation of Lenin, still
continues to be of value in the export markets. And first of all. of course, in
the countries of the Third World. Why? Because if you go to Latin America, for
example. the most stupid, most lifeless, most idiotic versions of the most primary
Naraisms are verified directly. There are rich and poor, the poor drop from hun-
ger and the rich are very rich. they have the means of production and they expro-
priate the few lands that the peasants have. The state? What state? The local
police are totally under the orders of the local landowner. The local priest-he
has been changing a bit for some time, but for centuries, his line was: "My chil-
dren, keep calm. the poor will inherit the kingdom of heaven!"

[Question] A veritable caricature, in short.

[Answer] Yes. The most ssinine caricature of the most insipid Marxism seems to be
verified there. Into this explosive mixture you throw a few copies of the Marxist
catechism, you throw a few enzymes of an organizational model....

[Question] Then in the last analysis, and whatever its motives, the USSR finds it-
self playing a progressive role in those countries?

[Answer] But in order to do what, in the last analysis? What is happening now in
Vietnam? A totalitarian bureaucratic society that is not solving the population's
problems. Of course, these Third World populations are desperate, they have an en-
emy, a solution appears in the form of a national front manipulated by the commun-
ists or supported by the Russians (because they are the only ones to give it aid).
The struggle begins. The Americans, of course, support the opposite camp. Anti-
Americanism, already existing, develops to the point of paroxysm. This is entirely
natural. The people do not know what is coming afterward. But we--we know. Some
say it is better. I do not agree.

[Question] The question is this: for Cuba, was Castro or Batista better?

[Answer] What is the situation in Cuba? There is a fantastic number of people in
the prisons. The material conditions--despite the enormous subsidies that the USSR
gives--are miserable.

[Question] Your point of view appears both pessimistic and disheartening: no al-
ternative for the Third World except the status quo or Sovietisation.

[Answer] Is it pessimistic to observe an auto accident or a natural catastrophe?
Nothing that the Western countries are doing or can do is going to change the situ-
ation.

[Question] Isn‘t it a little facile to decree in advance that no policy for devel-
opment of the economy and of democracy exists for Latin America?

[Answer] But listen! Give me an example in which the Western countries have suc-
ceeded with this "third way“ policy! Kennedy made the Alliance for Progress: what

was its fate? Even Carter--it is entirely right if he did not intervene in Nicara-
gua! Why? Because when one starts talking about a different policy, there are

20

FOIICNﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂi(HVLY
FOItDFFﬂJAl.USE(NVLY

airplane and tank manufacturers who block the process. Or within the countries
themselves, ruling classes who block things and find support, in the CIA or else-
where.

[Question] But all the same, isn't it worth the effort to try, as Hitterrand did
in a way, to push for a solution in El Salvador?

[Answer] But it is very well to find a solution on paper. Linking economic aid to
the democratization process, etc. But concretely, France has no clout in Central
America. It has in Africa. But what does Mitterrand do? He supports Nobutu! It
is not that he likes Hobutue, to be sure, but he does not have the means for any
other policy. There or elsewhere, there could theoretically be something else, but
that is not going to happen with the present Western regimes and with the policies
they are conducting. The situation therefore remains essentially the following:
Russia is trying to penetrate the Third WorldI and the Third World is an excellent
terrain for penetration. Even if it sometimes suffers a setback, as in Egypt. One
cannot conduct an enterprise of world domination such as the USSR is conducting
without suffering setbacks from time to time. And it will suffer more. Already in
Afghanistan, it is not a triumph for them, it is obvious.

[Question] What is the scenario that you conceive?

[Answer] I don't do futurology; but let us examine an hypothesis. Let us imagine
one crisis or another in such-and-such country of the Third World. The Russians or
a pro-Russian regime is installed, or simply a regime that the Americans perceive
to be such. Sooner or later, there will come a situation that will be objectively
critical or considered to be such.

[Question] For example, Iran.

[Answer] It could be Iran, or South Africa. It could be Africa, if Qadhafi were
not so weak as he is and if there had been a real descent of the Libyans toward the
heart of Africa. All the African countries except for one or two are in a fantas-
tic state of instability. They are pastebosrd states, Hobutu is kept at arm's
length by the westerners, etc. Therefore, at a given moment, the Pentagon, the
United States will react. If they do not react--for example, in an absolutely de-
cisive matter such as the Gulf--it means capitulation. If, in a key country, there
is an upheaval and an Islamic-popular-nationalist-revolutionary government declares
"I am keeping my oil!," Europe shuts down in 24 hours.

The United States would no longer have any choice but to react or capitulate in
fact and withdraw to its own territory. Or else they react: ultimatum, military
action, etc. At that moment, effectively, the European front becomes important.
The Russian general staff knows quite well that if things turn bad, the principal
_place of confrontation becomes Europe. If South Africa is at stake, then you can
suppose that there will be an attack on the Blve.

[Question] But you say in your preface: "The Russians do not want war, :hey want
victory.“ What does that mean?

[Answer] That the Russian general staff is not completely mad. Even if human
lives are not accounted for as they are in the Uestr-as was seen in the course of

21

FOR 0!!!C1AI.USE¢MNLY
FORlﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.USE(HVLY

ww ll--it knows quite well that total war means 100 or 120 million Russian dead.
Even for them, that is a lot. "hat they are aiming for is victory-~that is, the
internal collapse of the others, under maximum pressure. This is the explanation
for the Russians' fantas”ic overarmament--an overarmament that cannot have only the
effect of putting Russia "under shelter." For on such an hypothesis, now that con-
ventional supremacy is crushing and overkill has long since been achieved, why con-
tinue this enormous military production? Why a constantly growing fleet, when Rus-
sia does not need it for its defense? Because this overarmament has a decisive
psychological value in the confrontation. The Westerners, though armed, will find
themselves in the position of a man facing an adversary who pulls out a knife. then
an axe. Next you discover that he also has brass knuckles and a revolver and

that he is a karate champion! That's quite a hit; so then you capitulate. One
should not have any illusions about the American deterrent force. Imagine that
there is a Russian first strike: the only possihle American response would consist
in hitting the Russian cities, which would in turn lead necessarily to destruction
of the American cities. Now apart from the extreme cases (Hitler in his bunker),
who is the person in a position of political responsibility about whom one is sure
that he would take such a decision? All this, as Herman Kahn said, is to "think

the unthinkable." But in this perspective, one has to think about a "victory with-
out war."

[Question] In the face of this situation, it is impossible for you to avoid this

question: is it really necessary to have a strategy for the United States, for Eu-
rope, for the west?

[Answer] We do not have to put ourselves in the shoes of the politicians, who take
decisions in accordance with their own logic. Nor give advice to Reagan, who does
not know what he is doing and does it poorly. Rearmament, in the form it is pres-
ently taking, is an absurdity and does not interest me. I am not a "pacifist." I
consider the present European pacifist movement politically absurd and morally ab-
ject. What do the pacifists say? "Denuclearise, from Poland to Portugal!" which
means: the Russians and the Americans can nuclearise to an extreme, who cares, so

long as our precious little hides are saved! This is politically imbecilic and
morally unacceptable.

My point of view is that a popular movement must be organised for universal and tor
tal disarmament and for allocation to the Third World of the $500 or 600 billion
spent on armaments each year. It doesn't matter how. Not to the profit of the
local petty tyrants, psycopathic demagogues, in order for them to build armies in
their turn, but for development of agriculture and infrastructure.

[Question] All the same, I gather from your book that you consider the present in-
balance totally irreversible. Hhich seems enormous.

[Answer] It is unthinkable that the United States could cope with the military-
political-strategic challenge without restoring the draft, abandoned under Nixon.
But that is politically out of the question. At present there is a volunteer army,
insufficient on the quantitative level--the warships are short of personnel--and on
the qualitative level: the recruits, essentially unemployed persons, are not well-
qualified enough. Secondly, people are reasoning by the criteria of the 1939-1945
war, when the United States effectively built up a formidable war industry in 2 or
3 years. If there is a confrontation and serious crisis in the present era, the
time will not be counted in days, weeks or months, but in hours.

22
F03(Hﬂﬂ(1ALll§B(HVLY
[Question] Many maintain that the United States, with its fantastic industriai po-
tential, would in fact have the means to bring the Soviets to their knees, by im-
posing on them an armaments race that their economy could not support.

[Answer] This would suppose, on the part of the United States, an armament effort
that seems to me, for the time being, entirely improbable. On the Russian side.
the sums devoted to armament are already estimated at between 15 and 20 percent of
GNP. And at present, these expenditures are increasing by 5 percent per year in
real terms. Even in the face of an enormous American effort, the Russians would
have the means for coping, with additional expenditures that would represent less
than 1 percent more of their GNP. And they will do it.

[Question] Don't you think, in view of the population's already miserable standard
of living, that in the event that more blood is drawn out of the civilian economy,
there could be a gigantic revolt?

[Answer] I do not think that the quantity of blood drawn off would really make the
difference. with that point made, what is of capital importance for the future of
our world is to know whether or not there are democratic traces left in Russia. Of
this, we are totally ignorant. It is true that Russia's internal situation is one
of the most explosive there is: none of the problems posed under the old regime has
been solved-—that is the least that can be said. But at the same time there is a
leaden blanket that pins society down. Even apart from the Stalinist terror, the
regime has perfected a fantastic system of repression. Even though I do not share
his conclusions at all,21nov'yev was correct in stressing this "homo sovieticus,"
a new species of human, in a way, cynical, indifferent to the shabbiness of his
lot, to the future of society--provided that he be given his peace, more or less.
The whole question, for the future of Russia-and to a great extent, ours too--is
whether the dissidents are the tip of an iceberg or the representatives of a disap-

pearing race.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "le nouvel Observateur"

11267
CSO: 3100/337

23
FOI!DFFHJA1.USB(H‘LY
FtHRGJFFKJA1.U§EGUNLY

MILITARY ' FRAME

SALES, PRODUCTION STATISTICS FOR MILITARY AIRCRAFT UPDATED
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 20 Feb 82 pp 15, 17, 19, 20
[Article: The Programs of French Industry")

[Text] In order to intern its readers better about the nature and magnitude of the
production of the French aerospace industry, AIR ET COSMOS presents belos~five tables
that summarize this activity. These tables give the principal industrial and commercial
characteristics of the programs for aircraft (civilian and military airplanes and
helicopters), for engines and for missiles in which the national industry is signi-
ficantly involved, for which mass production has already been started or is still

in progress, or on which potentially important development is being done. These

data make it possible to quantify these programs and to present their status in

terms of orders, deliveries, rate of production, clientele, exportation.

Complementary data:

--1980 aerospace turnover: Fr 35 billion (consolidated); Fr a3 billion, not con-
solidated;

--l980 exports: Fr 20.5 billion;

--order book as of 31 December 1980: Fr 91 billion;

--export orders taken in 1980: Fr 27 billion;

--direct jobs: 110,000 persons;

--indirect jobs: 120,000 persons.

Principal personnel strength (as of 1 June 1981): SNIAS [National Industrial Aero-
space Co] (group): 39,000; SNECHA [National Aircraft Engine Design and Manufactur-
ing Co] (group): 19,800; Dassault-Breguet: 15,800; SNPB [National Powder and Explo-
sives Co]: 6,500; Turbo-eca: 4,500; Hatrs: 3,500; 88? [European Propellant Co]:
2,500.

Notice: For each program, the principal information is given as it is known to the
editorial staff of AIR ET COSHOS as of the "situation" date given. In addition,
there may differences of definition from one manufacturer to snotuer (for example,
is "delivery" made at the end of the assembly line, upon delivery to a subsidiary
or to the end-customer?, and so on). Finally, publication of certain data may be
restricted for reasons of industrial secrecy or for national-defense reasons. This
means that the information presented below may be incomplete or indicative only-of
orders of magnitude.

These documents will be updated regularly by the AIR BT COSMOS editorial team.

2h
FtIICHﬂﬂCIAl.USE(H‘LY_
.uOhsuOIuaclﬂ an

13.3.5.8". no: sauna-E35 A3 .vOuQ—x... on: on: 2.» cm canola; on» no «no no.3 u. sums: no 30.»
2503 :8- 23 6.3253. 2—0!- .. “hug—owns». on... I 3325: 2.0!- + as .3338 25:90 I o A:

git—‘3;

0.0.; 233 AM u ..

AC
FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L!

couch um< a>uz .mm

acmucm>< doc-sun: o oun>mum .cu
.caouxc: cam-sanxo_ ecu .nn
Bauo~n1363nonnuuulzo-uo-noxa an: .-
uuoanao + mamamnuh .uu

uuoaaau annioo .cN

unnaoo gem-omimu~:= .au

noun-a com .au

nonauOuoun N .un

vauuau- coco"; DOmuoooua n I unauOuoun u .o~
nonhuOUOua s I onuuuoua cm damn-muons: uocuuaoo .nu
.vuaumo you nonuuaoo .ooc-uh you unnoouom .eu

vuucomaaaloo no: damn-luauau nay
.vuuznaov taco! n “shanOwucu- canal I u

ucouou uooz any

 

mauMUuu 30: .nmo~ am «.0 .nn

Anonaac .cv N uuoaum .o~
acmuucaoo no henna: .

mecca

vu-su: onion o Auv

.0002 .Nu
38 33-33 .3

vuouh .o

oucu unsuao: .n

vouo>m~oa .0

35° + lumwv ouovuo .n

ououauoauaanx .a

acmuonsw .n

lduNOMm .N

85:54 .533: 4
">08

 

.uouaquunaua an

.voucva: on: 0cm~ one am once-duo 0:» no use uo-ou an gown) no eu-v

.o—Amaooa oaoﬁuno I + Adv

%

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”!(NﬂﬂClALllNE(HVLY

     

 

   

 

 

 

 

10
mmmnw i (a; ‘2’ ‘_ i (m
(2) (3) .5 unau-
m— u... eon-- I! 2

(Sta ....... Iﬂ5tvyg) mazn as»
can» ........ nun: an. maze: aaw
chau&.:u «mmng3) vain ocmxcunoam
nu nun . '"zﬁﬁmm' adam av. nun-u
u. u: . A) was“ ““0015
Anvuuo ...... . . uqu n
alum ....... . -:—- “War ad:-———
Lvusoo ..... ( 8 _—_--_-—-_—- . Aunoln
~uu . $43“ bau.uum.hu~

 

In. mum .. 'WT;~ - nun-c. hut-I!
Mun ill 1% 31..“ “may???“ M
WOO . .

m .......... 'W - —— __ -o-— Mn 2. (WI
MINI. ..... . . M M
will . tun, M4
QﬂffXN' . Auugzhsfum

mm um. a. . Goa-ll.
C u N “"71.”

M
was: 1...... - ......“

 

(Table concluded and key supplied on following page]

21
POI! omcuwssonur'
ﬂOl¢ﬂﬂﬂC1Al.USB¢NVLY

 

(l) 9 - optiona poaaible. (2) + lean upward; . neana stationary; - leans downward.
(3) Most recent date on which at least one of the elenenta in the line was updated.
(a) Marbore: more than 5.700 sold, in all veraiona. (S) 78 to be delivered.

(6) 192 to be delivered. (7) 108 to be delivered. (8) 30 to be delivered. (9) 38
to be delivered. (10) Not communicated by the manufacturer.

 

Key:
1. Gas Turbine Engines ll. Situation Date
2. Progra- 12. Notea
3. Function . l3. civilian
a. Hanufacturera 14. Military turboject
S. Orders-(fin. 4» option.) 15. Propeller turbine engine
6. Delivered 16. Turbojet
7. Monthly rate 17. Inpulae turbine
8. Trend 18. [expansiona unknown]
9. Number of countriea l9. Otonat aea-to-aea niaaile
10. Export 2 (as number) 20. Hiaoilea and airplanea

 

[Table concluded and key aupplied on following page]'

28
FOI‘DFFKJA1.USEINULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

ma no. a .- ‘u as me
an s ma .0 an um (23W M an
In I Mo 10‘

    

 

   

+0 we: (22?““W” n-

  
 

(22)”“""°" ""

  
 

 

E1

(2‘)!)m 1-

 
 

 

 

 

°|~|al° .I-

25"” W

  

 

Key:
1. Tactical Hioailea 12. Notes 23. Delivery end
2. Program 13. Braked both: of 1981
3. Function lb. 68-nn rocket-launchera 2‘. End of devel-
6. Manufacturers 15. Antitank opuent; deliv-
5. Ordered l6. Antiaircraft ery 1983
6. Delivered 17. Antiahip 25. Under develop-
7. Rate per month 18 Air-to-aurface lent
8. Trend l9. Antirunvay
9. Number of countriea 20. Target niaeile
10. Export 1 21. Airborne
ll. Situation Date 22. Under developuent; delivery

 

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

[1267
C80: 3100/383

l-‘OIOI'FICIALIEBONLY
FOI(MHHCLALIENIONLY

MILITARY V FRANCE

PRODUCTION, SALES, PLANS FOR NEW NAVAL HISSILES DETAILED
Paria AIR ET COSMOS in French 20 feb 82 pp 63, 65, b7, 51, 54
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "New French Naval Hiaailea”]

[Text] France is one of the most advanced countries aa regarda naval weapona aya-
tena. The Haaurca, Halafon, Martel, Aa-12 - ss-Iz-n and other Aa-20 and A8-30 air-
to aurface niaailea developed in the l960'a and 1970‘a are preaently in aervice in
several dozen foreign countries.

But some new French naval niaeilea have made their appearance in recent yeara: the
"naval Crotale" and Exocet and Otonat antiahip niaailea, which have already been
ordered by acne 30 countriea.

Other niaailea are alao under develop-ant for the l990'a: the SATCP (Surface-to-Air
Very-Short-Range) niaaile and the AS-lS-TT and auperaonic ANS light antiahip nia-
ailea.

“Naval Crotale" Antiniaaile Hiaaile

The ”naval Crotale" of Thonaon-CSP [General Radio Co], the niaaile part of which
waa developed with HATRA [hechanico, Aviation and Traction Co], is a abort-range
(more than 10 kn) all-weather aurface-to-air weapon ayaten capable of intercepting
aircraft flying at low altitutde, with alao a certain interception capacity againat
the "aea akin-er" antiahip niaailea.

The "naval Crotale" ia preaently in operational aervice in the Navy, which haa
planned to equip more than 10 ahipa with it: c-7o corvettea, F-67 frigatea, etc.
It has alao been adopted for the four P-2000 frigatea of Saudi Arabia, which ia
preaently the only country to have acquired the three veraiona of the ayaten;

The weapon system, in ita Crotale, "naval Crotale" and Shahine/SICA [expanaion un-
known] veraiona, is presently on order by ll arned forcea of 8 countriea. including
France (2 ayatena), Saudi Arabia (3 ayatena), South Africa, Egypt, Libya, Pakiatan,
the United Arab Eniratea (Abu Dhabi), and Chile, which ia the neat recent cuatoner.

More than 1,800 onceta

To date, nore than 1,800 of Aeroapatiale'a Exocet antiahip niaailea have been or-
dered by more than 26 countriea, including France, preaently the only country that
haa adopted all veraiona of the niaaile: the HH-38 aea-to-aea, the AM-39 air-to-
aea, the Sit-39 aubnarine to ace, and the til-40 long-range aea-to-aea.

30
FOI‘OIIICIAI.IE“E(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The navies of 18 countries, including France, have ordered 1,236 of the lot-38 sea-
to-sea Exocet to date, to equip 178 ships (see table below). Aerospatiale has al-
ready delivered nearly 1,100 Mil-38 missiles and has done more than no development
and evaluation firings of it since it was placed in service in January 1976. The
missile is manufactured under license by Great Britain, which has adopted it for
itself.

The long-range--more than 70 I‘m-401400 sea-to-sea Exocet became operational in the
French Navy in February, after two successful validation firings, one of them at
the hull of the decoa-issioned escort vessel "Le Basque" at a distance of 65 km,
from the experimentation ship "Ile d'Oleron."

The first French ship to be equipped with Mil-100’s is the A-69 dispatch boat "Prem-
ier Msitre l'ller," which will be fitted out in the spring of 1982. The m-ao is
also to be put on five other A-69 dispatch boats and seven c-7o antiaircraft and
antisubmarine corvettes; it is also planned, in the longer term, for it to replace
the ﬁll-38's on all the Navy ships already equipped, beginning with the three F-67
Tourville frigates.

But the RIM-140 has already been in service abroad for a year. To date, 307 Nil-40
missiles have been ordered by 10 countries (see table below), including France,
which adopted it more than a year ago (cf AIR 8T COSMOS, No 8210). The m—ao's or-
dered will arm a total of some 50 French and foreign ships.

Among the foreign countries, it should be noted that six new Exocet customers have
ordered the m-loo: Abu Dhabi, Bahrein, Kuwait, Qatar, Tunisia and Colombia (order
not confirmed). As can be noted, the m-Ao has made a remarkable breakthrough
among the Gulf countries in the last 6 months.

Qatar, in particular, has ordered three Combattante 3H patrol boats, each armed
with eight m-ao missiles. The first two units will be delivered in August and 0c-
tober 1982, and the third in January 1983.

One Gulf country, already equipped with All-39's and til-60's (on board ship), is al-
so the first customer for the coastal-batter version of the rot-1.0. This version,
mounted on a Berliet G80 6 X 6 all-terrain vehicle, will be operational in 1983.
Firings of m—so missiles (engine-driven mockups) have already been taking place
since the beginning of 1981. A firing of a complete inn-1.0 missile in its coastal-
battery version is planned for mid-1982.

The All-39 air-to-sea Exocet is an improved airborne version, with range varying
from $0 to 70 km, depending on the type of aircraft--helicopter or airplane--and
the firing altitude. The adaptation of the All-39 was completed in February 1982
(after five firings, four of them successful) from the carrier-based airplane Super
Etendard, and it is in progress on the Atlantic NG airplane, for France, where the
All-39 will be operational this year. But the All-39 has already been in service
abroad since 1978, particularly on helicopters: the Sea King in Pakistan and the
Super-Frelon in Iraq. Furthermore, the Iraqi Navy is reported to have sunk two
Iranian patrol boats and one frigate with the aid of All-39 missiles fired from
Super-Prelons (cf "Flottes de Combat" [Combat Fleets] - 1982). In the export
field, the adaptation of the Ali-39 for the Agusta Sll-3D helicopter (the Italian
version of the Sea King) has also been completed, and it is in progress for Aero-

31

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI(HHHCJALIAHEONLN

Exocet HM-38 Hiooileo (1a Countries)

...__.....—._-.____—.... . .._..

 
  
 

m

 

«to. ....s u».......

      
 
       
       

”mime

cum “(1‘)..1'98152 .-r I ,
We . .

  

WWW» ,

Wumul) '

MAM..." «(Lifer-um. .

WAN rum. ,v
Mao-“nun _ z 1 i s

  

 

[Table concluded and key supplied on following page]

32
FOI(MHHC1ALIENBONLY
F03¢MﬂﬂCJA1.USE(HSLY

    

  

wauua..(ll) ..............

Editor's Notes: (1) Pour equipped out of 17 planned, including 6 with lit-100's.
(2) MM-38 or MM-40 missiles. (3) Three other frigatas planned. (6) Armament
planned, ships under construction.

 

Key:
1. Countries/Ships 14. Belgium
2. Class 15. Brazil
3. Number or 16. Chile
4. Ships 17. South Korea
5. Missiles per unit 18. Ecuador
6. Cruiser 19. Great Britain
7. Helicopter carrier 20. Greece
8. Frigates 21. Indonesia
9. Escort vessel 22. Malaysia
10. Dispatch boats 23. Morocco
ll. Patrol boats 20. Peru
12. PRC 25. Thailand

13. Argentina

 

spatiale's Super-Puma; furthermore, it is nearing completion for the Mirage 50
fighter, and is in progress for the Mirage P-l for some foreign customers. Thus,
adaptation of the AM-39 will soon have been completed for eight types of aircraft.
But the Mirage 2000 and other French or foreign aircraft could also be armed with
the AM-39.

To date, 7 countries, including France, Iraq, Pakistan, South Africa, and perhaps
Peru also, have ordered 271 AM-39 missiles to arm 76 aircraft-helicopters and air-
planes.

The Exocet SM-39 is a new antiship version, fired from submerged submarines and
having a range of 50 km. It is presently being developed for the French Navy,
which will arm its Agosta conventional attack submarines and its SMA's (Nuclear-
Powered Attack Submarines] with it, as well as the SNLB's [Missile-Launching Nu-
clear Submarines] of the Strategic Naval Force (cf All ET COSMOS, No 881). The
first units to be equipped with it will be the SNA's, which are planned to go into
service in mid-1984. It is not presently planned to export this version of the
Exocet.

ANS Supersonic Missile in 1988
Aerospatiale believes it can sell up to about 1,500 MM-38 and 700 MM-bO missiles

before the placing in service of the future ANS [Supersonic Antiship] missile
planned for 1988 (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 865).

33
FOI‘O'INCIAI.IRIE(M§LY
I'UI mutual. USE. UNLI

Exocet not-1.0 missiles (10 Countries)

 

Editor's Notes: (1) The m-ao is to replace the Eli-38's on the units already
equipped. (2) The equipping of Colonbia's frigates with oncets has not been con-
finned.

Note: One Gulf country has also ordered the lei-loo, in the coastal-battery version.

—_—_——_————-———-—-——

Ke :
y l. Countries/Ships 6. Dispatch boat ll. Colombia
2. Class 7. Other units 12. United Arab Emirates (Abu
3. Number 8. Argentina Dhabi)
a. of ships 9. Frigates 13. Kuwait
5. of missiles per unit 10. Patrol boats 14. Tunisia

15. Malayaia

 

The ANS project is presently being carried out under Franco-PRC cooperation by
Aerospatiale, prine contractor, in cooperation with HEB [Nesserachnitt-Bolkow-
Bloehn] as principal joint contractor. The choice of ra-jet type (solid or liquid
fuel) to be trade in 1984 will determine the characteristics and performance of the
future aiaaile, though it is already knoyntiaguit will have a__rang_e__o_f about 180

In. The missile vill be entirely automatons. with a. super-m0 [Automated analog
computer” active radar self-guidance aysta fro the BSD [Electronics Systems
Division?] canpany, which already makes the electromagnetic self-guidance system for
all the Exocets.

Delivery or the Dauphin 2 - As-ls-rr in 1981:

The new AS-lS-l'l' entiship missile is being developed by Aerospetisle es the succes-
sor to the A542 (ordered by 26 countries) and as e conplenent to the hocet All-39.

3h
FOROMCIALUSIONLY
ﬁOI(NﬂﬂC1A1.USE(MVLY

The AS-lS-TT is a light (100 kg, including 30-kg charge), short-range (15 km), all-
weather radar-guided missile. It is used with the aid of Thomson-CSF's Agrion 15
detection radar and target designation.

The AS-lS-TT is presently being developed in an air-to-surface version to be carried
on Aerospatisle'a SA-365-F/Dauphin 2 helicopter, for Saudi Arabia, the first cus-
t:mer for the new weapon system. The Dauphin 2 (3.8 tons) can carry two or four
AS-lS-TT's. The heavy AS-332-P Super-Puma helicopter (7.8 tons) can carry four or
six AS-lS-TT's, as is proposed by Aerospstiale for India. But it is also planned

to develop an air-to-surface version for slow airplanes, as well as sea-to-sea ver-
sions for ships, and ground-to—sea for coastal batteries.

The first firing of the AS-lS-TT missile took place on 22 June 1981. Since then,
advanced development has been proceeding favorably. The first firing of a complete
nonguided missile was carried out successfully at the end of 1981, and the tests of
the Agrion lS radar on the Dauphin 2, carried out at Gavres in January 1982, have
confirmed the performance characteristics counted on (detection capacity and preci-
sion of distance measurement). These tests are to continue until mid-1982. An-
other Dauphin 2 is to receive its AS-lS-TT firing installation for the adaptation
tests (launching, stability, etc).

The first firing of a complete AS-lS-TT missile with radar guidance (from the
ground) will take place next May, and the start of in-flight firings from the Dau-
phin helicopter with Agrion 15 radar is planned for the end of 1982.

The validation of the Dauphin 2/AS-lS-TT weapon system is planned for September
1982 to mid-1983, with the first-off-the-line SA-365-P helicopter, which will be
used for the missile-qualification firings starting in mid-1983.

The Dauphin 2/AS-lS-TT weapon system of the "Sewari" contract will be delivered to
Saudi Arabia starting in 1984 and to the end of 1985 or the beginning of l986.

0tomat, Teseo and BRATO

In its different versions, 634 of the Otomat weapon system, developed under Franco-
ltalian cooperation by HATRA and Oto Melara, have already been sold to 7 foreign
countries, an an eighth contract is presently being negotiated with another country
(Iraq). These sales have been made by HATRA and 0to Melara for their respective
weapons systems.

The Otomat exists in four configurations, in accordance with the conduct of fire
and the missile used, which also determines the missile's operational range: 60 NM
[nautical miles] (100 km) without in-flight adjustment and 90 NH (160 [as pub-
lished] km) with in-flight adjustment (mainly by helicopter). The missile, with
Turbomeca turbojet propulsion, can technically (in terms of fuel reserve) reach
maximum range in all cases.

0to Helara has developed an Otomat Mk 1 with conduct of fire without adjustment and
an Otomat Mk 2 with Teseo conduct of fire using in-flight adjustment by a helicOp-
ter in an advance position; the helicopter takes control of the missile in flight.

35
F0I10F1l(141.lEﬂB(MVLY
lﬂlltnﬂﬂtlAL.US£lﬂVLY

This Teseo version is used on all of Italy's and Peru's ships equipped with the
Otomat; the ships of Nigeria, Venezuela and Egypt have the simplified Italian con-
duct of fire, with Italian or French missiles. The missiles are identical on the
whole, except for the level of guidance: the Italian lissiles use an Italian SHA
[expansion unknown] self-guider (one axis). and the French missiles, a French self-
guider (two area) from Thomson-CSP.

 

MAThA has also developed an Otomat Mk 1 that uses the CLIO (Otomat Integrated Launching
Conduct) conduct or fire developed in ccoperation with the RCA! [naval Weapons and
Construction Enterprise] of Ruolle. MATRA is presently ccmpleting development of the
Otonat Mk 2 version that uses the new ERATO (Extended-Range Automatic Targeting of
Otomat) conduct of fire. which permits transhorison targeting of the missile (Preach
or Italian) through acquisition of the new target coordinates by an advance helicopter,
with the launching ship retaining control over the commicstions.

The first customer for the Otomat Mk 2 weapon system, ERATO version, is Saudi Ara-
bia, which has decided on it to arm the four 2,000-ton frigates ordered from France
within the framework of the "Sewari" contract.

The Otonat weapon system, ERATO version, is the first to use the "compect Otomat"
missile with retractable wings, presently being developed by HATRA. But it is
planned to associate Oto Helsra in this project, notably for manufacture of the
containers-launching ramps. Thanks to the "compact Otomat" missiles in ovoid con-
tainer, it is possible to double the number of missiles on a given ship with the
same installation. However, the new missiles are identical to the preceding ones,
except for the starting of the turbojet, which is now done by a hot-gas generator
(pyrotechnic).

The first firing of a ”compact Otomat" missile was carried out successfully by
HATRA on 16 February. It made it possible to test the missile's initial ejection
phase and the deployment of the wing, which is an innovation vis-a-vis the other
Otomets.

The "compact Otomat" weapon system, BRATO version, intended for the Saudi frigates,
will be operational in 1983.

The coastal-battery version of the Otomat uses a different conduct of fire but one
with the sane capacity as ERATO, but with the Otomat Mk I missile, which may even-
tually be replaced by the "compact Otomat." This coastal-battery version is to be
operational in about 2 years. But developmental and demonstration firings have al-
ready taken place.

The first country to order the coastal-battery version of the Otomat weapon system
is Egypt, which is thus the world's first country to have a long-range antiship
missile launched from land, from containers mounted on Berliet 630 6 x 6 all-ter-
rain trucks, with the aid of a type-TRS [expansion unknown] 3510 (Thomson-CS?) de-
tection radar and target-designation.

This coastal-battery configuration. making it possible to guard 360 km of coast,

is on the whole very advantageous in certain cases (guarding of narrows, etc); but
it is not yet very widespread for a very simple reason: in most armed forces, the
deployment of such a weapon does not come under any branch (neither land nor sea)!

36
FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR1OFFNJAI.USEINNLY

Otomat Missiles (8 Countries)

 

Number of

Countries/Ships Class Ship'-—-ii;:iles 22' unit
Saudi Arabia

F-ZOOO frigates 4 8 (6)
Egypt

Patrol boats Ramadan 6 b (l)

Patrol boats 6 October 6 2 (1)

Coastal batteries - 2
Italy

helicopter carriers Garibaldi l a (3)-

Frigates Maestrale 6 4 (3)

Frigates Lupo 4 8 (3)

Hydrofoils Sparviero 6 2 (3)
Iraq

Frigates Lupo b -- (*)
Libya

Frigate Dat Assawari l 4 (2)

Corvettes Hadi M‘Rach 6 4 (2)

Patrol boats Beir Crassa lo a (2)
Nigeria

Frigate Aradu l 8 (l)

Patrol boats kae 3 4 (1)
Peru

Frigates Carvajal b 8 (3)
Venezuela

Frigates Mariscal Sucre 6 h (l)

Patrol boats Pederacion 3 2 (l)

 

Editor's Notes: The Otonat weapon system exists in four configurations, in
accordance with conduct of fire and the missile used:

(1) Italian Otonat Mk I

(2) French Otomat Mk 1 with CLIO conduct of fire

(3) Italian Otomat Mk 2 with Teseo conduct of fire

(A) French Otomat Mk 2 with BBAIO conduct of fire

Configurations (3) and (4) use long-range Otonat Mk 2 missiles, as do the
coastal batteries.

(*) The Iraqi order for Otomat missiles for its frigates is about to be
signed.

___—__—.___—___.———_-——————————-—-—————

Long-Range Missile with Supersonic Turbojet

The Franco-Italian cooperation between MATRA and Oto Melara extends also to the
studies for the future supersonic antiship missile that is to take over from the
present Otonats at the and of the 1980's or the beginning of the 1990's. These
studies had begun in Oto Melara in the form of the ”Briaereo" missile project.

In contrast to Aerospatiale and M33, which are studying a project for an ANS super-
sonic antiship missile with ramjet propulsion, MATRA and Oto Melara are oriented

37
lKll(ﬂﬂﬂC1Al.USIICINLY
FilliﬂﬂﬂCJAl.USE(MVLY

 

Interior layout of the Otomat missile, with, from front to rear: self-guidance sys-
tem, warhead, telecommand gyroscope, fuel and engine-oil tanks, turbojet and
booster (separate)

 

toward an aerobic sea-to-sea missile with supersonic turboject engine. This engine
is to be deveIOped by the 63TH [exapnsion unknown] group (SNECHA [National Aircraft
Engine Design and Manufacturing Col-Turbomeca), in cooperation with an Italian en-
gine manufacturer (Alfa Romeo).

HATRA justifies the choice of aerobic propulsion by the lover specific consumption
of a supersonic turbojet engine functioning at Mach 1.6 - 1.8 by comparison with a
ramjet designed for Mach 2.3 - 2.5, and the advantage it thus offers by way of
reaching longer ranges. The final maneuverability of the two types of missile is
to be comparable.

Naval SATCP on Turret

The SATCP very-short-range surface-to-air weapon system,being developed by HATRA
under the aegis of the DTBn [Technical Directorate for Missiles), is to be made in
four versions, varying with the "carriers": on a tripod for infantry troops, on a
land vehicle (armored or unarmored). on helicopters, and on ships (the shoulder-
fired version for infantry troops has been abandoned).

The naval version of the SATCP is intended in principle to be installed on "all
surface vessels of the Navy, to strengthen their defense" (cf "Plottes de Combat" -
1982). In particular, it will be very advantageous for small vessels which, be-
cause of their size, cannot make use of very elaborate, and therefore heavier,
nntiaircraft systems such as the "naval Crotale."

With this in mind, MATRA is designing a naval version of the SATCP vith a very compact
configuration and using an existing turret. HATRA's choice is presently for the

Tantale turret of the .6833 [Electrical Enterprise and Communications Company] already
in service.

The naval version of the SATCP on the Tantale turret could be installed on any type
of warship, from light patrol boats to heavy cruisers, and even on merchant ships
(freighters), in which case the weapon system could be installed in a transportable
container.

38

I‘ll(lﬂﬂC1A1.USE(MVLY
The SATCP turret. the prototype of which was recently presented to us, should weigh
less than l ton (about 750 kg) with six SATCP missiles on their ramps ready for
firing, an optical sighting telescope, and the cryogenic cooling system for the
infrared self-guiders (SAT [Independent Teleconmunications Col). It is intended
for the turret to be stabilized.

The naval SATCP will be able to use different means of targeting: optical guidance
station, infrared monitoring system, or on-board radar. 0n big ships armed with
the "naval Crotale," the SATCP system could benefit from that weapon system's tar-
getting equipment and thus give it extra protection during reloading.

The SATCP, as we recall (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 864). isa light (20-kg missile). very-
short-range (a to 5 km), and very-short-reaction-time surface-to-air weapon system.
The SATCP is designed mainly for intercepting airplanes and helicopters flying at
subsonic or supersonic speed at low altitutde. It is also planned to give the
SATCP some capacity for intercepting skinndng-trajectory antiship missiles (sea
ski-users) .

In its basic version (portable), the SATCP, being developed by HATRA--with the SAT,
the 83? [European Propellant Co] and the SNPB [National Powder and Explosives Col--
is to be placed in operational service in 1986. The naval version, which will re-
quire additional development and testing, should be available, under these condi-
tions, around 1987-1988.

The Navy is obviously very interested in the SATCP, whose development it is financ—
ing. But several NATO countries to which HATRA presented the SATCP at the begin-
ning of this year are also interested in the French weapon system, whose principal
competitor is the American Stinger.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

11267
080: 3100/382

39

FINICHﬂﬁC1A1.IﬂiE(HHLY
FOI(HHWC1ALIIHE(HVLY

MILITARY ' mcs

AEROSPATIALE SELLS RECORD NUMBER 0? TACTICAL MISSILES
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 20 Feb 82 p 61

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Record Sales of Tactical Missiles by Aerospatiale in
l981--0rder Book of Pr 11.8 Billion and Pr 4.35 Billion in Turnover for lissiles"]

[Text] In 1981, the Tactical Missiles division of Aerospatiale, directed by Michel
Allier. had a turnover (not including taxes) of Pr 6.35 billion, an increase of
more than Fr 1 billion (up 3h percent) over 1985 [as published] (Pr 3.25 billion).
The Tactical Missiles division is thus doing more than one-fourth of the Aerospa-
tiale group's turnover, which in 1981 came to more than Fr 15 billion. For the
current year, though, a more modest increase is expected-in the neighborhood of
Pr h.5 billion turnover for tactical nissiles.

This result is made up of the three weapons systems nanufactured under Franco-FIG
cooperation for Buromissile--i.e., the antitank hilan (nore than 158,000 missiles
ordered) and Hot (nearly 36,000 missiles ordered), as well as the ground-to-air Ro-
land (more than 17,000 missiles ordered). These have been the division's strong
points for several years now. '

With the antiship nissiles, Exocet (more than 1, 800 missiles ordered) which repre-
sent about 30 percent of the turnover; with the other prograns thus providing about
20 percent of the result. [as published]

But many programs are under development and will not contribute to boosting of pro-
duction until a few years from now. we mention the 0-22 target missile, the

As-lS—TT air-to-ground missile, the SH-39 subnarine-to-surfsce missile and the ASH? _
[Medium-Range Air-to-Surface Missile] tactical nuclear nissile. To this could also be
added the ANS [Anti-Ship Supersonic Missile] supersonic antiship missile (designed
under Franco-PRO cooperation), and perhaps also the Hades tactical nuclear nissile
(successor to the Pluton), if these programs are effectively launched.

Operational evaluation of the as-ao Laser missile is to begin in July or Septenber
and be completed at the beginning of 1983. An initial Air Force order, for its
Jaguars. is expected this year, which should result in deliveries for France at the
end of 1983; Two foreign countries are also interested in the AS-30 Laser, which
could be delivered to then in 1984.

As for the C-22 target missile, successor to the CT-ZO, delivery of the first ver-
sion (with Thomson—CS? [General Radio Conpany] guidance) to the French GEL [Landes

50

FIHICIHNC1A1.1EHB(HULY
Testing Center) firing range is planned for 1983 (18 specimens). The definitive
version. with integrated guidance (TTL [expansion unknown!) is to be delivered to
the French CEH [Mediterranean Test Center) firing range at the end of 1984 and
should be available for exportation at the beginning of 1985.

Orders and Deliveries of Tactical Missiles

 

Key:
1. Materiel 5. Production decided on
2. Orders 6. [expansion unknown]
3. Delivery 7. In production
a. Countries 8. Grand Totals

 

The order book of the Tactical Hissiles division presently totals Fr 11.84 billion,
up 17 percent over 1980 (Fr 10.09 billion). This represents a little more than 2
years of activity for the division.

Up to the end of 1981, Aerospatiale has taken orders for more than 563,000 ais-
siles, nearly 486,000 of which have already been delivered. Exportation accounts
for a total of more than 334,000 missiles, or 59 percent; but the proportion is
lore than 74 percent for the three Euronissile programs: Milan (26 countries) and
Roland (7 countries). It even approaches 90 percent for the Exocet sntiship nis-
siles: HH-38 (18 countries), HH-AO (10 countries) and AH-39 (7 countries).

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

11267 kl
080: 3100/3810 FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
PU“ menu“. ”9. Ul‘lal

MILITARY FBARCB

BRIEFS

RAHJET ENGINE POI HISSILE-0N3Rs [National Office for Aerospace Studies and Re-
search] and the HATRA [Mechanics, Aviation and Traction Co] company are presently
completing the development,.under the aegis of the Technical Directorate for His-
siles (DTIn), of a test model of a ramjet-propulsion tactical missile intended for
flight-testing of this "rustic" engine (without moving mechanical parts). The use
of ranjet propulsion on a tactical missile makes it possible, for a given bulk, to
augment its performance characteristics or, for a given range, to reduce its
length. But its application to short-range or medium-range nissiles has to meet
the fundamental requirement of low manufacturing cost, and it is necessary to adopt
sinple technological approaches, even at the coat of a alight decrease in perform-
ance characteristics. Such are the characteristics of the "rustic" aerobic engine
designed at ONBRA some years ago, the performances characteristics of which are far
superior to those of conventional rocket engines. This engine comprises:

--a conventional-propellant nozzleless accelerator, integrated into the ramjet's
combustion chamber, mith the chamber's tightness provided, as regards the air in-
takes, by hatches that eject at the end of the acceleration phase by simple differ-
ence of pressure; and one or more fuels, housed within the combustion chamber that
is thus exposed, and ignited naturally during the process. The single pyrotech-
nic initial firing cos-and is sufficient to trigger the various phases of function-
ing. [Text] [Paris All It COSMOS in French 20 Feb 82 p 39] 11267

COPYRIGRT: A. 6 C. 1982

CSO: 3100/2386 13'”

R2
FIII13FFICIAI.IIBI:(ﬂ'LY