APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00OBOR000100030000-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030056-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 11/8353

26 Match 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 18/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030056-6
NOTE

kas publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED ROROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
mo loonsmuc I- “rm No.
Q. - . . -

u\ m N run
26 March 1979

I. salami“ unanlunon Kept.
o.
lo. Mouse/Taskﬂml Can No.

II. Connect/Gnu No.

   
 
      

ramswnous on wrsrem EUROPE, (rouo 18/79)

    
     
 
 
  
     
   
     

7. Auk-uh)

 
   

 

I. l'uiwnun; (Mam/anon Name and Addres-
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22101

I2. Swen-um Organization None and Addie-s

       
  

l3. Type oi Report a l'mod
Coveted

As above

l5. Suwlem-euuy News _

‘6. Alumni»

  

The serial report contains political/economic information on 'deet European
energy, finance and trade policy matters as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine, programs and problens of the Iajor comnist parties.

including their relations with communist parties outside the West European
area. '

7. Key I'ouh and Du mam Aulyua. l7e. Dun-pun

Political Science ___Internstiona1 Affairs _Luxeabourg
Sociology ___Austria __Nether1ando
Propaganda _Be lgiun __.‘lorvay
Economics _0anada __Portugal
Ene rgy ___Cyp rus _Spain
Industry __Denma rk _Sueden
Trade ____l-‘inloud _Svitzerland
l-‘i nance LPrance _‘l'urkey
_Greeee __United Kingdom
In le.r.m/op.-..rnaca Ten-e __lce1and __Heet Germany
_l to l y

l1e.(u~'Atll~iv-I-l/"-vwr 5c. 50. 10

II. thumb-Inn Nan—em I’. run.” (last "I“
For Official Use Only. . "'9"! v . 26
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. ' ;Z‘:'|=Y‘-|J“l m m

:m' .M‘x m n

oom“~'0’-C$ an 1. I ll. THIS FORM “AV “E REPRO'WCED utcoou-oc '4D11-31l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8353
26 March 19

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 18/79)

Courems

FRANCE

Carter Seen 'mtting World in hunt"
(Mthurconte3m18m,2m79).................

Rocnrd Seen as Divisive Force in Preach Socialist Party
(Christian mum, Jacques noure; L'EXPRESS, 3 Feb 79).

Positlons on Mutton, Nuclear wastes Discussed
(Ynnn de L'Ecotsis; L'mnss, 3 Feb 79)

PCP's Financial Connections named in Detailed Book
(Jean Montsldo; L'EXPRESS. 17 Feb 79)

Briefs
Overseas Intervention Capability
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

CARTER SEEN 'PU'i'i‘ING WORLD IN DANGER'
Paris PARIS MATCH in French 2 Mar 73 pp 60, 79, 81
[Article by Arthur Canto]

[Textl In attacking Vietnan, Tong Heine-ping nest have had the iupression
that he had in some way gotten the green light frost the Americans. During
his trip to the United States. he stepped up his startling statements and
apocalyptic visions, without ever being seriously crossed by those with
when he spoke. Far from being satisfied to smoke the American-Chinese
peacepipe in the temple of the white House. he endlessly berated the Soviet
beast and was not seriously «banished by his hosts for all that. with ex-
treme ease. he even persuaded Jiny Carter to sign with him an unplanned
text whose anti-Soviet spirit is beyond doubt. This suggests one of two
things. Either he in some way considers the great chief across the Atlan-
tic to be an incompetent Ian whose opinion matters little or who has such
wavering opinions that they have because ridiculous. Or else he is abso-
lutely convinced of always being able to sway the chief , or so-called chief ,
of the mrican administration to accept his own views. Basically, what
threatens world peace is the “American void.‘ That is new the source of
the real specter. The tragedy is that Jim Carter's weakness is proving
to be so great that all world balances have suddenly been affected or upset.
That is when the worst can be expected.

The Russians themselves have always been glad to hold a dialog with a
strong and candid American president. Even during the worst period of the
Cold War, they cxenpiarily respected a Harry Truman, so explicit and so
impeccably direct. They were always very cautious with a cowboy and
”finger-on-the-trigger" style president like Johnson. They were evidently
heartbroken over the resignation of Richard Nixon, who exemplified an
astute and detenined model sovereign in foreign policy. We reusaber how,
in the sixties at the time of the incident of Soviet rockets in Cuba, the
young Kennedy was able to force Khrushchev's respect. The Russians like
to deal with a ban who knows what he wants. They value this for three main
reasons. (he reason is that they want to be able to assess the exact risks
or their own initiatives or reactions and not to exceed the limits. The
other is that a weak or fickle president, from weakness as it happens. does

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not have good control over himself, is not safe from reactions which are
too impulsive and may suddenly give way to rash decisions which create an
irreparable situation. The third reason is that a president who is too
weak abandons the sphere of authority, the initiative for action or the
choice of response to forces which are not responsible, such as the army.
the treasury or intelligence services, which are not in a position to mea-
sure all the consequences of their political acts. A president who is too
weak brings in too sany unknown factors on every occasion and communism
does not like to gamble with the unknown. Now as it happens, this is
exactly the case today.

He would probably even have to go back very far in American history to find
a president as surprising and vague as the pale Georgian in charge of the
White House.

In the beginning, however, the man had many assets.

"is origins are simple. This is a considerable advantage. It is better
not to be weighed down by heavy intellectual baggage for such a position.
The extraordinary Trman, one of the greatest presidents in American his-
tory, began his life as a shirtmaker. Johnson managed Amrica no differ-
ently than a ranch. Nixon was certainly not a well of knowledge. From his
experience in sports, Kennedy had acquired a direct and lively style which
made people forget the refinement of his tastes and the elite side of his
development. From a family of peanut farmers, Jimy Carter could have re-
tained much of his good country sense. He basically had a lot going for
him. The governor of Georgia, i.e.. the preconsul of a modest state with
a relatively la: population, he was able to remain in direct contact with
dynamic problems. He was able to remain aloof from the guile, lies and
false communications of far-flung capitals. In general, such trials harden
a man against all unreasonable fears.

He is working hard to succeed. He has a retinue which exhibits an
identical zeal. If pitiless newspapers have cruelly published photographs
in which the American first lady appears to be conversing pleasantly in one
instance with Jim Jones, the false prophet destined to order the collective
suicide of the Guyana Temple sect, and in another with John Gacy, since ar-
rested in Chicago for the sadistic murder of 32 young men, we know that
these are not rash acts, but accidents in a job which requires coming into
contact with too many people without any control.

Obviously, the Carters have a high awareness of the public welfare. The
President even handles with dignity the problem posed by his family.

Ruth Carter Stapleton, his younger sister, an electrifying evangelist who
preaches the miracle of “internal healing” worldwide, was naively de-
ceived by the American porno king Larry Flynt, who has been prosecuted in
the courts for publishing one of the most obscene magazines, HUSTLER, and
who was only too happy to take advantage of the friendship of a Carter.
Billy, his younger brother, a strange clown afflicted with an irrepressible

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stammering and the black sheep of the family, has made a fortune since
Jimmy has taken office by lending his name. in return for huge royalties.
to beer, tee-shirt, and peanut candy bar trademarks. The President has
exhibited decency and patience which demand respect. This man knows how
to calmly swallow abuse.

In getting himself elected, he demonstrated a lot of ability and tactical
sense, oven upsetting all predictions. No doubt it has long been known
that someone can be an excellent candidate as well as a poor president.

It is one thing to be elected; it is another to deserve having been elected.
This is quite true except that on such a scale. victory implies a lot of
know-how, some gift of foresight and a good deal of adroitness, qualities
required for exercising the presidency itself.

But overly severe handicaps did not fail to crop up. Carter was unable at
first to establish a clear and obvious public image, even physically.
Television viewers like to define the highest figures in terms of simple
and even simplistic visual images. De Gaulle was the volatile mastermind,
not always easy to take. Nixon was the shrewd operator. Kennedy was the
scion of an elite family agreeing to box in the most popular matches.
capable of playing Superman. Eisenhower was Percival, whose purity merited
the helmet. Truman was the tough sheriff who couldn't be duped. Carter?

. . . we dare not answer. We look at those teeth so real, so displayed
that they appear false. We unmask that wrinkled face, from deep discourage-
ments, which belies the good humor trying to break through. We observe the
strange vague look which, even during press conferences, seems more in-
clined to turn inward than toward those questioning him. We view the game
of hands which do not know what to do with themselves. we see a short fore-
head under a thick shock of hair, becoming furrowed with so many wrinkles
because of both big and little problems. The observer does not at all
"sense” the kind of man he is dealing with. He suddenly experiences an ir-
ritating feeling of uneasiness. Equally as suddenly. he is led to attribute

the same ambiguity, the same "incompleteness," to the man's thoughts as to
his face.

Next, the President continued to act in a manner which was too religious.
In the long run, too many sermons sound false in the White House. The ser-
mon even begins to seem like the easiest way of avoiding real problems or
real explanations.

Finally, with as much evidence, Carter appeared to be contradiction itself.
There is no end to the list of his wrong moves or turnabouts. After sift—
ing through 4,000 pages of documents, Andre halimi has even devoted an en-
tire book to this, "Carter 31. Carter no“ [Carter yes, Carter no]. as enter-
taininq an it is ominous. A famous caricaturist depicted him as Mr Samba,
one step forward, one step backward. He has come to be known as "Jilly
Who?“ of course the times, spinning too fast, expose any politician to
contradictions. The modern tribune. bent on overexpressing himself, can
necessarily only seriously contradict himself or act inconsistently in the

3

FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL lBE 0ND!

final analysis. Yet any objective observer has no choice but to believe
that Jim Carter will ultimately hold the world record for self-
contradictions. providing his own antitheses and tripping himself up. We

have seen him become entangled in his own counterpositions and counter-
proposals even in the most ilportant matters, such as Lebanon and Iran,
which affect world peace and it is not American policy. such as it cur-
rently appears in this China-Vietnam affair, which could change such an
analysis. Initially, Carter allowed 'l'eng l-lsiao-ping to announce his at-
tack without reacting. Then he learned of it only through the newspapers,
or so it would seem. Then just as he seemed to oppose it, he seemed to
approve it by referring to Vietnam's offensive against Cambodia. he did
everything to let the hunters unleash the hounds, but let the stag go free,
all the while swearing to high heaven that he has nothing against either
the poachers or the heaters and that no one loves peace and animals more
than he does. It is a sad spectacle.

The American void is unquestionable and is becoming the major factor in any
world analysis. That is exactly why our concern should be very strong.

It is too true that the stronger an American president is, the more he
strengthens all negotiating forces in Russia over belligerent forces and
the more he can keep impassioned or surrounded countries like China from
all imprudent acts or from all rash reactions. On the other hand. the
weaker he is, the more he allows China to give in to dangerous impromptu
actions and the more he helps to strengthen isperialistic, pan-Slavist and
conquering plans in Russia itself, to the detriment of all huanistic
chances. In any case, only a very great leader in Washington can induce a
new Russia to consider its own fate, to choose to develop its system more
humanely and to finally become the great reformers, which the entire world
wishes for it. In contrast. the American void is giving wings to the most
ravenous, the most cynical and boldest opportunists in Russia. .

To sum it up, in this tragedy as in the situation as a whole, it is not

exactly Russia or China which must be feared--but rather this dizzying
void and that poor lost individual . . .

COPYRIGHT: 1979 par Cogedipresse SA

11915
C30: 3100

I;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

RDCARD SEEN A5 DIVISIVE FORCE IN FRENCH SOCIALIST PARTY
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 3 Feb 79 pp 58-60
[Article by Christian Fauvet and Jacques Route]

[Textl On top of the dashboard of the Renault 30 traveling on the eastern
auto express route are a stack of newspapers and a maroon hat. It is 1700
hours. Tuesday. 30 January. His press conference (see Oliver Todd's edi-

torial) barely over. Prancois'utterrand is going to Chaloas-aur-Harne where
anxious party members are waiting for him. He himself is calm and relaxed

and in good humor. With both hands he unfolds the FRANCE-SOIR and busies
himself in reading marked passages.

lbwevcr. this silent reader is preparing for a great political battle. This
time the objectiVe is not power in the country. as in 1974 and 1978. but
power in the party. The opponent is no longer "the right" nor is it the
Communist Party. he is within the socialist ranks.

This opponent spoke out at the very moment of decision in the elections of
March 1978. He is Michel Rocard. In the midst of defeat he sang the song
of hope, immediately becoming. in the eyes of active party members, the new
face capable of giving their party a second wind. With a dizzying climb in
the opinion polls. television shows. and meetings in the four corners of
France. Rocard is taking wing; Hitterrand is silent.

0n l5 January the deputy from Yvelines played his latest card on Channel 2.
"if there is no agreement with Francois Fatherrand, what will happen?" --"If
we win in the April congress." Rocard responds. "Pierre Hauroy will be the

new first secretary of the Socialist Party." And. tacitly understood, he.

Rucard. will be the candidate in the 1981 presidential election. In plain

language. rutterrand will be out.

At the very height of the storm the first secretary of the Socialist Party
launched a single phrase among those which are causing the winds to shift:
"Let there he a truce to 'Hatamores" in order that we can prepare for the

cantonaieioctions." According to the "Petit Robert"[dictionary]"Hatamore"
means blusterer, bragnadocio. swaggerer.

5
ran orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The word scored a bull's eye. In all the federation the lassitude extends to
the east party member. In the department of Haute-Garonne. a Socialist

Party strongholi, membership has fallen by one third. Here and there dis-
couraged party members are tiptoeing away. "At the rate we are going," says
one of them, "we are in danger of losing the cantonal elections."

On Saturday, 27 January. Michel Rocard met with local party members at
Saint-Affrigne in the department of Aveyron. "My trip is for no other
purpose but to help you wage a good cantonal campaign. Are there any
questions?"

A member arose. "Dear comrade. your stories are very pretty but in my section
the party members are leaving." Two hours later. at Millau. the scenario was
the same. A member of the general council hurled at him. "Frankly. from here
one gets the impression that you are wrangling between yourselves."

On Sunday Hhxerrand'a challenger attended the federation congress of the
department of Correze. at Tulle. he was seated on the platform for only
2 minutes when a bearded mun. secretary of the Seilhac section in the
rnntun of ”ante-Correze. took the microphone: "1 am anxious to tell you
here that we have a big bellyful of personal quarrels." The applause
brought the house down. And yet. of the seven federation officers. six
are kocard partisans.

Attracted in the springtime by the "Rocard phenomenon." the party melbers
now mistrust it. Since 15 January they know that Rocard wants Hitterrand's
head. They are not ready to let him have it. Mitterand retains the father
image and that of statesman. Rocard. now at last, is no longer the man

[or rebirth but the man of divisiveness.

Copilot Applying the Brakes

On 11 February. in a room of the National Assembly, 101 rue de l'Universite.
the last act before the decisive congress in April will be played. On that
day the Socialist Party officials will seek, for a last time. an impossible
agreement. For Michel Rocard has decided to play his own game to the end.
even though he is aware that the trouble he has caused within the party by
attacking its head makes his undertaking a delicate one. "We have 2 months."
one of his closest collaborators explains. "to avoid having the congress
becoming a plebiscite on Hitterrand.

in the weeks ahead the Rocard partisans will make every effort to eliminate.
from their leader's behavior. anything that too much resembles personal ambi-
tion, and will place more emphasis on the political differences. For them
the plebiscite will be avoided only if the congress is to choose between

two ways of handling political and economic problems and not between two

men.

As for Pierre Hauroy. he does not want to incur the reproach of being a
pnrricide. In sllying himself with Rocard on 6 January he says he had no

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

purpose other than forcing Mutterrand to retain the same majority. the one
which for 2 years has controlled the party: the n1c:crpand-nsuroy-Rocard
alliance. Engaged upon a course which may result in deposing the first
secretary. Hnnroy now wonders whether he is not at a dead end. The Rocard
partisans. moreover, are disturbed at the first signs of sagging in their
ally. "Rocard has the unpleasant feeling of finding himself in a vehicle

with his foot upon the accelerator and a copilot who is jamming on the
brakes."

The breaches in the Hauroy-Rocard front soon appeared. Andre Chenard.
deputy mayor of Nantes. and a faithful Hauroy partisan. on 20 January
signed a motion against the Rocard partisans, demanding that the party
mtite around nutterrand and Mauroy. At the urging of Roger Fajardie.
first deputy of the mayor of Lille. an amendment adding Rocard's name to
the other two was put to a vote. It was defeated. Another proposed
adoption of the phrase "unity without exclusion." Understood: without
exclusion of Rocard. it. too. was defeated.

A Hitterrand clique has emerged even in Lille. holding a press conference on
Wednesday. 31 January. in Mauroy's own fortress. This was never expected.

In Puy-de-Dome. a department won by Pierre Hauroy. the deputy from lssoire,
Jacques Lavedrine. who had signed the Mauroy-Rocard text, sent a letter of
support to Mitterrand: he was followed by three former deputies. one of whom
is the present chairman of the general council. Albert Gazier, the former

minister. also pleaded for reconciliation between the first secretary and
Hauroy.

Even the overseas departments and territories. which the mayor of Lille
had attracted into his camp, are rebelling. The officials of Guiana and

Martinique are accusing Alain Vivien. a Mauroy partisan and Socialist Party
official for overseas. of having deceived them.

The mayor of Lille is not unaware that his alliance with Roeard is sometimes
regarded as basically wrong. On 18 January. at his request. he met with
Mltterrand to assure him that he would uphold reunion to the very end without
favoring this or that clique. Following that. with the Pas-de-Calais federa-
tion he drafted a unity text and on 1 February attempted a new advance to

the first secretary. "He shall not subscribe.“ said one of his partisans.
"to either a Rocard motion or a Hitterrand motion if there is no reconcilia-
tion between the two."

That is the position Mauroy will take at the ll February meeting--for the
sake of appearances. Any accord between Mitterrand and Rocard seeming
visibly impossible to him, the Socialist Party's No 2 man would act upon
the conclusion by presenting his own motion.

In the frigid festival hall at Chalons-sur-Harne. on Tuesday evening
Hitterrand addressed a handful of Socialist Party officials. He spoke of

the Nievre. of Eurocommunism, of the Aytollah Khomeine. Rocard was far
removed.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
On another tack Hituzrrand indeed gave him a dig, "I am said to be. it seems.
cold to Europe. I, who participated in the first European congress at The
Hague in 1947 with the Germans. By chance, I was even seated next to
Churchill. No. that argument is not to be taken seriously."

One dig, no more. Hitaerrand knows that the first rule for a surrounded
animal is not to move. He has not moved. He has seen the others beating
the countryside. Rocard following his trail with nose to ground, and Hauroy
on his heels, later hesitating.

Putternnnlhas enough perception of himself to be able to count his trumps.
Throughout his political career it is when he was believed beaten that he
recovered new strength. "I have not yet begun to take any action." he
confides. "and already the front of resistance to the offensive unleashed
against me is widening."

Announcing that the future now belongs to the 30-60 year age group, he has
raised. in his party, "a cohort of red guards" ready to cross swords and
prove that superannuation is not to be found where Rocard says it exists.
Among these new men are Laurent Fabius, age 32. the thinker; Lionel Jospin.
age Al. a capable officer of the general staff; and Paul Quiles. age 37,
alumnus of the Polytechnic School and "commando" operations amateur. Behind
them. Henri Emmanuelli. Christian Laurissergues. and Jacques Santrot. all
three of whom are deputies.

In the early morning hours of Hednesday, back from Chalons, Hitterrand his
hat on his head. opened the door of his house on the rue de Bievre. "Good
night. In 2 months everything will be clear." In his pocket was the rough
draft of the text which on 11 February he will put before Rocard and Hauroy.

"i am for unity without exclusion," he will tell them, "but I want it to be
brilliantly clear."

"Where is the Shame?"

He will require neither one to go to Canossa. But he will not compromise on
the political choices made 7 years ago by the party's majority. "l have ful-
filled the responsibilities assigned to my by the majority of the party
members. Whercin is that shameful?"

As Hauroy and Rocard wish. he states that he is ready to reorganize the party.
But he cannot agree to a reconciliation which would mean weakening his powers
as first secretary. "If they want to make me a do-nothing king or palace
mayor. It is out of the question."

From the evening of the directing committee's meeting on 11 February up to
8 April. Hittcrrand will fight tooth and nail to retain the same relative
majority in the party which he has made foremost in France.

And if by chance. he should lose? "Nothing," says he. "equals the strength of
a man who does not face up to the possibility of a failure."

COFYRIGHT: 1979. S.A. Groups Express 8

R 0?”
11.706 F0 uICIAL USE ONLY

(:80: 3100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

POSITIONS 0N EUM'I‘ON. NUCLEAR HASTES DISCUSSED

. Paris L'BXPRBSS in French 3 Feb 79 p 61

[Article by Yann de L'Ecotais]

lTextl "ho is still aware of Burston. the European Atolic Energy tel-unity
established in 1958 and (or the last 10 years fallen into desuetude? And
yet. following the Suez crisis. the "visionaries" oi’ Europe considered it
more important. economically and politically. than the col-tn market.
Baratou was the Old Continent uniting in the advanced dosain par excellence:
civil nuclear research and industry. who still knows that? At any rate the
European institutions and the French govern-eat which in the weeks or months
ahead my indeed find themselves in conflict. under the watchful eye of
Jacques Cherac who. on 23 January. apparently with no one paying it much
attention. said. "The European Communities Court of Justice has rendered

an opinion under whose terns France loses entirely its nuclear independence...
sinply...cut to pieces."

Comparability of the nuclear policy of France--a silitary atosic power-mend
the Euratos treaty is an old sore. General de Gaulle. with little desire
to see a key sector of French foreign policy "co-unitlzed" succeeded. by
"jawhoning" in terns of "sinicrises." oi’ disarming what he considered an
infernal snchine or supernationaiity. Great Britain. a silitary atomic
power. also distanced itself iron the constraints of the treaty. As (or
the British. no waves were made. in short. it was forgotten....

Up to the tier- when. last spring. the Belgian govern-eat sought an opinion
iron the (:omunt [08 Court of Justice: lay a member country sake co-it-ents
withln the scope of the international Atonlc Energy Agency (IAEA) without
regard to the (:omnity. that is. the European coo-lesion? This step is
not an artless one. Some passages in the Belgian docunent were drafted in
l-aniish and clearly appear to have been inspired by officials of the con-
nlssion. 0n lb November the Court of Justice decided: the tic-unity as
such. that is. the Brussels connission. must be "jointly responsible for

the agree-lent being negotiated with the MM on physical protection of
transported nuclear materials.

9
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not Very sellouu. you will say. But it is! For the justices at Luxembourg
have made their late rpretnion. in "dynamic fashion." as is said in European
eirclea. of the whole Euratom treaty. "The court." a high co-ission of-
ficial emphasizes. "has in fact recognized that supply. control. and priority
of nuclear materials constitute an inseparable and coherent trio." which is
what Guido Brunner. German member of the Brussels commission and an official
of Buratom. laid out before his colleagues on 13 December. on the basis of
the court's reasoning: the Community has exclusive jurisdiction in the
matter of providing nuclear materials within the European Economic Community
as well as to third party countries; physical protection (measures taken to
avoid misuse. theft, and so forth) is indeed a part of the security control

which is the responsibility of the Community: the Community is responsible
for European fissionable materials.

There is a change in dimension. Because according to the court and the
commission European inspectors should participate in the policing system
[or physical protection; renewal of the supply agreement between Canada and
France would be within the jurisdiction of Brussels and likewise the agree-
ment between Paris and Australia now being negotiated; management of the
plutonium produced at the La Nague reprocessing plant would be subject to.
('olmaunity control.

This concept--in accordance with which. from the standpoint of exchanges.
there is no difference between the common market and Euratom treaties--
results. roughly. in considering nuclear materials like potatoes. In
practice. what does this mean? If. for example. the Federal Republic of
Germany send irradiated nuclear materials to La Hague for reprocessing.
France would return the plutonium to Germany and it would be left to
Brussels to concern itself with its use and destination. "You very well
understand." a French diplomat reminds us. "that just because there is a
common market for medicines. morphine is not sold with no strings attached."

It is therefore a question of law and policy. On the first point the Court's
position is hardly debatable. 0n the second point. on the other hand. it
must he acknowledged that. since the Euratom treaty was drawn up. nearly a
quarter of a century has gone by: the international nuclear panorama has
profoundly changed and the "supply" section of the treaty can be re-exnmined.

The European Commission. or certain member countries. can certainly exploi:

in depth what is only an ”opinion" of the Court of Justice. as was done 8 days
ago with the couission writing to the International Atomic Energy Agency to
inform the latter that it would sit at the negotiation table on S february.

it may also he considered--and French diplomacy is exerting itself to promote
this awnreness--that judicial forms have nothing to do with this matter.
whleh may become a nasty bombshell. it was none other than Valery Giscsrd
d'HsraIng who recalled. in July 1977. that "the three basic conditions for
developawnt of French nuclear policy are independence. security and responsi-

hllity."
COPYRHBHT: 1979, S.A. Groupe Express

11706 10
60s m
c ' 31 ton orncut use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

PCF'S FINANCIAL CONNECTIONS BAKED IN DETAILED BOOK

Purim L'BXPRESS in French 17 Feb 79 pp [32-133. 135. 137-léé

[Extract from the book "Les Secrets de la Banque sovietique en France" by
Jean Nontaldo. published by Albin Michel, February 1979]

[Text] Jean Hontaldo consulted sole 400 kilograms of docu-
nents--originals. not photostatic copies-in writing his
book "Les Secrets de la Banque sovietique en France."
published by Albin Michel. L'EXPRBSS presents herein a
highly significant extract from this book scheduled to be
released this week. Never before have the close ties
between the Soviet state bank and French coanunisn been
revealed in such detail.

when calling the Cossercial Bank for Northern Europe (SCEN). or Burobank.
the "Soviet bank in Paris." the label I enploy is literally correct.
Legally and administratively. the BCEN is a French-chartered bank. Our
laws require foreign banks to have a Prench PDG [president-general sanager].
Guy de Boysson has been the 8628's nominal president since 1965. Through
two Moscow banks--the State Bank (Gosbsnk) and the Foreign Trade Bank of
the USSR (Vneshtorgbank)--Soviets hold 99.7 percent of BCEN capital stock.

The retaining 0.3 percent is held by French-en Moscow considers totally
reliable.

This means the BCEN-Eurobank is such sore foreign than all other foreign and
private banks established in France. It is the bank of a foreign state. but

its bland noncoI-ittal name gives it the dual advantage of appearing to be
both French and private.

Hhcnever sention is nude of the Morgan Bank. or the bank of lilbao. or Citibank.
or Barclayn. we know they are banks. branches. or agencies whose roots are
elsewhere. Yet the diversification of their capital stock sakes then more
French than the ICE“. and infinitely freer than the latter because they are
independent of any state authority. The USSR enj-ys the unconscionable

privilege of having a state bank in our country, a bank disguised “in the
colors of France."

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The president-general manager of the Soviet bank in Paris is Guy de Boysson.
a former communist member of parliament. Its real "boss.” however, is the
vice president-general manager. Vladimir Ponomarev.

This Soviet citizen has absolutely no freedom of action: he simply carries
out Moscow‘s instructions. here. for example. is how he is summoned to the
Soviet Embassy: ”Memo for Mr. Ponomarev: 12 October 1978. 1235 hours. The
Soviet ambassador called when you were out. He asks you to come to the
esbassy at 1730 hours. 17 October. Extension 291.“

In speaking to the Soviet bank's vice president-director general. the anony-
mous embassy individual who left this message "from headquarters“ said he
would "not call back" and did not want ”his call returned."

The BCEN-Eurobank is a Soviet bank financed by Soviet capital and managed by
Soviet civil servants. It operates exclusively on behalf of the Soviets.

From the standpoint of its overall financial statement. it is officially classed
as the leading foreign bank in France.

Singular relations closely link it to the French Communist Party and the COT
[General Confederation of Labor]. These two organizations stoutly affirm

they are independent of the Kremlin. Their statements team with protestations
to this effect. Yet in my book I prove that Georges Harchais and Georges
Seguy leave their funds in Soviet banks. How could these two men possibly
trust the Soviets with their money if they really had profound ideologicel and
political differences with the USSR? The PC! and the COT entitle Moscow not
only to know all about their funds. but also to receive and handle these funds.
This is the best proof of a veritable close relationship they no longer dare
acknowledge.

On 26 October 1978. I examined the books of the Scan-Burobank located at
77-79-8l Boulevard ﬂsussmann. Paris. The bank's three buildings. built in the
1900's. have had their facades modernized and all have bullet-proof metal
shutters and doors. its protective devices and measures already distinguish
the Soviet bank from its competitors. The difference appears even greater in
the way the bank keeps its some 3.500 numerically coded national and foreign
accounts. the best protected in France.

This very exclusive club. to which small and middling savers have very little
access. is distinguished by its homogeneity: it austere all the elite of
militant. intellectual. labor-union. commercial. diplomatic. and police-like
communism. A law obliges bankers to maintain banking secrecy. Another law
requires that a Journalist prove whatever he discloses. he is not bound by
secrecy except in matters relating to national defense and protection of minors.

As illustrative examples. here are a few 308K accounts as of 26 October [978:

12
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a. Georges Conant, somber of parliament. neeber of the central coeaittee, and
treasurer of the French Con-unist Party: account No 05316-6 with a credit
balance of 2,682,636.76 francs on "ordinary deeand deposit"

h. Rene Andrieu, aeeber of the PCP central colaittae and editor of L'hUHANITE:
account No 03710-3 with a credit balance of 6,835.55 francs on "ordinary deeand
deposit“ plus 90,000 francs in a "2 to 3 year fixed ters deposit"

e. L'NUHANITE, nain organ of the PCP: account No 5026-6 with a credit balance
of 277,737.5 francs. Marked progress: on 16 October this desand deposit was
256,170.17 francs overdraun; on 25 January 1979, it had a credit balance of
6,726,320.12 francs.

d. LA V18 OUVRIBRE, a CGT weekly: its president-general eaaager heari
Krasucki is a seaber of the COT confederal bureau and the PC? political bureau:
account No 5051-9 with a balance of 103,535.89 francs.

e. COT confederal headquarters: account No 5101-2 with 9,500,000 francs in
"3-eonth certificates of deposit" plus 1,056,669.02 francs on ”ordinary deland
deposit."

f. Eabassy of the USSR: accounts he 30213-5 and 60213-7 (cos-arcial representa-
tion): 269,776.89 francs and l,975,3l8.7 francs; account No 30216-3: 106,075
francs; account No 60203-8: 22,197.64 francs; account No 60877-9: 7,609,810.63
francs ("foreign fixed tern account").

Accompanied by a friend, I went to the 8088 on 16 January 1979 to open a
personal account. A clerk turned us away: "He are a col-arcial bank. He
cannot authorize a personal account here because we are not equipped for that...
Go to the 88? [National Pank of Paris] next door."

In the 803", every one who wants cannot be an Aadrieu.

All customers--banks, col-ercial fires, individual and legal entities-~are
charged variable "service charges." All except seven privileged custo-ers who
--because of the suns they handlc--src exceptionally entitled to "free" service.
These privileged customers are: Jean Kannpa,‘ Georges Gosnat, Secoura Populaire
Francois [Preach Popular Relief], Aeroflot. Sovexportfiln,TA$S, and Intourist.

Russian bankers consider the PCP and its agents to be in the sale category as
official institutions of the Soviet Union.

This has been the case since 1920, date the french Con-unis: Party was founded.
After Prague, after Solzhenitsyn, after the unispeachsble disclosures about the
Golan, etc., the French Con-unist press still unflsggingly publicists that

cartuon-llke issue In which the United States, the Federal Republic of Ger-any.

 

*Chiei oi the central couaittee's foreign policy section; now deceased.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_.-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France. Japan. and now China. are depicted as the "bad guys" while the USSR

and its friends. Vietnam and Cuba. are shown as the "good guys." Such faith-
fulness to the substance of Soviet policy is worth a few sacrifices in fora.
This immense service rendered the USSR by the PCP. its press. and the labor
unions it controls, are worth all the credit. all the loans. all the overdrafts.
and all the easy-payment terns Moscow grants.--through the l€£N~-to the COT.
L'HUMANITB. the PCF's publishing houses. and the business fires that supply
funds to the party treasury.

The Soviets have a sort of "barrier" to keep the PCP in line. naaely Georges
Gosnat. The lﬂﬂiznlflcnﬂtfreedom comaunist newspapers have to criticize the
USSR stops where his authority begins. Not only is Georges Gosnat the official
party treasurer. but he also heads the party's ”press.inforaation. and props-
ganda office." This dual position makes his the PCF's nost powerful and also
most circumspect apparatchik. By opening or closing his hand, he can vitalise
coamunist publications or sentence them to death. For the past 30 years. many
tens of billions of francs have passed through his personal account in the IGBM.

Georges Goanat is the son of Venise Gosnat. a factory worker and charter melber
of the P07. when Georges was born in 1911. his father was working in a military
industrial plant in Iourges. in 1926. he left that job and loved to Ivry which
then was already one of the communist strongholds of the Paris suburbs. Maurice
Thores was ivry's member of parliament at the time. Initially as janitor. and
and later as manager of a group of apartnent houses owned by the city of lvry.
Venise Gosnat earned a reputation as a strict manager. A disciplined communist.
he applied the communist party precept: "Devote all your time to the Revolution.
not only your free evenings." Maurice Thores noticed his and made him one of the
leaders of the party's clandestine apparatus.

Hith the Liberation. the father was elected deputy mayor of Ivry and appointed

to the central conmittee's main financial control collission. At the tine.

son Georges had already shown his mettle in France-Navigation. the PGP's first
large coasercial enterprise. During the Spanish Civil Mar. fro. 1936 to 1939.

he worked alongside Michel Peintuck. better known under the name of Jean Jerome.
Forner political bureau neaber Roger Garaudy has written that he was "the party's
grey eminence--its secret treasurer watching over party funds and man on behalf
of the Kremlin.“

During his first trip to Moscow in 1938. Georges Gosnat did not see the atrocious
reality of the Stalinist purges. He was eventually rewarded for his blindness.
BVer since then. Georges Gosnat has been the hub of the official and unofficial.
personal and direct. relations between PCF headquarters and Moscow. Some 60
years of faithful service have made him the sole irremovable member of the party
leadership.

he has special and extraordinary personal status withing the party. of some 15
political hureau members elected at the successive 19b? and 1950 congresses.

lu
FOR OfflCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only Etienne Fajon is still active. and he will probably retire at the next
congress. Goanat has remained in office throughout all the reigns: Maurice
Thorns. Waldek Rochet. and Georges harchais.

when secretary general Maurice Thorez deserted in October 1939 and sought
asylua in Hoacow. it was Venise Gnsnat who was assigned the task of saving

the secretary general's personal papers. As for his son Georges. he was
captured in 1960 and spent the war as a prisoner. be resumed his party
activities immediately after France's Liberation. A aesber of the two
Constituent Assemblies in 1965 and 1966. he becane friends with Guy de Boysson.
Their careers have been closely linked ever since: one serving in the Soviet

bank in Paris. the other in the sdainistrstion of the party depending on that
bank.

The first urgent need was to give themselves a respectable cover. For
Beysson. this was an easy latter because 21 branches of his Easily currently
fill two pages of the social register. For Gosnat. it was his unexpected
entry into the political caapsign in Charente-Haritiue. an entry that caught
the opposition unawares and won his election to the National Assembly in l9h6.
The sane year. he was appointed to the Georges Bideault government as under-
secretary of state to the sinister of arnaaent. The sinister was Charles
Tiilon. a coluunist. At 32. Gosnat was the youngest of the 10 cos-unist
acabers of that govern-eat. It was understood in high party circles. however.
that he had not been proaoted to excel in the aanageaent of public affairs. but
solely to give his a respectable title. he was also known to spend lost of
his tine in dealing with the PCF'a financial and business problems.

Then case 1967 and the start of the cold war. Political consequence: the
coauunists withdrew from the governaent. Econonic consequence: reorganization
of the financial ties between Moscow and the PCP bees-e iaperative. France-
Navigatlon was sold. The party's financial affairs were divided into two
sections: a covert one headed by Jean Jerome and and overt one headed by
Georges Gosnat. The latter served as provisional treasurer until l95b when

he entered the central connittee and becaae full-fledged party treasurer.

Diversiflcation of the PCF's economic affairs quickly revealed a wide gap
between the strictly cos-ercial sector--a series of profit-asking coapanias
the party was beginning to espand~~and the traditionally deficit-plagued
propaganda. press. and publications sector.

The treasurer had to keep an eye on both. and even issue warnings to the
latter or order it to halt certain activities. if only to retain the confi-
dence of Moscow and its bank.

Pierre Nerve. former editor of L'HUHANITE and member of parliament before
breaking with the party. has related in detail how. in 1952. he learned of the
discontinuance of the weekly newspaper ACTION which appeared to be independent
of the PCP but was actually financed by it: "One day. l was sunnoned to

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

central conmittee headquarters where I learned from Coanat--the party treasurer--
that ACTiON would have to cease publication the following week. I tried to
discuss the matter. but Gosnat told me he had simply been instructed to ask me
for a list of the newspaper's staff so that they could be reassigned if possible.
The decision had been asde. Although I was the newspaper's editor. I had not
even been consulted." 0

Pierre Dex has told how the Soviets stifled his weekly LBS LETTRES FRARCAISES
because it had taken the liberty of deviating too frequently from the Soviet
line. This concentration of economic power in the hands of Georges Gosnat was
complemented by a political promotion: when Maurice Thores. "the son of the
people." died in July 1964. Coanat succeeded his as member of parliament from
lvry. However. Gosnat is seen less in Ivry than in the Soviet bank where.
eoreover. his daughter Francoise is employed.

Member of parliament Georges Gosnat. treasurer of the PCP for some 30 years.

did his utmost to convince me that the connection between the PCP and the Soviet
bank was a very ordinary one. After denying the BNBC had any centralizing

role in financing the party. he explained: "I am not saying that this or that
company had no relations with the surc, but that has nothing to do with the
actual financing of the party. As a matter of fact. we have several banks. such
as the Societe Generale [General Trust] or the Credit Lyonnaia. The party must
currently have hundreds of accounts in I don't know how many different banks."

if. indeed. the BCEN ”has no centralizing role in financing the party." how is
it then that all communist newspapers. all principal party agencies. all party
"front" associations and societies. the COT and most of its unions. mass all
their accounts in the Soviet bank and do everything to conceal them? There is
no equivalent accumulation of accounts in the Societe Generale or the Credit

Lyonnais.

l extracted the following information about the CCT's accounts from the BCEN's
books on 26 October 1978: two confederal accounts, 213 rue Lafayette. Paris 10.
No 05101-2 and No 08636-9; 65 accounts for publications and propaganda.
including: Center for Economic and Social Studies and Research. 10 rue de
Vezelay. Paris 8. account No 05008-9; LA VIE OUVRIBRE. No 05051-9; L'AVBRIR
SOCIAL. No 06983-2; L'ECHO DES HBTALLOS. No 07993-0; Editions Contact.

No 078h3-7; etc. There were also three accounts for comaunist groups officially
connected with the COT: Athletic and Gymnastic Federation of Labor. No 5136-8;
Tourism and Labor. No 07811-5: Labor and Culture. "0 04411-5. A total of 22
national federations had accounts: fatners. lumber and wood products. stone
and clay products. railroads. government employees. apparel and headgear. food
industries. chemical industries. energy industries. clothing industries. paper
industries. glass industries. netallurgy. means of transportation. ports and
decks. public health services. SEITA [Commercial Tobacco and Match Hanufactur-
ing Agency] employees. theater. underground workers. textile workers. civil
servants. etc. There were also accounts for: 28 departmental and local unions
and associations; five labor exchanges; 15 inter-union associations. general

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

groups. and union sections; 65 national and parent unions: 35 of the largest
employee-management committees in France: Renault. SNBCHA [National Aircraft
Engine Design nnd Manufacturing Company]. Aerospatiale. Dssssult. LHT [Telephonic
Equipment]. Alsthom. ABC [expansion unknown]. frintemps department stores. etc.
Plus accounts for 26 other organizations, etc.

Total deposits: some 50 million francs in over 200 COT accounts.

In examining the bank's records. I counted the following number of accounts for
the PCP proper: 3] newspapers and periodicals; bl publishing firms. news
bureaus. advertising and propaganda offices; 13 figurehesds; 55 associations.
federations. charitable organizations. unions, and councils; l9 committees.
training and propaganda centers; 60 (minimal estimate) commercial firms. print-
ing companies. and bookstores. A grand total for the PCP per se of 219 accounts
with net deposits of several tens of millions of francs.

Rapidly glossing over the existence of a "millionaire" BCBN account in his own
name but belonging to the PC? for whom he is authorised to sign. Georges Gosnat
limited his comment to: ”Re have several banks...The party must currently have
hundreds of accounts in I don't know how many different banks.”

Let us carry the logic of that explanation to its ultimate conclusion. Con-
fining ourselves. on 26 October 1978, solely to the account--268 million francs
and a few centimes--the PC? has in the Soviet bank in Gosnat's name. and con-
sidering that the party has as much money in "hundreds of accounts" in who knows
"how many different banks." we must also conclude that the PCP is not serely the
richest party in France but also richer than a big multinational company.

The party does. it is true. have deposit accounts almost everywhere in Prsnce.
But the total sear-a figure Cosnat is careful not to reveal-is in no way
comparable to the fortune managed by the BC!" on Boulevard Houseman.

Vladimir Ponomarev rules over this fortune with the assistance of several
countrymen. including the directors Viktor Krivochiv. Vladislav Sudakov. and
Sergey Vanine. These are Soviet officials with Boulevard Houseman as their

duty station. They are administered as such by the Eurobank's personnel office:
on 7 December 1978. that office paid their ”inhabited house taxes" in full. For
Ponomarev (2.2M francs) and Sudakov (1.213 francs) to the chief treasurer of
Neuilly-sur-Seine. For Krivochiv and Vanine to the chief treasurer of the 16th
ward [Paris]. four apartments provided them by the bank in fashionable neighbor-
hoods. The bank's French personnel are not entitled to similar benefits.

In financing the PCP and its empire. the BCIﬂ--thst microfilms all of its books
for Moscow’s information--definitely'has the centralizing role Gosnat is
reluctant to admit. an incomprehensible reluctance if the Soviet bank were .
indeed a bank "like the others."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coamunist press and publishing activities are large 3038 customers. For the
past few years. they have experienced insurmountable difficulties. Their
costs have exceeded by far their circulation and commercial support capa-
bilities. To mitigate the chronic financial weakness of this propaganda
network. the Soviet bank grants it easy and deferred payment terms it would
obtain nowhere else and helps keep it artificially alive despite its lack of
readers and advertising.

A summary table. prepared as of 1 August 1978. of "customer service trans-
actions" and "current status of accounts of principal customers“ shows that
L'ﬂUHANITB's deposits--funda in demand and fixed-tern accounts-tota1ed
1.622.000 francs. 1.500.000 francs of which represented a loan from the bank
in the form of discounted negotiable instruments.

The CDLP (Center for Press and Book Dissemination) coordinates the activities
of the party's publishing firms. services the extensive network of communist
bookstores. operates the Book Fair at the Fete de L'HUHANITE [annual 2-day
communist fair and carnival in Paris suburbs]. and has a monopoly of sales to
employee-management committees and 1.813 communist muoicipelities. The CDLP's
"resourcef‘ totaled 652.000 francs. but thebCEN'gave it 2 million francs in
“financial assistance.”

The Poissonniere Management Company received 1.229.000 francs in financial
assistance. This company manages the real estate of L'HUHANITB and other PCF
publications. The Central Advertising Agency (ACP). whose "resources"

amounted to 957.000 francs. had received 1.392.000 francs in assistance. The
ACP handles all advertising for CST and PCP organs. The Economic Interest
Group for Bette and Records (CIELD)--one of the PCP's main commercial enter-
prises-~showed no credit whatever in its account. but the "financial assistance"
granted it by the 006“ totaled 1.314.000 francs. Le Livre [Bookl-Club Diderot
operates on 5.963.000 francs of "financial assistance" while its account shows
a credit balance of scarcely 265.000 francs.

Similar imbalances were found in the accounts of CAL (Culture. Arts. and Letters).
GBLC (Community Publishing and Books Group). Club Hesaidor. etc.

As its books show. the Soviet bank keeps coununist press and publishing firms
above water. It stands to reason that the BCEN's Soviet stockholders. whom
Guy de Boysson calls "our authorities." would certainly not open such huge
lines of credit to press and publishing firms really free to criticize the
Soviet regime.

Could this be the reason the treasurer now seems to have abandoned to their
sorry fate such slightly rebellious party organs as L'AVAﬂT CARDS and CLARTB?‘

*L'AVANT CARDS is the weekly of the Coo-unist Youth Movement of France (HJCF).
CLARTB is the theoretical. political. ideological. and cultural review of the
Union of Colnuniat Students of France.

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

In the "Report of the Customer Services Department Management Committee"
dated 2i December 1978 (File SP/hD). I read the following: "AVANT GARDE-
CLARTE review (3?). it will be recalled that there are still different
attachments on the L'AVANT CARDS account.

"Its sanagesent has informed us that arrangements have been made with the
different creditors to have the attachment orders cancelled.

"As for the account of the CLARTB review whose account operates under the
same signature [as L'AVANT GARDB]. let it be noted that we do not deem it
appropriate. for the present. to issue a checkbook."

when the communist press changes bankers. we may then begin to believe it is
wearing "the colors of France.”

The BCEN's hooks prompt us to feel this change will not occur tomorrow.

In concluding his virtuous statement. Gosnat candidly added: "Besides. the
PCP cannot quit the 303". Such a decision would be interpreted as a political
maneuver." Indeed it would. and not by the French. but by the Soviets. They
would view it as a sign of a degree of independence they could not accept.

The French Columnist Party does not suggest to its members. sympathisers. and
friends that they deposit their dues. contributions. and subscriptions directly
in the Soviet bank. That would be too conspicuous. The PCP uses postal
checking accounts like the other political parties. But unlike the latter.

it uses them only as a screen and a leans of transmitting them to a bank that
is not French. I positively state. indeed I prove that the PCP "launders" its
funds before recycling them. It is the only party that confides its treasury
and the secrets of its activity to foreign officials.

"hat would Georges Harchais--patriotic to the point of being chauvinistic
when he feels like it--say if a party of the {parliamentary} majority or

the Socialist Party were to hand over its funds and all the details of its
operations to agents of the Heat German Deutachbank or the white House?
Because. after all. Vladimir Ponomarev. Viktor Krivochiv. Vladislav Sudakov.
and Sergey Vanine are not acting in a private capacity. They have been
officially appointed by the Soviet government to supervise and report on what
happens in its French bank. As a result. authorities in Moscow quite naturally
have a comprehensive. daily. detailed. and exclusive picture of the financial
and commercial activities of the PCP and its subsidiaries. labor unions. mass
organizations. and fellow travellers.

it was not by chance that l began drafting my report of this investigation on

26 October I978. A day earlier. the PCF's political bureau had plunged to a

new low in effrontery with a very lengthy statement on the financing of
political parties. Presented as the "PCF's Answer to Prime Minister Barre."
this statement analyzed Valery Giscard d'Bstaing's proposal to finance political
parties with public funds.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alarmed at the prospect of having to prove the "open and above board" nature

of its financial operations. the political bureau opposed this proposal on

the grounds of "respect for the independence of political parties. independence
totally inconsistent with public financing." The political bureau argued:

"0n the contrary. it is normal for this financing to be the exclusive responsi-
bility of members and supporters of each party and to be placed under their
control." Now this is exactly what I am doing. I as placing the secrets of the
party‘s financing under the actual control of PC? members and sympathisera.

The PCP has no legal existence: it has never filed its articles of association
as required by the 1901 law on associations. Consequently. it neither possesses
nor declares any money or property in its own name. This is the best way of
avoiding any audit or check. any possible prosecution. seizure. attachment.

or injunction. This is why PCP funds are transferred via private accounts.

For example. the accounts of Andre Raau. treasurerof the PCP's Paris Federation.

The PCP "declares itself prepared to submit to examination by a parliamentary
fact-finding committee investigating the financial activity of all political
parties. a committee whose membership would be proportionate to the votes
received by the various parties."

An excellent idea.

Like all banks. the BCEN uses computerised accounting and posting methods. For
these data-processing purposes. all individual and legal entities considered
and treated as communist are indexed under the code No 18. Included therein in
a friendly but systematic mixture are: the French People's Relief. Prance—USSR
Association. Union of French "omen. Union of Valiant Men and "omen, or indi-

viduals like Guy Charpentier who is charged with collecting and depositing the
salaries of elected communist officials (members of parliament. municipal
governments. etc.) There are a total of 9b accounts indexed under code No 18.

In the BCBN. embassies, diplomatic and related personnel are grouped under
No 24. In 1975. there were 32‘ of these accounts--an absolute record for a
bank in France--listed on sheets of a pleasant shade of blue.

The bank has even more diplomatic accounts today because of the steady increase
of personnel within the Paris embassies of communist countries. In the list

of those accounts. 1 came across the names of many persons with ties to the
intelligence community: Cubans. with the greatest plethora of personnel.
Guineans. Russians. Hungarians. Czechoslovaks. Poles. Bulgarians. and Vietnamese
--the most prodigal. oddly enough--along with Palestinian. Israeli. Uruguayan.
Algerian. and other travelers. Because also moving about within the official
communist diplomatic community there are middlemen. brokers. and agents domiciled
in Portugal. Liechtenstein. Yemen. Mali. Hong Kong. Tripoli. Rio. Buenos Aires.
Kinshasa. Beirut. Tokyo. Salonica. London. Zurich. Basel. Geneva. Jeddah.
Bogota. Lagos. the Federal Republic of Germany. Austria. etc.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Code No 81 is [or insurance companies such as the Black Sea and Baltic firm which
serves Soviet diplomats.

Code No 15 includes more than 1.300 private persons admitted as such in this
Boulevard Houseman club despite the fact that it claims to be ill—equipped to
open accounts for individuals. This list contains intellectuals, artists. and
athletes who are communists or communist sympathizers, most of whom assert they
are independent of Moscow. Sometimes they have a credit balance, sometimes
they are overdrawn. Among these are Andre Hurmaer, Rene Andrisu, Laurent Salini,
Martins Honod. Antoine Aquaviva. Robert Lambotte. Madeleine Riaud, Pierre Durand,
Jean Rabate and others. reports for L'nUHANlTB, etc.

A comical note: Jean-Paul Sartre must have forgotten to close his account: He
has a credit balance of 628.25 francs. Likewise Roger Garaudy who has a balance
of 1.98 francs. Haldeck Rochet. former secretary general and current honorary
chairman of the PCF. has 5.25 francs, and his reviler of May 1968, the writer
and film director Guy Debord, founder of the “situationist” international and

a virulent critic of Soviet bureaucracy, had 9,683.02 francs on 26 October 1978.
Dehord's account is one-tenth slimmer than Rene Andrieu's with its 108,737.67
francs on 16 October 1978 and 103,052.28 franca--still including 90,000 francs
in a savings account--on 25 January 1979.

in the BCBR, rsnk-and-file members and middle-level communist cadres are
conspicuous by their absence. Yet they unwittingly do contribute to the bank's
wealth: their modest dues and donations swell the coffers of party organizations
that. in turn. hoard them in this bank which is reserved for the aristocrats of
the revolution.

COT unions are dedicated to having their "savings" make money for them in the
Soviet bank. These Frenchmen distrust patriotic establishments. Hill socialist
members of the COT be pleased or, at least, disturbed to learn that the 32 labor
unions and employee-management committees having "well-heeled" savings accounts
in the hCHN as of 26 October 1978 included the following: Fraternal Association
of Hetallurgists, 2,859,000 francs; Workers Committee of the Sispsno-Suiza
Division of SNBCHA. 1.620.000 francs; General Union of Federation of Civil
Servants. 4,563,000 francs; National Federation of Railway workers, 3.800.000
francs. etc.

Total savings of the CGT and its affiliated organizations: approximately 31
million francs.

On 16 November 1978, the day before the bOth CGT Congress. the radio news program
"Evenemcnts" [Events] broadcast an investigative report by the journalist
Francois Gault on "the CCT's Finances." "The CGT had for the first time agreed
to open its books." The CGT's treasurer, Ernest Deiz, told Gault that "in 1971
the COT had 7.300.000 francs. 90 percent of which was deposited in one bank.

In 1977, this sun had risen to 21,500,000 francs deposited in equal parts in

[our banks."

21
FOR_0FFIC1AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 16 October. in the BCEN alone. the single account No 05101-2. of the COT.
213 Rue Lafayette, had 1,046,588.56 francs on "ordinary demand deposit" plus
9.500.000 francs in "fixed term" deposits (3-months certificates of deposit).
in other words, in reserve. If the CGT'a money is really'beposited" in equal
parts in four banks. then its “liquid assets" between 16 and 26 Ottober 1978
amounted to more than 5 million francs withdrawable at any time plus 38 million
francs withdrawable upon maturity: a total of more than 62 million francs.

l challenge the CGT to produce receipts or vouchers proving that on the afore-
mentioned dates it had as much money in three other banks as in the Soviet bank.

Georges Seguy and Henri Krseucki. who are members of the PCF's political bureau
in their capacity as CGT officials, conceal from the noncommunist majority of

the CGT's 2.300.000 members the financial practices of the communist minority who
hold the key leadership positions in the CGT.

Some of the employee-management committees working with the BCBN are guilty of
a very serious offense. In violation of the provisions of the law. they are
diverting to the benefit of the PCP and CGT the millions of francs entrusted to
them. The Soviet bank assists them in thus deviating these funds from their
intended purpose. The employee-management committees of some of the largest
national firms are involved. the Renault committee and those of companies doing
national defense work: Dassault. Aerospatiale, SNECHA, etc. (See "La France
communiste." Albin Michel. PP 80-86).

These committees annually receive a variable percentage of the total amount of
wages paid. it amounts to 5 percent in the aircraft industry which is power-
fully represented in the Soviet bank where their millions ultimately wind up.
These wealthy committees are not subject to tax audits. They take advantage of
the ignorance of pusillanimous employers and manipulate this money with no con-
cern for the contradiction existing between their profession of faith--"Buy
French. invest French. and manufacture Prench"--and their politico-finencial
behavior.

The Dassault employee-management committee is currently in difficulty despite its
considerable revenue. Yet it has endorsed a loan by the bank to a private
individual. Let that company's wage earners draw their own conclusions.

Furthermore. the CGT's Public Utilities Federation has. for its part. endorsed
another person's loan. 00 the ubT's lowly dues-paying members approve of such
obligations? In the case of the Cooperative and Medical Social welfare Society
(OSCH) of Ivry-sur-Seine--a communist municipality and Georges Gosnat's district
--the obligations assume substantial proportions. 0n 2 December 1976. the BCEN
granted the OSCM an "initial loan" of 1.238.500 francs.

0n [2 October 1978. the management committee of the bank's customer service
department reviewed the OSCH's situation: "It will be recalled that in antici-
pation of the sale of their ivry buildings-~estimated value: approximately

4 million francs--we approved a mortgage loan of 800,000 francs.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The chairman of that association appeared before us and inforned us that the
sale would he canpleted at any noment (two buyers were seriously interested).

"Meanwhile. the OSCH-having decided to cease all of its srtivity within the

next 12 months. but gradually so as to satisfactorily resolve attendant financial
and social probiess--asked us to increase our assistance from the initially
approved 800.000 francs to 1.100.000 francs to enable it to meet. without
default. its 30 Septesher 1978 deadline.

"Following an interview with Mr. de Boysson. we agreed to grant an additional
loan of 300.000 francs with the endorsement of the Union of Public Utilities
and Public health Employees. but we informed the 056“ leadership they would

have to take all necessary action to ensure their meeting the 10 October
deadline.“

As devoted as he may be to the cause. Guy de Boysson is. nevertheless. obliged
to set certain liaits to the Soviet bank's generosity. even if a CGT union as
rich as the Union of Public Utilities and Public health Bnployees has given its
endorsement.

For all these transactions. Messrs. Ponomarev. Krivochiv. Sudakov. Vaniae

and de boyssoa follow the advice of a staunch communist. Robert Pirolli.

This friend of Georges Gosnet and Georges Harchais whom he assisted in the
negotiations on the left's Common Program. is a professor at the Ecole
Polytechnique and a certified public accountant. he is also the auditor for

the BCEN. the PCP and its coanercial firms, including the Parisian Papers Office
of thc GiPCO [expansion unknown] group. in one of Pirolli's reports submitted
to this ilrm's regular stockholder's aeeting. we find confirmation of the PCP's
use of CCT funds. in fact. under the heading "Other debts of more than 1 year."
are listed substantial loans from the hational Federation of Government workers.
National CCT Press Union. National CCT La Chapelle Darblay Union. ctr.

Pirolli's report concluded: Our business is booming. Our financial situation
Is a comfortable one. Our indebtedness is well-balanced..."

Thanks to money from COT labor unions subsidized by the state and employees.
the BCEN is thereby freed from a burden: it finds supporting the PCP already
expensive enough. .

The CGT. ﬂu-PCF. and top communist party leaders have saving accounts with the
nCEN. Certain communist dignitsties choose the Soviet bank also when they want
to borrow money. Such political loans. called "personal loans.“ have been
elven to Guy Charpentier. and to Robert Golly. mayor of Plessis-Robinson and
husband of Jacqueline Celly. a meaber of the central committee and secretary
general of the Union of French Hosea. These two nen seem to have less financial
requirements than two higher-ranking borrowers. Laurent Salinl of lflﬂﬂiANlTE
and Jacques Denis. The latter is one of Ce‘rges Harcbais' right-hand men. a
member of the PCP central coanittee since l96l. and a foreign policy expert.

-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with such ”stiff" debts. it would be surprising if. when the chips are down.
they can have any freedoa of action where Moscow is concerned.

How do the Soviets go about supervising and monitoring communist organisations
and labor unions? Apart from the commercial fires the scan already ti.ntly
controls. French coamunists have other scans of obtaining funds. such as
collections. solidarity drives. and subscriptions. This ease of funds could
escape the watchful.eyes of the Soviets and constitute pocket aoney that would
give French coasunists a certain degree of freedoe. But these funds are paid
into numerous CCP [postal checking accounts] and eventually wind up in the
scan. After it has been posted and distributed throughout Eurobank's Iultiple
accounts and books. this sale money returns. as and when needed. into the

some or another CCP.

This ”round trip" serves n threefold useful purpose:

1. it enables the Soviets to know the exact amount of Ioney available to the
P6P. including its mass and "front" organizations.

2. It permits the PC? to receive suns froa sources it cannot acknowledge.
sums that are “laundered" by asking it appear that they have been "innocently"
received through subscription. special collections. and other appeals to the
party faithful's generosity.

3. It makes it possible to hide free the sillions of Frenchmen who subscribe
to party newspapers and respond to CGT and PCP fund appeals that the true
depositaries of their donations are the Soviets.

"hen the PCF's political bureau launched. in loving terns. "a national fund
drive in support of the Vietnaaese people.” it added as a footnote: ”Please
make donations payable to CC? Georges Gosnat No 63-65-7l-P Paris." This same
procedure is used for all other fund drives. The PCP has as Iany CCP's as
its needs.

By receiving these funds automatically deposited in the BCEN by Georges Gosnat
and his comrades. the Soviets are thus familiar at all tiles with the ability
of the party and the GOT to mobilize the masses. The Soviets are also thereby
kept informed of the financial health of the PCP and CGT down to the nearest
centime. As an exaaple. one need only refer to the PCP's annual "high mass."

La Fete de L'HUHANITE (SCEN accounts No 06602-6 and No 08683-6).

There is no way Georges Harchais can hoodwink Vladi-ir Ponomarev about the
results of that annual operation. or. in general. about the balance sheet of
the PCP and everything connected with it. The fact is that the BC!" is more
familiar with that balance sheet than Georges Harchais hiaself.

COPYRIGHT: 1979. Albin Hichel et L’Express

8041
650:3100

2“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 03].?

FRANCE

BRIEFS

OVERSEAS INTERVENTION CAPABILITY-Janice is increasing its ability to inter-
vene [militarily] overseas. The forthcoming delivery of sone 30 Transall
transport aircraft that can be refueled in flight will enable the air force
to intervene up to 7.000 kiloseters free France. By 1980 France will have
an air-portable intercontinental conunicstions systsn that will put the
vomnder or French forces in action abroad in direct contact with the any
operations center under the cousnd of General "cry. The lack of such a
connmications system was felt during the operations in Chad and Zaire.
[Text] [Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 12 Mar 79 p 23]

050: 3100 m

9-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY