FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10360

3 March 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 13/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infornation prinrily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained. ‘

Headlines, editorial reports, and enterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was smrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded U a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. ‘l'ines within itens are as
given by source.

The contents 0). this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Governeent.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING (”HERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINA‘I'ION
017 THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 13/82)

Cou'reu'rs
Tm FORCE

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? GM!

First Flight Test of HBB Solid-Pmpellsnt Ramjet
(AIR m ”ms, 28 "w 81) COO.I."00....OOIIIO'OOOOUIO.en...-

MGY ECOMMICS

ITALY
Grsndi interviewed on Eni's Strategy
(Alberto Grendi Interview; mm, Dec 81) ..................
POLITICAL
NETHERLAIIIE
Dissension, Internal Problem of Labor Psrty -
(Feike Salverds, et «1.;VRIJ DEMAND. 23 Jen 82)
MIIJTARY
FRANCE

Defense Budget for 1982 Outlined: Air Force Seen Lacking Funds
(AIRETCOSM,21HOV 81) 0.0.0.0....OIIOIIOCOIOOOOOCCOCOIICC

Defense Ministry View Four Options in Air Detection Syetan
(Am m cm. 28 M" 5 Dec 81) ooooeeoooeeoooeeeeeeeeoeeeeo

Helicopter Division Chief Discusses Trends, Production, R I D
(Jacques Morisset; AIR m cosmos, 19 Dec 81) .................

-s- [III-WB-ISOH

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWWONLY

mm YORCBB . WWICWW

FIRST H.168? 1'38! OP nae SOLID-W we:
Parie All! 31' com in French 28 Nov a1 p «

[Text] The use [morerachnitt-Bolkow-Blohn] company (rm) haa just successfully
conpleted the first two flights teeta of its new boron-fueled solid-propellant
rat-jet” the development of which hae been under way for the last 3 years under an
PR6 Defence niniatry contract. The teats were carried out in Sardinia (Italy).
using a duny nieeile with a tort 'Mel of m'a loud-propellant ranjet as its
cruise vehicle and the first etage of an heerican “Honest John' niaaile aa a
booster. These tests were designed to test only the operation of the boron-fueled
solid-propellant ranjet. The experinental niaaile wee therefore equipped with a
telemetry link and with a guidance and piloting ayeteta coneiating of a strapped-
down inertial navigation equipnent and cooputer. According to In. 'the perfor-

mance of the ranjet fulfilled all expectation, even at attack anglee greater
than 8 degrees.

This boron-fueled aolid propellant ranjet ia daaigned for next-generation tactical
eiaailee like the new ans supersonic antiahip liteile developed jointly by

“Roseanne [National Induetrial Aerospace Coapanx/ and nae under a cooperative _
Rance-German project. It is preaently considered the preferred eolution for

the Iain ANS delivery vehicle. But the builder. of the me actually have a

Medium Range His-11:9). The final choice in due to be nade in ion, at the con-
clusion of develop-em work and flight teete on the two types of ranjeta. to be
carried out between now and than in France and the m. -

'COPYRIGST: A. G C. 1981

9238
C80: 8119/0693

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY BOOMNICS ITALY

cum: mum on nu‘s smear
none ENERGIA an Italian Dec 81 pp 16-27

[Interview with Alberto Grandi. president of the National hydrocarbons Agency,
by Romano Prodi, in Rome. Novewer 1981]

[Text] [Question] Can you present briefly the strategic lines along which an
[National Hydrocarbons Agency] is moving and the ways in which this strategy is
tending to be formulated?

[Answer] Various motives. decisions and restrictions are confluent in the strategy
of a special structure like the structure of an enterprise with state participation.
Alongside the statutory tasks. we have government decisions and guidelines. expressed
in laws. resolutions, authorizations. lie have objective behavior restrictions.

First of all, there are the ones stealing from the greater responsibilities and
requirerenta of a social nature with which we are inevitably charged. Re are think".
ing of the subject of supplying methane in the South, which certainly a private
cowany would not accomplish, at least in the dimensions established in government
headquarters.

This does not mean that the strategy is "given" to us, but we certainly have a
degree of freedom that is smaller than the degree of freedom of a private enter-
prise. especially in the choice of field toward which to direct our activity.

It suffices to mention the obligations of the former m [Agency for the Management
of Mineral and Metallurgical Concerns] cospanies. and. more recently, of the SIR
[Italian Resins Company] and the Liquichinica Cowany, and, in a certain way, of

the Monti Group. delegated to an, inorder to point out the most important restric-
tions.

ENI's strategic plan, however. does not waste time on the determination and quanti-
fication of sectoral objectives and on singling out priorities in programing in-
vestments. but, rather. it is characterised especially by the industrial policies
that it assumes. by the ways in which it intends to pursue the previously selected
objectives. It is up to us to act so that an operation that night be taken

as one of mere salvage is incorporated in a framework that will have its own sco-
nonic validity and that can thus be turned into a positive act.

From the point of view of priorities. actions undertaken in the field of energy
(to increase the degree of autonomy and reliability of supplies and to contribute

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to a change in the energy system) and actions for inroving the publicly owned
chemical industry. ,

with regard to industrial policies, the basic motives consist of the following:

[a.] Internationalization: this is an approach pursued, with appropriate initia-
tives. in the whole range of the Group's operations. for individual industrial
activities and for financial activities. It should be pointed out that the solution
of the problem of the basic chemical industry is being sought. for the first time
and in a radical manner. on an international scale. .

[b.l Stimlus and reorganization of scientific research activities and activities
for innovation. with a trend toward interventions in the energy and chemical sec-
tors, specific forms of organization of research in high risk areas. joint ventures
with international operators.

[c.l Adoption of strict criteria for ensuring investment quality both for the
reconversion processes and for new investments.

[d.] Trend toward measures and interventions to ensure the necessary shift of the
prevailing "orientation toward production." characteristic at present of large
activity sectors of the group (chemical and textile industries), to an effective
"market orientation."

[e.] Pursuit of a more balanced relation in the financial structure between own
means and overall coverage, with the possibility of acquiring fresh money not only
through the state. but also through access to the national and international stock
markets.

Although these are intervention and method priorities with which we intend to move.
it is also true that there are other serious problems to which great attention
must be paid, like improvement of the textile sector and of the formr EGAN com-
panies. The isportant point is to avoid occurrence of what happened in the textile
sector where. for exaaple. the improvement of Lanerossi. which was achieved in

the 1960's, was later suffocated by the acquisition of other enterpises imposed

on us--like Monti. Fossati. Cotoniere Heridionali—with resultant huge losses.
With SAHIM, for example, the 577 billion lire that the state had granted to RM

as endowment fund were almost wholly. absorbed by covering the losses generated

by the inherited production structure.

[Question] In a few words. BN1 feels that being a public enterprise is constantly
more burdensome. with a whole series of impositions that a private structure does
not have to undergo.

{Answer} What we are trying to do in the various sectors of the Group is to acquire
private partners precisely for the purpose of putting ourselves in a logic that
will be tied as much as possible to an industrial management rather than to a purely
social point of view, with all the problems that this kind of position entails.

[Question] How is the need for a long-term strategy-~often. as you have said,
"imposed" on BN1 from the outside--reconciled with the discontinuity of the political
authority characteristic of the Italian situation?

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The government's continuity represents an indispensable requirement.

In my opinion. the lack of it is one of the main sources of problems for the PPSS
[State Participations] system. And that is not only with regard to the aspects

of a strategic nature. but also because of the possibility for the shareholder—the
state--to ascertain the validity of the management that it has placed to guide

the enterprises. At present. the managesmnt has a series of formidable alibis
precisely owing to the fact that the per sons with whom it speaks change constantly.
I have been in ENI for a year and a half now and I have already seen three energy
plans. Under these circumstances. it is ilpossible to have stable. precise direc-
tives. Too often we are faced with program drafts that vary as the ministers vary.

The idea of extending the term of office of the presidents of state participation
agencies seems to me one that can be shared. but it would require-«in order not

to prove to be useful solely for internal organisational purposesna continuity
of presence in the government structure. It is possible to determine the specific
responsibilities for a failure to attain the objectives only with stability of

the persons with whom we deal.

[Question] ENI's strategy—regardless of how it has been forming-~has been confined
within very Pad“ 11m1t8. judging from all that you have said so far. The first
point is the lack of clarity or. rather, the vagueness of the objectives that the
agency must pursue. as is shown by the experience with the energy plans. The second
point is the risk of constant interference from outside the agency, which. every
time. diverts huge funds from the primary objectives to which the agency's activity
should have devoted itself. The third obstacle is the "discontinuity" of the outside
authorities to which the agency should report on its own operations. In view of

the fact that it will be difficult for these obstacles to disappear in the near
future, how do you believe that the achievement of a strategy of constant produc-
tion diversification is compatible with so restricted and tortuous a maneuvering
area? Voluntarilyor not, in the last few years. am has in fact expanded the range
of its activities iapressively. both in the sectors in which it was traditionally
involved (like the energy sector) and with regard to new sectors. This strategy

is exactly the opposite of the strategy of the largest international energy enter-
prises, which. with considerably more resources than ENLhave preferred to sin

a production and marketing specialization. abandoning less important sectors and
less advantageous markets.

[Answer] Precisely for the motives that I mentionedto you first. in many cases
the course of diversification was 1:19on on the agency. A typical example is

the exasple of the textile sector in which we are now pursuing a line of disin-
volvement. at least. Another example is the example of the mineral-metallurgical
sector. This sector came to ENI as a result of the dissolution of mm. The ac-
tivities thus taken over were and are considerably passive. The only possibility
for improvement lies in a vast program of internationalization of the sector. with
the resultant readiness of the public shareholder to coinit trillions of lire to
it. Therefore, it is up to the government to decide if it is in favor of th.’
kind of operation. causing SAHIM to come out of a situation that is cowellim, it.
at present, to operate only on national mines that may. perhaps. have strategic
importance, but certainly no economic importance. In this essmlption. I wonder

if it is not worth while to set up an ad hoc structure. with financing adequate
for the task and a management not distracted by other isportant duties. The white
book of the Ministry of PPSS itself pointed out the need for incorporating the
activity of aluminum, zinc. lead and other nonferrous metals in one single agency.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIRI. 03l- Ul‘hl

At any rate, I should like to point out—when an "excess" of diversification is
mentioned-how, even in the most recent on programs, a very high share of invest-
ments (85 percent) is always concentrated in the energy sector and auxiliary activi-

ties.
[Questim] And what about diversification in'the field of the energy sector?

[Answer] In this case. too, diversification initiatives result at times from outside
pressures. He would certainly not have thought of expanding our activity also

into the coal sector. if we had not been told to do so. If the shareholder has
chosen to put us in this field. this decision must. therefore. be supported by
logically consistent behavior. The same can be said of the oil sector in which

we entered, recently. in the Hediterranean (former Honti Group) "venture." This
decision nay have its economic validity. but it fallsiinto a trend that certainly
is not to be exaggerated. 0n the day when m should be obliged to guarantee 60

to 70 percent of the country‘s oil requirements. at that point it should be wondered
whether the entire nationalization of the sector is not preferable. The requirement
for maintaining a diversification of operators seems. on the other hand. to be
definitely indispensable. because it takes it possible not only to ascertain the
economic quality of the operation of the state agency..but also to ensure greater
reliability in the country's energy supplies. In short. attention must be paid

to the fact that an does not have to extend its own market- share excessively.

That would not be in the country's interest. Moreover. the government has. within
the field of a price policy that protects the interests of the oil coqanies. the
instruments needad for requiring those same cowanies not to abandon the nrket

in times of depression (it suffices to point out how the concessionary systen oper-
ates in the'oil market). Otherwise. the matter of "institutional" supplies by

m ends by harning the state. In fact, when the domestic market makes economically
valid results possible. the state agency's share decreases. while in the opposite
situation it increases excessively. as is happening at the present time. when we
are supplying over 60 percent of the nation's oil requirements. '

[Question] threover, the Monti case represented a dangerous precedent in the oil
sector with the risk that abandonment of our market by other operators will finally
find expression in a further forced expansion of 3111‘s share.

[Answer] Precisely in.order to reduce BNI's presence. in terms of quantity, on

the domestic oil market. we are seeking to proceed with operations like the one
concluded with Occidental in the chenical industry. In other words. to call foreign
operators back into Italy to meet the oil supply requirements.

[Question] Haliciously. it may be said that the "foreign draft" can also be used
to hold out against "domestic" obstacles.

[Answer] I should say that this is true.

[Question] In a logic of better allocation of the Group's resources, how do y0u
Justify m's remaining in the nuclear sector. where very high losses are being

recorded. where the future certainly-doesn’t appear to be better and where there
no longer is that concern of the 1960's for ensuring reliability of fuel supplies.

which gave rise to ml'a entrance in the nuclear field?

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] The Group's crisis in the nuclear sector is caused by the incredible
diversity of the programs decided on in their tin and the construction of nucleo-
electric powerplants. That is to say that it is caused by national programing

in this sector. The present difficulties of A612 [Rational Italian Oil Company]
Nuclear stem from having taken on co-itmentsnby specific. official government
directive-with regard to programs that later turned out to be unrealistic. The
situation would certainly not have been different. if an organization different
from an had been carrying out the initiatives for nuclear fuel supply. Several
times, we pointed out the need for coping with problem ate-ling from this by means
of appropriate coordination action with ML [National Electric Power Agency].
Every solution can be taken into account in this framework and on the basis of

a point of view that is not business-oriented. but. rather. that is to the greater
advantage of the nation. The problem raised at this point is who pays for that
mistake in programing. In 1992-1993, the cumulative loss for uranium enrichmnt
and storage will be on the order or 8 to 9 trillion lire. including capital and
interest. And this is still assuming that this Energy Plan. which however con-

siderably reduces what was previously approved. will be carried through to ful-
fillment.

[Question] In the light of this sorry experience. now. almost 10 years later,
you are confronted by another programstic directive: all projected toward coal.
1n the 1977 Energy Plan almost no mention was made of it and now a consumption

of close to 60 million metric tons is estimated by the end of the decade. In other
words. a situation is being forecast for Italy's coal future not very different
from the situation experienced in the nuclear sector and no less risky a situation.
with investment choices that are being started even before the basic aspect of
the "social acceptability" of those same choices has been ascertained. 0n the
contrary. we are witnessing a race between operators to accelerate presence in
the coal sector with everyone laying claims. in that sector. to inclinations that
are at least questionable.

In this situation of uncertainty and of industrial risk. how does BN1 evaluate

the choice of coal? And also, in view of the decision by Bub-the larger con-
sumer and. therefore. the one with which you deal primarily--to acquire coal directly
and to acquire mining participations on its own, what concrete prospects are there
for 381 in this field?

[Answer] Because it is true that, in view of the way in which things have gone
in the nuclear sector. it is absolutely necessary for our country to adjust to
other solutions, including the coal solution. ENI is seeking to move toward this
choice. risking but prudently. Theoretically. next year we shall have the possi-
bilityof bringing 3.5 million metric tons of coal into Italy. A good part of it,
however. has already been placed on the American market and another part can be
acquired directly for the requirements of our coke plants. Therefore, the pre-
sent availabilities of ENI are no risk from the economic point of view. It is
certainly unthinkable to go to support immediately investments that my ensure
20-30 million metric tons in a period of lo to 6 years. Thisamnunt should repre-
sent 50 percent of the agreement provided with ML, in accordance with the PEN
[National Energy Plan] forecasts.

i'..cent 1y, I stated my perplexitias in this connection on the advisability of m's
becoming a direct mining operator. It is a different matter for ENE]. to have re-
liability of supplies and the capability of competing in suppying coal.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore. it is a question of setting up, on the one hand, with reference to the
National Energy Plan. an action program by an adjusted to the need for reliability
of supply for the Italian market (and the m programs are subject not only to

the government's approval but also to examination by Parliament) and, on the other
hand. it is a question of making possible an independent cosmercial supplyi activity
of BNEI. that will enable m to ascertain the advisibility of supplies from AGIP
Coal and that will enable AGIP Coal to compete at all times with the most qualified
international operators. Naturally. because the requirements for reliability
will lead to a couitment by as: requiring huge mining investments. it is natural
that a certain guarantee for placing coal from deposits abroad to which an: holds
title is necessary. BN1 and m have already set up. for this purpose. a Coal
Committee in which all problems of integration and coordination between the two
agencies pertaining to development of this source will be examined. The committee
should be made up of a series of relationships at a more operational level. It
seems to me that an orientation like the one that I have set forth here is also
expressed in the latest edition of the Energy Plan.

In short, BN1 does not want to take on the role of sole institutional supplier
of m. but. as an international operator in coal. it counts on having am as
its main customer, certain to succeed in supplying the agency under conditions
of conpetition with the other international operators.

[Question] With regard to the chemical industry, Bill has enormously expanded its presence
to the less attractive primary products that show severe problems of excess pro-
duction capacity and of intolerable competition from "new producers" on the interna-
tional level. with its accounts at 'hand, how can BN1 cope with this kind of situa-
tion? How such acceptance of outside pressures and of informed strategy.- is there
in 281's decision? '

Can you sumrize for us. for purposes of this subject. the terms of the BNI-OXY
agreement? Can you in particular present the advantages that will be derived by
ENI from the operation?

[Answer] First of all. I state that ENI is not programing new action in the primary
chemical industry. but. rather, it is seeking solutions to existing problems in

a difficult task of improving activities and initiatives that have gone into a

state of crisis. Absorption of LIQUICHIHICA and of SIR has given rise, within

ENI. to extremely important organizational problems. In fact, we have to bring
together personnel who formerly operated in hot competition. He have to eliminate
plants that are useless duplications. We even have to shift personnel to a plant
that was formerly a competitor. and so on. This commitment was assumed on the

basis of government decisions. as is evident from the legislative context in which
the operation is incorporated. This is no reason for the evaluation of the "pro—
ject" necessarily to be negative. It would become negative. if the solutions adopted
should be influenced by undue pressures. by the prevalence of special interests.

Having said that. there is still the queStion on the validity of the program. on

the effects on 881 and on the nation's economy of the anticipated initiatives.

The lines of action connected with the establishment and development of the public
"chemical pole" go beyond mere action of rationalization and renovation of the
primary chemical industry. and they affect development of the secondary chemical
industry. the nutrition sector. pharmaceuticals and parapharmaceuticals. development

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of applied research and of innovative research, modernisation of the marketing
mechanism. a definite move toward internationalization.

This is the framework in which the agreement for the establisl-ent of W fails.
This company is in joint venture between m and Occidental Petroleul Corporation.
The agreement was signed definitively in Ron on 29 October 1981. This is not

the only initiative that ENI intends to carry out along this line in the chemical in-
dustry. This one should be followed by others that will enable us to join up with
international partners in special sectors of the chemical industry.

ENOXY, whose activity should start on 1 January I982, will he participated in
equally by EN! and Occidental with a corporate capital of $1.05 billion ($525 mil-

lion for the chemical sector and $525 million for coal) and will operate interna-
tionally.

BJOXY, a holding company with headquarters in Holland, will hold 100 percent of

the operational companies represented in Italy by BNOXY Chemical Coqany. which
will include the petrochemical activities that will be taken over from SIR and

ANIC [National Agency for the Hydrogenation of Fuel] (about 60 petrochemical plants)
and in the United States by anon Coal Incorporated. which will have a coupler

of four coal mines.

A third comany, ENOXY Management. with headquarters in Zurich, will preside over
the operations of coordination. organization and decision-making of the operational
cowanies. This structure's primary objective is to ensure, with the collaboration
of international managers. the resurgence of anon petrochemical on the organiza- ..
tional, logistic and marketing level, in order to achieve degrees of efficiency
comparable with the most effective competition and to acquire, therefore, broader
and more stable positions on the Italian market and especially on the foreign mar-
ket.

The chemical activities, which are starting from a very passive economic situation
owing to considerable industrial and financial problems, will have a financial
structure-by means of the contribution by partners and by the government support
provided in the chemical plan of Minister Dc Hichelis--that will make it possible
to hold the burdens down to levels of absolute cometitivenesa with regard to com-
petition, in order to allow the necessary maneuvering freedom for proceeding with
the industrial inprovement of the activities.

Coal activity will be based in every phase--from extraction to transportation and
to marketing--on the support and management of Island Creek. the Occidental Petro-
leum subsidiary operating in the coal sector and which. in size, is the fourth
largest coal producer in the United States with reserves of 4 billion short tons.
KNOXY Coal. with its four mines and with reserves of about 250 million short tons.
has. at present, a production of 6.8 million tons, expandable, in the short term,
to 10 million tons. Fifty percent- of the coal mined will be available to m for
the doestic market and, obviously, for the international market. We also have

a berth available at Baltimore that provides access for ships up to 150,000 tons
dead weight, making it possible. therefore. to reduce demurrage charges,'now any
high in-the United Statea.'by 30 percent.

In particular with regard to chemical activities, ENOXY'a objective is to set up
an international group with a size comparable with the largest European groups

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the field of previously selected activity sectors. The production capacity
of ethylene is around 1 million metric tons, one of the largest in Europe. The
objective is to achieve a turnover of around $6 to /$7 billion by 1986-1987. This
objective should be attained by operating along the following lines:

1. By assming prominent positions, in Europe, -'in inortant sectors of the petro-
chemical industry. especially in the large monomers (ethylene, propylene, vinyl
chloride, butadiene, and so on) and in the principal plastic substances (low-density
polyethylene and linear polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride, polystyrene) with European
shares of 8 to 10 percent for the principal products.

2. By being present on the latex and synthetic rubber market with sizable shares
(15 to 20 percent).

3. By increasing the production capacity of some plants in Italy and by proceeding,
subsequently, with a program of purchases in other European countries, in order
to expand the production and marketing base.

ENOXY will have a production structure closely integrated with raw materials pro-
vided by the parent corporations at competitive costs. The production lines will
be rationalized. Technologies will be updated rapidly and the plants will be de-
veloped in their production capacity (also by colpleting some plants in Sardinia
whose construction work ha 3 been interrupted for some time now).

In the area of fixed costs, ENOXY will minimize general expenditures and the cost
of labor by setting up an operational structure and a very flexible, efficient
headquarters, comparable with the structure and headquarters of European competi-
tors.

[Question] Coming to the critical problem of oil supplies, what scenario do you
anticipate in the short term (1981-1982) and in the media term (1985-1990) on
the international market?

[Answer] The framework in which the problem of oil supplies is located is full
of uncertainties. distorsions and risks, not only in the medium term but also in
the short term.

The sizable decrease in oil consunption by the industrialized countries seems to
be a factor of relative stability, but here too how much does the situational com-
ponent come into play?

A stabilization factor, at least in the short term, seems to be represented by
the oil policy of Saudi Arabia, which is giving evidence of great responsibility
with regard to the international community (for exalple, the "war relief" supplies
in the period of interruption of Iraqi and Iranian supplies) and it has pursued,
with some degree of success, a policy of unification and modernization of prices.
of their indexing on sound bases. But what data have we for knowing if and when
one of the many factors of uncertainty weighing heavily on the world oil system
(the future of Egypt after Sadat, the Palentinian issue, the Afghan issue, the
development of the Iran-Iraq war or some other new trouble spot) will succeed in up-
setting this moderate, balanced line that seems to be prevailing at present? The

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

v. only know that difficulties. in terms of availability and prices. may come up
at any time, and we must take that into account in our policies and in our programs.

an increase in the burden of supply, except, obviously, when it is a question of
carrying out specific technical operations in terms of reliability, like organiza-

ae has happened historically. that the preparation of measures taken with regard
to reliability. like. for example. the formation of stable, continuing relations.
stipulation of long-term contracts, will give rise, under certain market conditions.
to rigidity and burdens with regard to a more "coulnercial" method of operating.
It must not be overlooked, however. that. in different market situations, relia-
bility also becomes an advantage. To give an example, if in the period of crude
"shortage" (1979), m had wanted and had been able to give up part of its own
increased supplies on the spot market where crude oil had exceeded 860 a barrel
(compared with official prices of $214 to $27), it would have made huge profits,
in spite of its withdrawing crude oil to a considerable degree from areas with
the highest price level. The real problem is that. at certain sizes and when a

on the other hand, constant addmatments and timely responses?

[Answer] Precisely in 1978-1979. 2N1 saw the largest increase in its supplies

of crude 011. without resorting to the spot market. In that period, imports in-
creased by about 10 million metric tons. compensating for the reduction in indepen-
dent operators. The risk of a large deficit in the country's supplies, urgently
made plain by the government authorities at the end of 1979, drove ENI to conclude
contracts at any cost. Still at the end of last year. the situation of BNI's crude

10
won omcm. use and
ITO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore, we acted to cope with this crisis situation. Suddenly, however, things
began to change.

Pirst. Saudi Arabia replaced the Iraqi in selling crude to us. Then, before any
reasonable forecast, Iraq resumed supplies at the, rate of 150,000 barrels a day.
There were also possibilitiesof buying from Kuwait. Iran reamed supplies. making
abOut 100.000 barrels a day available. Concerning a program for withdrawals of
crude for 1981, which ENI indicated at the beginning of the year at 67 million
metric tons, the Hay 1981 forecasts rose to 53 million tons. In view of the modi-
fications that had occurred on the market owing to lower consumption thus we came
around to assuming a surplus (availability-requirements) of around 8 million tons.

The Group's response capability, however. was not lacking. By means of a policy
of reduction of withdrawals of more expensive crude, in June the surplus forecasts
had been reduced from 8 to 6.6 million tons. In September. to 1.5 million and

in October, around 0.5 nillion tons. At the same time, the price went down from
an average of $37.50 a barrel P03 in the first half-year to around $310 a barrel.

a price that is substantially at the average of the other companies. taking into
account legitimate differences in quality.

The significance of the concept of surplus should be explained at any rate. If
AGIP should again have to meet unforeseen requirements on its own market. because
of the withdrawal of other operators as has happened in the past. it would be es-
sential for it to have, at all times, the possibility of increasing the amount

of available crude in a short time. ‘

Therefore. a supply surplus must not be regarded as an emceptional condition.

but rather'a necessary one. That raises. however, the problem of how to find an
inexpensive method. but rather one capable of yielding profits. of maintaining

those amounts of crude that we might regard as a reserve of the company. For this
purpose. A01? is actively conducting research activities on various markets on

which to sell crude with the intention of opening up outlets in remerative markets
from which it will be possible to withdraw.“ the time when the Italian market

has an urgent need for reasons of quantity and quality.

Therefore. the activities directed toward reducing the surplus that was shaping

up during 1981 are also viewed from the aspect of actions directed toward increasing
the flexibility of crude supply and. therefore, toward coping better with the re-
curring surplus crises showing up on the international crude market.

[Question] ENI's full support of the arguments. advocated up to now by the private
companies. in favor of a process of gradual liberalisation of our market, especially
with regard to price establishment policies, has given rise to some interest and
to—do. Can you smariu your position on this subject? -

[Answer] m's position with regard to oil prices is a position of transition
from a system of administered prices to a system of supervised prices. This po-
sition stems from a careful. deliberate evaluation of the effects that the methods
of operation of the mechanism for determining prices have had on the nation's oil
system. It is not merely a question of losses. serious however. that the delay

in price adjustments has brought about. but also and especially of the distorting
effects produced on the market as a result of the artificial price level maintained
on the domestic market.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These effects can be sumarized, by simplifying, in a situation of instability

of the market, owing to flights especially by smaller operators in periods of
reduced suitability, with negative repercussions for the BN1 Group, which not only
has to make up supply shortages in those periods precisely when this is most bur-
densome, but it is also thus subjected to artificial pressures and to constant
variations in market quotations themselves.

[Qwstion] Two objections that can be made to liberalization of the market are:

a. How can ENI maintain a "controlling" function of price tensions. when it has
higher production costs than the other enterprises?

b. 0n the other hand. how could BN1 support competition by the other operators
favored by lower costs? Would not 3111 run the risk of being restricted to the
less attractive market segments (fuel oil) and excluded from gasoline and gas oils?

[Answer] The assumption that BN1 is "structurally" in a situation of inferiority
with regard to the other operators in the oil cycle is unrealistic. If this were
so, we would not ask for a transition to a system of price supervision. At any
rate, it is true that up to the middle of 1981 EN! recorded an average cost of

$37.50 a barrel FOB for supplies, a price higher than the average on the domestic
market, amounting to $36 a barrel FOB.

This difference was due to the greater presence of Saudi Arabian crude at official
prices and of spot crudes in the pool of the other suppliers.

In order to cope with this kind of situation, we adopted “hard" policy with regard
to the more expensive crudes. At present. we are not withdrawing crudes from
Libya and we have cut off purchases of more expensive crudes.

Precisely in view of a more pronounced cometitive position of BN1. actions have
been scheduled for optimizing the oil cycle. They include:

a. Search for a pool as economical as possible and suitable for the refining and
final market structure of AGIP in Italy and for their evolution.

b. Search for products to incorporate in the oil cycle in connection of optimiza-
tion of the preceding point.

C. Development of a transportation system that will minimize stops and will optimize
runs for the purpose of obtaining the best economic results.

Returning to the matter of donestic prices. I believe that a plurality of operators
is in the country's general interest. Achievement of this objective can be guaran-
teed only if those who operate in Italy have the possibility of making a profit,
even with all the cyclical fluctuations. In view of this. how does the problem

of "supervision" come up with regard to the present system of price "administra-
tion"? "Supervision"iuedistely adjusts the price to the variations in costs. while
"administration" always entails a government decision with all. the political pro-
blems resulting from it. Moreover, supervised price must have very precise limits
of its own. They are established by the situation of prices in the European coun-
tries that are, at present. a reference for establishing administered price levels.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Who is to ascertain this? In my opinion, the state should use its "secular arm,"

that is to say Elli/AGE, which should calculate what the averages are for prices
of oil products by referring to European prices.

[Question] Let us go on to analyze some problems inherent in Bill's organizational
strmcueo

BN1 employs 1,500 persons in central functions. Also, excluding personnel assigned
to many different ministries (about 500 persons), as: shows an employment in the

holding comany greater “than the number of eqloyees in considerably larger multi -
national companies.

[Answer] A cmarison between different organizations, like the holding caspany
of a multinational corporation and the holding company of a group with state par—
ticipation does not seen to me entirely acceptable.

There are functions and procedures pertaining to the role of a public agency that
involve the esployment of special personnel not found in a private international
organization. The obligation of establishing the interface of public administration
structures with a bureaucratic nature causes a certain degree of bureaucratic pro-
liferation also at the level of economic agencies. like BN1. I believe, however,
that the problems should be regarded from a different point of view. Two motives
and two organizational conceptions have been superimposing themselves on each other
and intertwining with each other in the history of the agency: what we can call
strong centralization, with the maximm number of functions concentrated in the
holding comany, and a more coordinated structure. with increasing room for auto-
may for the operational companies. achieved, however, in forms that are not expli-
cit or institutional and often in uncertain ways. The structure of the holding
company did not succeed every time in adjusting to these changes in organizational
policy. thus causing a gradual increase in personnel. A situation that is not
always clear is derived from this, with sedimntation of organizational structure.
loss of importance of roles. proliferation of duties, and so on.

The problem. now, is not oneof establishing the "cut" to which the personnel are

to be subjected, as it is one of reidentification of areas and Emotions of the
holding company and of the company, within a strategy for objectives that will
enable the Group to have all the services, first of all activation of the strategic
and operational managerial function. in order to establish the relationship between
volume of competences and professionality and the objectives.

[Question] Still in connection with personnel, BN1 is faced with two very important
problems:

a. The departure from the Group by some very outstanding persons of the second
generation. I. am thinking in particular of Bgidio Egidi and Lorenzo Roasio.

b. An appreciable imbalance in the age structure of the executive class, in view
of the importance of the experience factor in managing enterprises in the energy
sector.

To what do you attribute the first phenomenon and how does BN1 intend to overcome
the second?

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] With regard to the first point. obviously avoiding an attempt to interpret
personal evaluations that were the basis for specific decisions, it seems to me

that the subject should be brought to a more general level than the level of anal-
yses of the internal operational conditions of the Group. Constantly more exten-
sively and comprehensively. the management of a public industrial group is obliged

to face up to the impact of an outside reality; of a political reality in the broad-
est sense, that affects its terms of operation. its inclinations and definitely »
its choices. In this context. departure from the Group can b) regarded as a response
on the individual level.

Concerning the second point. I should like to point out how change at the top levels
of the individual companies has always been rather frequent at the operational

. and managerial level. The situation between a company and a holding company is
different. especially in the holding company and company administration. In this
case. a problem is involved that stems from the generally too sectoral and special-
ized characterization of the executive group of the holding company to which is
added. at present, a certain degree of heaviness of the average age.

[Question] In the 1950's and the 1960's. BN1 represented a formidable reference
point in the growth and regeneration of the Italian industrial system. representing
an almost unique example of "compactness" of the administrative group and providing
Italy, along with other state participation enterprises. with a new "lay" techno-
cracy, that is to say outside the large industrial families. Both the first and
the second statement could certainly not be repeated today.. The "divisions" within
the Group (between ”peripherals" and "centrals." between executives and top level
of the holding company, between company and company. and so on) prevail over forces
of unity. raising important questions on the very capability of the Group to respond.
under similar conditions. to the new tasks imposed by the country. Connected with
this problem is the still more critical problemyon which the first one perhaps
depends. of the relations between 2N1 and political parties. How far have these
relations "degenerated"? And how could they be properly revived?

[Answer] I an answering the three questions jointly. because they are closely
connected and also. in some way, form a conjecture: degeneration of the relations
between institutions. political forces. public economic agencies. dequalification
and division of the administrative group. It is a conjecture that. naturally.

has firm. varied confirmation factors. but that requires some specifications and
differentiations.

The situation of extraordinary "compactness of the executive group," pointed out
in the question. had its origin in special and, in part, unrepentable conditions
that should be pointed out:

[a.] The particular time in the history of BET. a time characterized by the success
of the initial battle for methane that offered the basis and the opportunity for

an authentic explosion of initiatives. requiring in turn creation of new organiza-
tional. technical and entrepreneurial instruments. and all that on the basis of

a small initial nucleus and. therefore. excited over the great opportunities that
were opening up to it.

lb.) The country's general climate, a climate of reconstruction. of common convic-
tion on specific value. of enthusiasm in participating in a great process of indus-
trialization.

1h
FOR OFF-1C1“. USE ONLY
[UK UPI'ILIAI. use UNI-Y

1c.) The nature of a "challenge" taken on by the operations of m, a challenge
with regard to the industrial potentates, the mythical seven sisters, but also
.private industry, entrenched in rigidly antistatiat positions.

[d..] Also the situation at that ties reduced the impact with the political world

predominantly to a relationship at the top level. in particular between government
and enterprise.

When there isa transition from a phase of prevailing creative drive to a phase

of prevailing operation, spaces close up. frictions-«lac for objective reasons--
increase. noral tensions are attenuated. Pronthis point of view, I would not over-
eatinate the indicated motives for division. Although there certainly are perverse
"noti'ves" in then, they are also the result of real difficulties that can find
their solution, only if there is a desire for one and it is known how to seek it.

At present. the country is, just as it was perhaps in the postwar period. confronted
by a new turning point. What has been achieved is creaking and risks collapsing.
New incentives, new ideas and the courage for new entrepreneurial challenges are
needed. And the situation of BNI reflects the country's situation. today just

as it did at that tire.

The Group is energing from a phase of magerial sluggishness to start off on new
courses, in energy, in chemistry, pursuing lines of more definite opening out into
the international field. seeking and creating conditions of innovation. In the
face of innovative events-~like the agreement with Occidental---there has not yet
been. both within and outside the Group, that kind of response and support that
we night have expected.

We have the duty to develop-with renewed attention to the organizational force ,
that is to say by seeking ways for a definite resumption of a "teen "dialogue and
with a different spirit of participation and consensus—a suitable clients for

a bold. binding program.

In order to be able to operate in this way, it is indispensable for the shareholder
to act rapidly to eliminate situations within the Group that end by causing dis-
order and disorientation that are objectively intolerable for the purpose of
achieving final success.

If we know how to operate in this way, we shall also find an answer to the problen
of the "degeneration" of relations between an and public institutions, between

BN1 and political parties. It is not a question of closing the doors. but of making
distorted interpretations of the nature of those relations constantly less possible.

[Question] In view of the challenges that ENI is called upon to make, it is possible.
therefore. according to you, to reconstruct an agency that has in itself a greater
possibility of determining itself its own strategy, of facing up to the outside,

of finding. through this challenge. a new force of unity?

[Answer] Aside fron what may be affected optimises. the objective is certainly
possible. An effort by everyone is needed. however. It nuat be realised that
an instrument of wealth like Bill cannot be used for power maneuvers, but only for
operations tied with the creation of wealth. If I met give an optimistic note

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

with regard to everything pertaining to the future, I shall give it after having
read the Anato report. a report that. although with a need for suitable revisions,
is a very valuable and iaportant docullsnt, if it succeeds in being the point of
reitrence of the reform of the system of state participation.

Trend of 3111's Instantaneous Operational Margin in 1981
(situation resulting fro: the Interninisterial Price Conittee action
on 30 October 1981 and from the OPEC resolution of 29 October 1981)

 

FOB cost of Lira/dollar (:1? cost of Return on the Operational

iaported oil exchange rate imported raw rav laterial margin

(8 a barrel) material from the in- (lire per ton)

(lire per ton) ternational
narket (lire
per ton)

Honth (A) (3) (C - B - A)
1980
Dec 33.50 930 237.000 222.000 -15.000
1981
Jan 37.50 953 271.000 234.000 -37.000
Feb 37 . 50 1.020 290 .000 257.000 ~33 .000
Mar 37 .90 1.037 297 .000 257.000 ~40 .000
Apr 37.90 1.076 310.000 257.000 -53.000
Jun 35 . 80 1.184 321 .000 273.000 -48.000
Jul 35 . 30 1.215 325 .000 283 .000 -42 .000
Aug 35 . 10 - 1, 245 330 .000 283 .000 -47.000
Sep 34.30 1.187 308.000 283.000 -2S,000
Oct. 33.70 1.180 301.000 283.000 -l8,000
Now' 34 .10 1. 200 309.000 297.000 ' -12 .000
Dec* 34 . 10 1. 200 309.000 297 .000 -12.000

* Estimates.

commu'r: L'Edltrice dell'Autonobila LEA-Rona 1980

10.042
680: 3104/91

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(M$KJALlSE(ﬂﬁJ

POLITICAL NETHERLANDS

DISSENSION, INTERNAL PROBLEMS OF LABOR PART!
Amsterdam VRIJ NEDERLANW in Dutch 23 Jan 82 pp 1, 2

[Irticle oy correspondents Peike Salverda, Jeroen Terlingen and Max
van Veezel: ”Panic in the PvdA [Labor Partx7”

[Texﬁ7 Like King William II changed from conserq
vative to liberal in 48 hours, Max van den Berg
changed after a weekend of deliberation from
radical to realist.

Lucky for him, he does not stand alone. His
entire Second Chamber group is drawing up the
New Course: tax relief for business men, higher
premiums for employees and benefit recipients.

Only Joop den Uyl still keeps up their courage
during the stay in the woods.

The PvdA is receiving therapy.

At long last, the PvdA Executive Committee is frightened to death,
witness the statements at the end of the first retreat weekend. ””he
party is in disorder,” ”great panic prevails.” Not the unemployment
figures, industrial shutdown, and the treasury deficits produced»
this frame of mind in the officials, but the continuing drop in the
polls. The electorate threatens to shrink 30 percent in a year's
time, members walk out monthly in groups of five hundred.

few party leaders overlook the political consequences of the Wagner

Committee report on industry, or the economy proposals and part time
studies of top officials. All the sharper before their eyes are the
analyses of.thc PvdA chief for market research, Kees Bode, framer of
the melodiously titled, but, moreover, not very encouraging reports

such as "The Dull Inconvenience" and "The Great Journey"--accordinn

to 0'66 [Democrats '6ﬁ7 vell understandable by the PvdA.

The PvdA Executive Committee has already learned one lesson from the
Jan Terlouv club; it is concerned about image projection, not about

17
F0!(HﬂﬂCUU.USE(NNLY
FORIOFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

the content of the policy followed. Policy must be adjusted if it

is necessary to improve image projection. An executive committee
member said Tuesday morning,summarizing Bode's recommendations: "The
PvdA's policy is not wrong, but the party's style, spirit, atmosphere
and influence are not suitable. The party must come across differ-
ently.

That image-—n reading of Bode's internal notes indicates--cnn be sum-
med up in the following, not very flattering characterizations: the
PvdA is not credible--the party makes promises year in, year out,
which it knows will not be kept; the PvdA is incapable-the apparatus
docs not function, executive committee, party council, congresses

and division meetings are distinguished by great mutual dissension;
the PvdA is demanding-~it issues ultimatums, gives no arguments.

Under the heading "New Course," the new Max van den Berg declared on
Monday in NRC HANDELSBLAD the switch which was discussed for 2 days

in the Speulderhos hotel in the Guelders Garderen. Its key words
appear to be borrowed directly from adjutant Bode's advertising jar—
gon: "attitude," "communications disturbance," ”information,“ 'sort of
short circuits," "credibility.”

Van den Berg's face-lift has until now especially psychological sig-
nificance, that applies especially to the social security of the
party chairman himself, who does not want to tie his fate any longer
to the not very promising prospects of the left wing. Van den Berg
said in NRC HANDELSBLAD: "I myself was identified earlier with a
certain wing in the party, but now I say we must integrate much more,
it is now sink or swim."

Regarding the weekend of deliberation itself, really only Friday
evening itself was worth reporting--consequently as for the rest,
people were confused. The political leader (Den Uyl) considered it
his duty here to keep up their spirits. One party leader said: "Den
Uyl held a pep talk and, as in all pep talks, it had no content."
Another leader said: "Den Uyl acted very self-confident. It was
almost amusing. he sat there beaming, looking around and only things
came out like: fellows, things are going well, we will pull through
all right.”

Two incidents that Friday evening illustrated that it involved here

a meeting of the leadership of a political association. State Secre-
tary Hans Kombrink who wants to remain longer at the Ministry of
Finance, expressed a view, which showed surprising agreement with
that of his present chief,Doctor of Laws Fons van der Stee. Chairman
Van der Berg, in a report issued (PB No 102 1981/82) about the econo-
mies which the PvdA had pledged itself to in the current budget year
felt himself bound to a maximum: "5 billion is the limit and already
unusually heavy. State Secretary Kombrink, whom it may be assumed

18
FOR(NWKJALLSE(”HX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has been entrusted with the scope of the spring report to appear in
6 weeks, declined in advance such an umpteenth limitation. If the
PvdA wants to continue to govern and, nevertheless, wants to main—
tain the connection between minimum wages and minimum benefit, then
more must be saved in government expenditures, more than 5 billion.
The executive committee listened to him.. Vim Heijer spoke in a con-
ciliatory fashion. Minister Van Dam remained hidden behind his news-
paper the rest of the evening. No decision was taken.

The Van der Louw Lobby (represented at the weekend of deliberation
by Meijer, Peper, Kombrink and Kayne den Bak—-the latter is at the
same time political consultant of the Minister of Culture, Recreation
and Social Welfare) directed its attack on the party itself. With
Heyne den Bak in the lead, the lobby wanted to subject the entire
party leadership to shock therapy. The leadership does not under—
stand the country's problems. hat was quite obvious from all the
protests against the proposed economies in the Health Insurance Act

benefits—-while even much more was in store for them.

The prevailing ideas of the party leadership must be reformed as soon
as possible. Den Uyl advised against the recommended theraPY. Peper
moderated Den Bnk's words. The proposal was held over.

"hen it came as a surprise for everyone that Max van den Berg an-
nounced the New Course Monday, completely on his own initiative and,
moreover, pledged himself to a minimum economy of 5 billion ("let us
first try to achieve the 5 billion“) and, by the way, gave up his

own main point of controversy (closing of the nuclear power plants in
Borssele and Dedewaard). The PvdA is doing its utmost, on the eve of
the election campaigns before town councils and Provincial Estates,
the result of which is predictable, to remain acceptable afterwards
to the CDA [Christian Democratic AppeaI7, which can then again take
the road of a majority cabinet with the VVD [reople's Party for Free-
dom and Democracy7. Van den Berg's about-face anticipates that de-
velopment. If the CDA continues to tolerate the PvdA longer as a
government partner, the reel struggle will not break out in it, the
struggle about more economies in social security, the struggle about
whether or not there will be any fundamentally different setup of the
benefit system. Den Uyl is against that, but his top officials, the
CDA and parts of the PvdA want to reduce all employee benefits to
half the minimum plus an individual extra allowance to ether at the
most:_a full minimum benefit. (see VN [VRIJE NEDERLANQ , 20 June
1981). There is also the struggle about whether or not a reduction
of the WAC [paw on Labor Disabilitj7 benefit; whether or not compul—

sory work for 18 to 20 year olds and whether or not a jobs plan.

New Retreat

The party executive committee may still not have made any political
decision but the Second Chamber group has already begun with that.

19

FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY
FORiﬂWKJALlﬁifﬂﬂuy

The group is going back into the woods next weekend (at the confer-
ence resort of the Federal Savings Bank in Doorn). One day is re-
served for outside speakers to come and express their opinions about
the PvdA. The conclusion will perhaps be identical (not credible,
incapable, demanding), but the motivation will differ: am ng the
guests of the roup are both Mient Jan Faber of the IKV nterchurch
Peace Counci and Dr Ruding of the Amro Bank Vim Kok of the FNV
[Netherlands Trade Union Federatiop7 and Jan ﬁogterom of the Associa—

tion for the Preservation of the Vadden Zoo.

The second day could be of more political significance, because then
the parliamentary group, party executive committee and officials Max
van den Berg and Vim Heijer may listen. The subject for both of them
is the New ourse. What that implies, Vim Heijer has managed to ex-
plain very cloarly for a week and a half, supported as he is by a
confidential memorandum from the deputy chairman of his parliamentary
group, Arie Van der Hek. Van der ﬂak is by nature a realist, although
long before Van der Louw with his supporters decided to be so. It is
all the more remarkable that Van der Hek's work ("Concerning: Social
and financial-economic policy for 1982") was not questioned during a
rather detailed discussion in the group Tuesday last week, while there

was every reason for that.

Van der Hek writes, taking a relative view, about the purchasing power
of the lowest paid: "The condition of this income is not absolutely
firm in terms of purchasing power, but may drop less than every other
income." Yith that the PvdA group opens the way for a purchasing power
drop of the lowest paid which exceeds 1 percent. He discusses, with
precisely such a relative view, the income leveling which his political
leader, Den Uyl, stuck to, until now. The parliamentary group's report
declares: ”The figures--l percent and--4 percent are moreover, arbi-
trary for they are based on a method of computation whose validity
must he questioned in advance."

Van der ﬂek thinks that the PvdA emphasizes too little that restora-

tion of the economy is a condition for new employment opportunity.
"is report says: 'He are not taken seriously about the goal of eco-

nomic recovery.

His opinion about the job plans of the individual ministers is: ﬁThe
PvdA must avoid counting out Jobs from inconsistent plans, by manipu-
lating election platforms and government agreements, isolated from

social conditions."

Van der ﬂek frankly chooses "tax relief for the employers (the govern-
ment included)." He gave the parliamentary group the choice. In the
first place: separate the benefits from the wages and thus keep the
benefits down. Second option: no separation, but let the employers

20
FOR(NWﬂﬂALlEE1MNuy
FOR(WFKJALUSBONEY

pay a smaller premium to the social funds and let the workers and
benefit recipients pay a higher premium. Third possibility: no sepa-
ration, but reduce the gross wages.

Van der Hek rejected the first option at the present time (because
he opposes separation)_and the third (because he opposes government

involvement in wages for years). The second possible choice remains.
That means that the PvdA favors reduction of net wages and benefits.
The report says: I"l'he released funds help to restore the competitive
position, but now the costs of it are paid by all workers and benefit
recipients together."

Van der Hek thinks that, besides the PvdA, the trade union movement
must also publicly commit itself to the choice of his second alterna-
tive. If that does not happen, then the PvdA will have to drop its
opposition to separation. he confidential report says: "Coalition
partners and the trade union movement would have to expressly commit
themselves to 2. to prevent drifting toward 1.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 VN/BV Veekbladpers

8490
030: 3105/94

21
FOR€WFKJAL1§EtNﬂX
IIIICHNHCJA1.USE(NULY

MILITARY FRANCE

4""

DEPBNSB BUDGET FOR 1982 OUTLINED: AIR FORCE SEEN LACKINC FUNDS
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 21 Nov 81 pp 11, 12, 64

[Article by J.G.: "The National Assembly Passes the 1982 Defense Budgetuthe De-
fense Council Has Passed Several Measures Concerning the Nuclear Porces"]

[Text] On Saturday 15 November 1981, the deputies to the National Assembly com-
pleted examination of the draft defense budget for 1982, discussion of which had
opened the day before. while the minister of defense, Charles Hernu, was announc-
ing in the Assembly that the Defense Council had recently decided “to start on con-
struction of a seventh missile-launching nuclear submarine" and that "the program
authorizations had been provided for starting in 1982 the first studies on a system
intended to succeed the Pluton," the Elysee's press department was issuing a com-
munique announcing the following decisions, reached at a Defense Council meeting
held on 30 October last:

--a seventh submarine, representing a new generation, will be built, to be placed
in service before the middle of the next decade;

--the number of missile-launching nuclear submarines on permanent patrol will be
raised to three within the next few years; equipping of them with the new multiple-
warhead H-b missiles will be continued;

--the Pluton tactical nuclear missile will be replaced, when it reaches the end of
its service lifetime, by a new ground-to-ground missile of greater range, to be
called the Hades, whose payloads will be defined later;

--a new ground-to-ground mobile ballistic missile will be developed; this new stra-
tegic weapons system will succeed the Mirage IV's when they are retired from ser-
vice.

Anxiety of the Air Force Budget Rapporteur

Before the statement by the minister, who was to justify the main options of the
defense policy as conceived by Mr Hauroy's government and defend the broad outlines
of his draft budget for 1982, Loic Bouvard, advisory rapporteur for the Air Force
budget, had told the Assembly of his anxiety, based on "several defects," which we
smarise briefly: "The military programing law had provided that 22.27 percent of
the defense credits should be allocated to the Air section. Each year saw an ad-
vance toward that objective. But in 1982, the trend takes an unfavorable turn, and
from 21.25 percent of the defense budget in 1981, the Air section will drop to only
21.12 percent in 1982. The target is thus receding. The most direct result of

22
FIIICHWHCJAI.USEGNVLY
M UI'I'ILIAI. USP. URL!

this harmful evolution is at the level of the program authorisations that lay the
groundwork for the future. In effect, the program authorizations for the Air sec-
tion will renain below the Fr 20 billion threshold next year, and on the basis of
the probable rise in the cost of military supplies, it will decrease in value as
compared to 1981."

The rapporteur then enumerated,_in his speech, the four harmful effects of the
slowdown of the effort which, in his judgment, characterizes the 1982 budget:

"First of all, the reduction in orders of Mirage 2000's depressing the potential of
our air defense. '

"The Mirage-2000 building program is already 2 years behind schedule.... Hhile the
first assembly-line planes, in the version designed for air defense, may be deliv-
ered in 1983. they will not at that time be fitted with their definitive engine or
with the most highly developed radar, which will not be available in quantity until
1986. Meanwhile, the Mirage 2000 will fly with the excellent radar with which the
Mirage F1 is presently equipped; but that radar is not the best-suited for inter-
ception of airplanes attempting low-altitude intrusion.

"There is thus a delay in the technical completion of the Mirage 2000, but there is
also a lag in the orders for the plane.... The Mirage 2000 was initially to equip
the Air Force in 1982. since that target could not be reached, the orders for Mi-
rage Pl's were increased. But next year, instead of ordering 50 Mirage 2000's, as
planned, it will be possible to order only 25, for lack of credits. Thanks to this
drastic economy measure, the Air Force, in View of the austerity imposed on it, re-
covers a certain mass of funds for maneuvering with that will enable it to cope
with its other needs one way or another.

"But the consequences of this forced economy may be serious in the long term. For
the men, first of all: the lag in orders for the equivalent of a squadron of Mirage
2000's will make it necessary to keep a squadron of Mirage Ill's in service longer.
But this latter plane, which was excellent 15 years ago, will be run down in a few
years, despite its legendary touchness. The repetition of such an operation an-
other time could not at this point be done without risk to the life of the men who
will pilot the plane.

"There is a seriOus consequence also for the Air Force's capacity: it will not be
possible to reduce the Mirage 2000 orders another year without the Air Force's be-
ing forced to decrease the number of the £50 planes that the imperatives of our de-
fense make it necessary to put into service.

"Secondly, the shortage in our stocks of combat munitions at the end of l982-—that
is, at the time when the next draft budget is being prepared-~will be on the order
of one-third, as regards shells for 30-1. cannons, 'bombs, munitions for the ZO-m
twin-tube antiaircraft gun and Crotales. The shortage will remain on the order of
30 percent for air-to-air missiles; and it will not be made up for the air-to-
ground rockets.

"Thirdly, our military air transport's long-distance capacity remains insufficient.
The insufficient load capacity and range of our Transalls are known. To be sure,
25 Transalls capable of being refuelled in flight were ordered from 1978 to 1981;

,-

23
FIMR OFFIClAl.lEiE(HVLY
FIN!(NHN(JAI.USIE(HVLY

but no additional orders are planned either in 1982 or later. But the Nord 2501's,
some 100 of which are still flying, will not be replaced one for one. In addition,
the Transall cannot be used to carry powerful armored vehicles, of the AMX 30 type
or the new AMX 10 RC. Thus our external-intervention--'external-assistance'--
troops...can be supported only by light armored cars.... One can only deplore the
fact that our military transport facilities are not always coherent with our rc-
sponsibilities, our cummitments and our strategy, and that nothing in the draft
budget is planned for remedying this situation. The re-engining of the fuel
planes, though useful in any case, is not a response adequate to the seriousness of
the problem: we continue to have imperative need of a heavy long-range transport
plane.

"Fourthly, the modernization of the low-altitude defense of our bases is progress-
ing too lowly. A plan exists for achieving this result, to be sure, but its ful-
fillment is far too slow. In 1982, the credits will make it possible to build only
28 new shelters for airplanes and to provide doors for only 66 shelters. The annu-
al ordering of S6 20mmn twin-tube guns does not compensate for the crying absence
of a missile that is effective against planes flying at very low altitude, which
could in this way thwart our air defense.... To remedy this deficiency, the gov-
ernment appears to be leaning toward purchase, in the United States, of a Grumman
E-ZC Hawkeye airborne radar system. This system, in service in the American Navy
since 1976, is about five times less expensive than the Boeing AWACS [Airborne
Warning and Control System], but achieves performance characteristics that are
still compatible with the dimensions of French territory and the specific needs of
our defense...."

Thirty Mirage 2000's Ordered

The minister of defense, in his long address, desired to alleviate Loic Bouvard's
anxiety, specifying in particular "that at least 30 orders (of Mirage 2000's) will
be made between now and 1983. The first Mirage 2000 planes will be equipped with
multimode Doppler radar..., with better performance characteristics than the pres-
ent radar with which the Mirage F1 is equipped. Furthermore, the Air Force will
order 30 Epsilon planes.

"Protection of the air bases remains one of the priorities of the Air Force, which
has devoted an ambitious 7-year plan to it. Fifty-six 20-mm antiaircraft batteries
will be ordered in 1982, raising the total of orders in 6 years to 272, which is
120 more than the program law. At the same time, 28 concrete shelters for air-
planes, and ll underground PC's [Command Posts] will be built, by means of infra-
structure payments that total Pr 982 million in payment credits, which is an in-
crease of 36 percent over 1981."

The Nuclear Forces

As regards nuclear armament, strategic and tactical, the minister gave the follow-
in specifics:

"The credits devoted to the nuclear forces...will total Pr 20.135 billion in pro-

gram authorizations and Fr 16.499 billion in credit payments. The increase in pro-
gram authorizations is considerably sharper than for Title V as a whole: 20.6 per-

cent as against 12.5 percent. Their proportion of the total equipment budget thus

goes up quite a bit, from 25.9 percent to 27.8 percent.

2%
FOR OFFICJAI.IEHECMVLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

"The increase in credit payments is 18.3 percent, which keeps the part of Title V
devoted to the national strategic force and to tactical nuclear weaponry at 30.(
percent. The credits earmarked for the air component of the deterrent force cover
essentially the expenditures connected with the Hirage IV, the equipment of which
with electronic countermeasures is strengthened; with the 0-135 refuelling planes,
which will be re-engined with CPU 56 jets developed jointly by SNECHA [National
Aircraft Engine Design and Construction Company] and General Electric; and with the
medium-range air-to-ground missile with which a squadron of five Mirage lV's will
be equipped in 1985.

"...The program authorizations provided for the strategic naval force, an essential
component of our deterrent force, total Pr 3.6 billion, up 30 percent from 1981.
This increase reflects the continuance of construction of the sixth missile-launch-
ing nuclear submarine, the “lnflexible,” which will enter the operational cycle in
1985, equipped with the new H—é multiple-warhead missile. The strategic naval
force also has to prepare for the refitting of the missile-launching nuclear sub-
marines, which will receive the new H-é missiles starting in 1987. Finally, the
missile-launching nuclear submarines presently in service have to be maintained, at
least, in operating condition.

"...For nuclear experimentation, a program-authorisations total is allocated that
makes it possible, as-regards the part transferred to the atomic testing center, to
continue the test-explosion programs, and as regards the armed-forces part, to fin-
ance the expenditures for infrastructure and for materiel equipment.

"...Finally, as regards tactical nuclear weaponry, the credits provided make it
possible to finance the AN-SZ weapon, the medium-range air-to-ground missile and
the Pluton weapons system."

As regards the Army, the minister specified in particular, with reference to mis-
siles, that the Milan will still be delivered in 1982 but will not be ordered any
longer; that 38 speciments of the Hot will be ordered, which exceeds the targets of
the program law; but that on the other hand, the orders for Roland ground-to-air
missiles "will not make it possible to make up for the shortfalls accumulated dur-
ing the preceding 10 years"--though this will be done in 1983.

For the Navy, the minister stressed, three airplanes (Editor's Note: They are Pal-
con 20's) will be ordered in 1982 in pursuance of the same program aimed at giving
our country means for action on the high seas--means that are commissioned by the
- Navy but on the operational level come under the minister of maritime affairs.

The Armed Forces' Activities

with reference to the armed forces' activities, the minister stated: "For the Air
Force, the objective of 500,000 hours of flying time. which represents minimum
training time for the combat pilots, the carrying-out of transport missions and
general training of personnel, has had to be reduced to £19,000 hours. This has
been made possible only by the decrease in the number of pilots per plane, which
has gradually gone down from 1.6 to 1.2

"For the air forces, 706,000 m3 of jet fuel and 16,000 m3 of aviation gasoline will
be provided in 1982, so as to reach total annual activity on the order of 620,000

25
son omCIAL use ONLY
FOI(MHHCJA1.USEIIVLY

hours of flying time, making it possible to provide the combat pilots with 180
hours per year on an armed plane, to preserve the present level of active flying
time for the navigatin-personnel schools, and for transport aviation to meet the
armed forces' needs."

Research

The research programs to be continued in 1982 are:

--for the Army: the main combat vehicle to succeed the aux-30, the antitank heli-
copter, and the engineers' armored vehicle;

--for the Air Force: development of the Mirage 2000; its air-to-air weaponry; the
laser-guided bombardment systems; the H-88 engine;

--for the Navy: development of the SNA's [Nuclear Attack Submarines], of the mine-
sweepers, the antiaircraft and antisubmsrine’corvettea and their weapons systems:
DRBJ [expansion unknown] 11 radar, sonars. missiles, and in particular the SH-39
antisurface missile. capable of being fired from a submerged submarine.

Exportation of Armaments

The minister of defense gave extensive information relative to exportation of arms-
ments, specifying in particular:

--the chairmen and rapporteurs of the parliamentary committees on defense and fin-
ance will henceforth receive, when they are made, the texts of the intergovernment-
al agreements governing programs that result in authorizations and grantings of
credits in the name of the Ministry of Defense;

-likevise. each transcation involving the granting of program authorizations under
Article 29 of the decision of 16 July 1966, which makes it possible to initiate
early orders for'foreign purchasers, will likewise be communicated to the chairmen
and rapporteurs; "

--every 6 months, these personages will receive a note summarizing the situation.of
our war-materiel exports.

These data will comprise in particular the state of the orders and deliveries for
the previous 6-month period, details on these operations by broad categories of
materiel, and a breakdown of the sales as between the 0800 [Organisation for Eco-
nomic Cooperation and Development] zone and regions outside the OECD.

In Favor: 393 Votes

The 1982 defense budget was passed by 393 votes to 83, out of #80 eligible to vote.
Three deputies of the RPR [Rally for the Republic] group-~harcel Dassault, 6. de
Benouville and Charles Haby--voted for the budget.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

11267
cso: 3100/269

26
F0!(HﬂﬂChULlEIEOhﬂN
lTMl€IﬂﬂCLALIlSE¢HHLY

MILITARY FRANCE

DEFENSE MINISTRY VIEWS POUR OPTIONS IN AIR DETECTION SYSTEM
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 28 Nov, 5 Dec 81

[Article by 3.6.: "France Seeks an Airborne Detection System--Grumman's z-zc Hawk-
eye Is One Possible Solution; There Are Others"]

[28 Nov 81 p 33]

[Excerpts] It is nothing new that the effectiveness of the means of detection that
the French air defense has for opposing penetration of enemy craft into the nation-
al air space is not perfect. .Hhile coverage of all of the territory at high and
medium altitudes is total, it proves in any case insufficient. even very weak, at
low altitude, since the threat at this level has become the preponderant one, be-
cause of the increase of the ranges of action of modern airplanes. In order for
French air defense to remain loo-percent credible, this defect must imperatively be
remedied. ' '

since the number of radar stations on the ground that one would have to have in or-
der to ensure effectively a homogeneous and continuous low-altitude coverage is far
too high for a ground-based solution to be envisioned in practical and economic
terms, airborne detection is the only other way to solve the problem.

For its part, the Air Force-which, in cooperation with the other armed forces and
within a broadly interministerial framework, fills a major role in the organization
' on which air defense rests in France--has a choice among four solutions today: two
already existing airplanes, the Boeing B-3A and the Grumman B-ZC, can function as
airborne detection platforms; and two oterh proposals can be considered, constitut-
ing the other two options: a Transall, the Franco-PKG plane, equipped wither with
an AER (Airborne Early warning) system developed by Marconi for the Nimrod Mk 3, or
a system largely derived from the one developed by Grumman, who is an outstanding
specialist in logical applications. for the most recent version of the 8-20 Hawkeye
in service in the 0.8. Navy.

At the beginning of this week, the Grumman company invited to its Bethpage (Long
Island, New York) installations, where the 2-20 hawkeye is assembled, a small group
of French journalists, both to present the plane to them (and the concept on which
its use is based) and to show them the diversification of the company's activities
and communicate its desire to try to develop closer relations with the French aero-
space industry and conclude agreements with other French industrial sectors.

27
Ft"!()FFlC1AI.lHiB(HVLY
within the framework of this action, at the time that the signing of the important
contract signifying the breakthrough of the Ariane launcher into the United States
was announced in France (see Pierre Langareux's article on page 39), a representa-
tivs of Arianespace present at Bethpage stressed the action and role of Grumman in
that operation. He admitted that when Arianespace was created 18 months ago, the
very idea of orders from the United States was unthinkable. He explained the suc-
cess of Grumman's action by the knowledge that the American builder has of space
problems and the potential market for Ariane launchers in the United States.

in the specifically aeronautical,srea, Grumman has already had or expects to have
contacts with some French industrial firms. To some, proposals have been made for
possible transactions (this is the case with Thomson-CS? [General Radio Company],
Crouzet, Turbomeca). Others, such as SOGBRHA [cirondine Company for the Mainten-
ance and Repair of Aeronautical Equipment], have expressed interest in possible
heavy-maintenance work, on the hypothesis that the French government orders a num-
ber of Hawkeyes.

[5 Dec 81 p 23]

[Excerpts] The Ministry of Defense, for its part, has already received the com-
plete results, communicated by the Air Force, of the second operational evaluation
of the s-zc Hawkeye carried out at Hont-de-Harsan last April. The results are pos-
itive in many respects, though some serious uncertainties remain. In order to form
a more precise idea of the comparative merits and disadvantages of the two planes,
the Ministry of Defense has asked its departments to carry out a comparative study,
the conclusions of which should be submitted to it by 15 April 1982 at the latest.

Boeing, which last Tuesday presented to the press the E-3A AHACS in the standard
version for the U.S. Air Force and for NATO (see following pages). limited itself
to stating that it had not to date submitted any bid to the French Air Force, since
the latter has not told the Seattle builder anything about its operational specifi-
cations.

The price announced is $78 million (1981 value) for the equipped plane at the
plant. Questioned about the cost of training the monitors responsible for exploit-
ing the data during operational missions, the Boeing representatives declared that
‘ they could not give an exact figure. Questioned about the hourly fuel consumption
of the AHACS, they indicated 6,815 liters.

Two information missions comprising engineers of the DCA [expansion unknown] and
officers of the Air Force visited the Tinker base of the U.S. Air Force (this base
provides the support for the AHACS fleet) and Boeing (Loic Bouvard's report) a few
months ago. But Boeing has not been informed of the commentaries drawn up on the
French side at the conclusion of these information flights.

The Air Force is not presently considering carrying out a full-scale evaluation.of
the AHACS over French territory. It is intending to call on NATO for gathering all
the information that it will consider useful. Hithin its budget limits, the Air
Force is certainly not in a position to envision acquiring as many AHACS as hawk-
eyes; in both cases, a minimum of four planes is necessary. If other ministries
participate in the financing of the B-3A, by virtue of the pluriministerial charac-
ter of air defense in France. the choice would not be posed in the same terms--on
condition, of course, that the participation of the other ministries concerned is
not a symbolic one.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1981

11267
CSO: 3100/268

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIII¢HDWC1AI.USEGMNLY

MILITARY - FRANCE

. HELICOPTER DIVISION CRISP DISCUSSBS TRENDS, PRODUCTION, R 6 D
Paris AIR ET COSMOS in French 19 Dec 81 pp 27-31
[Article by Jacques Horisset: "Harignane: Priority to Industrial Efficiency"!

[Iext] In 3 Years, the Helicopter Division of Aerospatiale will Double Its
Production

The year 1980 was a very good one for Aerospatiale (Helicopter Division) and its
American branch ARC: Pr 6.2 billion in orders, 85 percent of uhich was for export
to 39 countries; consolidated turnover of Pr 3.2 billion. 78 percent of it from ex-
portation; 34$ helicopters delivered, and 639 new craft of all types ordered. Not
to mention important license contracts made with the Indonesian company Nurtanio
for production of the Puma and Super Puma, and with the PeOple's Republic of china
for production of the Dauphin. 0n the whole, an entirely remarkable balance-sheet
--due to the success quite obviously encountered in the world market by the heli-
copters of the new range: AS-350 (Ecureuil/AStar).AB-355(Bcureuil-ZlTwinéstar).
SA-365N (Dauphin 2), AS-332 (Super Puma).

Hill 1981 be a fruitful year also? To find out, we asked that question of Francois
Legrand, who kindly received the AIR ET COSMOS team. "At this year-end," the di-
rector of Aerospatiale's helicopter Division replied, "it is still too early to
give you exact figures, but I can already tell you that our sales figure will
doubtlessly be even higher than that of 1980, which was itself a very good year.
Our market penetration is developing, and 1981, as you know, has been marked by the
success of the Super Puma (which has broken through into the North Sea) and of the
Twin-Star. Our real problems are mainly problems of delivery."

Optimizing the Production Instrument

"The complete renovation of our range represented a period of pure creation, and we
must now set ourselves to producing--whence the in-depth renovation of our produc-

tion instrument, as regards both neans and methods and the organization of it. To

this systematic quest for industrial efficiency is added a big effort at adaptation
to the civilian market. which has became our No l customer--whence the development

of after-sales service.

"In 25 years, we have succeeded in creating a helicopter industry that provides a
living for 25,000 to 30,000 persons in France. But profitability and competitive-
ness are the real factors of job-creation. In the coming 3 years, we expect to

29 I
FOI‘OFIICIAI.USEGDNIN
FIIICIWﬂCIAI.USE(HVLY

double the number of helicopters produced and marketed. “hence, in order to
achieve the production level aimed at, the systematic use of computerization, of
modern manufacturing methods, of new materials. The increase in production also
can be achieved only by reorganizing the circulation of information, which is in-
dispensable for correct management of supply, storage, handling, which represent a
considerable percentage of costs.

"As hithe automobile industry, from which we are transposing certain achievements,
we are therefore led to optimize the whole of our production instrument. That is
what it will take to remain competitive. One need only see, for example. our glu-
ing line for Dauphin elements and the setting-up of preassembly lines to be con-
vinced that the investments made are justified."

"Of course, all this does not mean in any way that we are neglecting research and
development, which enabled us to create the new range: we are now applying our-
selves to raising the level of research again,-so as to prepare for the next de-
cade's generation and to upgrade the existing one. Let us say that there is a cy-
clical calendar for development of a new range: research is followed by develop-
ment, then industrialization, which requires sizable investments. The nearly si-
multaneous launching of our three new helicopters created-if one examines the evo-
lution of expenditures over time--a certain wave effect, which is entirely normal."

Subcontracting

"Another problem is that of the subcontracting network. The percentage we are
tending toward is 50 percent; a part of this subcontracting is of course assigned
to units of Aerospatiale's subsidiaries that are~likely to benefit from it. Sub-
contracting is actually necessitated in the following cases:

--search for the best economic or technical conditions (specialized subcontract-

ing):
‘--adherence to industrial agreements made with other countries (cooperation, com-

pensation):

--utilization of recognized competencies (for example, Fist for its transmission
cases); _

--utilization also of the existing industrial capacities, on condition that they
offer a good cost-effectiveness ratio.

"It is in this spirit that we are helping to ensure the work load of certain of our
group‘s subsidiaries. The SOCATA [expansion unknown], for example, does 40 percent
of its work for our division."

Franco-PRC Cooperation

"Forseversl years, we have been working with H33 [Hesserschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm] on an
'HAC.' or antitank helicopter, project (PAH-2 in the German terminology), the de-
velopment of which has in the last analysis proved difficult to carry out within a
budget framework that is too narrow for the ambitions of the project. whence the
question that was posed last Spring: should something be done on the nationl scale,
or should cooperation be started over again on other bases? Thus it was that the
HAP (Support and Protection Helicopter) concept arose, in which priority is given
to support and protection, with the nighttime antitank possibilities assigned sec-
ond priority. Such a machine could be built on the basis of the present Dauphin,

30
FOI.0F1ﬂ(JAl.USB(NVLY
FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

but given a different fuselage, and it would offer the desired qualities of maneuv-
erability, speed and protection.

"The HAP concept is developing. Such a machine should be capable both of ground
intervention and of providing protection of helicopters from enemy craft. This
would require, for short distances, the use of a cannon with which a sighting and
orientation system would be associated; for distances of several kilometers, we
would need a missile, but a specialized missile, offering maneuvering capacities
very different from those asked of an antitank missile or even an air-to-air mis-
sile, because a helicopter has very high maneuverability.

"The most expensive item will obviously be the development of the weapons system.
It should be noted that in France we already have available to us thermal cameras
that are at least as good as their American counterparts, we are therefore favor-
able to development of the Portos system (the designated successor to the Venus
system), via its components; if it proves really desirable, it will always be pos-
sible to go from a roof-sight system to a raised sphere system (Giraffe).

As for nighttime antitank combat, the idea is developing of simply using third-
generation light-amplifying binoculars, which are simple and light, whereas a sys-
tem such as the American PNVS [expansion unknown], which is too sophisticated for a
battlefield, leads to complicated and expensive solutions.

"ThisﬂAfu derived from the present Dauphin, would be a bi-TM 333, weighing about
3.8 tons. '

"None of this keeps anyone, on either the FRO side or the French side, from being
aware of the importance of starting up on cooperation again. A joint proposal has
therefore been worked up by the two industrial firms concerned and it has just been
submitted to the armament directors. It has two aspects:

--a proposal for development of a less expensive craft than the former PAH-2--in-
termediate, in a way, between it and the French HAP/“AC concept. Weighing a little
more than 4 tons, this ship would use the dynamic elements of the Dauphin, but with
a rotor redesigned by M33 so as to obtain the additional lift needed and especially
the additional maneuverability desired for the mass envisioned (4.2 tons). The en-
gines would be TN 385 R's--that is, engines derived from the TM 333, with the col-
laboration of HTU [expansion unknown]. The optronics would be those of the Portos
system, with possible use of U.S.~modules manufactured (under license) in the PRC.
The target date for the first deliveries of oeprational machines is 1987. The fu-
selage configuration would probably be a side-by-side two-seater, with lower tur-
ret. It remains to find the financing, which would be facilitated by the export
possibilities.

“n meeting isnow planned for the first quarter of 1982: the ball is in the govern-
ments' (and the users') court.

--creation of a 612 [Economic Interest Group] responsible for managing, on an
equal-importance basis, the adaptation of the Super Puma to the FRG's military
needs and the development of a European tactical transport helicopter. These craft
would therefore be built in three versions. differing only in their systems and
equipment: PRC, French, 'export.’ The first machine, with a fuselage designed
around the systems envisioned, could be flying at the end of l98b/beginning of
1985.'

31
FOR<0FHKJA1.US£(HVLY
FOR¢HHHCIALIEIIONLY

Engines Named Desire...
What are your relations with Turbomeca?

"We note with pleasure the entirely remarkable recovery of Turbomeca, which is
studying and developing new techniques and components; the Bordes firm, which is
coming back into top world position, is showing an obvious desire to define a range
of new products, beyond the "Makila," with which we are particularly satisfied but
which is actually a transitional engine.

"The new generation that we need can be defined as follows: a SOO-HP family, a
1,000-HP family, a 2,000-HP family. Priority should be given to the 1,000-HP tur-
boengine: it is repr 'ented by the TN 333 (850 HP) and its derivative the TM 385 R
(1,000 HP +).

"We need it for l985, in order to upgrade the Dauphin.

"Next comes a modern turboengine of 1,800/2,000 HP, called on to succeed the Haki-
la; it will enable us to develop, for the 1990's, a Super Puma Mk 2.

"He also need, for the Ecureuil-Z. a bSO-HP turboengine equivalent to the present
Allison but in a more modern version. The studies started at Bordes 2 years ago
led to an economic impossibility; and since that time, the dollar has climbed, and
the price of the Allison too. we are therefore reexamining the balance-sheet of
the engines' cost in relation to that of the craft, while Turbomeca, for its part,
is studying the possibility of developing a simple and not too expensive engine
that could replace the Allison.

"The AS-JSS, in fact, is being called on to replace the Alouette-3, and we will
perhapsbe led to develop an as-ass Mk 2 with a more spacious fuselage. The Air
Force is going to equip itself with As-355's fitted (in the first batch) with Alli-
son engines. A decision will be taken later for a second batch capable of receiv-
ing the future Turbomeca engine as a retrofit. It should be noted that the financ-
ing of this new engine is being ensured jointly by the DGA and the DGAC [expan-
sions unknown], with a certain amount of self-financing by Turbomeca.

"The development of a military Bcureuil-Z will, of course, entail certain adapts-
tions; the military AS-355 will be perfectly well-adapted to liaison, training,
specialized missions (surveillance of 'sensitive' bases). It will also be able to
take light armament, but in this role, the Gazelle remains a remarkable machine.

The Programs

Etienne Lefort, program chief to Mr Legrand, drew up for us a balance-sheet of the
programs in progress:

--The Super Puma is now being turned out on an assembly line; there are firm orders
for some 100 craft, not counting the options (including some 20 military machines).
In fact, practically all of the 150 craft on which manufacture has started are al-
ready sold. Deliveries began in July, and some 20 Super Pumas will have been de-
livered by the end of this year. The rate of delivery will reach 4 per month dur-
ing the first quarter of 1982, and it will rise to 5 or 6 per month at the end of
that year, which will see the delivery of the 80th machine.

32
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USBINVLY
IK”!CIGWLJA1.U§I§0NIJ

After the Super Puma's remarkable breakthrough into the civilian market, offshore
in particular (after the North Sea, the North American market, which has not yet
been worked very much, is opening up in turn, the Super Puma being very competitive
vis-a-vis the Bell 214 ST, which has not taken over), 1982 will probably be the
year of the breakthrough into the military market, especially in the short version”
(180 kg lighter). The machine is now certified in its two versions, at 8.35 tons,
but the flying range has been opened up to 9.75 tons. In its category, the Super
Puma is best as regards safety (big reserve of power), comfort (low vibration lev-
el, low noise level, thanks to special internal fittings), economy of operation
(initial potential: 3, 000 hours; easy access for maintenance), output (high speed).
possibilities of flight in an icy atmosphere (testing program planned this winter
in the Grand Nord).

--Dauphin: more than 600 machines have been sold, including the SA-360's, the
SA-365C's and the 90 SA-3666's of the u.s. Coast Guard.

Some 10 SA-365N's have now been delivered, and high production rates are planned:
10 machines per month at mid-1982, 16 per month at the beginning of 1983. Con-
struction of 300 machines has started.

It remains to obtain the American and British I?! [Instrument Plight Rules] certi-
fications, expected in the first quarter of 1982. The Arriel turboengine, which is
proving satisfactory, is being delivered right on time by Turbomeca. Effort is now
being concentrated on certification of the optional equipment: radio, built-in flo-
tation, special equipment for offshore operations. Pinsl development of the
SA-3666 is completed (French certification anticipated in first quarter of 1982).

--Ecureuil: 1981 was the year of the 15-355, some 450 of which have now been or-
dered, a good 100 of which will have been delivered by the end of this year. The
fabrication rate is around 20 machines per month. IFR certification is anticipated
in mid-1982.

Some 750 of the single-engine version (AS-350) have been ordered. including 450
AStsrs with Lycoming engines and 300 Ecureuil with Arriel engines. After the line
was temporarily shut down because of delays in deliveries by Lycoming, it was reac-
tivated, the American engine manufacturer having finally managed to solve its prob-
lems. At the end of this year, more than 500 AS-350's will have been delivered,
and the two parallel lines are now operating at full speed: in the first half of
1982, the rate will reach 35 to 40 machines per month (AS-350's + AS-355's). At
the end of 1982, the rate will rise to 50.

--Lama: the SA-JlS is still coming off the line. This "crane" version of the Alou-
ette is still valued, because it is irreplaceable. About 360 Lamas have now been
delivered, and the fabrication rate has been stabilized at 2 machines per month.
In a few years. a Lama HR 2, fitted with a TM 333. should appear.

--Finally, the Gazelle, whose assembly line has stayed open because of the Army's

orders, is the object of new interest, while the last Super Prelons are being de-

livered (100 machines have come off the line). The Super Puma equipped with AH-39
missiles is now taking over.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1980

11267 m
cso: 3100/24: 33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY