APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROPoz-OOOBOR000100040020-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040026-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8390

10 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 21/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040028—8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLT

JPRS L/8390
10 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE

(FOUO 21/79)

Coureuts - PAGE
COUNTRY SECTION

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Energency Measures for European Steel Industry
(Eugenio Occorsio; IL SOLE-24 DRE. 7, ii, 16, 15 Feb 79). 1

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Rederni Office for Protection of Constitution Criticized
(STERN. various dates) .................................. 9

Postal. Electronic Surveillance
Use of Informants
Lack of Security

FRANCE

'New Opposition' Hithin PCF Described. Discussed
(Bernard Guetts; LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR, 12 “at 79) ...... 27

Labor Minister Bouiin Interviewed. Defends Policy
(Robert Rouiin Interview; PARIS HATCR, 16 Mar 79) ....... 30

CFDT's Naire Interviewed on National Labor Picture
(Edmond Maire Interview; PARIS HATCH, 16 Mar 79) ........ 37

Pertinent Official Interviewed on Research Policy
(Pierre Aigrain Interview; PARIS HATCH, 16 Her 79) ...... 43

Briefs
PCP Membership Requirement 45

SPAIN

Briefs
International Labor Meeting 66

- . - [ 111 - wt - 150 rouo]
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION INTERNﬁTIONAL AFFAIRS

EMERGENCY MEASURES FOR EUROPEAN STEEL INDUSTRY

Milan IL SOLE-2‘ ORB in Italian 7, ll, 14, 15 Fob 79
[Article by Eugenio Occorsio]

[7 Feb 79. p 5]

[Text] Paris: The French government yesterday accepted the
union proposal to lower the retirement age to $5 for workers

in the Nerd and Lorraine steel industry. The move -- announ-
ced at the close of a meeting between Labor Minister Robert
Boulin and union representatives of the sector -- is obvious-
ly aimed at easing some of the pain inevitably connected with
implementation of the plan to restructure the steel industry
drafted by the government, which will involve laying off 25,000
steelworkers over a 2-year period.

The measure, however, does not appear to be sufficient, of it-
self, to quell agitation among the steelworkers, who have al-
ready staged massive demonstrations in the last few days at
Longwy in Lorraine and at Denain in the Nerd. The unions, which
called out all 120,000 of France's steelworkers on a national
strike on 16 February, are demanding that the government go

back to the drawing board with the entire plan to restructure
the steel industry.

Metz: There has not been a break in the mass demonstrations
protesting against the job cutbacks which are the most conspicu~.-
one aspect of the industrial and financial restructuring plan
the French government is proposing as a final solution to the
crisis in the steel industry, those effects have been felt even
more keenly in France than in Italy. In 1978, according to
early estimates, steel production dropped to 23 million tons

as against 27 million in the pre-crisis year 1974.

When you say “steel" in France, you are talking mainly about
Lorraine. In the 10 kilometers between Hetz and Thionville,
with offshoots reaching into Germany and Luxembourg, lies one

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the heaviest concentrations of steelmills in Europe. The
redimensioning operation will be drastic: most of the existing
plants are obsolete, and no longer profitable to operate.

The results of this situation and of other factors (first among
them the worldwide crisis in the steel markets): in Lorraine
there were 52,416 people working in the steelmills in 1966, and
new there are 35,802; in another 2 years, there will be only
26,300. Nationwide, the overall job losses from shutdowns

and layoffs have amounted to something on the order of $0,000
in Just 6 years.

First, though, let's take a careful look at the latest overall
plan, which was announced by the government on 10 October after
getting the assent only of the most “moderate“ of the national
union offices, and hence over the open opposition of the left.

The starting point is the 3,700 billion lire loss piled up from
1975 to 197 . The greatest change called for has to do with

the capital stock of the three major conglomerates: Usinor,
Chiers-Chatillen, and Sacilor, whose output accounts for 90 per-
cent ef the national total and is concentrated mainly in Lor-
raine. Control would pass to the State through the establish-
ment of several holding companies: a number of reductions and
increases of capital, and consolidation of some of the debt.

The whole package seems indispensable primarily to halt the spi-
ralling interest charges which constitute an abnormal burden on
revenues, as is the case with our own Italsider, in which the
interest factor is over ll percent. In France, that bite will
be mucd down from 13 to 5 percent.

The indebtedness of French steel companies now runs around 9,400
million francs, the equivalent of 1,900 billion lire. These are
the steps the banks will be taking for the financial part of
the treatment: 1. conversion of 600 million francs in credits
into capital, so as to achieve subscription for 30 percent of
the capital for each of the two holding companies; 2. writing
off 400 million francs in interest due (that is 80 million francs
per year for 5 years on that portion of their credits not con-
verted into capital); 3. a commitment to maintain a line of
credit on behalf of the companies at least equal in volume to
their current lines.

The measures envisioned for the plan will expire at the end of the
5 years provided for implementation, at which point a public

issue of securities will be undertaken, with formulas still under-
going scrutiny. As of now, the two holding companies will issue
preferred stock, any dividends from which for the first 5 years
will be reinvested, and whose quotation (the value less to share-
holders will be 30 percent, but even before the treatment plan

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their shares had dropped to a third of their nominal value) will
be permitted on the Bourse beginning with the 0th year.

As for plant upgrading, the restructuring plan tends to concen-
trate the French steel industry around three major hubs:

Dunkirk (where on of Europe's most modern steel plants was built
in 1963), Fos-sur-Mor (near Marseillo), and Meta, where there
will be the greatest number of shutdowns, partly in order to
lessen the impact of this development hub on the whole industry.
Production capacity will be cut back from 31 to 27 million tons
per year, and actual production by 1983 will be 25 million tons.

Steel's future in France and elsewhere lies mainly with oxygen-
furnace plants, and this is the direction in which it is moving.
The Air Liquide Company has built the biggest distribution pipe-
line system in the world here in Lorraine and in the western part

of Belgium, with branchesrunning to Luxembourg, Germany, Holland,
and the region around Dunkirk.

Once this colossal treatment, certainly the most daring ever un-
dertaken in France, has been completed and the steel sector has
been restored to industrial and financial health, the government
is convinced that not only the financial and technological gaps
can be closed, but the productivity gap as wen” with 150 million
tons of steel as against Germany's 190 million and Japan's 327
million tons. Working on it will be men free of the taint of
ministerial bureaucracy. The government and the major national
banks, called upon to appoint the men who will implement the
whole package of measures called for, they are insisting

that will not accept the term "nationalization," and vow that
all decisions are and will continue to be taken from the market
economy approach.

[11 Feb 79.p 11]

[Text] Brussels: In Belgium, as in France, massive government
steps are about to be taken to rescue a steel industry plagued
by a crisis to which there appear to be no viable market solu-
tions. The problems are the same ones we face at home: an in-
terest load so big as to swallow any profits, a debt burden out
of all proportion to assets, and industrial structures sorely
in need of repair. And this is the way Belgium, with its fine
tradition in the industry, even though the sector has been ail-
ing for a number of years because of the steady depletion of
coal and iron are resources, is planning to deal with them.

The impact of the crisis on the Belgian steel industry has been
painfully evident, as shown by these data:

1. The decline in production: 12.6 million tons in 1978, which
was 11.5 percent better than in 1977, but 22 percent below the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
"crucial" year 1974 (16 million tone).

2. The operating losses suffered by the big three corporations:

in 1977 (much the same situation prevailed in 1973), Cockerill
lost 200 billion lire, ﬂainault-Sambro 73 billion, and Sidmar
30 billion.

3. Productivity per worker has been declining steadily, and it
now stands at 212 tons per year, as against Italy's 240 (al-
though the French situation is markedly worse).

4. Labor costs here are the highest in the EEC: 430 francs per
hour, or 12,000 lire, as compared with the Italian average of
4,200 and Germany's 1,960.

The broad outlines of the restructuring plan, with particular
reference to economic restoration, were approved by the cabinet
on 23 November 1978, after 2 years of negotiations among the
government, the steel companies, and the unions. We got the
whole story from Christian Oury, president of the Belgian Blast
Furnace and Steel Plant Group, which is the local equivalent

of Italy's Assider. Here, briefly, are the highlights.

a. Conversion of medium- and long-term financial indebtedness
to convertible bonds, issued by the corporations and underwrit-
ten by the State, with maturity in 5 years. This measure is
less radical than the one adopted in France, where the bonds
will be immediately converted into stocks by public bank con-
sortia. In exchange for this pledge, here again the State will
pick up a portion of the capital equal to 60 percent of shares
held by major stockholders (40 percent);

b. a 5-year extension on payments to suppliers;

c. further payroll cutbacks (employment has declined already
from 74,000 at the end of 1974 to $0,000 today) totaling 6,000
more Jobs over the next 2 years through early retirement at $5
on 70 percent of base pay, full pension to be paid beginning at
age 65. The adjustments over past years have been achieved
primarily through freezing turnover, except fox 1,500 workers
affected by a plant closing, who were guaranteed full base pay
for the first year, 90 percent base pay for the second, and

80 percent base pay for the third;

d. State participation in refinancing some of the companies.

As of new, the government has picked up 35 percent of Cockerill
stock and 22 percent of Sidmar's. Boards of directors will have
equal numbers of government and private-sector members;

e. The State will guarantee cash-flow requirements in exchange
for convertible bonds.

l.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Clearly, there will be a lot of government activity involved,
and putting it all together will be anything but simple. The
specific procedures will be established on a case by case ba-
sis directly by the companies. The Job cutbacks already in
the works will, in any case, raise considerable difficulty in
reomployment, which is particularly sensitive in the two vital
zones of Liege and Charleroi, which were hard hit in the Six-
ties even before the coal crisis struck, and battered again

by the slump in heavy construction. The government has sought
to get through the initial problems by making available half

a million Belgian francs (around 14 million lire) for every
job lost, and through plans to create new ones to replace them
as a result of new investments starting as of 1 January 1976.
Additionally, for unemployment compensation alone, 154 billion
lire have already been paid out. Private shareholders have
come up with 280 billion in working capital for new investments
in areas other than steel.

[l6 Feb 79, p 13]

[Text] Luxembourg: we must not overlook the steel industry in
the tiny Grand Duchy: snuggled into the very heart of the great
basin that includes the German plants in the Saar, the French
mills in Lorraine, and Belgium's Charleroi installations, Luxem-
bourg is anything but a minor factor, for more reasons than one.
The historical basis lies in the fact that right here, in the
Dudelange area, 18 March 1886 saw the first batch of Thomas type
steel (which today is the most in demand and widely used) ever
made on the continent of Europe, thus opening up the future for
the highly phosphated ore from the Lorraine mines, as well as
for Belgian and German coal.

The economic importance of Luxembourg's steel industry stems
from the world-wide reach of the Arbed corporation, which has

a monopoly on Luxembourg steel. Arbed is one of the biggest
corporations in the world steel market, with extensive holdings
abroad: French and Brazilian iron mines, coalfields in the Ruhr,
an interest in Belgium's Sidmar corporation and in other steel
companies in Germany, Austria, Brazil, and Argentina.

In Luxembourg, Arbed and its subsidiaries provide jobs for some
25,000 people (out of 350,000 who make up the total population),
but employment levels are steadily dwindling at an alarmingly

high percentage, again because of the crisis. Production rose

a little in 1978: 4.7 million tons of steel, a 10.5-percent
increase over 1974, the last "good" year before the cutoff of

the international markets toward which practically all produc-
tion was directed. Further, all raw materials (iron ore and

coke) must be imported from Sweden, America, and France (Lorraine).

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Exposed as no other to the ups and downs of the international
situation, the Luxembourg steel industry has been losing money
for years, to the point of triggering the restructuring steps
already under way, which will certainly have drastic impact on
employment. By way of example, the hourly cost of labor in
1977 was 9,561 lire, as compared with 6,535 in Italy, 7,569 in
France, 10,120 in Germany, and 11,200 in Belgium.

Part of the government-run plan is a steel cooperation agreement
between the governments of Belgium and the Grand Duchy (where
steel's share of the economy is by far the largest of the few
sectors to be found there). The agreement calls for a concerted
effort at streamlining and updating plants, preserving the bal-
ance between the two countries' steel industries, and making al-
lowances for European interrelations.

Worth noting is the fact that the Rodange-Athus Mining and Metal
Company, an Arbed subsidiary, owns a rolling mill in Belgium at
Athus, in addition to its home plant at Rodange.

[15 Fch 79. p 17]

[Text] Brussels: This lengthy Journey through the crisis beset-
ting the Community's steel industry and the emergency measures
the various governments concerned are contemplating comes to
its logical end in a series of meetings at Berlaymont Palace,
called for the purpose of getting a global picture of the situ-
ation as it affects the Nine. An initial datum to emerge from
the information provided by the experts gathered there is not
heartening: even though in 1978 there was a slight upturn in
world production, here in the EEC we are still woefully below
the pre-crisis level (production prior to 1974), and the out-
look for the medium term is anything but hopeful.

To grasp the discrepancy between optimum and actual production
capacity, one need only recall that the most reliable forecasts
of market conditions over the next few years cite 174 million
tone as the optimal output for the BBC in 1983, whereas today
it stands at 201, with output of 148 million and hence with a
mean rate of utilization well below the 85 percent cutoff point
for economic viability for plant.

The European steel industry (see chart on output and producti-
vity) will therefore have to pay a very high price to tailor

its structures to fit the new requirements of the world market:
the general decline in consumption, combined with the growing
influence of production by non-Community countries. From such
countries comes a never-ending flow of experts to the BBC, which
consequently and paradoxically finds itself in the position of
importing a lot more steel than it ought, at ever-lower prices

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and in a system of competition which in many cases is anything
but proper, even though in very recent years agreements have
been reached with three fourths of these countries.

 

at am STEEL PRODUCTION

Ptoduxlone a ' I" m
oldemtglca . .
um on teen 7‘ n ”M"
uau
In no it m ”J 1’ I

@313 40“ 019% 42% 42% “I”

millions of tons

Shaded bars: 1974
Solid bars: Est. 1978

Wodmuvlu w. coca-m ’" PRODUCTIVITY
“a”. “ “N a nu W”. annual tons per worker
u nu
mm i I [an = FRO]
I Source: OECD and Chambers of
Joe 00‘

0. Ft out art organized labor.
'OCIII ecu a “move Meal

 

 

This is certainly no new problem, but it is one which nobody so
Far has managed to solve, despite the setting of minimum prices
and guidelines for markets within the Community, and of refe—
rence prices for imports from abroad (these prices are the es-
timate world average prices made public as a basis for determin-
ing whether a given price is fair, or constitutes dumping). Now
they are trying the planning and quantity control approach, with
all the predictable unknowns surrounding it.

Declining consumption, dropping net margins of exports, and ex-
cess capacity: because of these threee chronic ailments the
whole of Europe's steel industry, but most particularly that in
the weaker EEC countries, stands in absolute need of drastic and
urgent measures to restore its industrial and financial health.
The subject inevitably leads us home to Italy, and to Italsider
in particular, where the deficits are still piling up because of
the impossibility of recovering the tremendous sums laid out on
prcqwdslsinvestments (in 1973 and 1974 alone the peak effort was
made, in view of rising trends on the market). Debt service
costs alone reached 500 billion per year, and only the planned
inerease in capital from 1,179 to 1,800 billion will make it pos—
sible to make at least a partial improvement of the amount of
ready capital in relation to investments and indeptedness (4,000
billion).

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even so, from the point of view of plant, the Finsider group need
envy nobody. The substantially up-to-date structure of its plant
makes Pinsider stronger than would appear from its balance-shoot:
the complete-cycle plants (Bagnoli, Taranto, Genoa, and Piombino)
are all on the sea, and this cuts down on their supply shipment
costs, and the solid charge plants (Terni, Dalmino, Lovere, and
Campi) are also close to the raw materials (scrap) collection
centers and to their markets.

One "structural“ exception is the Baguoli plant. The EEC Commis-
sion knows full well that this is one of the very few "plague-spots"
in Italian steelmaking on the technical efficiency score. That
would require very costly restructuring investments, called for

both under the final program for the steel industry within the
provisions of the Italian industrial reconversion act, and under

the proposed regulations for aid to the sector filed some time

ago with the Brussels Council (but as yet not acted upon).

Going back to the whole group of Italsider and Finsider companies,
it is worth remembering, as we learned in detail in earlier in-
stalments of this article, that the situation is every bit as
serious, particularly in Belgium, France, and Luexmbourg, coun-
tries in which massive government intervention has already begun
to lighten the load of interest costs and to assure capacity to
move ahead with reconversion investments , without bankruptcy
breathing down their necks, by means of adequate recapitaliza-
tion.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Bditrice Il Sole-24 Ore s.r.l.

6182
cs0: 3104

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

FEDERAL OFFICE FOR PROTECTION OF CONSTITUTION CRITICIZED

Hamburg STERN in German 8 Feb 79 pp 68-70

Postal. Electronic Surveillance

[lent] Section VII in the Federal Office for the Protection
of the Constitution is actually supposed to find terrorists.
But instead of solid facts, it is providing solid scandals.
bureaucratic idling and embarrassing disappointments.

DER STERN reveals how the "lazy bones" work.

Letters for the Munich attorney Juergen Arnold, 35, were suddenly delivered
to the wrong addresses. Some of his private mail went to his office, and
sometimes business letters arrived at his home. Arnold wrote to the
responsible district post office 60 and asked for an explanation. The

post officeknewnothing: "Unfortunately, in spite of all efforts, we have
not succeeded in discovering the conditions that led to the fact that some
letters addressed to your home were sent to your office."

The information was false. For at that time--it was August. l975--the
lawyer's telephone was being tapped by order of the Federal Office for
Protection of the Constitution (BfV), and his mail was being opened. And
in the process. some postal official had often thrown all the letters
that had been returned from being opened into a bundle and shipped them
off in the basket for only one delivery district.

The reason for the investigation was that Arnold is a leftist. He defended
a member of the terrorist "Second of June Movement," represented the Trikont
Publishing House after the spectacular confiscation of the Bommi Baumsnn
book, "Hie alias anfing" [How It All Began], and was the lawyer for a
femsnle bank robber from the Munich anarchist milieu. Arnold's "mistake"
was that he took the side of his clients. "I did not identify with them--
but I am of the opinion that they must also be treated Justly."

Since the constitutional protection authorities. in spite of wire taps,
mail openings and continual observation. could not find any proof for their
suspicion that "Arnold was a central figure in anarchicsl terrorisl (con-
stitutional protection dossier) in the Munich area and in part beyond it,"

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the federal office in Cologne pushed for sharper measures. BfV President
Richard Meier wanted conversations in the lawyer's office to be monitored
with a bug as well. His colleagues in the "Bavarian State Office for
Protection of the Constitution" (ELEV) received under the official symbol
L VIII _ 086 - S - 182 S88 ("Operation Fork“ [Gabe1]) permission to spy on
Arnold.

This was not at all easy BLfV President Dr Hans Ziegler wrote to Meier
concerning this matter: "Here we have always proceeded from the idea
that, for a listening effort possibly to be effective, we would have to
succeed in obtaining neighboring rooms in the house. After we tried to
do this but failed, we considered the operation to be impossible. Ihe
considerably greater risks of an operation from outside are unanimously
recognized and have been discussed by everyone."

Ziegler was right. Arnold's room located in a communal office on the
Mohenzollern-Strasse in Schwabing, on the ground floor, with the cellar
below, yard behind, colleagues right and left, and a young team of designers
above. A break-in (Ziegler politely: "Operation from outside") was something
Ziegler did not want to risk: "The value of such an action here as in
similar situations is not considered to be worth the risk."

Meier reacted furiously: "I cannot express my agreement with this answer
from the BLfV. While our judgment contains several indications of meetings
in A's office, the letter only repeats unfounded views of the P(resident)
of the BLfV."

Meier was in a mood to bug. After all. he had just given the green light
for "Operation Uinzer" [Operation Hinegrower] in which the lawyers Maag,
Becker and Croissant were to be bugged--and approved the break-in into the
house of nuclear physicist Klaus Traube ("Operation Muell") [Operation
Rubbish]. To soothe him, Ziegler offered: "The BLfV will soon suggest

an object with a less problematic listening operation which can be executed
as a test. Preparations for this are underway."

There is no evidence against Arnold that could justify the planned listening
operation and tricks which are still being played today. The lawyer attracted
attention because he was embarrassing; he was tricked, for example with
house searches ("We are looking for explosives"), and learned years ago
about an investigation procedure against him. Even today he does not know
why it was made or continues. "hen larger terrorist acts occur, he is
always visited by two officials of the Land Criminal Department who demand
an alibi from him for the time in question. He is on the list for the
observational search "Befe 7" and is often detained for hours at the border
when he travels abroad. Me bears it with composure and believes: "If it
were not a constitutional government. I could not be a lawyer here. In

the GDR or in Chile 1 would certainly not be one."

The bug has become the heraldic animal of the Second German Republic:
begging is done during break-ins, even "as a test" (could anyone have been

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

caught in this manner?). and walls are hugged (Ha-Minister of the Interior
Werner Maihofer: "He do not do thatl").

STERN (No l2/l971: 'Kbnstituiional Protector X") knows of cases in hamburg
in which the Constitutional Protection Office has rented hotel rooms next
to suspicious persons and put hugs into holes bored into the walls. And

if new and then in this service a bugging is refused. the reservations are
certainly not of a legal nature. An example: in the early summer of 1976.
Senior Police Officer Hilhelm Knueck. #8. from the BfV decided. in a case
which he was handling. to bug a place. He made a written request. but his
superior. Governmental Adviser Ast. refused for "technical" reasons: it
was known from the "Huell" case (listening operation against the nuclear
physicist Dr Klaus Troube) that the apparatus did not work. Kueck was mad.

This process is typical for Department VII. in which Kueck works. Nowhere
else is this seemingly "extreme means" (Haihofer) used so frivolously as
there. The legendary statement of one-time Minister of the interior Hermann
"oecherl that his constitutional protectors "could not continually run around
with the constitution under their arms." has now taken on quite a new inter-
pretation: The "Soldiers of Department Seven." so it seems. do not know

the constitution at all. It is not surprising that in a federal bureacracy
so full of affairs. Department Vll is already the one with the most affairs.

it was founded in 1973 by the then president of the bfV. Cuenther Nollau.
because there was no group capable of keeping watch over terrorist cells.
Fighting terrorists was something new. The beginnings of the bombings had
simply been ignored by Department ll (leftist extremism) which was responsible
at the time. the usual methods which were used. for example. against a party
such as the German Communist Party. were almost useless against terrorists

groups: acquiring and inserting spies who worked sometimes for a lot of
mney .

Err reasons of secrecy. the new department was not placed in the large head
office on Barthelstrasse in Cologne. but in an office building on Hidders-
dorfer Strasse in Cologne. in a building in which they had rented two floors
hrr l5.000 marks a month. "Project Duke lﬂerzog)" as it was called internally.
was disguised as a "Federal Accounting Office." Originally. Department VII
was to havu been housed in the Federal Automobile Inspection [TUeV] highrise
in Cologne-Huelheim. in 1976. the whole department had to retreat to
Barthelstrasse. But this move cost something more than half a million marks.
The reason given by a conmussion of the federal ministry was that "Project
Duke" had been placed on a much too active street. 1he real reason: a bar
fight had become public in which four officials of Department Vll. among
them a senior orficial with karate training. had been beaten up by a bully.

For the first chief of the terrorist fighters. Nollau got Operations Chief
hans-Juergen Hiehe from the State Office for Constitutional Protection in
hanover. Niche. a former journalist. was considered to be one of the
eleverest and most capable "operators” who had worked his way up without
university study to become the leading governmental director. But the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

capable Hiehe soon lost his appetite for the new job and went back to
hanover. First of all. the promise was not kept of promoting him to
"Director in Constitutional Protection" (senior civil servant). In the
second place. the buildup of the department was not working as well as
had been promised. but was rather being choked In the bureaucracy. The
necessary financial and personnel decisions took months to cone from the
Ministry of the Interior.

There was a lot of elbowing. Many of those who had volunteered were

eager for rapid careers and interesting tasks about which the people

in the Interior Ministry could only dream at their desks. In the operational
area there were business trips. telephone and car privileges. and expenses
as well as the monthly operational pay of lRS marks. called "dirt pay"--
quite a bit of money for a senior government inspector with a salary of

1.579 marks.

Nollau's successor. Richard Meier. also had more trouble than he wanted with
the "Seven." There was the case of the agent recruiter. Hubert Kleuptncr.
from the Operations Department. In October of 1975 he had recruited an
informant and drunk two glasses of wine with him. Later he drank another
glass in a hotel in which Gudrun Ensalin was supposed to have spent the
night 3 years before. And as chance would have it: on the trip to the
hotel. Klesptner was checked by the police. his blood contained 0.835 per
thousand. The police were lenient. but the punishment in his office was
draconian. As a disciplinary action he was transferred to office work.
and his coming proaotion was postponed for a year. Klenptner was the
photographer who took the beautiful color pictures during the break-in

in Traube's house.

The Seven did not become the effective striking force that had been desired.
but rather went its bureaucratic way just as stubbornly as all the others.
A good example of this is the working out of an "observation." 0n 1 August
1975. a baron. from Cologne called up the federal office and reported on
sonething that he considered to be "suspicious." he had seen a Renault 6
that had parked near the Bichholz estate (near Cologne) on the side of

the street. Several cars had pulled up at intervals. 0n the other side

of the street there was also a police patrol. The baron had noticed the
nulber of the R 6 and reported it to the constitutional protectors.

The call ended up in Section I l (Principle Quertions). The reviewer.
Kind. a lawyer. passed the observation farther to the directors of Sections
Vii (Terrorism). VI (Extremist Foreigners). IV (Counterintelligence) and
Ill (Leftist Extrendst). Section Chief Heinrich Degenhard (it!) wrote a
little "0bs.?" on the note (Observation?). while the others wrote nothing.
In the meantime the process had gone on for a day in the office. Now it
wandered into Section VII. where the group leader. Dr Karkowsky. added:
"Determine the age." A week after the telephone call an evaluator makes
the results of his research known:

'The editors know the name.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--The roller was not listed in the telephone book (In the Evaluation Office
there was only an old telephone book. The baron was in the new one.)

--The owner of the R 4 was a 05-year old man from Barnheis-Merten. about
whom no further Information had been stored.

No one really knows what he should do about the situation. Host of the
readers sign without a date--something they have learned from long experience.
whoever shows publicly how long the paperwork has been on his desk just gets
unnecessary trouble for himself. In order to at least do something. one
worker suggests "carefully carding" the R-A owner.

R'r the man from Bornheim. this means that since he was notleed by a baron.
but since there is no evidence against him. his name gets into the large

files of the constitutional protectors. It is stlll there today. All in all.
l7 officials took part in this. many twice. with ten denunciations like

this. one could put whole sections of the Constitutional Protection Office
out of commission.

With the Seven's lack of suceess. pressure came from outside. The pedestrian
lawyers in the Federal Ministry of the Interior always eye everything that
is new with mistrust. In the Federal Criminal Police Bureau [BKA] in
Hiosbaden no one knew exactly why constitutional protectors should now be
out after terrorists. And in the governmental area. some politicians were
not happy about the fact that a "political" body should now be looking for
people who were still designated officially as "ordinary criminals." BfV
President Meier then--after 2 years of nothing-~had to make a decision:

to shut up or to get new. better people. But since he is an ambitious man
and would have liked very much to brag about successes in the fight against
terrorists. he decided to try his luck again with new people. From Hiesbaden
he got Governmental Director Klaus Greenewald. SPD. as Section Leader
(discharged at the beginninu of February l979--the new chief of the "Seven"
is now Friedrich Halter). From Section ll (Righteat Extremists) he not

the Director of Evaluation. Christian ﬂofmann (EDP). called "Krischan."

The leading governmental director. who was 61 at the time. was an experienced
evaluator who had already entered the BfV in 1951. He had worked for years

in eonnterintelligenre and later as a teacher at the Constitutional Protection
Schuol in Cologne. Meier had only obtained "of-son with a heavy heart. be-
cause the old civil servant was considered to be difficult and stubborn.

Hhen Section VII decided to break into the house of Klaus Traube. the

nuclear physicist. ("Operation Huell"). Hofmann refused the operation "for
reasons of intelligence as well as for legal reasons." The result: hofmsnn.
although he was responsible as the group leader for all operations. never

saw the "Huell" papers again.

Ibfmann's confession unmasks. to be sure. the assurances of the minister of
the interior of the time. Maihofer. to be untrue. it had been the "unanimous
opinion of all offices involved." that the bug in this "extremely dangerous
situation...hsd been necessary." according to Haihofer. The fact is. however.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that along with hofmann. another important official warned about operation
"Huell;" the Deputy Section Leader of VI! and "Group Leader of Evaluation."
Friedrich Walter. The "unusual procedure" (Hofmann) was even controversial
in the certainly less prudlsh Federal 0fflce--new light on the constitu-
tional awareness of the minister of the interior of the time.

ﬂofmann's deputy in the "operations" group was one of the main actors in

the Traube operation: Governmental Director Guido Korte. 52. (cover name
Rombach). The lawyer came from the Interior Ministry in Bonn to the Federal
office in Cologne. not out of inclination. but "because my wife intended at
the time to do something in Cologne." Korte was the official who dealt with
the managers of Traube's employer. Siemens. and had made the decisive notes
according to which Traube "could gain access to radioactive and fiasionahle
materials. among which were the highly poisonous plutonium...(and)...large
amounts of the reactor coolant. sodium. that. together with oxygen. produces
an explosive with the highest explosive effect."

Nothing was correct in this. as a statement of the Siemens subsidiary.
interatom. shows: "Dr Traube could...not plan or commit any act of terrorism
against atomic power plants...1he experiments breeder KNK in Karlsruhe was...
out of cosmussion. There was also nothing to be gotten there. nothing to
sabotage. nothing to blow up. On the premises of our firm there...only 20
grams of plutonium oxide.... all welded airtightly in refined steel-covered
pipes. The material is kept in a fire- and thief-proof vault which none

of the three managers can approach alone. but each one only with the
simultaneous presence of two officials from the Duesseldorf Labor Impartment."
Concerning the sodium claim of the Constitutional Protection Office. Inter—
atom said: "That is completely beyond the question...A fire occurring in
this manner would not even be as dangerous as a gasoline fire." It should
not be forgotten that Operation "Huell" (Haihofer: Danger for the Community.
extra legal state of emergency) is still being justified bythe"access" of

Dr Traube to radioactive material.

Korte's exaggerations are. to be sure. not personal slips. but are rather
typical for the pressure for success under which the members of this de-

partment stand. No one else in the house. therefore. makes such frequent
and unscrupulo's use of postal and telephonic surveillance. Competitive

thinking came along with the pressure for success.

Since they definitely want to catch a terrorist for once. they do not allow
their colleagues from the BKA--if they can help it--to look into the docu-
meats. Hhen Traube made a date in the summer of 1975 with some friends for
a vacation on the Yugoslavian island of Corcula, the constitutional pro-
tectors left him alone in spite of the order for observation. rather than
requesting assistance from place to place. This was naturally not because
of friendliness but because they were afraid that other places could snatch
the "unusual case" away from them. Minister Haihofer. according to a report
from the Department of the interior. hadbeen'ﬁndignsnt" about this behavior.
And BRA Chief. Herold, wrote a furious letter to his minister of the interior:
"In the BKA. surveillance should have been accomplished on the island of
Corcula from 0 March 75. in this case by way of Interpol."

IL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ikputy Chief of the BfV. "ans hardcnhewer (CDU) wrote a mild letter of
explanation to Haihofer--and iu the process pointed straight toward the next
competency ruckus: the “RA could not be informed at this early point because
"another case...wouid burden the cooperation with the state offices for
constitutional protection which take competency limitations very seriously."

”he would be surprised that these offices do not accomplish anything with
the terrorists. Terrorists comply neither with the sanner of operation

nor with the competency limitation of our constitutional protectors. During
the search for the kidnaped Employers' President. hanns Martin Sehleyer. the
Seven again were noticed by their colleagues in the other security offices.
For lack of their own information. they got information from police head-
quarters in Cologne. dressed it up a bit. and sent it as their own informa-
tion by telegraph to the Schleyer special commission. And the criminal
police in Cologne are still laughing today about the observer from the Seven
who made himself so conspicuous that criminal police officials arrested him.

The Vll experienced a high point when Section Leader Klaus Cruenewald decided
to track down the super-terrorist. "Carlos." if Carlos had known how the
Cologne BfV started out to catch him-he would hardly have been able to light
another fuse. he would have laughed so much.

The operation was called "Hal" [Shark] and began when an Arab came to the
German Embassy in Algiers with the sensational report that he knew the
hiding place of the much-sought Venezuelan.

Section Leader Gruenewald. who received the telegram by mistake on his desk.
sent the senior governmental inspector. Lothar Dahlke. to Algiers. he had no
idea of field operations for he was an evaluator in the office. and highlv
near-sighted to boot. but he was the only one of l00 people who could at

least speak good French. Dahlke rented a room in an exclusive hotel that

was Just opposite the alleged Carlos hideout. and stared day and night through
his special field glass. For 3 weeks he called up his superior. Gruenewald.
and reported: "Shark not sighted yet."

in the hotel. Dahlke soon attracted attention because as a tourist in
beautiful Algiers he was only interested in one thing: the house across

the street. The Algerian secret service (trained by the Hinistry for State
Security of theCDR)listened from the beginning and became suspicious because

of the coded sentences. They then fed Hr Dahlke false information and
chased him through half the city.

his telephone calls with Cologne became longer and more important until.
after 6 weeks. the Algerian Secret Service wanted to know directly fros
him what he was actually doing there. This was a tip for the man from
Cologne to leave at once.

He flew hack to the Rhine. wrote a long final report "a. d. A." (pigeonholed)--
as everything that is locked up never to be seen again is called. There was
still trouble with the travel costs. The fussy administrators wanted to

know to the Pfennig why tue adventure had cost 9.500 marks. not counting

nvney for tips. ‘5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Use of lnformants

Hamburg STERN in German 16 Feb 79 pp 59-65

[Text] How the terrorist searchers from the Cologne
Constitutional Protection Office hire spies. work with
them. and what sort of things they want to learn in
this way--sbout heinrich Boell and old ladies. female
social workers and STERN.

Businessman Karl Hilewsky.* 30. was in trouble. After his divorce he had
begun to drink. his hills gradually became unmanageable for him. and he had
to pay child support for two small children. But he had no work. At night
he slept in a men's lodging house on Heserstrasse in Frankfurt. Then he
read in the PRANKPURTER RUNDSCHAU an advertisement of the city "Frankfurt
Organization for Social Homesz" "Social workers needed." He applied.

A short ime later. two men visited him in the lodging house; they neither
introduced nor indentified themselves. They took him to the "Europa" cafe
on Kaiserstraase. "This already seemed strange to me. for people in the
city administration do not take people to a cafe." 1he two unkown men
offered him the job with the city if he would also do something "for the
good of the republic." In this way he would also earn a few more marks.
The offcr was tempting. He was to receive 1.860 marks gross as a social
helper. and as a "Fellow worker of the State" he was to receive another
900 marks.

Hilewsky could live in a boarding house immediately. There was only one
catch in the deal. There was always someone from the Constitutional
Protection Office there. while he etc. while he drank-and everything was
paid. "no you still have cigarettes? Shall I get some for you?"

A few days later he was introduced to a new contact man. a young. thin man.
somewhat pale. who called himself simply "Henner." Hhat Hilewsky did not
know was that it was senior police court officer hermann. agent runner of
Department VII in the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution
in Cologne. Hilewsky, at every time of the day and night. could call him
up either at his secret private number 0 22 73/81 17 or directly at the
Federal Office for Protection of the Constitution at the numbers 51 76 06
or 51 21 57.

"Here is Christoph with h." This code brought a connection with "Henner."
who then usually made appointments with him in large Frankfurt bars with
many customers. Honey was of no consequence here. "We always ate for
around 100 to 150 marks." "Manner" played his part very well. "My God.
he drank. I like to take a drink myself. but that guy..."

*Ths right name is known by the editors.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR "FFICIAL "SH "NLY

At the heninninn. "henner" eVeu hrounht a "psychologist" to the meetings.
on older gentleman with a hold head who rqueezed Hilowukv like a lemon:
"he even wanted to know what position i liked best in sexual Intercourse."

“1 Got Money for it. and I Has Finally hoiup All Right Anaiu."

The new agent now received 500 marks a month rash directly; 500 Inrka were

paid by the Constitutional Protection Office into the hank account of
Hilewsky'n dovorced wife. for her support.

Hilewsky. the fallen one. the ex-convict. was now Completely in the hands
of the Constitutional Protection Office. He was hehoideu to the. fol money
and a job. To be sure: he had to spy on his colleagues at his place of
work. “Nenuer” was above all interested in the female social worker.
Birgit Schilien. 36. a working member of the organization for assistance

to prisoners. "Amnesty international." She had taken two citizens of

Chile into her apartment and it was his lob to find out what kind of
people they were.

ﬂilewsky also delivered dossiers on the other colleagues. "Neaner" was
always highly interested in the question of whether one would hide terrorists
that visited. a "suspicious" social pedagog was even tested: a young nan
was sent to him in the office who claimed he was sought because of occupation
of a house and asked if he could spend the night with him. The social worker
let the man sleep in his office in the Old Folks' home--the overnight guest

was not a leftist house occupant. but an informer from the Constitutional
Protection.

The agent of the secret service did not spend much time thinking about what
.e was doing. He was only interested in one thing: "i got money for it.
and I was iinslly doing all right again." For this reason he spied on
another leftist Frankfurt group that has as much to do with terrorism as
the state secretary of the Federal Ministry of the interior of the time.
Andreao von Schoelcr. had. For he also belonged to the "humanistic Union"
(MU) which was to be checked out by Hilewsky.

Among others. the Constitutional Protection Office was interested in the
:R-year-old former secondary school teacher. Dr ilse Kunz. member of the
nu. Milowwky come to her with a touching story that he always told when
he wanted to establish contact anywhere: "l have Just cone out of prison.
have no money and do not know what I should do." This line always had an
appeal to the leftists. hr Kunz. too invited the supposedly starving Inn
to right away and gave him 50 marks.

Miiewskv was supposed to stay In contact with the old lady and ask her
about her political views. Constitutional Protection wanted to know from
uvctor Kunz. who had been one of Ulrike Heinhof's teachers in the 1959s.
whether she would give terrorists refuge. Hilewsky's stories from the
leftist scene were well paid for by his agent runner Hermann: "he was

generous in every way. i not payments fron him that I did not have to
justify."

l7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For 2 1/2 months Hilewsky delivered eagarly--then something strange happened;
the treasury at his place of work was suddenly rubbed; 5.000 marks were
missing. who could it have been? Naturally a convicted felon. An order
was made for Hilewaky'a arrest. he went underground and called his ”Heaner"
in desperation. he advised him: “u; not do anything at first. Do not go
to the police: we will seat again. I will take care of it." They set in
ﬂnnau Castle in Philippshof and calculated: for keeping his ears open for

2 l/2 mouths. Hilewsky got about 6,500 marks with expenses. "henner" gave
his an airplane ticket; he was to fly to Berlin. go underground there. and
receive new assignsents. But Milewsky had had enough of the Constitutional
Proteetion Office. he drove back to Frankfurt. For some months he heard
nothing fros "henner." until he suddenly stood before the door again and
threatened: "You can go to prison at any time: there is enough evidence
against you."

Hilewsky was convinced and went underground as a wanted criminal. He was
supposed to try to spend the night In the leftist bars "Hatschkapp" and
"Elfseter." They would "often hide someone from the police." he was to
keep his ears open in the "Club Voltaire." a traditional meeting place of
Frankfurt leftists. and above all he was to listen to lawyers who drank
their beer there. Hilewsky went around with 293 marks of social help and
thought only: "Damned shit. you are living off then again."

"You Can dave As Much Expense Money as You want"

So he went to the "Communist Union of Heat Germany" (KBH) as a wanted
crisinsl. cursed the city and the state--and soon was allowed to stay.

His job was to spy on the system of canoras and lighting effects with which
the KBH had secured its headquarters in Frankfurt.

when Hilewsky had to go to jail again for another old reason, he soon
received a visitor. "Henner" advised him to have the leftist lawyer.

Ole Brinknann. represent hlsr-and to spy on him at the same tile. Brinkmann
is a menber of the "Humanistic Union." when he finally got out of jail
again. Hilewsky wanted finally to put an end to the spying: at least 10
tiles he repelled attempts from "Henner" to set his to work again. After
he had again sat out a short prison stretch. he found a place to stay near
Fulda--but soon thereafter the owner knew where Hilewsky came from. It was
easy to guess who told on his: "henner" was around again. Hilewsky: "They
tore up my room because they wanted to have me again." Hilewsky was hired
for the third time. "Do you want to do solething in Cologne?" Hilewsky

did not want to. but as always he needed money and he had a dismissal

letter in his pocket. His new target was explained to him for half a day:
the “Socialist Self-help in Cologne" (SSK). This organization takes care
of fallen people of all kinds and participates in a local newspaper. which
duly annoys all the public offices. the KOELNER VOLKSBLATT.

This rise the job was were difficult. for Hilewsky was not only to listen
but also to become active hisself: "You can have as much expense money as

18
FOR OFFICIAL USK ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

you want. Just see to ii that you get a lot of people drinking. Hake the
people do a lot of drinking and whoring so that there will he a lot going
on." Miiewsky could soon report success: “A group of from six to eight
people had been living it up; the women were going in and out. A call--

and I had annoy again."

And things happened in the SSK as the Constitutional Protection Office had
hoped. There was trouble. SSK member, lothnr Gothe. 35, remembers: "I
never experienced such debauchery here in lU years.“ Hilewsky: "‘Henner'
found Boell's activities in the SSK highly interesting." Heinrich Boell had
given the group a house and was sometimes a guest r: their general neetings.
Milewsky was now supposed to report whether Boell gave the SSK people money.

when he comes and what he says. Heinrich heel]. and object of terrorist
search?

STERN. too. was on the desired list of the constitutional protectors. Since
the editors had also received information from the SSK on an article about
private earnings of physicians on the public payroll. Hilewsky was supposed
to ask: "What did STERN pay for it?" A search for terrorists?

Anarchists Lured According to the Fly-Catching Method

At some tile or another th- trouble grew to such proportions in the 85K

that Hilewsky was kicked out and refused admission to the house. "Henner"
immediately had another job rot him: "Drive to Frankfurt and find out about
(blzen." Coleen is a lawyer who defends leftists. But now Hilewsky finally
had had enough: "of course it is wonderful when one can drink and where as
much as one wants at someone else's cost. but one always gets hit afterwards.
They mess everything up for you in order to keep you in their grasp. I want
to warn everyone who letn himself in for something like this."

it is scandalous to see what information the terrorist searchers want to
obtain. and It is just as had to see the dirty methods they use to keep
informants dependent upon them. Can this be what the then Constitutional
Protection Agency president, Guenther Nollau. was thinking of when he pro-
posed to his Minister of the interior "ans-Dietrich Genscher in May of

i972, that he "slip secret confidence Men into the ranks of the terrorists?"
Han Miiewsky perhaps the "new type of agent," that the first Director of
iwpartnent Vii (ierrorlsm). “ans-Jeergen Hiehe, had described? This was
supposed to he the future agent who had to dig his way for years into the
center of violent political criminals. Young academicians were to be
recruited for this purpose. if possible. reserve officers, people with
education and national consciousness. But Uiehe's top agent remained what
he was: a dream wish from the spy texthook.

another high official of Department Vll. Personnel Director Christian
("Krisrhan") nofmann. once hit on the plan of using young border officials

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an undercover agents. They were to go to villages and found country communes
in order to lure anarchists according to the fly-catching method. A crazy
idea that only had one interesting aspect: how little a federal German
terrorist searcher knows about the situation.

"Armed Combat Will Be Part of it, Too"

If they cannot plant a spy with money and/or blackmail, It looks bad for
the constitutional protectors: then they'must contact the leftists them-
selves. And nothing frightens them more. for they know well that they are
much too badly educated to do this. Their knowledge is not sufficient for

substantive discussions with leftists-~a reason why the agent recruits fail
again and again.

The case of Senior Governmen: Inspector Ringer shows how such a disappointment
looks in detail. The young, ambitious official came 16 years ago from the
Federal Border Guard to the ”ederal Office for Constitutional Protection
(va). where he learned the job from the bottom up. First he was a street
obserVer in an observation group. Then he "took care of" spies from radical
foreign organizations--he was an agent runner in Department VI. which was
responsible for this. When the terrorist department was founded. Ringer was
soon there as "diligent and ready to take the initiative" because he antici-
pated a more rapid advancement with the "Seven."

Last year he received the assignment of finding out about the 23-year old
student. Martin Mai,* from Luebeck. The Constitutional Protection Office

in Schleswig-holstein believed that Hal was at odds with his friends from

the Luebeck "prison group"--and a quarrel is, according to old secret service
experience. always good: Mai was to be won as a spy against his old friends.
Ringer made an appointment by telephone to meet Hal in the "hotel Zur
Lahmuehle." He said he was "Rolfgang from Frankfurt," and that he was

trying to make contact with radical leftists: "He intend to create an
organizational framework so that common progress can be made. Armed combat
will be part of it, too." Back in his office. Ringer made a complete report

on Hal. His judgment: "Not very well-versed in politics, can be used.
probably can be recruited."

But in the meantime. the student had begun to have doubts. what "Wolfgang
from Frankfurt" had told him about "armed combat" seemed too unusual to him
and to the "prison group." They decided to test their strange comrade at
the next meeting. when Ringer contacted Hal again after some weeks. the
"prison group" was well-prepared for the man from Cologne. They were
expecting a man in his middle thirties, about 1.75 meters tall. with dark
blond full beard, long hair. jeans and a sportshirt. Promptly at 1600 Mai
and Ringer met in a bar in l.uebeck--under the table .1 tape recorder was
secretly running.

*Thc editors know the real name.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"[ feel cunmleteiy howled over by you"

Ringer soon got caught in traps: he was not prepared for n substantial
discussion. Finally he gave up. Here is an extract from the tape recording
of the and ending:

Mai: “what have you been doin up to now, anyway?"

dluger:. alias "Wolfgangz" "Hell. I am a very retiring person. This has

to do with my professional activity. 1 was once employed by QUICK, and I
wns fired."

ﬁai: "Then you don't do much. what do you do? Or don't you do anything?"

Ringer: Remains silent.

Mai: "You haVe said what you want from us. We have said what we are interested
in. You have to answer that."

Ringer: "Hell. 1 was not prepared for this. I feel completely bowled over
by you."

How could Ringer have prepared for this? He had never learned anything like
that. when Hui then accused him openly of being from the Office of Constitu-
tional Protection, he fled from the bar. But in front of the door a dozen
angry leftists were waiting for him. They took pictures of him and insulted
him. Ringer's colleagues from the Kiel Constitutional Protection Office.

who were supposed to provide security for the meeting fled for fear of

being similarly unmasked.

The Notebook Hith Secret Telephone Numbers Captured

The "Prison Group" even captured the constitutional protector's notebook
with many names and secret telephone numbers. In Cologne there was a big
stink because of it: "Crossly careless." Ringer was placed in a desk job.
put away his leftist clothing. wore suits from the arv special deliverer
Heingarten (10 percent reduction). cut his hair short and put on a tie again.

In his place there now sits an official who up to a few years ago was still
selling tickets with the Federal Railways and was afraid of losing his job
there because of automation. Department Lender Klaus Gruenewaid fought
tooth and nail against the one-time railroad worker: “The man does not
understand anything about the business." But Personnel Chief Christoph
Cruenig (CSU). who decides in a very authoritarian manner who will be
transferred where and why decided: "Then he will just have to learn-~the

man has been ready for promotion for a long time now. I am happy to have
finally found a position for him."

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lack of Security

Hamburg STERN in German 22 Feb 79 pp 63-65

[Text] Minister of the Interior Maihofer was indignant. It seemed to the
highest civil servant of the constitutional protectors that the publication
of the Traube papers in DER SPIBGEL might also be uncoefortuble for him.
Therefore he desperately needed guilty people. He sought in vain to obtain
the Federal Cabinet's approval to prosecute the SPIEGEL. Twice this was
refused. although Minister Justice Hans-Jochen Vogel gave him powerful
support.

Angrily. Haihofer limited investigations to his own area. At the beginning
of March. 1977, he established an investigatory commission that was to find
out how the secret papers could have been revealed. "ere Haihofer gave the
starting signal for a punishment expedition that was without precedent. Laws
were broken to get proof--DIE ZEIT wrote: It is "the story of governmental
thoughlessneaa that borders on the criminal..., where those participating
were obviously only interested in removing unwanted people from the depart-
meat."

It was shocking what the Hsihofcr Commission, under the direction of
Ministerial Director Kroppenstedt. learned from chemically prepared
questionnaires. wire tapping, reports from informers. and snbtle inter-
rogations. A member of the commission. Governmental Director Treeger.
summarised the result of the first "administrative inquiries" after 2 weeks:
It has been proved that far more than 50 people had had the paperwork of
Operation “Huell"--the break-in into Traube's house was prepared within
the department under this code name-in their hands, 13 signatures were
not identified. and many people, who must have seen the documents. had not
signed. Besides this. control of the paperwork "seemed at first glance

to be very faulty.“ Thus it was. for example. difficult to ascertain
where further copies could be found. It was certain that the search for
the leak promised to be exciting.

One morning. about 20 officials of DepartmentV (Security Department) suddenly
secured the corridors of Department VII in the Federal Office for Protection
of the Constitution (DIV). took over the shredders so that no one could
destroy damaging material, even guarded the toilets so that nothing secret
could be flushed away. and posted guards outside so that no one could leave
the side building. in which the "Seven" were housed, without being seen.

By 1200 every official had to list in detail what papers he had in his desk
or safe. All persons who had to do with the “Huell” papers now received
prepared questionnaires that they had to answer within a week. "Each
questionnaire and each letter." according to a private dossier. "was

changed minutely in text." in order, in the case of a publication of these
papers,” to determine from which member of the BIV they came."--Again
nothing happened.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The result of the first written question: 94 members of the Constitutional
Protection Office already had knowledge of "Operation Huell" before its
puhlication--many more than could have been estimated according to the
location of the papers. Shocked. the commission conducted a second
questionnaire in which the answer sheets were prepared chemically in such

a way that the fingerprints of the senders could be determined. Besld 1
this. the telephones of the constitutional protectors in question were
tapped by Report VIM (Security Service). Again nothing.

Secret Papers in Open Safes

In looking through the pile of papers designated "086-8-182 36] (Operation
Muell)" the official investigators were relieved to find that DER SPIEGEL
had only had access to from one-sixth to one-seventh of the total action.
Thus some "interesting and essential detsils...were not evaluated," including
the "Requests for information" to several state offices of constitutional
protection. But the officials were not quite happy in their further search
in the DIV. For when they put the administration of Department VII under
the magnifying glass. they discovered: “The course of the paperwork cannot
he determined completely...from the index cards." because “papers had been
received or given out without entry on the index card." As far as the
entries which were made were concerned. they were "partially incomplete

or incorrect." In plain English: More people than had been thought at
first were in the position to see the top-secret papers, to lend them out
or to copy them.

In addition it was discovered that the files stood in such a way "that the
members of Department VII could approach them unobserved." Thus the safes
"were not locked during working hours, and at least in some cases the doors
were open. The files in two rooms stood open for everyone." Hhen all those
responsible for the papers were busy at the rear of both rooms, then "it
could have happened often that the open safes in the first room were
completely unguarded." The cabinet in which the "Huell" papers lay, stood

in the first room--and not only that: It stood directly next to the door
to the corridor."

Director of Documentary Administration in Department VII, Senior Government
Secretary Hans Burger, 62. said that the flow of papers within his section
"could not he directed or controlled" by him. because "there was a constant
coming and going" in the paperwork security room. No wonder: Only two
specialists had the job of answering thousands of "regulatory questions"
about candidates for public service. In this confusion. according to the
overworked Burger. it would have been possible for "every member of Depart-
ment VII to have removed these papers and copied them without a control."
The photocopier stood two doors down the hall on the same floor in the
canteen.

About 280 Constitutional Protectors Could Have Known About "HUell"

Governmental Inspector Hubert Klemptner found that "photocopies were often
made without sufficient control... in the process. there was not even an

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accurate record of which photocopies were made or how many copies. In my
opinion, it was possible up to the time of the (Traube) publications, to
copy papers (concerning Operation Muell) without any notice being taken."
Since the drawers were too small, some of the documents could not be kept
in the safes, but were stored in the transport boxes from the last move.

The commission members learned from a constitutional protector how care-
lessly the Traube case had been handled: Since the doors of the colleagues
across the hall were always open, he knew what was going on in Overath-
Marialinden, Am Troetenberg 2. where Traube lived. Shocked. the commission
also discovered that the secret operators in Cologne had made a mistake in
"Operation Huell" that contradicts eVery secret service practice: The
“operative" documents were stored together with the documents of the
evaluation. Normally the evaluators of all secret services never get to
see the operational methods of their colleagues. the "Collectors." The
documents for the latter always stay in their own safes; only information
necessary for the further prosecution of the case is sent forward. In the
"Traube" case it was a pure mistake to put the documents on the break-in
and the surveillance together with the total report.

The commission summarized the event: "When one thinks that every member of
Department VII could get to the case..., one realizes that about 280 members
could have had knowledge of or access to the whole "Huell" case.

The work of the commission was, to be sure, only bureaucratic eyewash, for

the BfV believed it had long ago unmasked ihe"guiltyones": the journalist,

"ans Georg Faust, and the official, Karl Dirnhofer, evaluator in Department

VII. Faust had been smeared by a "secret tip" that he had offered the

"Huell" documents "already in the fall of 1976." In the arrest order against
him it said: "Faust first told Second German Television programmer Lowenthal...,
who, however, refused to use the material."

Nothing of this was true, but strangely: There is no information available
on Gerhard Loewenthal as to whether he did anything against this obviously
false assertion of the Federal Court. It was thought that Faust has also
earlier given secret documents to DER SPIEGEL. This supposedly came from
“secret tips and other knowledge." In plain English: Faust and DER SPIEGEL
had been placed under surveillance before by wire tapping and spies.

The official, Karl Dirnhofer, was soon regarded as "suspicious," since he
could not explain in an inquiry why he had taken out the "Muell" documents
that he was to work on in the beginning of September, 1976. To be sure:
whoever wants to secretly remove documents and copy them, does not fill
out the forms correctly, but does it in such a manner as the commission
had also discovered: roundabout and without asking nnyone--no one notices
it anyway.

Additional Illegal Information About the Suspect

Eleven people were at first regarded by the commission as suspect; later
there were only eight, but within the office Dirnhofer was always considered

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'illi lll’l’liIlAl. illll-Z UNLY

to he the guilty one. The "Colnisnion Report" states: "Finally. additional
Infuuwmition was available to the th on the hauls of its intelligence
meannreu." In plain English: The tclephonen had long been tapped.
Illegally. as was later determined by the Court of Appeal in Cologne. The
wire tap specialist of Section V/H A (Security Service). Senior Governmental
Councillor Kaspereit. wanttl the Voice of the official or the telephone
known. An opinion of the "Physical-Technical Federal institution" in

hraunuchweig was. however. negative: the voice could not definitely he
identified.

But the statements of Dirnhofer's ”colleagues" were still damaging him. To
be sure. not one knew anything damaging. but some of them went on the attack
without being asked before sowernment attorneys and criminal officials--
indicatIVe of the climate in the department. Governmental Councillor

Claus Ahrend said about Dirnhofer. with whom he had served earlier in
Department Ill (Leftist Extremism): "He gave me the impression of a con-
fused fanatic." Ahrend is the official who put together the controversial
snooper list of leftist publications for the Border Guards. Ahrend was

also that official who. after the putsch in Chile. separated "acceptable”
rofuneen at the German embassy in Santiago and who wrote a derogatory report
on the work of the leftist bishop. Front.

Employee Adalhert Buechau: "I only know Dirnhofer as a dissatisfied com-

plainer who always attacked others and who used the most original curse
Hordﬂ. It

At first. General Federal Attorney Rchmann made a preliminary finding

against Faust and Dirnhofer of "sabotage against the constitution" (Paragraph 83.
Criminal Code). This high carat paragraph. which had never been used in the
history of the Federal Repuhil«.gJVethe inquiry officials total freedom:

They tapped the suspects' wires. opened their null. observed them round the
clock. Both were arrested. Office Councillor Dirnhufer sat in the in-
westlxatory prison in Bonn under tcrroristlc conditions in the previous
unlllaume cell. which. as with the GDR spy. was constantly hugged.

After a successful constitutional grievance. the federal attorneys had to
give up the case. because the appeals court had decided that an inquiry could
not be made according to paragraph 88. Faust and Dirnhofer were then
prosecuted for violation of the secrecy paragraph. 351. a comparably alld
rule which does not allow wire tapping and opening mail.

Consequently. the Bonn Land Court stopped the case against the two men.
Evidence had been obtained in an illegal manner and could therefore not be
used. The government attornevs appealed. and the final decision was made
by the state supreme court in Cologne: The journalist. Faust. could not
be prosecuted further. but the official. Dirnhofer. could. on the other
hand. lust because he was an offitlal.

This case will begin on 9 April before the Bonn Land Court. The mere fact
that it is taking place is a scandal. and the next scandal is that up to

25
FOR ill-"fifth“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

now on public prouurutor and no politician lum uvor vorrlml about thin
(Ionatltutlunnl I'rou-ctloo Ofﬁce that. on Ilu- protnnrc or looking for
wrmriuu. tupu when and onion ulwncvcr It plwsou. And then gathers
documents and "knowledge." no God and nu: HEIJ mul Ilu puhllnhur.

Axel Sprtoaer. There In a thlck filo. on lulu In which. God known. there
In lunch that has nothing to do with the bedroom tcncurrhura from Cologne.
llorr noun. you take over!

(IOPYRIGIN': I979 Gruncr .lahr M: & Cu

912‘
(:50: "03

2!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE "31L?
FOR OFI‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

'NEW OPPOSITION' NI11HN PCF DESCRIBFD, DISCUSSED
Paris Lu NOUVhL OBSERVATEUR in French l2 Mar 79 p 43
[Article by Bernard Guettn: the Contenders of the 23rd Congress"l

[text] hight weeks after the 23rd congress. far from returning to the ranks
or turning in their cards, the Connunist conteiders are making themselves
heard with enough force and assurance to begin to constitute a genuine in-
ternal opposition-owhich is unprecedented in the long history of crises in
the PCF. An opposition that has continued to grow since the collapse of the
ieft's hopes in March 1978.

Last weekend a hundred or so contenders held a colloquy in Bordeaux. This
week others are organizing a “torus-debate" at the university of Villetaneuse.
on the theme "Is There a Crisis of Marxisn7". with the participation of n
neaber of the econoaic coaaission of the central committee. a aeabor of the
confederal bureau of the COT [General Confederation of Labor] and also social-
ist ailitunts like Patrick Viveret. or Trotskyites like Nenri Weber. A third
debate-~on the history of the PCFo-is to take place soon. with Charles Tillon
as guest of honor. This Monday the first issue of a new weekly, MAIhTENANT.
is coaing out; the contenders occupy a prominent place in its editing. In

the Seuil Editions, Antoine Spire. long-tine aanager of the PCF's publishing
house, Social tditions, is taking the leadership--as ﬁerard Molina and

Yves Vargas have just done at Maspero--of a new collection entirely devoted to
"communists at large." All of then. right up to the nest moderate. are af-
firling that at every one of their cell meetings they confirm the existence of
a "profound political aalaise" which perueates Party ranks and would assure
their critics at least a potential audience.

Today. however. the contenders are looking anything but pleased. Not even

the telegrams by which Gaston Plissonnieg, a neaher of the political bureau.
announced to Antoine Spire and Jean Rony the publication in L'RUMANITE of

9 March of their very critical contributions to the congress debates was
enough to cheer then up. This is because, though newly born, the Coaaauiist
opposition is shaken by so many contradictions and pole-ics to be followed
that the aeeting it is to hold this Saturday in Paris night well establish the
break that it had previously avoided with difficulty on 24 February, at the
tiae of an earlier aeeting organized by the Althusserian group.

'Jean Rony recently published an article in L8 NDNDE strenuously critizing
the Pcr's positions on Europe. 37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30R OFfIClAL USE ONLY

ON that day it was Just a question. in the minds of the members of the group
(among whom were Etienne Ballbar. Gerard Molina. Yves Vargas and

France Vernier). of putting in place a group "for reflection and research on
countries reputedly engaged in building socialism." To mark well the limits
of their project. they had taken the precaution of informing the secretariat
of the central committee of their initiative. invitations had not been sent
to just anyone and Jean Elleinstein. the symbol of absolute insubordination
and suspected of "preparing for his own rally in the PSF [French Socialist
Party]." had not received one. in short. it was Just a question of turning
over several ideas on a theoretical problem. but certainly not of organizing
an opposition.

But then when this meeting opens on 24 February there are--in a room in which
over 100 persons are crowded together--at the side of the Althusserians.
members of the opposition known as "leftist". in favor of democratizing the
Party (but also of returning to strict Marxist-Leninist orthodoxy). members
of the opposition known as "rightists". quite detcnmined to draw a bow on
Leninism. And also "Gramscians" and “leftist huroconmunists." And chiefly.
many bewildered rank-and-file members. ready to leave the Party for lack of
success in making themselves heard and knowing where they are; they had
joined with the Socialists to make the left win. and now they are being told
that the Socialists are the principal enemy. They were Communists because--
deviations. Gulags. psychiatric hospitals or not.-communism was nevertheless
a future of human hanmony. and here coemunism is Cambodian genocide--which
was not denounced by the PC? until the moment when it needed to approve the
Vietnamese invasion--. then the war between China and Vietnam. and tomorrow.
perhaps. a war between China and the USSR.

Contrary to the Althusserlans. who want-ohoth from prudence with respect to
the leadership and respect for democratic centralism--to remain very moder-
ate. those rank-and-fiie members want to "throw themselves into the heap".

to shout aloud and without tactical concern that the opposition exists and
that it will fight with all available means to make itself heard. lhen

Yves Vargas. who is presiding. states, "We are not here to prepare for the
23rd congress. nor to form a group." he is just putting a match to the gun-
powder. “Maybe; but your initiative will inevitably lead you to create a
splinter group." retorts Alexandre Adler. one of the co-authors of "The USSR
and Ourselves". who has come for the sole purpose. he will explain. of warning
the Althusserians. "You haven't the courage of your logic." answer

Helene Parmelin. Marcel Drach and several others. who are hoping that the op-
position wiil no longer be content to exist. even in abundance. but that it
will find the means "to offer an alternative. a reason to continue to miii~
tate. for all those in the Party who are ready to renounce it." A heavy task.
obviously. on the definition of which all those who would have decided to un-
dertake it are far from being in agreement. For five hours the tension will
do nothing but mount. and unanimity will only he realized on one point: the
new appointment for this Saturday.

But that appointment. which should bring together still more people. was very
actively prepared for. as much by the "go-to-war" people as by the
Althusserians. who had clarified things on 24 February by saying. "Those who

28
FOR OFFICIAL USC ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have been unable to organize the group of their dreana want us to do it in
their plnee. we will not walk into that nperntlon.“

The "three common denominators" acknowledged by all the eontenders--a "eon.
slstent" anti-Staitnisn; the conviction that their Party bears at least a
share of the responsibility for the rupture in the Union of the Left; and
the desire to invent "new forms of political ailitantisu"--nre strong enough
that the opposition will not keep quiet for some tine. Hill they be enough
to :revent a break in the rnrty? “Not very likely." the opponents adult.
And iﬂtOlOfﬂﬂt avengeis? "Especially not that!" they Fay. all of then.

COPYRl(Irt: 1979 "le Nouvel Observnteur"

89JL
CSO: sino

.‘9
FOR OFFlflAl. USE ONLY
'Oll OFI’ICIAI. USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

LABOR NlNIS‘I‘BR BOULIN IWVIEUED. DEFRNDS PULICY
Paria PARIS HATCH in French lb March 79 pp I‘ll-69

[Interview with Labor Ninieter Robert noulin by Liliane Gallifet: "I Do
Not lnow why Chirec Doea Thia. I See No way Out.”l

[Text] Quantion: Inatead of the announced relief. we have in recent
Iontha been witneaaing a regular. worrinme und intolerable riae in un-
awloynent. “hat ia happening?

Anawer: I never announced that there would be env relief. [ alwaya
indicated--and hr. Barre did no likewiaeo-that the recovery of the French
aconoay. in other worda. the creation of globe. requires patient and stub-
born efforta end hr. Barre gave hinaelf .1 deadline of l yeara. The Ger-
nana. who enbarhed upon thia recovery effort before we did. gave then-
aelvaa 6 yeara and after that tine had passed. they barely began to eee
the iirat reaulta.

Queation: Do you not have the iapreaaion. Hr. Hiniater. that everytine

thie aubjact ia taken up. people keep putting the target date off becauae
the reeulta have not yet Interialited‘l

Anawer: not at all. I aaintain that I have alwaya indicated that it would
not be poaaible to cone up with a viaible reaponae to ceploynent problena
before the aacond half of 1979. The aenaurea taken to provide jobe for
young people. part-tine work. the reforn of the National Beployeent Agency.
the raion oi MIC lexpanaion unknownl. the alternating training progren
for young people. which ia auppoaed to cone out in April. end other ele-
nenta which will be operational ea of October 1979 end. in acne caaea. an
of the beginning of 1980. Job Mahler's unfortunately will be with we thie
year. And i an afraid that they will get worae an petroleun pricee go up.
The entarpriaaa will have to aahe additional eiforte. it will alao be
naceaaary to launch eector revival eftorta. that is to eey. to provide
encourage-not of a financial or budgetary character for activitiea that
will not require energy or raw eateriale in large volunea and where
govern-ant aid can aupport the econoay. That in any cue in ny peraonal
opinion.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

"1 Believe In Selective Recovery"

Quaetion: You explained thoee aeeeuree eeveral Iontha ago. In othor
worde. there in no new plan now in view of what ia going on?

Anawer: Yea. ao far I had not been talking in terns of eeloctive re-
covery. There ie a whole keyboard which we have to play no required.

Job problem are tied to the economy ae e whole. when you nenufecture
counditiea. it ie not enough to etockpile then on the atation platforae.
You have to find export or doneatic outlete. The eolutiona are thoee
which I have juat nenrionad and they reapond to the etructural phenoeene.
I do not know anybody. neither in the oppoa gtion. nor in the najority.
who gave are any other velid reeponeee. Neither Iy fellow labor niniatera
in the (Jo-anity. nor the finance niniatere of the 0300. alnoat all of
when I queetioned on thie iaeue. And that includee n lot of people.

Queation: In your opinion. are the propoeela of the left--hiring in

public utilitiee and recovery through conauapt ton—Juet good enough to
chuck out?

Anewer: Conemption revival aeane that you are going to have neny ncw
unenployed beceuee the balance of paynente will be upaet. the franc will
loae ground quickly and. coneequently. we are going to have to pay aore
for energy and raw neteriale. l'he problea of excees enterpriae coete
will then cue up. we would not be exporting nny aore end we would have
between 300.000 and 500.000 lore unenployed during the year.

for the peet $0 yeera France hee experienced increaeing econoeic diffi-
cultiee. w. conpeneated for then by injecting aoncy into the cconony.
either through the budget or by einply creating aoney. Since we were
operating under a eyetna of fixed parity. we devalued our currency tile
and again and that worked very well. The Keyneeian reeponae wee per-
fectly valid for decadee. But it ie no longer. becauee. today. we are

in e eyetcn of floating parity and devaluation therefore takee lore away
free ue.

Ae far ea public eervice jobe are concerned. they will not create any
wealth to be dietributed to the French; theee are not inveetlente but
budget expenditurea. How dare the Socialiet Party claim that we ehould
create public Jobe while being indignant over the budget deficit? One
cannot be en incoherent except when one ie in the opposition. The
enewer to unewloyannt ie inveetnent and coupetitiveneee on the aerkete.

The reet in nothing but a eaokeecreen.
"Perhaps Re Are Too Late"

Queetion: You talk about inweatnente; that in a part of the propoeele
node by Jetquee Chirec. And now you don't like hie eolutione any-ore?

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FFHIIM. USE ONLY

Answer: To say that investments are necessary for a country in order to
give it increased production capacity is correct. Let us recall sane
facts. In 1978. close to F10 billion were node available to all businesses
and that consequently enabled then to invest. Mr. Barre tried very hard
to permit the enterprises to accusulate in-house funds by holding salary
increases down. Finally. the "Hoaory operations" involved F3.5 billion
in stock purchases on the exchange and helped enterprises gain access to
the aoney market. One can hardly do were unless one wishes to devote an
even greater portion of treasury funds to investments. if that is what
the people want. then let them say so! Reducing social expenditures is
very good but. to get to that point. you have to reduce social benefits.
you have to extend the retirement age. you have to reduce the snail risk
in the matter of illness. and you haVe to drop the hospital allowance .
but who would propose a progras like that?

Question: Up to what point would you refuse to change your policy? Until
your head is on the block?

Answer: No. but that is a question you should put to Mr. lielmut Sclusidt.
Hr. Callaghan. the Italian Prime Hinlater. the Dutch Prime Minister. and
the Danish Prine Minister. Perhaps even Mr. Carter. This is a global
problea. He are in the midst of an international crisis. In l929. no-
body pointed a finger at the French premier to tell him: ”It is you who
are responsible for the crisis."

Question: He nevertheless do get the impression that the administration
is just waffling.

Answer: You are dead wrong. The edeinistration cones up with the only
responses it can come up with. But these are not spectacular responses.

Question: Nor do they produce results.

Answer: Yes. indeed! The economy will begin to recover the eoeent we
have results. I hope that this will be by the end of the year; yes. I
do think it will be the end of the year; the nunber of job seekers will
not increase any further. But if the price of petroleun is tripled.
what do you want oe to do?

Question: Do you not think that the administration has been rather
awkward in presenting its plan on the steel industry?

Answer: It is true that the Germans elieinated 30,000 jobs without
causing any noise or any violence. But this is because they established
pereanent coordination between the steel industry as such and the unions
a long tine ago and we in France do not have enough of that. This is why
i was assigned the mission on 6 February to receive the labor unions and
to get together with them and see if negotiations were possible. be they
economic or social. Perhaps we came too late.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: Is it true that the nunber of ineigrant workers keeps going
up in spite of seasuree taken. such as "help in getting then to go hone?"

Answer: There have not been many departuree-ssversl thousand. I an
thinking of reviving the idea or voluntary returns by proposing to the
foreign laborers that we pay then 90 percent assistance to be paid out
just once. I an going to discuss that with the labor unions.

Question: This is a little bit what the Ger-ens did.

Answer: Not here is whet they said: The work pernit is hereby with-
drawn as o! toaorrow--and 500.000 workers had to leave. He cannot do this
sort of thing.

Question: Sons people suggested that a study he conducted on a European
scale concerning the creation of reel national workshops to enploy the

unenployed. such as they have then in the overseas departnents. Hhat do
you think about that?

Answer: I have just cone back from Guadeloupe where everyone was unani-
nous in condesning the national workshops which are a reel disaster and
which I would like to replace with a syetce of unemployment assistance
adopted to those countries. The national workshops would only serve to
conceal the enploylent difficulties. Luxembourg hes been successful in
this to a certain degree because it had 90 percent of the foreign labor-
ers there who were assigned to such jobs as landscaping end painting. Are

yOu going to get the steel workers in the North to do landscaping work or
road repair?

Question: And whet about civic [national] service for the young-the
sort of thing that would be equivalent to cooperation. but in the hose
country?

Answer: th not 5 years of nilitary service? These are all patchwork
solutions! The problel of the young people is the problee of vocational
training end adaptation to jobs offered. The paradox of France is that
we have unesployed end lerge nusbers of enterprise nenegers. particulerly
in the crafts sector. who cannot find the qualified workers they need.

I would like to rendnd you that. out of 650,000 young people who arrive
on the labor aarket every year. 250,000 have no degrees. None at ell.
Only elternete training would reaedy this situation.

Question: You announced on several occasions that you would like to con-
bat phony unesployed. the registration of woeen for uneaployaent who went
to benefit (roe social advantages without really working, as well as the
noonlighters. what about that?

Answer: Right now. the reform of UNEDIC, which regulates all of these
problens. is being fully discussed. The social partners hope to arrive

33
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at an agreement on 16 Match. This will be an effective and extremely
important reform which will take effect as of October.

”Let him Overthrow the Governmentl"

Question: As time goes on. the situation keeps getting worse in several
regions and several sectors. Are you not afraid of an even worse deterior-
ation during the weeks to come?

Answer: I hope not. because violence does not help the worries of the un-
employed any.

Question: Do you believe. like Mr. Barre. that political elements keep
agitation going?

Answer: I sincerely think that. as the premier said. the labor union
organizations are trying very her-i in this nutter to defend the interests
of the workers-according to their own concopt--ond they will try to avoid
excesses. It is true that this kind of situation presents temptation to
trouble makers whom unfortunately we always have in countries such as ours.

Question: As part of the work preparatory to the 8th Plan. the Inset
[National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies] estimates that
there will be 1.7 million job seekers, approximately. in 1983. Do these

forecasts correspond to your estimates?

Answer: It has also been said that we were going to have 17 million
french-en by the year 2100. who can predict what will happen in 19837

If energy problems were better mastered. if the United States and Germany
were to rest-e growing. then we would not have 1.7 million job seekers.

Question: Do you believe that the creation of e conisaion on employment.
as demanded by Jacques Chirac is helpful?

Answer: I am ready to make pounds of documents available to the members
of parliament on employment problems which are perfectly well known; but
I do not see why this should be a subject for a special investigating
coemittee. You set up couitteee on specific subjects--but not on em-

ployment.
Question: "hy. in your opinion. did Jacques Chirnc demand that?

Answer: I just don't know. If Chirac thinks that the meders of parlia-
ment should be better informed on the employment situation. he is correct:
but that could wait until 2 April.

Question: The RP]! [Rally for the Republic] deputies have bitterly criti-
cized the administration's policy. what do you think about their atti-
tudeI

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

Answer: I told my friends during the parliamentary meeting in Guadeloupe
that I find it entirely normal that a group as important as the RPR should
have the right to criticize. But it must be up to the high level of the
event; it must sows into a phase of coherent proposals rather than allow
itself to come out with primary reflexes on this subject. I am not saying
this in a polemical spirit. I know that, when one is a deputy. when one
has things going. demonstrations in front of one's city hall-then one has
such reflexes. I only hope that my friends will be constructive. when
Michel Debre says that it is necessary to reduce the budget deficit. I
would like to know what expenditure items he proposes to cut from the bud-
get. With the current increase. which comes to around 3 percent. if it is
not sustained by a controlled budget deficit--which by the way would not
involve printing more money--how are we then going to sustain the economy?

Ht would drop to a growth rate of less than 2 percent and we would have
2 million people looking for jobs!

Question: Some of the 32R deputies deaanded that the urn ministers pull
out of the administration. Hhat would you tell thee in reply?

Answer: That is the language of the Third Republic. when the political
parties issued injunctions against the prime minister and threatened him
to pull all of their ministers out of the administration. The Assembly
system killed the Third and fourth republics. This system is finished.
He would spontaneously leave the government if our Geullist sensitivity
were hurt by decisions that are not in keeping with the principles which
we advocate. But we will not quit the government on the basis of injunc-
tions from a party. I refuse to go back to the Fourth Republic.

Question: People keep wondering how you can feel comfortable in this
party which everyday criticizes what you are doing.

Answer: He shall see but it is necessary for this party now to move into
a phase of coherent and positive criticism. Or it would have to overthrow
the administration. It has to know what it wants. For the time being.
here is what my voters tell me: "We do not understand any of that Paris-
ian bickering."

"Look at That Left"
Question: Is majority cohesion in bad shape?

Answer: Yes. but that depends on what it is supposed to do? when one pur-
sues a different policy. you have to know what you want to accomplish. I
repeat that the only alternative is to oust the administration and call for
elections. I certainly would not assume responsibility for that because

I am afraid that this would only plunge France into chaos in view of a
disunited left incapable of governing. Just look at that left in the face
of the steel industry crisis; there you have a leader of one of the biggest
political formations whose name is Hr. Hitterrand who goes to the North

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Lorraine and then tells us: 'ﬂere is my plan"--and he reproduces

the Ferry Plan. word for word. which is a plan for the failure of the
French steel industry. And he adds one supplementary measure: Pay the
workers for 60 hours but have then work only 35 hours. This scans that

he would be guaranteeing the instantaneous liquidation of the French

steel industry. "hen a political leader gets to that point, it scene

that he is no longer capable of assuming his governmental responsibilities.
That is ell and I as carefully weighing my words here: Mich that left. no
alternative is possible.

Question: So. what is Jacques Chirac's game? Why is he doing all that?

Answer: I do not know. At any rate. I see no way out. when I left the
UNR (Union for the New Republic] in 1976. for a few aonths. I wrote that,
before getting trapped in a deedend street, one must make sure that this
will not lead to a deadlock. This question could also be put to Mr.
Chirec. "Are you caught in a deedand street? Did you make sure that
there is a door at the end?" I an talking of a door in terms of the
national interest, naturally. not in terns oi the personal interests.

COPYalcﬂr: 1979 per Cogedipresse sa

5058
C80: 3100

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

cm's was INTERVIEW on NATIONM. won Plcmw.
Paris mus HATCH in French 16 liar 79 pp 54-55

[Interview with French Democratic Confederation of Labor leader Edmond
Maire by Mark Ullmen: 'The People's Anger is Beginning to Worry He"l

[Text] Question: Let us not talk shop; let us talk about France. what
is your diagnosis for the economy and for employment?’

Answer: Everybody is pessimistic about jobs. including Mr. Jacques
Chirac who seeks to exploit social discontent to benefit his own per-
sonal ambitions.

Question: Why are you going after Mr. Chirec. rather than Mr. Mitterrand
or Mr. Herchais, who also demanded that parliament be called into session?

Answer: The CFDT [French Democratic Confederation of Labor] has no alle-
giance to any political party and we are not going to refrain from criti-
citing any of them either. But this has gone far enough! Do you not
think it shocking that Mr. Chirec is trying-through a purely tactical
stretegem--to get everybody to forget that his party permanently guaran-
teed the implementation of Berre's policy through its votes in parliament?
And then. beyond soee more or less strong epithets. he proposes no alter-
native to the employment policy. Horse than that, when it comes to re-
fusing e reduction of working hours and encouraging business profits for
an uncontrolled revival of investments, he uses the same language as Mr.
Barre. we will not allow ourselves to be diverted from the course of
labor union action by this kind of political efforts.

Negotiate. If Not ...

Question: What is it you are blaming Hr. Barre for right now?

Answer: I find that his therapy has not been successful. He have had a
restoration of the balance of foreign trade and a very slight decline in

inflation. But even this was achieved at the price of a definite slow-
down in wage increases. In all other areas it has failed. Never has

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unenployment been as high as this. Never has the situation of the French
economy, as coapared to Western economy, been as weak. where did Barre

fail? Planning. restraints on the manufacturer. He sacrificed jobs, he
sacrificed the regions. it seems. for the sake of modernization. And what
do we have now? Not a modernization of structures but. on the one hand,
industries which are in trouble and. on the other hand. so-called daydreans
which sonehow always get away from us. I will tell you this quite sincerely:
hr. Barre has failed. He wanted to restore the economy on the backs of the
wage earners. The wage earners paid but the future is not guaranteed.

Question: When Mr. Barre came to power. we were heading straight for
catastrophe. we were still living in an economy where everything was
based on expansion with ease and devaluation.

Answer: It is true that lack of preparation for the future is not some-
thing that came up just today but that is just one more reason for putting
an end to this. Hhen you lay workers off in the name of a so-called indus-
trial tranaforaation. you must, at least. make sure that these workers will
have a clear picture of the kinds of jobs they could expect in the future.
But that is not the case due to lack of planning. The workers who were
laid off turn up among our liabilities. They are in distress and confused.
Sane of then have sacrificed their lives in the service of sectors which
are now proclaimed to be no longer profitable but nobody tells them even
what kind of retraining they night look for. Don't be astonished if they
are angry. The 1978 election campaign caused social discontent to be di-
verted toward political battle. Today, this is no longer so. He can de-
tect the first signs of a real mass action aimed directly at a motionless,
unchanged and unalterable Barre policy. I will tell you this: If this
policy does not go into negotiations, it will be swept away.

...Everything Can Come Down

Question: In your opinion, does the recent conference between the labor
unions and industry minister Giraud, on the subject of the steel industry,
constitute a step forward?

Answer: A very tiny step. The labor unions went to see Mr. Giraud to
present their views about the future of the steel industry and the steel
industry basin. They did not find a conversation partner ready to look
into his industrial policy together with them. For the people out in the
field, people who with their own eyes can see their factory closed down,
the reaction could only be negative. Certain incidents did take place
and the despair of a population group here or there took on the form of
violent actions against property or person. The CFDT is against such
gestures because they always entail the risk of backfiring against their
authors and they do not promote nasa actions that are broadly supported
by the population. But one must also realize what the local steel indus-
try manufacturers associations mean to the workers of the North and Lorraine.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE “NIX

For decades. they have been the symbol of n feudal Eight of domination.
a constant refusal to talk. when the Metallurgical industry Union today
takes the pretext of these incidents to break off negotiations started
with the labor unions. I can only say this: This is your responsible
and provocatory behavior. We arrived at the tense situation we have
today because the forge owners. with the coaplicity of the govern-eat.
for many years acted like bosses by divine right. in view of this sit-
uation, we certainly will not overlook the negotiation possibilities
offered by Mr. Giraud. He siaply say this: The perspective offered.

no matter how small it may be. neat not be expressed by a simple dis-

placeaent of the problem. we lust have concrete. appreciable. and fast
results.

Question: The tensions you talk about are specific to certain Jobs and
certain regions. Do you think that there is a risk of contagion?

Answer: The real anger of the sasscs is still somewhat restricted. You
have the hill country of Lorraine which is shaking up the entire region;

Valenciennes-Denein. shaking up the North; Nantes and LoircoAtlantique;
St. Etienne and the Loire: Haraeille and Bouches-du-Rhone; you have nose
signs of this sort oi thing at La Rochelle. at Bouiogne. at Dieppe, and in
other places. In the rest of the country. the situation is uncertain.

But it is true that the idea is beginning to take shape that the point

at which sons of the regions are is the point where all of the others will

sone wind up. I an not telling you that all of France is in a state of
mobilization but I on saying to you that we are at the start of a basic
change in the social climate and that the general balance can tilt.

Question: If the situation is as you describe it. do you not think that
it would be better to put safety valves in those places where the pres-
sure is strongest. that is to say. in the distressed regions. rather than
challenge an entire policy?

Answer: Re are not against the idea of seeking original solutions in
certain critical zones but we must distrust palliatives whose repercus-
sions we cannot always measure. At any rate. we do have negotiations
to be conducted on the national level.

Question: Are you thinking in terns of reducing working hours?

Answer: Let us take this exanple. The CFDT has Just decided that a
reduction in working hours henceforth is its priority for the aonths to
cone. The objective is to love toward a 35-hour week. But. of course.
we must take realities into account: For example. the situation is not
the ease in highway transportation and in education. Nevertheless. i

do not believe that negotiations can be limited to the regions that are
experiencing a crisis. It would be absurd to propose a asssive reduction
in working hours for all professions in Lorraine and for none of the-

in Cheapsgne-Ardennes.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

Against Nationsliss
Question: llhat do you propose?

Answer: its will not restore full employnent without profound changes in
our way of life and in our society: but there are esurgency measures that
not be taken. As I said before. i an thinking here in terms of reducing
the weekly working hours with a prospect of getting- to 3% hours but we
lust also think of the creation of a fifth team for each work station -u\d
a ban on supplesentary [overtime] hours or. sore specifically. their obli-
gatory pay-ant. This last eeasuro--to which one would have to add the
creation of jobs in the public sen-ices and in the local services that
are available to the public-would create many jobs because the voluse

o! over-tins hours is enorlous. When Mr. Barre replies that these sess-
ures cannot constitute solutions to the employment problee. he bases his--
self on a rather specious line of srguaentnt ion which we are quite fsniliar
with. the kind where they say: Your dernnd is not acceptable because it
would presuppose fundamental structural rhuugeu. 0n the one hand. this

is wrong. 0n the other hand. it simply lmils down to admitting the exis-
tence of a blocked society in which markets in trouble have no prospect
other than uneaployeent and submission. hetween the talk about "French
dasocracy" and the actions of the Giscnrdinns. there is a vast abyss.

Question: If you create jobs in the local continuities, you would have to
anticipate an increase in lacs! rare». that in to sav. a new distribution
of public nosey aaong the three "voracious ones." in other words. the
national govern-sot budget. the social security budget. and the budget

of the local co-inities. Hould you be in favor. for exs-ple. of reducing
social security expenditures in order to increase local taxes which could
create jobs?

Answer: Sosa aodifications in the distribution of social benefits are
undoubtedly negotiable but. generally speaking. we are not in favor of
reducing rights which we intend to safeguard and to advance. ‘l'o isprove
local finances. one could call for new revenues. i would like to note
that. when he case to power. hr. barre said: "I will attack inequalities
and privileges!" In reality. he did nothing of the sort. The very
linitation of the policital aajority. on which Giscard and Barre base
theaselves. prevent a real reform of the national treasury and a reduction
in the wage scales and revenues. Hitheut waiting for socialise or funds-
Iental structural changes. I say now that we could--and we should-41: of
this mt create a tax on big weal°h and tax high incoees snore heavily.
I an saying that an increase in low wages would reviVe consumption and
that a reduction in the hierarchy would at the sane time be a factor in
social justice and in the aodernizatzon of France. Do not forget that
the entire spectre: of incomes is much broader in France than in other
European cemtrias.

1.0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

Question: Since you brought up Europe. let us talk about it. Do you
believe that the struggle ior eaploymeat must be conducted on the level
of the Cos-Ion Market? Do you believe that labor union deaands must be

coordinated so that french enterprises will not be penalized when it cones
to competition?

answer: I believe first of all that the European dimension is useful and
that all European labor unions should support the 35-hour week; but 1 as
not saying that all solutions must be European nolutions. You never make
social progress in that way. You have progress in some sectors which
then is picked up by others. As a satter of fact. I as for Europe. not
only because the coordination of demands seems desirable to use but .1an
because I as afraid. as far as frame is concerned. that we might with-
draw into ourselves. Poujsdist. demagogic. siaplistic theories can still
have a hold on the population. This is precisely why we recently reacted

rather vigorously to the nationalist slogans that cropped up here or
there.

For A New Hendcs

Question: Do you think that there is a real danger that we might see
Europe, in general. and Germany. in particular. serve as scapegoats?

Answer: I believe that the remarks by Hr. Debra and Hr. chirac have a
rather dangerous background and I was struck by the simplistic and the
vehement tone of some of tho columnist proposals. A few weeks ago. you
were able to see a front-page headline in L‘KUHANITB: "No to the Euro-
pean Superhighway." wen. when you read that article. you realise that
this European superhighway was A-87 which runs around Paris. The rea-
soning employed by L'HWITE was that this highway was designed to serve
the interest of the German or Belgian leading strata. in order to make it
easier for them to get around Paris! Hhen you get to that degree of stu-

pidity. when any pretext will serve to oppose your neighbor-that is
indeed cause for worry.

Question: How should we counteract that?

Answer: first of all. by calling a spade a spade and this is what we did
at the cm. And then we did that by fighting for jobs on a European
level. Our labor union has worked very hard and we should hope that

the government will do the ease. Regardless of the angle by which we
view the uituation. we always come back to the motionlessness of the
barre policy. that i find most scandalous in the preaier's attitude is
that it here any hope. Everything is happening so if Hr. Barre had said:
"There is no way out. You other workers. you can do what you want. you
can stage mass actions if you want; all you have is my policy-so sake
the best of it." This certainly is an invitation to crime or rather an
invitation to violence. This is a trap laid for the labor union movement.

[.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL "SE ONLY

This is a trap (or a collective action which-~for lack of anything positive
it night be ained st--entails the risk of exploding.

Question: And how will all this end?

Answer: It will and badly. in the long run. this kind of excess bach-
fires against the workers. against the unemployed. against the weak. It
can also lead to recourse to authoritarian leaders.

Question: If you believe in this danger. why are you not trying to de-
fuse the lost explosive situations rather than look for overall solutions?
Listening to your suggestions. l so afraid that expensive fornulss. which
night he ieaginable to soothe special distress situations. will becoee
generalized and the trench econony will flounder under the weight of
burdens that are too heavy.

Answer: We are always open to a search for special solutions but they
cannot be enough when it cones to responding to the gravity of the pro-
blems we face. At the seas tine we are aware of the overall constraints
upon the French econony. Hr. Barre certainly realized a certain nueber
of (acts and explained then quite frankly. Unfortunately there are
other facts which Mr. Barre did not wish to see because they threaten
the interests of business and industry. And then. instead of recognizing
the social difficulties. he denies then. in the France of today. a real
eteteslen would follow the Hendes tradition. 0n the one hand. he would
not engage in deeagogy; he would not say "Everything is going to he easy.
everybody will be happy." But. on the other hand. he would try to get
the workers involved in the definition of viable solutions. These solu-
tions would have to be negotiated and not ieposed abruptly. just by
chance. as in the case of the steel industry or television. The future
has to be prepared; it cannot be iaposed. Believe you ee: You lust
never place people with their backs to the well because then they will
get angry. The risk is that France night again find itself torn not
only politically but also socially. It is high tile for the governeent
to change its nethods and policy.

COPYRlGHT: 1979 par Cogedipresse SA

5058
cso: 1100

kl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "PFICIM. "MI ”MN

COUNTRY auction FRANCE

PERTININT OIIICLAL INTERVIEUBD 0N RESEARCH POLICY
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 16 Mar 79 n n3

[Interview with Secretary of State for Scientific Research Pierre Aigrain
by Laureate Haeuroll

[Text] [Question] Barre says privately that he basically counts on three
ainistere to overcoee the econoeic crisis: Honory. Giraud. and you. Does
this eean that scientific research has recovered its former standing?

[Answer] Yes. but the preaier never told me anything like that. In the
adeiniatration's spirit. scientific research is today considered very
ilportant not in short-range terns-~reaearch will not resolve the steel
industry crisis in Lorraine over the next 2 yeara--but rather in long-
ranga terns. The first effects of this new policy will be detected as of
1985.

[Question] Severtheleas. one can here everybody say that research in
’rance is lagging.

[Answer] Not in qualitative terns. It is true that it has its strong
points and its weak points. in biology. for era-pie. we are inadequate
in certain disciplines. juch aa nutrition or clinical phat-ecology. in
other words. as applied to Ian. 0n the other hand. genetics is a peek
sector. The trouble is that. when we are good. this is not clearly
noticed by public opinion and the Iedia.

[Question] Can France coopete with countries such as the United States
and the USSR which have treaendous (undo?

[Answer] A aediue-eized country cannot clsie to be the first in all die-
ciplines but it met be in thc lead platoon. That embles it already to
have access to all worldwide research. It is not enough to get scientitic
publications and coununicationa from all over the world: you also have to
know how to reason then. Being in the lead group oeane thus having a
ticket that will get you into the club.

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

[Question] th are there so few Nobel prizes being awarded to French-
sen?

[Answer] You ought to ask the Swedish Academy that question! Prizes

are awarded to individuals of great value but not to all people of great
value. The prizes. noreover. are awarded for work dating back 20-30

years. soar often. Unfortunately. at that time. French research was not
in very good shape. To that you can add the fact that the researchers.

who do not know how to aake publicity for the-selves with the aedla. know
even less how to wake publicity for the-selves with other scientists. Now.
the award collitteas pick those they know.

[Question] Is there still a brain draln nuing abroad?

[Answer] No. This is a phenomenon which dates back to postwar tines
and at that tile it was confined to aedicnl research which was not in
good shape anyway. To a certain extent. i regret that we only have 50
brains per year who definltely abroad. out of the l5.000 we train. If
there were lore, this would enable us to establish lore contacts. The
Americans have realized this; the brain drain is heaviest in their coun-
try.

[Question] Can we have big discoveries capable of arousing the interest
of the public at large?

[Answer] They are foreseeable. And. if they take place. the public does
not always grasp their importance. At a accent when we celebrate the
100th anniversary lo! the birth] of Albert Einstein. we oust recall that
his discovery of the theory of limited relativity. which revolutionized
science. did not arouse any interest. to the point where he did not get
the Nobel prize for it but for his explanation of the photoelectric
effect. but who remembers that. anyway?

COPYRIGRT: 1979 par Cogedipresse SA

5058
050: 3100

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SEC I'ION NANCE

BRIEFS:

PCP MESH? munnewrum the eubJect or gtvln PCP memberehlp card-
to [warmth the clause [1n the PCP'G regulation? requiring hench
mtlonnllty to become n part number V111 reportedly be eliminated at. the
“#39108 {arty congress. Tug [hue PARIS MATCH in French 30 hr 79
9 0h

C80: 3100

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR DI'TICIAI. US". ONLY

cmm-rm! sscnou SPA!"

BRIEFS

rmmrom. m mun-4o e reeult or e (m [dual Union or mug
propoenl Spain will hoot, for the first tine,tbe Cong-one or the Interna-
tional Confederation 01‘ Free labor Organization (CIOSL) from 15 to 23
Nave-bar [T972]. Thin contederation rep-eeentu 65 million members. In
addition the Second Worldwide Meeting of Unlon Iouth will be held in our
country in Me: 1 . A oxintely 15,000 delegates n'on different countries
will attend. :57 [ELM mm 16 in Sponieh 25 m- 79 p 5]

050: 3110 END

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY