FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10056
16 October 1981

West Europe Report

[FOUO 53/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 53/81)

Couteurs
ECONOMIC
FRANCE
Patronst: Role, Policies Under Socielist Government
(Henri Vacquin; PROJECT. Sep-Oct 81) ....................
POLITICAL

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Strauss on Coalition's Problems, CDU/CSU Policy
(Franz Josef Strauss Interview; STERN, 10 Sep 81) .......

FRANCE

Revel: Hitterrand Policies, Contradictions
(Jean Francois Revel Interview; CAHBIO 16, 15 Jun 81) ...

Debray's Cuban Ties. Government Role onnined

(CAHBIO 16, 15 Jun 81) ..................................
ITALY
New Law on State Subsidies to Parties Proposed
(Luciano Santilli; EUROPEO, 14 Sep 81) ..................
SPAIN

PSOE's Guerra Optimistic About Party's Prospects
(Juan de Dios Hellsdo; CAHBIO 16, 7 Sep 81) .............

- a - [III - WE - 150

can “m"A' 'lt‘F Ann I;
FOIAOFFKJAL.USB(MVLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

PATRONAT: ROLE, POLICIES UNDER SOCIALIST GOVBRWT
Paris PROJECT in French Sep-Occ 81 pp 959-954

[Article by henri Vacouin: "The Need for Employer Identity“] _

[Text] In four rounds. the employers have lost political power. Along with it
they also lost a certain type of relationship with the administration. The labor

inspector is becoming more of a source of worry, the "provisional order" is becoming
less clear, "the R6 [General Information Directorate of the Ministry of the Interior]
is becoming less useful," "the conciliation board members are less slow. and layoffs
are even more rigid while it is almost impossible to fire any labor union delegates.
all of this is taking place against the background of an expanded labor union role

in the enterprises. The employers suddenly find themselves exposed, without any-
body to latch on to in dealing with a political power whose scale of values is as
alien to them as it is unpredictable and disquieting.

Employers in Limelight of Politics

Since May and June 1981. an entire population stratum. which plays a decisive role
in keeping the economy going and thus managing its performance, has been adrift.

It is even further shaken up by the close look which the political power or the
labor unions are taking at it in their naiveness or ignorance. "It is enough to
make you vomit," says one; "this is like traveling steerage," said another in July,
at a moment when the employers. circling the wagons, are more concerned with
standing shoulder to shoulder than developing a determination to harm anybody.

In this very binary country. the images of Epinsi worked too well in the past to
permit the recognition of the real identity of the other side to be easy. Today.
the employers are paying the price. Of course, the former majority and they them-
selves made much use of the procedure to deny the Left and the labor unions but
they did not gain anything. Before that, the labor unions developed under the same
Hanichean gaze and we have been able to see the results for ourselves. The poll-
ticsl majority and the labor unions should meditate on that score at the risk of
failing to bring about the change which they are henceforth committed to. Since
1974, it was that same desire for change which brought Hr Giacard d'Bstaing and
then Mr Hitterrand to power: This is a latent demand for a more reliable social
regulation system, aimed at less unemployment and more efficiency.

Because Giscardism did not succeed in Iodifying the effectiveness of the social
triptych, that is, the public powers, the employers, and the labor unions, it is
now Hitterrandism which is today responsible for doing the job. The social
consensus, which the government is seeking, because this is a profound demand,

‘1
INJR‘0I11CIA1.IISI:(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

means that it is necessary to rethink the links between the employers, the labor
unions, and the government. It would work only within the context of the social
game, with the labor unions replacing the employers in the privileged link which
the latter had with the government. The social crisis triptych-—in coming to
grips with the 2 million unemployed in the future-needs a strong policy and that
means a labor unionism which will awaken to reality plus a powerful employer
identity so that mutual exchanges may be bounced and so that the realities of

the enterprise may be presented in the debate even and above all if the interpre-
tation which the employers give to events is different from that of others.

Now, this fundamental need for a strong identity for each actor does not depend on
each of them. The most vulnerable right now are the employers; it is perhaps not
entirely useless to remind the new government of that either. Political power
always structures its conversation partners and this is particularly true in
France where the employer institutions traditionally have been strongly under its
control. The abrupt break of the umbilical cord between the political establish-
ment and the employers will only accentuate the solitude of the employers. It
will be necessary to avoid any hasty interpretations of their behaiior at the risk
of understanding nothing.

The State of the Employers

In the face of this new attitude, where are the employers and, in order better to
understand their state of mind, where do they come from? Beyond their well-known
heterogeneity. they have in ccmmon a taste for power, for action, a developed sense
of individualism, an aggressiveness stimulated by competition. and great pragmatism.
All of these are aspects which characterize them even ahead of the profit motive.

To succeed or to last. they also need some contradictory aptitudes. including
strict management and a capacity for transgression without which their can be no
creativity. While they have no monopoly on these aptitudes. they live them daily
with a sanction of their decisions which is all the more immediate, the smaller
they are-and that helps to develop the art of decision-making.

Nevertheless. the employers, like the rest of French society, can be subdivided in
various ways, depending upon the approach. The Marxist approach gives us a rather
homogeneous representation, except when the vicissitudes of elections introduce the
need for separating the big ones from the little ones. The election approach lines
them up in the form of Giscardo-Chiraquians. Looking at their current or future
ways of behavior, general definitions are even more effective. Their pragmatism,
their loyalty to the enterprise, and their fighting spirit in the end make them
accept social and political changes. But right now. the employers, small or big,
are in shock and they are worried and their first reflex is to kick. The preceding
administration was familiar to them; they knew how to anticipate what it was going
to do; the new administration is still rather hazy regarding its blueprint and the
more it is so, the more it plays on cords which are not theirs. The visit to the
Pantheon of President or the sincerity of the premier may seduce the crowds but
they irritate, they confuse, and they even shock a little bit and lyricism is
often something unusual in employer circles. Hr Barre had gotten them accustomed
to the upgrading of business, while the newcomers, with a few exceptions, appeared
less competent and less credible to them. Anti-intellectuslisn is as widespread
among the employers as workerism is among the labor unions.

2
FOR10FFKJA1.USEIMVLY
F0!‘0FFKJA[.USEIMNLY

After the Fear of the Labor Unions-a Revolution of habits

Finally, for most of the employers, the elections were not won only by the political
Left but also by the labor unions. This is another characteristic of the majority
of French employers; the labor unions were never really recognized as a fact of life,
they were barely tolerated. Labor unionism inspires fear and that fear grows the
more one has to deal with it. Now, more than two-thirds of the employers, the

small employers, are not familiar with it; they experience it through agents,
avoiding the cut off figure of 50 persons and they establish branches for groups

of 69 people. For those who have practical experience with the labor unions, the
"annoyances" rather than fear characterize their behavior and their familiarity

with labor unions, as a fact of life, is approximative; by way of example we night
mention the hard approach which was greatly developed after 1978 where the decline
in the fighting spirit in support of wage demands involved the enterprise manage-
ment in a struggle usually directed against the labor unions as such.

Prom Hr Purnon at Novatome, going through the “salt mine“ of SNIAS [National Aero-
space Industry Company], at Harignane, where an employer group worked to eliminate
the labor unions as a fact of life in general or mounted a selected drive in which
the COT [General Confederation of Labor] and the CFDT [French Democratic Confedera-
tion of Labor] suffered heavily. In other employer circles, fear produced soft
technologies for the elimination of manufactured products in the peripheral re-
carch companies of the employer institutions. Finally, a certain liberal, modern,
young or Christian employer group, although in the minority, pursued a strategy of
cooperation with the labor unions. According to all evidence, this group is today
least troubled. This fear of the labor unions on the part of the employers is
accentuated today by the specter of the extension of ' ttive bargaining agree-
ments, particularly in the PHE [small and medium-size businesses] where the assump-
tion as to the development of labor unionism in the streets, in the counties, or

in the residential sections causes a real scare. (A labor unionist once a week
comes to the street, as is done by the CFDT in Paris in the Sentier section.)

Here again, when the extension of labor union influence takes place, the employers
simply adjust, finding out that reality is less anxiety-generating than the myth.
Right now, fear is sustained by the absence of contact which permits all kinds of
assumptions, including naturally the most apocalyptic ones. For the most part,
the employers associate labor unionism with an attack on their freedom to make
decisions; it matters little to argue about the refusal of the labor unions to
become involved in this field; this fear has irrational strength behind it.

The employers also are going to have to submit to a long-range regionalization and,
as of now, a new say of gradual negotiation, from the national level to the branch
level and down to their enterprise. we cannot rule out the possibility that the
time when it was enough to implement the decisions of the particular labor union
»category is gone. The reduction in working hours will really be negotiated in the
field as a function of the special features of each enterprise. It will be necessary
to negotiate the replacement of certain gains with others, based on th; specific
nature of the enterprise and the moment; it will be necessary to know how to work
out temporary and renegotiable accords, to replace the sliding scale with the

scale of economic realities, and to negotiate partial compensations and productivity
increases. In addition to surprises on the market and regarding credit, the

3
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE<0NIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

employers will have to learn to negotiate differently, taking on the burden of
having to train their labor union conversation partners in absorbing managuent
date which for the most part are beyond them. Never before perhaps has so much
been demanded of them. This is because they are not only asked to participate

New Legitimacy

Accustomed to adversity, the employers should. after recovery. benefit from this
situation and derive some advantages. There are many elements in their favor.

Since 1974. the crisis has considerably upgraded the image of business; the

French have. become aware of this: Jobs and the quality of life constitute a de-
cisive key in the enterprise. This realization of what business means is accompanied
by a simltaneous understanding of the management function. In 1968, many employers
had confused the demand for a different type of authority with a rejection of
authority and government. As a matter of fact. what we have now is a tremendous
number of demands that must be handled—but in a different way. this way. This is
perhaps what brought Hr Giscard d'Estaing down and what Mr Hitterrand understood

so well since he is a fan of Florentine authors. The new administration has much
charisma and much in the way of symbols; it is also developing an image of power
whose fallout will benefit the legitimacy of the exercise of decision-making
authority by the manager of the enterprise.

benefit from an entirely different demand addressed to them by the government. Of
course, less will be possible in the way of excesses because surrounding labor
union and government pressure will be much more present; but, regardless of how
little the rules may be respected, the administration, which needs the employers
for the economic upswing. will become more sensitive to their state of mind. And
that includes compensation for the increase in the interoccupational minimm growth
wage, the recasting of the entire social security setup, as well as the desire of
the new administration in Paris to meet with the enterprise bosses. Never before
has an administration expressed such curiosity- in meeting with business and the

employers who are less and less considered exclusively as profiteers but also as
sources of jobs.

The Possible Awakening to Hilitantisn

The average employer conceives a link with his professional organization as being
something very close to anarchism where individualism exerts pressure on the desire
for collective investment. From his labor union, he expects assistance in terms

of disputes and the law, he expects aid concerning the rights for supervised working
time and an often narrowly corporativc defense of his individual interests. The
average employer was a virulent autonomist; in his eyes, the CNPF [National Council
of French Employers] and the CGPMB [General Confederation of Small and Medium

Size Businesses] were very Parisian organizations from whom he demanded much with-
out giving any of his freedom out in the field.

In their entire past, the employers have displayed tremendous allergy against
collective organization. The only moments of unity came during the time of the

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

great fear, in 1968, before Grenelle, and the launching of the 3850 in 1936. The
corporatist-individualist had n limited need for collective identity to support
his. Today, a radical change is taking place. The French Left wants "to diffuse
power in the enterprise"; this suggestion touches the very center of the scale of
values of the small or big employer. The stakes are no longer measured in terms
of 21 more or less in financial terms but involve the very foundation of employer
identity. From this change will spring an entirely different demand for collective
belonging and employer identity, in other words, a stronger demand for a national
link around which this identity could take shape. The employers are going to
dscover the strength of the unity myth.

The 18 July 1981 protocol on the reduction of working hours was forwarded for nego-
tiations by branches and the latter in turn will pass this on to the enterprises
before spelling out their conitnent. This decentralization will make the employer
negotiate on the basis of his own specific nature and he will no longer be in-
plementing a nationwide agreement. This is an evolution in the association link
between the employer and his organisation; the employer will ask his local,
departmental or regional association to help his in negotiating. And the employer
organization will get more involved in the real situation faced by its menbers.
This double phenomenon can lead to a kind of association link which would be some-
thing new.

The political establishment has turned regionalization into the keystone of its
reform drive. This upgrading of the department, of the region, as far as the
enployer is concerned, will move the decision-mking places closer to the place
of his preoccupations. A personality in his region, very such in evidence on the
social scene, the employer is already in a good position to tackle his task much
better than the local union leaders. Decentralization will upgrade or create
regional negotiating bodies for which the enployer structures, sometimes unused
for a long time, are much better prepared than the labor union structures. The
employers will discover that reality offers much more opportunities than the
apocalyptic visions might hint today.

Toward a Powerful Rational Employer Confederation?

The fear of the wolf, the defense of identity, the learning of negotiating proce-
dures, the adversity represented by the international crisis, the obligation to

go it alone—now that they have lost their mentor with the disappearance of a
friendly political establishment—the need for henceforth having a connon frame

of reference, a doctrine, a policy—all of these are new factors whose combined
effects will push toward a rally. It renains to create the doctrinale and organi-
zational conditions for this profound duand. The aployers are not entirely
helpless. Over these past 20 years, they have often struggled with these problems,
regardless of whether it involves doctrinale or even awkward research (the liberal
charter of Mr de Calan) or proposals for structural reforms in the GEROP. Regard-
less of the tools which the employers may use, they face one problem: At last to
create the great employer confederation which will be totally representative and
which will be adapted to the profound latent demand.

Did not Mr Hitterrand, from the ems [Center for Socialist Studies, Research
and Education] to the Rocardians, manage to solve the nobles of squaring the
circle-which was more complex in its heterogeneity than that of the employers?

5
MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If Mr Ceyrac goes, it now remains for the employers to figure out their poucy and
to find the leader capable of tackling the difficult management of the operation.
But that is not the least paradox: At a moment when they believe they have lost
much due to the elections. the employers find theueelves forced to win their
identity.

COPYRIGHT: CERAS, 15, rue R.-Marcheron,92170 Vanvee.1981

5058
cso: 3100/982

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? cm

STRAUSS 0N COALITION'S PROBLDB, CDU/CSU POLICY
Hamburg STERN in German 10 Sep 81 pp 264—271

[Interview with 080 chief Franz Josef Strauss: "'If Schmidt Has the Courage To
Reduce Social Payments. We Are Prepared To Support 111nm]

[Text] In an interview with STERN, CS!) chief Franz Josef Strauss
explains why the CDU/CSU should not hope for a breakup of the
SPD-FDP coalition and under what conditions the chancellor can
count on CDU/CSU support.

STERN: More and more Germans want to emigrate because they do not see any real
future prospects. How do you feel personally?

Strauss: Uneasy too when I think about the present situation in Europa and in this
country. For simplicity‘s sake I draw on the words of Bcononic Minister Graf
Lanbsdorff for the conclusion that things are not what they should be in this coun-

try. lle has said recently that the country aust be straightened out again. Surely
one does not make such a stateaent unless sonething is not right.

STERN: This probably is also the view of those who are eaigrating. and their
number is increasing. It is expected to aaount to 100.000 next year.

Strauss: Too nany things are converging at present-the fear being stirred up by
ideologists to serve their purposes, the fear of war being stirred up by people
espousing pacifism. behind which is Moscow's psychological warfare. Added to this

is the vague feeling that the foundations of prosperity are swaying and that the
pillars of stability have already partly burst. Perhaps one ought to include a
third native. People see countries with great expanses. where life is more infernal.
with less government providence and social care. less government oanipotence, with
greater personal freedom of moveaent and. at the seas tine. substantially greater
risks and less social security—the United States. Canada. Australia. I at least
have not heard of anyone wanting to go to the countries of really existing socialise.

STERN: Do you seriously believe that the fear of war now nanifesting itself in the
protest of the peace movement is exclusively the result of Soviet propaganda? Don't
you think that asny pe0ple are honestly and sincerely nanifesting their displeasure
about constantly increasing araaaent?

7
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
IKNIOFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

Strauss: I want to make this clear once and for all: I have never yet imputed a
dishonest motive to convinced pacifists who are against any use of force. but I
have done so in the case of communists espousing pacificism to serve their purposes.
in whose view Soviet atomic weapons are instruments of blessing. whereas atomic
weapons in the hands of the Americans represent diabolical means of mass annihila-
tion. In this connection. even though unfortunately hardly any history is being
taught in school any more...

STERN: ...Not in Bavaria either?

Strauss: In Bavaria still and again. but not to an extent I find satisfactory. In
this connection. I say. one should not forget the disastrous role played by the
pacifism debate in France and Britain in the thirties. Hitler was delighted about
its expansion. made sure he was kept informed about its progress and drew the con-
clusion from:itthat. because of their internal exhaustion and because of their
internal weakness. the western powers in the event of an attack against Poland
would no longer be in any position to implement their Polish security guarantee.

STERN: What do you mean by that?

Strauss: All collectivist systems, all totalitarian states have an inner law--
expansion of power. They are not satisfied until whoever is their closest neighbor
is subjected by force to their will for power. or at least made politically
dependent.

STERﬁ: You once said that Brezhnev has more brains in his behind than his German
admirers have in their heads. So chances are that he will not start a war.

Strauss: I said so after an anti-Reagan campaign in part of the press and the

media public corporations. As if Reagan were the cowboy in international affairs.
constantly in a "High Noon“ mood. his hand on his gun. walking into the Western
saloon. shooting down the lights--in other words. representing an incalculable

risk. Reagan had said: The communists lie and cheat when they are concerned about
world revolution. The German admirers of Brezhnev and opponents of Reagan then
inundiately empathized with Mr Brezhnev. noting while shedding crocodile tears that
the door between Moscow and Washington had now been slammed shut for an indefinite
period. They had not even been able to dry their tears when Brezhnev declared that
he attached the greatest importance to meeting Reagan as soon as possible in a
summit meeting to discuss all great international questions. and thus also those of
armament and disarmament policy. I therefore need not retract any of my assessment
of the tactical attitude of totalitarian states. I consider Brezhnev a true states—
man who. unlike Hitler. is not blind to risks or obsessed by risks but conscious

of risks and shying away from them.

STERN: Fear happens to be the basic feeling in our time. Since the founding of
the Federal Republic is has never been articulated as strongly as now.

Strauss: That is true. But we should also name the fearmongers. How about the
federal chancellor. whohasclaimed several times in all seriousness that the
CDU/CSU is conjuring up the danger of war and that the SPD alone offers a guarantee
of peace? Is that not fearmongering? There is a macabre humor in the fact that
now suddenly the chancellor in Copenhagen is urgently reproaching Europe for being

8
F08‘0FF"JA1.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

too :Ifn1ld. This is a case of someone feeling guilty. because. if only owing
to his high position and his former high reputation. he has decisively contributed
to generating that fear. It is a case of someone switching from the arsonist's

role into the fireman's uniform. The whole spectacle being staged by the SPD in
connection with the counterarming decision and the decision by the 0.8. President

to produce the neutron bomb-a spectacle in which Soviet producers too have made
known their interest and their participation-has led to an increase in this

climate of fear.

STERN: There is also fear for our economic future. But since the federal government
began its efforts for a budget reform the 000 and CSU have been silent. leaving the
citizen in a quandary as to where the CDU/CSU would do its red-penciling...

Strauss: ...This question was bound to he asked...
STERN: ...At the moment it is the most urgent question...

Strauss: ...I will not avoid it either. But first I would like to make it clear
that we refuse to share the responsibility for all that the SPD-FDP coalition has
botched since 1969. and also that we are not prepared to take the blame for the
government program, which is inadequate and unbalanced and constitutes a poor
compromise.

STERN: But the citizen is entitled to expect a clear statement by the opposition
concerning the policy of expenditures for the next few years...

Strauss: ...Nor do we want to get out of that. On the contrary. we will make some
economy proposals of our own. As long as the government is not prepared to expose
the true causes of the poor financial situation with unsparing self-criticism. and
to steer a radically new course from social-care thinking to performance thinking.
there is no togetherness anyway. So please no further search for alleged scape-
goats to serve as an alibi for one'a own failure!

STERN: What do you mean by that?

Strauss: When things were going downhill economically. the SPD-PDP government

never looked for mistakes of its own. Those at fault always were the businessmen.
the doctors. the dentists or the real estate agents. and finally the oil princes

and the multis--in other words. me too. For I too am a multi: I own 100 Exxon
shares...

STERN: ...Exxon has 697.000 shareholders...

Strauss: ...0ne really ought not to overestimate my influence on Exxon's business
policy. But back to the economy program. As far as I am concerned. one thing is
clear: Before one can talk about individual points of budget reform. one must
reveal the true causes of the precarious financial situation in order to make
possible a radical change of course.

I am sure the government has not got the strength to do so.

STERN: what do you think are the true causes of the financial straits?

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Strauss: Ever since the SPD and FD? started governing, it has become fashionable
to spend more money than is being earned and. on top of that. through ever new
taxes to see to it that business loses the desire to invest. without investments
there are no jobs and no funds for covering social expenditures. Our economy has
not slowed down only because of the policy of high interest by any means, as the
Social Democrats would like to make one believe. It is suffering far more acutely
under the disparagement of business and the performance concept. One therefore
has to put an end to this philosophy of envy and to this credo of ignorance. Or
did the SPD and the FD? perhaps not arouse the covetOusness which encourages the
lazy to be lazy? When the government realizes this and. on top of it, at long lasL
summons the courage to make reductions in social payments we cannot afford any
longer, we are prepared to support it.

STERN: In an all-party government? Or are you flirting with a grand coalition to
remove the financial straits?

Strauss: The opposition can neither resign, nor can the opposition claim a majority
in the current Bundestag. The government must approach us. It was not all that

long ago that Mr Schmidt shouted to the CDU/CSU in the Bundestag, "I don't need you
to solve my problems."

STERN: As minister-president you have the opportunity in the Bundesrat [upper house]
to change the economy concept your way. Do you want to take advantage of that
opportunity. are you going to let the government run aground?

Strauss: In case of a genuine change in course, our offer of cooperation stands.
But I think the coalition is unable to make a fundamentally different economic and
financial policy. such as is also being mentioned by Genscher and Lambsdorff after
they have put the country in disarray as helpers of the SPD. He cannot spare the
FD? that blame.

STERN: At least the liberals have prevented the supplementary tax demanded by the
SPD and the employment program.

Strauss: And that was needed too. For with those crazy notions the socialists
have demonstrated once more that they cannot learn. As soon as they venture forth
into the economic policy and financial policy sector. they leave their brains in the
cloakroom, then put on a small or large Marx wig. including a beard, and then again
hold forth about the theory of the state being in charge everywhere and of the
stupidity of business. They probably will never understand that social security
presupposes performance which brings in the money. But I cannot expect performance
from someone whom I constantly burdern with new taxes. Therefore all plans for
releasing the money to rev up the economy with the help of tax increases are just
as imbecilic as wanting to make a diabetic feel more vigorous by letting him have
some glucose.

STERN: Is it really possible to do without more taxes?

Strauss: The possibilities of taxing the citizens have been exhausted. If one

wants to get the economy going again, one must lower taxes (such as the wealth and
license taxes). Even businesses that are no longer profitable. that are in the red,

have to pay a trade return tax if they duly pay the interest on long-term borrowed

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capital. As long as the burden of interest was 6 or 7 percent, this was not such

a pressing problem. But now that the interest is between 1!. and 16 percent, at
least in this area innediate steps should be taken. and the CW and the CSU would go
along with these. And the planned new fixing of unit values of real estate not

not under any circumstances lead to a cold tax increase, and thus to cold exploita-
tion of real estate owners.

STERN: You have no use for governmental esployment programs?

Strauss: Unem; loyment can be fought only by lasting strengthening of private and
public investments. not by programs intended to offset economic trends. The SPD
calculations to finance government programs creating jobs with the help of ever
higher taxes. in order to rev up the economy. have never yet worked out. The only
correct prescription is to enable businesses to increase their yields. and thus also
their profits, but also to give the workers performance bonuses.

STERN: But first you expect the workers to take on new burdens as a result of
drastic intervention in the social net...

Strauss: ...The social net ought to help the truly weak. Today the social net is
increasingly being abused by the lazy as a comfortable hamock. That cannot be

tolerated any longer.

STERN: Where would you put the knife first? At continuing to pay wages in case of
illness?

Strauss: Such intervention presupposes a readiness on the citizen's part to make
sacrifices. . .

STERN: ...It seems to us that this readiness is greater than the politicians
believe it is...

Strauss: ...I think so too. 1 am therefore prepared to advocate tough measures.

STERN: You are evading our question. What do you think about continuing to pay
wages in case of illness. for instance?

Strauss: Never fear; you will get a clear answer. We will have to introduce
waiting periods for all workers in order to limit. above all for small and medium
enterprises. the no longer bearable avalanche of costs resulting fros continuing
to pay wages. In this country the average absence owing to illness is simply too
high. Surely we are not a nation of sick people.

STERN: Would you also advocate reductions in unemployment benefits?

Strauss: Social payments have to be examined in toto—in other words. also including
unemployment benefits. which are not excessive in the case of the truly un-ployed.
Surely it is absurd that in this country someone drawing memploymentcompensation.
by taking advantage of the continuation of wage payments and of the wage tax adjust-
ment for the year. can earn more than someone who has worked every day throughout
the year. Some action has to be taken there. Just as important are stricter rules
governing the question of whether someone can be expected to take a certain kind of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAL.USIZONLY

job. Or is it proper for the federal government, in 1981 for example, to pay more
than 8 billion marks in subsidies for miners' insurance (as much as three-quarters

of Lhe total expenditures) if the rightly superior care of miners is also extended
to those who have never worked underground. Also unavoidable are reductions in

certain areas of overblown social assistance and the canceling of payments in the
event someone refuses a job and the like.

STERN: The economy commissars of the opposition are also considering changes in
promoting training.

Strauss: We will be unable to avoid cutting the BAfoeG [Federal Law for the

Advancement of Education] payments to high school students, and of course there
will have to be a rethinking of aid for college students as well. There are too

many college students being supported in the Federal Republic. It used to be that
5 percent of an age group would attend college--and would do so at a high level.

Today an average of 20 percent attend college-lowering the level of performance
substantially.

STERN: How do you want to make reductions?

Strauss: I am for a two-track system. Whoever does normal-level work can get
loans; whoever comes up with a top performance should get a subsidy or fellowship.

STERN: why are the CDU and C80 actually being so difficult as far as a reform of

the children's allowance is concerned--for example. as regards introducing income
limits?

Strauss: I don't need any children's allowance of course. Nor do I oppose income
limits. A children's allowance is certainly already problematical as far as the

first child is concerned. for the family's burden does not really start until there
is a second child and particularly a third child. And there. of all things. the
government wants to reduce payments. We don't agree with that.

STERN: Last week it looked as if the government would fall apart over the economy
dispute. Here you hoping for a switch in coalition by the liberals?

Strauss: So far the prevailing opinion has been that Genscher was confronting the
SPD with the alternative: Either the SPD knuckles under. or the PDP will leave the

coalition. Put politely but drastically. this means that the tail is wagging the
dog. This relationship is now starting to reverse itself. Increasingly the dog

is wagging its tail again, because in the future the threats of the EDP will no
longer be taken seriously by the SPD. Hr Genscher and Mr Lambsdorff have made so
many vigorous threatening statements only to slip into the coalition bed again
afterward. having sacrified their sacred principles in order to make the coalition

last a little longer. They have fallen on their faces again. They did not even
manage to put across their minimum demands...

STERN: ...But at least they have prevented salient tax increases. But back to the
question: Did you think the FD? would leave the coalition?

Strauss: l have never been one ofthosewho predicted that an F0? change in
coalition was pending or was to be expected soon for sure. Besides, what Genscher

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wants or does not want is alnost irrelevant. As a result of its nany strong
statements which then were not aade good. the FD? has forfeited its credibility.

We will not permit it to steal away from its conplete share in responsibility.
None of the poor conditions it now deplores would have come about without the FDP.

STEIN: Wait a minute, hr Strauss. Didn't you signal to the FD? some tine ago that
if it finally left the coalition and for-ed a government with the CDU/CSU it could
even count on Genschar becoming chancellor?

Strauss: I beg your pardon? That did not come from me. But a CDU/CSU politician
is supposed to have said so. I think Mr Genacher hinself in conversation with.
several people answered this hypothetical question with a clear no.

STERN: Why are you so firmly convinced that the FD? will stick with the SPD?

Strauss: Because Genscher is afraid that the party will fly apart. that there will
be a rightwing and a leftwing FDP. with neither unaging the S-percent hurdle. At
the FDP party congress in Cologne. Genscher had to fight a strong wind concerning
his policy of dependability vis-a-vis the NATO two-track decision and his clear
stand about the need for nuclear energy. he had to put his whole prestige on the
line in order that the party congress night not end in an open defeat for him.
Since then he has known where he stands with his party.

STERN: Why is it that the opposition kept silent so persistently in the budget
debate, thus giving the FDP a chance to advocate demands reaching far into the COD
electoral clientele? Did none of you notice that?

Strauss: Your question is not entirely unjustified. Genscher blew up a balloon.
which then hovered brilliantly over the vacation landscape. But in the neantine
the air has gone out of the balloon again. and it is lying all wrinkled on the
ground. As opposition we must not pretend to be the governannt. Besides to a'
large extent the POP copied our demands. But at the coalition table it lost its
courage again. How does our saying go? Sure they would have liked to. but they
didn't dare he allowed to.

STERN: Anyway. there is no supplementary tax and there is no increase in the
value-added tax.

Strauss: But of the salient intervention in the law governing perforlance
[Leistungsrecht] which he and Lanbsdorff talked about. only fragnents have remained.
This liberal socialist coalition has again shown that it is capable of only one
thing-~gradually to make the country ungovernable.

STERN: Ungovernable: that is one of your exaggerations. And. plese, why do you
say "liberal socialist" and not "social-liberal"?

Strauss: Because the latter. as far as I am concerned, means the wrong use of two
terms sacred to me to describe poor results.

STERN: Let us assume that the FD? will. after all, change its coalition preference

before 1986. or that there will be a CDU/CSU-PDP coalition. Is it conceivable
that under those circumstances, of the successful tandea of Economics Minister

l3
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJAL.USE10NLY

Schiller and Finance Minister Strauss of the Grand Coalition of 1966, the latter
will go to Bonn again in order to. as you say, straighten out the country again?

Strauss: That questionlhave been asked several times in the Bavarian Landtag,

though in a much less friendly tone than yours. Personally I do not have the
intention or desire to return to Bonn as a working politican. The idea that as a

minister-president one has quit national politics is erroneous anyway. I have
learned, though, that one should never say "never." because that way one imposes
a restriction on oneself which night not make any sense one day.

STERN: You would be keen on national politics then?

Strauss: I enjoy being Bavarian minister-president. which right now is better than
being mayor of Hamburg.

STERN: Does that mean that you do not want under any circumstances to become
candidate for chancellor once more?

Strauss: I will not allow my person to stand in the way of any formation of a
coalition, if only because of course I reserve for myself the freedom of opinion
and of speech depending on how things are going.

STERN: And how are things going inthe CDU/CSU?
Strauss: The CDU/CSU is facing an acid test. It must achieve the masterpiece of
subordinating to a greater degree all interests of groups. however legitimate. to

the overall concept. That means a radical change in course, a genuine alternative

to the government program, without which the CDU/CSU cannot claim credibility
either.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AG 5 Co.

8}90
CSO: 3103/4b8

lb

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

RBVEL: MITTERRAND POLICIES, CONTRADICTIONS
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 15 Jun 81 pp 64-67

[Interview with Jean Francois Revel, former editor of L'EXPRESS, in Madrid; date
not given]

[Excerpts] Jean Francois Revel, former editor of L'EXPRESS, spent 6 days in Madrid
at the invitation of CAMBIO 16 and DIARIO 16.

"I have signed a contract to write a short treatise on the Mitterrand program, the
socialist plan and, in particular, the anticipated nationalizations which, whatever
the left may claim, entail a total change in the nature of the French economy. If
all the private b:nks are nationalized, the control of credit will be transferred
completely into the hands of the state, and this is absolute state control of the
economy."

A Facade of Moderation

But, with Revel, CAMBIO l6 wanted priaarily to analyze the French political situa-
tion since the Mitterrand victory and before the legislative elections that will
take place in June.

CAMBIO l6: “hat is your opinion of the first socialist government of the Fifth
Republic?

Jean Francois Revel: It is a rather improvised government, aimed at offering France
an image of moderation with a view toward the legislation elections. Personages
from the old SFIO [French Section of the Workers International (French Socialist
Party)] have appeared, such as Prine Minister Pierre Mauroy himself, who is very
anticonmunist; there is Michel Rocard; and the members of CERES [Center for (Social-
ist) Studies, Research and Education] appear to be greatly controlled.

I mention improvisation because Mitterrand did not want to assume power so quickly.
He wanted Giscard to remain at the Elysee until the 28th, and that is what he told
Roger Frey, head of the Constitutional Council. But Giscard did not agree. He
wished to leave as soon as possible. That forced Mitterrand to move hastily, and
not without creating tension among the government group. For example, the prime
minister who had been planned was not Mauroy, but rather Claude Cheysson, who had
to be content. if we can use such terms. with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cheysson accepted that relegation very unwillingly, and then demanded, in return,
that the Ministry of Cooperation. which in France means Africa, be combined with
the Foreign Affairs Ministry. In fact, that ministry has been entrusted to Jean
Pierre Cot, who will come directly under Cheysson. Under Giscard, it was one of
the ministries directly subordinate to the president. And now, Debray's appointment

as Hitterrand's adviser, something disturbing, will not help to improve the atmos-
phere.

016: So, a perfect socialist harmony does not pravail....

JFR: There are individuals on this team who hate each other's guts. The French
Socialist Party is a great mosaic of movements, in the image of the Socialist
International itself. There are convinced Atlantists and irate anti-Atlantists.
There are advocates of a mixed economy and advocates of the state's total control
of the economy. There are Social Democrats and there are Harxiat-Leninists; and
Hitterrand has had to give each one of the movements its small portion of power.

C16: How can cohesion and continuity be achieved?

JFR: Everything depends on the results of the legislative elections. It would be

a big surprise if the left did not win them, although a fluctuating movement cannot
be precluded either. But let us consider the most predictable hypothesis. which is
the victory of the left. Then, everything would depend on the dimensions of that
victory. The French electoral system is very peculiar, and can facilitate enormous
changes in, and transfers of votes. If the left wins a small majority, of 10 or 12
deputies, Hitterrand will have to give up many things in the socialist plan. If
the landslide occurs, and it gains 50 or 60, it will be backed by a highly radical
assembly, which will demand of it the implementation of all the promised measures,
regardless of how insane they may be. In fact, it may be predicted that a sizable
increment in the number of socialist deputies, elected with the support of communist

votes, would redound, rather, to the benefit of the Ps' [Socialist Party] most
leftist wing.

616: By way of a welcome, Hitterrand has had to confront a decline in monetary value.

JFR: That is so, Overnight, and this is a fact, we French have found ourselves 25
percent poorer, and it has been necessary to put all the meat on the spit; that is,
the Bank of France's reserves, to prevent a more serious decline. We are told to
remain calm, that there are sufficient reserves for 6 months. But this, in essence,
also means that Raymond Barre did not handle it so badly, did he? Now, the govern-
ment proposes to bring about a tremendous increase in consumption. The interoccupa-
tionalguaranteod minimum wage [SHIG] will rise to 3,500 francs, in other words,
about 60,000 pesetas. The family subsidies to the aged and retirement funds will
be doubled. The demand will increase, but the supply will not; because there is

no confidence and, in addition, it will be necessary to cope with the demands for
raises in the higher wages, wherein there is always a desire to maintain their
difference from the SHIG. This does not help the battle against unemployment; and,
on the other hand, it does foster the invasion of the French market by foreign
products which are far cheaper and increasingly cheaper. In short, the prospects
are by no means pleasing. not even for the short term.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nationalizations
616: And what about the nationalizations‘!

JPR: This is a key issue, concerning which, insofar as I can observe, Hitterrand
has succeeded in deception, even in Spain. liis package of nationslizations is
impressive and, in fact, it socializes the French economy entirely. "hen he is
attacked on this point, Hitterrand always hides behind De Gaulle. But he has
nothing to do with it. Hitterrand is nationalizing a vast number of business firms
whose stockholders are small holders, people with savings and postal savings bank
accounts; and, in addition, all the private and financial banks, which in turn
control a huge number of industries. One can readily see that this number of nation-
alizations far exceeds that carried out be De Gaulle. De Gaulle nationalized unpro-
f itable entities such as Coalyards of France, or carried out punitive nationaliza-
tions such as that of Renault, which was accused of having worked for the Germns.
What Hitterrand wants to do would impose on the French economy limitations that

would preclude its being considered a market economy or one of free enterprise any
longer.

c16: However, during the election campaign he seemed to be abandoning many things.

JFR: During the election campaign Kitterrand was very ambiguous. and constantly used
that double-talk which typifies him. On some occasions he said that his presidential
program had nothing to do with the Socialist Party program; while on others, such
as in the debate with Giscard, he accepted the socialist plan and all its nationali-
zaticns completely. In any event, his so-called "presidential" program was only
slightly more moderate than that of the party. When talking with Giscard, he reaf-
firmed the fact that he intended to nationalize all of the private banks. Now let
him explain how that can be done and, at the same time, avoid a totally state-
controlled and bureaucratic economy. 0n the other hand, in an interview that I
held with him for L'DO’RESS, he appeared completely moderate and circumspect,
claiming that the model of society would not be changed. to the point where I had
to call him later on the telephone to point out that, during the entire interview.
he had never uttered the word socialism. He asked me to send it to him, so that

he could add something containing that word in the margin. And he did so.

There is something that is clear. If the socialists and conunists gain the 300
deputies in the forthcoming elections, I don't see how they will be able to resist
the rank and file of their parties, to prevent all that their leaders have promised
them, in writing. It mat not be forgotten that the PS rank and file militant is
as collectivist as the communists. These are ideologists in the style of Chevene-
nent (leader of the PS left wing and minister of technology and research).

The Double-Talk

C16: Let's speak a little more about Nitterrsnd's "double-talk".

JPR: Precisely because Hitterrand has always used double-talk, one day appearing
more of a Social Democrat than Schmidt, and the next, more radical than Brandt, it

is obvious that all his real policy depends on the results of the legislative
elections. It will also depend on the number of socialist deputies who need

17

MR OWV’WM. "8! ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

communist votes to win in the runoff election. To give the readers of CAHBIO 16

an idea: In the assembly which has just been dissolved, there were 117 socialist

and radical socialists deputies of the left; now then, of those 117, only 12 had
been elected without a need for communist votes. A socialist landslide could occur,
and there may be many socialist deputies who do not resort to the communist vote.

But that simply means that the socialist vote has become radicalized, and that the
votes in favor of the PS extremists have increased. 0n the other hand, if Hitterrand
has only five or 10 deputies as a majority, the moderates, such as Charles Hernu,

who is a classic Hendesist, will be in command in the government.

C16: But if he has to get along with such disparate people in order to govern, will
Hitterrand be able to maintain France's international position?

JFR: Actually, there are in the French socialist world positions as different on
international policy as on domestic policy. In the present team, there are indivi-
duals totally opposed to NATO and BBC, who practice a sort of Red ultranationalism
and who would completely accept the closing of the borders, because Europe means
the multinationals; and, on the other hand, there are veterans of Europeanism, not
only in the government, but also among the hmmediate advisers, such as Pierre Uri,
who was with Jean Monet, and others. Then there is another major sector which is
essentially Third Horld oriented and anti-American, and which does not consider the
USSR a threat, because the real threat is the United States, imperialist capitalism
and all that....So there is friction, and there will be friction in the future; it
will increase, and obviously that will result in a weakening of France's interna-
tional position. Now then, Francois Hitterrand has, in succession and at the same
time, used the language of each one of the movements, waiting to see which is the
one in command in the party. For the present, the matter is distributed rather

in favor of the Third World proponents and the leftist ultranationalists, with a
few bouquets for the Atlantists and Europeanists. One need only note who his pre-
ferred guests were on the day of his "coronation": the Gabriel Garcia Harquez's,
etc; whereas no dissident, not even those who are closest to the PS and who live

in France, was invited. And who advises him on external affairs? Regis Debray, who
is an agent of Castro propaganda, as everyone knows, I mean that it is an honorable
profession....It would suffice to say so publicly and clearly. But that is very
disturbing, because Hitterrand neither knows nor understands anything about the
Third World. Economically speaking, he is a nonentity. In domestic economic policy,
he is beginning to understand something; but on international issues he continues
to believe in the most childish things: for example, that if the underdeveloped
countries are poor it is because the imperialists have stolen their raw materials,
and so forth. Hence, we again encounter total error.

The Holy Alliance
616: To conclude, after the fall of Giscard, where does the left stand?

JFK: As we know, the Gaullist RPR [Rally for the Republic] and Lecanuet's UDF [French
Democratic Union] have become united in an electoral coalition. This is important
psychologically, because the war, the hatred and the low blows between the two

groups were perhaps the main cause of Giscard's defeat. Even in Chirac‘s own ter-
ritory, in Correze, the RPR promoted voting for Hitterrand. Now the solution to

this problem (and perhaps a possiblebalancingor compensation effect that is rather

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connonplace in France) may conceivably benefit the right. In spite of everything,

I believe that the presidential majority will achieve the parliamentary majority.
The Opposite would be a great surprise. For the right, the nest important thing

is having found a leader in Jacques Chirac. Moreover, one observes among the
French electorate a confluence toward a vast center. The French electoral map has
undergone a genuine revolution. It can no longer be said that this or that region
is a territory of the left, or vice versa. For example, the PCP [French Communist
Party] has lost one labor and industrial tone after another. and has nade some
headway in underdeveloped agrarian regions. This is perhaps the only positive
piece of information free the French elections. 0n the other hand, the Ioderate
right vote tends to occupy the entire map of the nation, becoming deregionalised and
mixed with the also moderate Social Democratic vote. In other words, France seems
to be headed toward an electoral situation similar to that of the United States;
that is, toward a disappearance of the traditional French electoral tribalisn and
toward the advent of an electorate that is perneeble and changeable, depending on
the individuals, the ideas and the programs offered it, or depending on the interna-
tional situation. and this regardless of the strength of the leading local politi-
cians. If Chirac knows how to read the French electoral map, and acts accordingly,
he may bring about a great national trend in his favor. He should be no means

turn the opposition into a right wing conservative group.

Hitterrand and Spain
C16: Hill the relations between France and Spain inprove with Hitterrand?

JPR: I have come to Spain for a few days to rest, to see bulls and also to become
informed somewhat concerning the situation. Despite that coup psychosis that one
detects among certain colleagues in the press and in sane newspapers, I am optimis-
tic about Spanish democracy. It has just won a notable victory in Barcelona. The
updating of the policy, under difficult circunstances, has amazed Europe, and I
believe that coupism, if there is coupism, has received a sharp blow, if I may use
the play on words.

As for Mitterrand and Spain, I feel that I as being repetitious, but we are faced
with the same problen of double-talk. In principle, as although he has never

said anything concrete or precise, Hitterrand and the socialists should be note
favorable than Giscard; and regarding the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group],
after Regis Debray's appointment, I hope that I am wrong, but I don't want to
delude myself, I don't believe that the Spaniards can do it.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Canbio l6, Infornacion y Publicaciones, S.A.

2909
CSO: 3110/8

19

FOR OWVWAI. USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

DBBRAY'S CUBA“ TIES, GOVERNMENT ROLE BXAHINED

Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 15 Jun 81 pp 66-67

[Article by x.n.: "The Cuban Connection"]

[Text] when President Francois Hitterrand named Regis Debrsy a personal adviser for
foreign affairs, the shock and uneasiness increased in the Western foreign ministries,
and particularly in those of Latin America.

Now, and for the good of civilization, Fidel Castro has just given the presidential
adviser exceptional support, by entrusting Cuba's representation in the UNESCO
exeCutive body to Alfredo Guevara who, in addition to holding positions associated
with the "revolution's" cultural activities, is the person in the leader's closest
confidence and that of his brother, Raul, in the dark maze of security and the Cuban
secret services, according to reliable sources.

Alfredo Guevara is a long-standing member of the Cuban Communist Party who, at one
time, when upset, embarked on a crisis with the orthodox communist movement and went
into exile in Mexico, coming in contact with Fidel. When the latter overthrew

Batista, Guevara was one of the organizers of the first Cuban security entity, along
with Cienfuegos and others.

This man of culture and good taste studied in Paris, and later in Prague. In Cuba,
he has served as director of the Film Institute, and is now vice minister of culture.

In fact, Western intelligence specialists and services consider him an essence of
a "Father Joseph" in the Cuban secret services; and he has always been at the side
of Fidel Castro on "historic" occasions, such as those in Bogota or Chile.

Some of the Cuban politicians and intellectuals now exiled or jailed in Cubs were
personally interrogated by Alfredo Guevara.

The Mission in Paris

In these circles, which are generally very well-informed, it is claimed that Alfredo
Guevara's function in UNESCO is a mere cover. His true mission is that of serving
as a direct contact between Fidel Castro and Regis Debray. Debray's presence in

an office at the Elysee is like manna falling from heaven to Castro.

In fact, the Cuban Embassy in Paris is filled with personnel who are completely

devoted to the USSR, whereas Guevara, although he is a communist, is primarily a
member of Fidel's system and apparatus.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another important endeavor of Alfredo Guevara, to be carried out together with Regis
Debray on the splendid platform that has returned to his Paris for such things,
consists of the organization of a World Congress of Solidarity With the Cuban
Revolution, to be held in Havana, which would be an imitation of former demonstra-

tions at the time when Castroism enjoyed great prestige among the leftist intellec-
tuals all over the world.

This involves the reconstruction of that fabulous propaganda system, based either on
self-interest or gratuitousness, and fostered with invitations to hundreds and
hundreds of intellectuals and artists to visit Cuba.

In fact, nothing of all that remains in Europe any longer, despite the assiduous
defense of Castroism on the part of writers such as Garcia Marquez or Julio Cortazar.

Alfredo Guevara has just concluded a first stay in Paris, to which he will return
in September. His position in UNESCO has left him a large amount of free time.

Whereas, in the cultural area. Alfredo Guevara's preferred occupation is films, in
the realm of security and secret services, one of his specialities, there are the
subversive and national liberation movements,and there have been indications of
very concrete relations on the part of this individual with the POLISARIO (Front)
[Popular Front for the Liberation of Saguia e1 Bamra and Rio de Oro].

This is not the first time that UNESCO has served as a platform or cover for that
kind of business.

Without going further, in connection with Spain CAHBIO 16 has learned that, until
recently, a high-ranking South American (although not Cuban) official of the inter—
national organization was responsible for shipping to Spain money from Cuba that
was destined for various extreme leftist organizations.

Thismoneywas received in Barcelona by the person who until her death 3 years ago
was the Cuban consul, Marina Diaz Arguello, who also held the position of consul
in the Canaries, a major Cuban and Soviet espionage base.

In this regard, it may be recalled that the head of the Fishing Institute in Cuba
is Isidore Halmierca, the number one security man.

Havana's interest in subversion in Europe, especially in the Mediterranean countries,
is long-standing. It may be recalled, not without interest, that Regis Debray was
Fidel Castro's contact with the Italian editor, Peltrinelli,when the latter, before
being assassinated, was financing the organization of the first terrorist groups

in Italy.

COPYRIGHT: 1981CAHBIO 16, Informacion y Publicaciones, S.A.

2909
C50: 3110/8

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICS ITALY

NEW LAW ON STATE SUBSIDIES T0 PARTIES PROPOSED
Milan BUROPEO in Italian 14 Sep 81 pp 10-13
[Article by Luciano Santilli: Double or Nothing]

[Text] Financing for our political parties. Deeply in debt
incurred by increasingly costly staff and apparatus,
Italy's political parties are keeping their fingers
crossed pending enactment of a bill that would dou-
ble the already controversial subsidies they get from
the government. Just how do they spend the money
entrusted to them? Are all expenditures justified?
And do the official financial reports tell citizens
the whole truth?

The democracy factory resumes operations this fall amid a sea of troubles.
Things are not going at all well, not only because its customers, the
voters, have grown hard-hearted, and are looking with increasing lack
of interest at the generally mediocre quality of the product. The
parties are in danger of permanent shutdown, or of subsisting on star-
vation rations because they are plagued by debts and by budget reports
leaky as so many sieves. Warns Renato Altissimo, Minister for Health
and administrator to the Liberal Party (PLI):"The smaller parties sim-
ply don't have the clout or, if you will, the business income the PCI'
is said to have from business activities, nor yet do they enjoy the ad-
vantages that come from peopling the civil service and the State, as
does the DC. If the government does not intervene, Italy will very
shortly have a two-party system, and the smaller ones will Just fade
away."

Like everybody with debts big enough to make them candidates for bank-
ruptcy, party administrators dream of a stroke of luck that will instant-
ly put them back in the black and satisfy their voracious creditors.

The parties have been preparing for thisxuagical turnaround, semi-secret-
ly, for months now: a new public finance bill, which will psactically
double the amount set in 1974 (45 billion lire per year plus the extras
provided for election campaigns), and, most importantly, will peg it to
inflation, is all ready. When they plucked up courage to place a draft
bill already approved by the Senate on the Chamber agenda, the political
leaders knew very well that they were challenging public opinion.

22
FOR(NWKJALUSEONLV
row m-HUAL USE ONLY

The operation is not one of the block-busters that leave great gaping
holes in the national budget: the total cost of financing for the
parties, which will reach 120 to 130 billion lire, will not exceed 3
ten-thousandths of the GNP. And yet the Radicals have vowed an all-out
battle to stop it, armed with more than 8,000 amendments. Roberto
Cicciomessere, who wrote most of them, will make some fairly far-out
proposals. For example, one amendment would confine financing to par-
ties winning more than 5 percent of the vote. In this way he will give
his comrades ammunition to take exception to his amendment in intermin-
able speeches which will effectively tie up the Chamber. The need for
hard cash for the parties is so urgently pressing, though, that hush-
hush negotiations are already under way to forfend such a threat. Par-
liament's pledge to appropriate billions for fighting world hunger, the
Republicans' perennial demand, is rumored to be the price for calling
off the filibuster.

Actually, not even the Radicals are still making an issue over the legi-
timacy of public financing. "The voters, albeit by a very shaky majo-
rity, have said they want it, and we must take due note of that," admits
Cicciomessere. Furthermore, there is some cogency to the tally-sheet
now circulating among party administrators: the 45 billion lire from
1974 are worth, in real terms today, about a third of that. On the ba-
sis of those figures, there is a lot more muscle to the arguments of
those who demand that the moralization process, the linchpin of the
platform of the government Giovanni Spadolini heads, be conducted with-
out hypocrisy. In other words, that State financing be adequate to an-
able the administrators to resist the temptation to mingle it with other,
less immaculate sources.

The touchstone for measuring the legitimacy of the parties' call for
help thus turns out to be quite a different one. How did they use the
money they have already got from the taxpayers? What has changed in
the composition of their revenues since 1974? While the answer to the
first question must perforce be that they spent it the same way they
spent funds before, with the extra safety net of a guaranteed income,
it is also easy to note that there are parties, such as the Republican
Party, which already depend for very large percentages of their funds
on a check from the Office of the President of the Chamber.’

The major parties, with the PCI and the DC in the lead, count heavily

on contributions from members and sympathizers. Their annual reports
contain entries bulging with billions, such as "acts of generosity," or
"miscellaneous revenues." DC administrator Filippo Michele would never
admit, any more than would his colleagues, Franco Antelli of the PCI or
Giuseppe Gangi of the PSI, that that money wasn't laboriously scraped
together, a thousand lire at a time. And yet they cannot dispel the

irresistible suspicion that there are Just as many unmentionable con-

They say in the Radical Party: "The parties informed the voters: you
must finance us out of the public monies, or else we'll steal, we'll
be corrupted. Yet how many sordid stories have come to light since

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1074?" In short. it is by no means certain that the public contribu-
tion has in fact raised the level of morality in politics, or that it
has kept parties and factions immune to the temptation to seek the
disreputable charity of rogues and scalawags looking for protection.

No such grant as the one enjoyed by the Italian parties exists in any
other European country, although there are many facilities made avail-
able in thv form of services for political activity.

Cash financing, however, is still vital to the Italian parties, a far
Cry from the 10th-century model, still working in the United States,

of campaign organizations which are pared down to practically nothing

in off yours. "The money from the State has shored up the party appara-
Lusvs. horn of a tendenCy toward bureaucratization that stems from their
extremely ideological character, in pursuit of a solid consensus on the
principlrs rather than the practice of governing," reflects Giuseppe
Ruspautini, the PRl's administrator. ‘

1hr figures are eloquent (see table). The DC spends more than 6.3 bil-
lion lire a year on salaries, about half what it spends on the press
and propaganda (those two items are the costliest for all parties).
"We have cut staff, we have worked out systems for using people better,
but the barnacles, the petty privileges, and sundry people sent round
with recommendations are there, all right, in party offices as else-
where," Michcli complains.

Altissimo has Conducted bloody RIFs: the PLI has cut its payroll from
130 to 50, yet even that skeleton staff costs almost 700 million lire,
nearly half the regular yearly contribution from the State. Clearly
the perfectly oilcd organizing machine of the PCI, costing 4.1 billion
lire a year, should qualify Antelli to run the personnel office of a
multinational solely on the grounds of his efficiency. There are those
who still wonder, though, how the figures in the annual report jibe
with sums under the charitable contributions heading, upon which, one
way or another, the Communist Party depends-

Kot all the praise -- or all the blame -- of course, falls on one side:
the Social Democrats (5.3 percent of the vote in the last elections)
spend close to a billion lire on their leaders, executives, and employ-
005, and another billion and a half (those two items alone swallow up
the entire State contribution) goes for operating expenses (telephones,
rent, organizing expenses, and travel). Either they are spendthrifts,
or else the DC's nichcli is a wizard because he has never exceeded 1.2
billion lire to maintain a machine that rakes in better than a third of
the vote .

Ean the parties whnnn organization is largely a matter of fantasy and
thr quod will of Lhrir members, like the Radical Party and th~ Proleta-
rian tnity Party (PDUP), run up heavy expenses, albeit commensurate with
thnir showing in the elections. Salaries are not, as they are in the
DC, pegged to the contract pay for office workers and the Roman electric
utility workers, nor yet do they match those in the PCI, which arepegged
to the metalworkcrs' wages. Francesco Rutelli, secretary of the Radical

25
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

3.03..

:13! .‘u
out."

as a.

.32. ‘u
Ian: :-

 

53... nun-innum-

.33:

.III I

332:

3:33

I

l.

.I|. .

gal—d
IQ! ‘-

 

33. I:
E2

In 1:
9.. ~33- ~

I

30.33 0 IR;

IIIIIII

9.3.9.993 I133:
' .3 a as:

 

3‘02 58$

333:: 3393.9: 5.83... 9:83...

8. 3:: .81. 3.

. IE 3t

II. ..I .

       

Q

a

 

 

is: 3.3.3“. 3.3—..- .o
0333.. 2. 8- Id 3.. g.

 

3. .3 5 52:3 =

.3523 I u I. .3! EEC-n.-

I III.

 

3:3..al 1:3.

.xmmr... 3‘ 35

9999.99.91W- :9 «9.99% 2. 9.9.2999... 9.

..cI-z. 3353

3:: . Id .33: . 3.303 c

 

 

  

 

.Sualaw 3033...: .‘qu-o

 

 

 

swung-l!" a

..3Ii—ciucige

 

Sui-38mg.-

 

 

 

g: I: c
u!‘ .—

 

 

99.59 62.5 3.3:
R. .39...

523.3 .

a
9.953:
393.95

333.3%

I: .15
lull-c 3

 

pig‘-

itliilni911

3-3: 3.- ; c

u... A ..mqwrmwwﬁ- .9939...»

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM!0FFKJALLSE(»HN

KEY TO TABLE
BOOKS IN THE PARTIES' POCKETS
REVENUES
1. ANNUAL MEMBERSHIP DUES
2. CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE STATE
(including reimbursement for regional
and European campaign expenses)
3. MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL REVENUES
4. MISCELLANEOUS INCOME
5. ACTS OF GENEROSITY
TOTAL REVENUES
EXPENDITURES
1. PERSONNEL
2. GENERAL EXPENDITURES
3. CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERIPHERAL HEADQUARTERS AND ORGANIZATIONS
4. EXPENDITURES FOR PUBLISHING, INFORMATION, AND PROPAGANDA
5. EXTRAORDINARY EXPENDITURES FOR ELECTION CAMPAIGNING
TOTAL EXPENDITURES

DIFFERENCE

 

The total expenditures reported by some parties include'sonenot clas-
sified under any of the five headings in the table. The difference
between revenues and expenditures in some cases is not equivalent to

a real deficit. Parties which had accumulated a surplus in the preced-
ing fiscal year may choose on some occasions to carry it over into the
revenues for the next fiscal year.

26
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Party, makes 400,000 lire net. And yet ittakes only supporting organi-
zations parallel to the party, such as the Calamandrei Center or Friends
of the Earth to start a hemorrhage that will wipe out the cushion of any
economies. .During 1979 and 1980 the PRI has accumulated a deficit of
some 860 million lire.

The burden of the peripheral structure, the sales subsidiaries of the
party-owned businesses, is even more horrendous. The Socialists hit
5.8 billion lire, and the PCI lays out better than 38 billion to back
up its 12,000, not to mention sections and their federations.

To be silent is a fate tantamount to death. All Italian parties are

clearly agreed on the truth of that axiom, judging by what they spend
on the press and propaganda.

Except, that is, for UNITA, which does run in the red, but which boasts
a circulation which, on certain holidays, tops a million. All the
other party papers have almost invisible circulation: a few thousand
copies of IL POPOLO (all DC members of parliament and leaders are re-
quired to subscribe), AVANTII, I1 SECOLO D'ITALIA, and UMANITA. The
tab: billions for the DC and PSI, hundreds of millions for the M51.
The herculean efforts the Republican Party has made over the past 24
months at economies have gone to revive LA VCCB RBPUBBLICANA, which
was mired in debt and losing money.

To stanch this growing hemorrhage in expenditures, which depends partly
on actual cost increases and partly on the parties' stubborn conviction
that the strength of the apparatus and the volume of propaganda are
directly proportionate to success at the polls (a look at the figures
will show they are wrong), the subsidy simply didn't have a chance.
That is why the parties keep asking their members for more and more
help. Party cards cost more; the targets for contribution at party
festivals are more and more outrageous; there are more and more cele-
brations and demonstrations, risky operations which often do not even
pay their costs.

In Parliamentary circles it is no longer the communists alone who com-
plain day in and day out about having to turn over a fat slice of their
subsidy to the party. Giovanni Cuojati, the Social Democrats' admini-
strator, has had alternately to beg and throw tantrums to get what he
wanted from his own party's deputies in the Chamber (the party is over
5.5 billion lire in debt). In the other minor parties, too, alms from
MP8 is already accepted practice.

And even so, this is not enough. The cost of Italian politics, offi-
cially quoted at around 154 billion lire, is in fact far higher. So

the beleaguered bookkeepers do the best they can with unfathomable
jugglings. Bartolo Ciccardini recounts this peculiar occurrence: the
DC in Rome entered 600 million lire in its accounts as collections for
party cards, which in fact had not been issued for 2 years. Underground

rivers of money sometimes ooze up, no matter how careful the administra-
tors may be.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"Their annual reports, morover, while they show cash on hand, do not
include either a statement of financial health (indebtedness to banks,
social security, or suppliers) or a list of assets (real estate, com-
panies engaged in business, real estate, or tourist-trade activities),"
explains Benito Covolan, president of the Financial Analysts' Associa-
tion. "At this rate various arrangements by the national leadership
can incur debt, receive financing and gifts that do not show on the
books without anyone's knowing about it. The way they are compiled and
written these days, theparties' annual reports are a mockery."

The Communist Party owns, in addition to its headquarters on Via delle
Botteghe Oscure and other premises in Rome, 30 percent of its section
headquarters scattered all over Italy. But they do not appear on any
official statement. Equally mysteriously missing from the report are
the names of the construction and real estate corporation which owns
real estate on behalf of the DC, and the names of Sofinim and other
corporations run out of the Socialist Party's administrative office.

ness activities which help to pay expenses. Actually, a good many
administrators commonly engage in financial transactions which are some-
times put through with the guaranteed yields on treasury bills (DOTs)

or government bonds (Republican Ruspantini, for one, admits doing this
sort of thine), and sometimes floated on the riskier ups and downs of.
the stock market -- a practice which recently had a lot of administra-
tors wringing their hands benause they had acted on bad tips from un-
reliable sources, according to a persistent rumor at Montecitorio.

These parallel activities are a kind of second job, providing additional
income which could never replace the essential revenue from the public
subsidy. This is why, avoiding unnecessary publicity, the parties are
going to see to it that the Chamber very quickly increases the set hend~
out for all of them. Beginning next January, the contribution will be
updated on the base of an index maintained by the Central Statistics
Institute (ISTAT)minus a third, calculated on the total national tax
revenues. Reimbursement for campaign expenses, however, will be made
immediately and in toto, rather than being spread out in payments over
the legislative term.

"We do not produce goods; we are not like companies that can raise the
price of their products," Micheli argues. The complex machinery that
protects against inflation but also helps to fuel it is not, however,

the only major problem facing Italian companies. The other big push is to
boost productivity. And it is on this score that even those who admit
the legitimacy of public funding and who are sympathetic to the request
for an updating tend to worry a little. What evidence of increased ef-
ficiency have the parties produced since 1974?

Their productivity, measured in ideas and laws for better governance of
the nation, does not seem to have grown. Perhaps the money given the
parties was not simply thrown away, but so far it certainly is notwhat
anybody would call a lucrative investment.

28
FOR(HWK]ALI£HBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But Are They Public or Private?

That is anything but an academic question to Italy's political parties.
According to the law, political parties are free associations of pri-
vate citizens, without status as a corporation or fictitious person.
Public financing for them was arrived at on the principle that they are
public agencies which contribute to the life of the democratic State.
"It is clearly an anomaly, which ought to be done away with," admits
Ugo Spagnoli, vice-chairman of the Communist MP5. It is an anomaly
which illustrious jurists have suggested redressing by changing the
parties into legal organs (corporations). It is also quite probably a
major obstacle to any system of effective control on their budgets.

The audit of party books by a committee of auditors, even in the more
rigorous version which Parliament will write into the new regulations
on public financing, is in fact a mere formality. The secret books of
the political parties will remain in the jealous custody of the party
administrators. Legally recognizing the fact that the parties are in-

deed public organs would make it possible to bring them into the pur-
view of the Audit Office.

Against this eventuality, however, there are no less belligerent argu-
ments. "The principle of control must be made to guarantee the propri-
ety of all revenues; it must not be permitted to shackle the freedom
of the parties to use their resources as they see fit,‘I is the convic-
tion of Francesco Paolo Bonifacio, former minister of justice, who re-
ported out to the Senate the bill now before the Chamber.

lone politicians, and threaten to cut off public contributions for in-
complete or improper reports. other regulations, however, Jravc room
for doubt. For instance: contributions of less than 5 million lire
per year may remain anonymous.

Gustavo Minervini and other independent leftist Deputies, while they
favor State financing, consider the text of the bill as approved by the
Senate inadequate, and have therefore drafted a number of amendments:

a requirement that party administrators retain all documents and papers
bearing on their accounts and make them available to the Audit Board,
and another requiring the Office of the President of the Chamber to
conduct informal audits.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Rizzoli Editore
0182
cso: 3104/1380

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PSOE'S GUERRA OPTIHISTIC ABOUT PARTY'S PROSPECTS
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 7 Sep 8| pp 31-33
[Article by Juan de Dios Hellado]

[Text] "If I didn't know his voice, I would say that it was a 0CD
[Democratic Center Union] ’progressive' speaking." This was how a Socialist
mayor on the Costa del Sol summarised Alfonso Cuerra's speech to businessmen
in the tourist and construction industries.

Another mayor was even more terse: "He talks like a government official," and
a third, from the Labor Party, added: "There is no reason for the P803
[Spanish Socialist Workers Party] to exist after what Guerra said. that's
what the 000 is there for."

The pale, completely untanned Alfonso Guerra seems to have spent his
entire vacation trying to figure out how to put his party and Felipe in
Honcloa. .

"I have the impression that this is how it will be. At least the polls

show us to be sure winners, although we all know that they change a lot, and
you cannot mechanically claim that they are borne out precisely. Now then, we
have a chance to win and to have an sizable majority." Guerra feels that
neither the administration nor the UCD will be able to hold out until March
I983. "They've run out of replacements and are incapable of offering hopes
to the country because they can't even offer hopes to their own voters. I

am convinced that the 000 won't make it to the next elections."

Elections in l982

According to the Socialist leader, the elections will be moved up to the
fall of I982, and "if you prod me further, to the spring of next year."

The government itself is also considering this likelihood and has already
shown its nervousness by inventing ridiculous things like secret pacts with
foreign powers.

Alfonso Guerra designed his party's electoral strategy at his summer retreat
in Tarifa (Cadiz). At least that is what we can gather from his remarks.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"My duty so far as the person in charge of the election campaigns has been

to convince the country that we are going to win and to dispel any mental
blocks that people might have against the Socialists by conveying a sense of
calm. We have a political and even a moral obligation to prepare for the
contingency of having to govern.” Guerra, who does not exactly have a
reputation as a moderate, is neither frightened nor worried about the role
that he night have to play in this entire operation. "I don't know whether
explaining all this to the country means becoming a moderate," and he
challenges anyone to prove that "what I am saying now are not the same things
that I have always said."

Of one thing he is certain: If his party does not win a large enough majority
to govern, it will not turn to the communists. "I have the impression that
we will not go along with the communists, and I think that the communists are
as aware as we are that a Socialist-Communist government is not feasible, at

least for the time being. Agreements and compromises can be reached, but
outside the government."

He has an alternative answer, and his eyes turn to certain factions of the 000,
but this does not mean that the Socialists are trying to sink the centrists,
"because the poor fellows are already in bad shape, but some of them could

fit into a Socialist government."

The French experience, "which we are monitoring with great interest," is not
a model for Spanish Socialists either, because each social situation demands
a different approach and different changes.

But a socialist political map of Europe is already taking shape in Alfonso

Guerra's mind. “Our certainty comes from our ability to offer the country

hope, because Spain wants a change." Be draws the following conclusion as

he sinks down into one of the plush sofas at the Harbella inn: "There is no
one else besides us, except for the people who have been in power since the
dictatorship, and they aren't offering any guarantees to the citizens."

PSOB Congress, Everything in Place

There is not a single cloud in Alfonso Guerra's mind portending stormy
weather at the upcoming PSOB congress. "We have became convinced of our
responsibility, and common sense has settled in in the party."

The PSOE's "number two man" feels that "positions will be very uniform at the
upcoming congress. although there might be some differences." He expressed
his complete conviction that "the internal crises plaguing the parties will
show up the least in the P805 congress." his almost total assurance was
faithfully reflected in his almost 2-hour talk with businessmen and P808
activists. He would then tell CANDID l6 that his party's leadership is
working full bore to prepare for the "political entry, which will not be a
military parade or an easy stroll," and in which Felipe Gonzalez will again
play a major role after a certain period of zest and call.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Felipe Gonzales will emerge from his "barracks" and, from what we can gather
from Alfonso Guerrs's remarks,.will return of his own accord. "Felipe is
important, but he is not everything," Alfonso Guerra noted. “Because
regardless of all his good qualities, his ability to get across to the people,
his personal charm and political imagination, in a party like ours, Pelipe
Gonzalez is not everything." To Guerra, there are other things too: strong
roots, a great organisation, unbeatable cadres ”and a party leadership headed
up by Felipe, and it's not by chance that the two go together."

The P803, which almost seems to be tasting power already (if we go by Guerra's
arguments and hopes), could not have had this kind of leader without its
organization behind him, nor could the party organization exist without

Felipe Gonzalez and the teamwork accomplished in recent years.

"This is not the Guerra I know; they've switched him on me," said a

Socialist at the conclusion of the talk. No playing to the gallery, no
headline remarks, not even a "barb." Self-controlled, measuring his words,
although this time it was Sancho Ref who infuriated him. Any self-respecting
administration would have quickly gotten rid of an inept minister like Sancho
Rof. But there he is, and no one can kick him out. And Guerra exclaimed
"Since he's the BOD boss in Pontevedra, anyone can get rid of him."

Guerra is so convinced that the P802 will win the next election that not
even Calvo-Sotelo causes him to lose sleep, Inch less takes the victory a
bitter one. With Andalusian, if not Galicisn sarcasm, he says: "The bitter
victory will be because of the grief on his face, the infinite sadness
reflected on his face. I think he's a good election adversary; I, at least,
prefer him to someone else."

In an air-conditioned, four-star hotel with plush cushions, Guerra could be
taken for a tourist who has lost his way, with his enormous glasses and eyes
that look but do not see. His feet are firmly planted and his head is as
cool as a computer, however. "No one should fool himself, because this
country's problems can't be solved in 0 days or even 0 months."

Unemployment, inflation, industrial reconversion, the redistribution of
income, interregionsl solidarity and increased public investment are some of
the issues that the P802 will exploit in the election campaign. "Belting
the drop in employment and creating new jobs will be one of our main
objectives."

In Guerra's opinion, the first thing to do to accomplish this is to create
a climate of confidence, to rescue ourselves from the economic chaos that
government authorities have gotten us into. In this regard, the Socialists
feel that they have one unavoidable task: to shatter the network that has a
monopoly on credit policy and to end the widespread paralysis of investment
and low productivity. "Only the PSOE can do this, even if it has to
confront the nine banks that dominate the economy and control credit." And
the Socialists are preparing for this ruthless struggle, which in the

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

Socialist leader's opinion has already begun on the Night, which "has tried to
create a climate of fear by insolently claiming that people could lose their
cars and television sets or by employing more sophisticated techniques and
saying that we have sold out to a foreign power."

Another Kind of Capitalism

The I percent who control 25 percent of the country's wealth will have an
implacable enemy in the P802, to judge by Guerra's remarks. He said that if
the Socialists come to power, they would apply drastic fiscal pressure,
clarifying that they are not against business, just a certain powerful and
parasitic sector that produces almost nothing. ”We would replace plundering
capitalism with productive capitalism, inasmuch as you cannot use the word
businessmen to describe the people who have engaged in criminal profitcering
with cooking oil, killing more persons than terrorists have this year. He
cannot tolerate what is happening with Fidecaya and what is going to happen
with Banco Occidental. These 'businessmen' are going to have an implacable
enemy in the P805."

“A change in the system, not a change of administration, is the only thing

that can work in Spain right now, as has happened in France, and all of this

on the basis of consolidating democracy. The current administration has
pursued a policy of gestures, of taking problems more seriously and of acting
with greater foresight, but that's as far as it has gone and it has not
inspired confidence within society or within the administration itself, because
it hasn't taken any serious steps, such as firing Sancho Rof."

he then fires out a question that resounds through the hotel hall almost like
a shotgun blast: “What kind of confidence can a government withaminister
like that generate?"

He does not want to unveil the election campaign strategies that the PSOE's
minds are devising, because one of the party's targets is now the NATO issue.

NATO Membership Without Consultation

"They'll force it through on us, without consulting the people. I would like
someone in the administration or the "CD to explain to me why Spain is
joining NATO, because none of the arguments essayed so far is valid, or to be
more exact, no one has explained the advantages to me."

The issue of NATO membership will be the first major skirmish, paving the
way for the frontal assault on power, and according to Alfonso Guerra, the
administration and its party are not waging a clean struggle.

"There was no reason for the government to publicize the military's resolution
on the NATO issue. In any case, the military is just an advisory body, and
it's not honest to use it like the DOD has done. The fact of the matter is

that the Right is prepared to resort to all sorts of arguments and ruses to
sidestep a referendum."

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alfonso Guerra's keen political nose tells hin that the RAID issue is already
virtually decided, although the Socialists have to uphold their views, out

of "pzrticular concern over the shameful way in which the GOD apparently
negotiated membership in RAID.” Surrounded by socialist disciples, Guerra
adds pragmatically that the government should have first secured full-fledged
membership for Spain in the European Economic Community and then in RAID,

not the other way around.

"The 060 should not use the military as a screen for its strategy, because
with or without NATO what our Armed Forces need is a major technological
overhaul.

"For political reasons, among other things, the Armed Forces have to be
updated technologically, and some of their members have to forget about their
notions of a coup, so that, furthermore, they can be of use for

something, so that they can be strong and so that they can fulfill the
missions that the constitution entrusts to them."

he feels that the operational divisions, duly modernized and overhauled, ought
to be stationed at our borders, not in urban centers or at worker rallies,

"to give them the feeling that they are defending the nation, and not against
(put it in quotes) 'internal subversion.'"

"In any case," Guerra says, su-sriring his previous thoughts, "we Socialists
are not going to have it easy. It will take more than a day to break the
resistance of much of big capital and to rid the atmosphere of specters.

The lack of confidence that the Calvo-Sotelo administration is prompting in
itself might lead people to begin placing their trust in us."

The economic program that the PSOB will present at its upcoming congress and
that was drafted in its entirety by Basque economist and deputy Carlos
Solchaga, is reported to be almost completely social democratic. Guerra
himself was hesitant throughout his address and remarks about the thorny and
ticklish issue of nationalizations.

"For the time being," he said, "we will nationalize the high-tension grid,
and what happened to Suarez won't happen to us, in the sense that when he
announced this move, he suddenly got 1.3 billion pesetas to finance the 000's
campaign."

Generating confidence among businessmen and the social and economic sectors and
throughout the country will be the socialist platform for getting to honeloa,
with a clear-cut social democratic program that will go after votes on the
center-left.

This is why Guerra was very careful with his words. "We Inst not confuse
nationalization with socialization."

3“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Guerra could not help getting in thiobarb: "There'a Celvo-Sotelo on a pleasure

trip in the Aegean, and back here he's trying to aneel: through a goal on ue
with the Gibraltar issue."

In Tarifa, with the Rock in the background, Alfonso Guerra eifte through the
aocialiet economic program that Solchaga prepared and that Guerra will have to

"turn into a vehicle" at the upcoming Socialist congreaa, the congreaa of
homogeneity.

COPYRIGHT: I981, lnforuacion y Revietee, S.A.

8743
(:80: 3110/1 END

35