'UK 0"?“ IAI. Hat. UI‘IJ

JPRS L/10321
12 February 1982

Worldwide Report

ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030030-0

lNJR‘OFFTCJAI.lJSEZ(NQLY

WORLDWIDE REPORT
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 2/82)

CONTENTS

- SUB- SAHARA" AFRICA
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Lack of Rain Harning Sahel Agriculture
(Mohamed Maiga; JEUNB AFRIQUE. 16 Dec 81) .

MADAGASCAR

Briefs
Tropical Storm Damage

"EST EUROPE
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Increased Pollution of Baltic Sea Predicted
(Horst Guentheroth; STERN, 17 Dec 81) .....

- a - [III

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030030-0
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1093. 16 Dec 81 pp 82, 83
[Article by Mohamed Haiga: "Requiem for the Sahel")

[Text] Once more. the shadow of death hangs over the Sahel. This year, the

food situation for men and livestock is more precarious there than in the darkest
days of the seventies. The 1981-82 farming season will obviously be a failure
in practically all the states of that area forsaken by the gods. And this year,
as in the preJious year and as in the 1972-73 seasOn. they all live with the
haunting fear of a serious grain shortage.

"I have never seen anything as bad as this." we were recently told by "grand-
father" Bonzei, a robust 86-year old man now retired from the Water and Forestry
Services Department of Hatagouna (Mali). Bonaei. with almost a century of ex-
perience in desertification, knows what he is talking about.

What happened in 1981? Mother Nature betrayed mankind as it did last year.

The rainy season started suspiciously in May. The rains were coming down thick
and fast. Good green grass and grain shoots carried the promise of good har-
vests for December and January. But. unfortunately. these hopes were soon shat-
tered. Just like in 1980. The rain stopped as suddenly as it had started.
That was in September and October. at the most critical moment, when the grains
are at the stage of "advanced pregnancy." as they say in the Sahel. and badly
needed the water. The millet-~grown on "hilly areas" which means far from the-
rivers--soon turned yellow then crumbled away under the saddened and powerless
eyes of the farmers who had spent their last ounces of energy weeding and doing
other arduous tasks under a relentless sun.

The rice, which had been planted along the rivers, went the same way as the
millet. Both in Mali and in Niger. the ricefields waited in vain for the flood-
waters which shOuld have made up for the lack of rain. The "freshet" came too
late.

An additional scourge, insects and other "millet-eaters." jeopardized any ef-
forts, however small, made to irrigate. Forming huge black clouds, for weeks
the locusts and grasshoppers swept down on the young shoots which were still
standing. Something unusual if not unprecedented happened: these small beasts.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
avu yllhuaow you with.

more voracious than usual. devoured even the grass reducing the livestock to
dying. So for many stockbreeders. the laborious and slow "reconstitution of
the livestoc " is a phrase which does not make sense anymore. After becoming
consolidated for a period, the nomadic cattlemen are dispersing again driven
by the need to seek hypothetical waterholes and grazing lands.

As for the sedentary cattlemen, they are emigrating again to the very few areas
which have fared better (and there are not many of those). This is why in the
Hatagouna District (saved from desertification by the determined fight against
woodcutters carried out first by Bonzei and late' by his son Bouba) which lies
between Mali and Niger, there has been a concentration of populations of every
ethnic origin. Some live off the wild fonio while others rely on good old
African solidarity and wait for the relief of "international assistance."

However. most of these populations of northern Mali are migrating toward their
traditional population development areas: Niger which is facing a difficult
food situation; Ghana in the clutches of insurmountable economic problems;
Nigeria which is determined to oppose the immigration of its African "brothers";
the Ivory Coast which is no longer the same Eldorado as during the last decade.

Since misfortune never comes in a single shape. the food shortage hit the local
population just when the liberalization of grain trade practices in Mali has
resulted in shattering increases of prices.... what little rice there is costs
500 Malian francs (250 CFA francs) a kilo in a country of large families and
small incomes. High prices also make it difficult to purchase a bag of millet
in Niger....

An even more serious development, which is the cause of the famine drama, is
the desertification which becomes more visible with every passing year. In a
location 100 kilometers west of "atagouna, a sexagenarian sadly looks at the
sand-covered landscape and reminisces: "To think that 20 years ago I spent
my days fighting the baboons." The presence of baboons indicate the presence
of forests or. at least. of dense vegetation. This proves how rapidly the
environment is deteriorating. The awakening threatens to be shattering for
people further south who think that they are safe from the desert....

Naturally, the inhabitants of these accursed regions are waiting for the relief
nr foreign aid. thv uncertain nature of which they clearly perceive. "Instead
of the tons of flaur which are sent to us every year. we would rather have a
modest irrigation pump for each village." a leading Hatagouna citizen told us.
Would several thousand of those pumps cost the international community more than
the hundreds of thousands of tons which every year make rich a handful of civil

servants who have become experts in the art of misappropriating international
donations?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique CRUPJIA 1981

8796
C80: 5000/5635

VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

TROPICAL STORM DAMAGE—-Benedict, the first topical depression to hit Madagascar in
1981, on 20 December caused the following damage to Nossi-Be and the northeast
shore: destroyed 80 percent of the materials used in daily production; disrupted
communications; left 500 persons without shelter; destroyed 80 percent of the agri-
cultural production: damaged hotels, some as much as 50 percent: damaged homes and
public buildings. including the medium-wave relay station. No lives were lost and
reconstruction has already begun. /Excerpts/ aris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1886. l-Jan 82 5 49 (Copyright: Rene Moreux et Cie
Paris 1982/

C50: 5000/5644

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

INCREASED POLLUTION 0P BALTIC SEA PREDICTED

Hamburg STERN in German 17 Dec 81 pp 136. 136

[Article by Beret Guentheroth: "Haas Death on the Ocean Ploor"]

[Text] Each year large sections of the Baltic Sea floor are becoming contaminated.
Experts fear that if the level of water pollution continues to rise, that the Baltic
Sea will soon be dead.

Only slowly does the Baltic Sea recover from the consequences of the warn weather of
summer. Severe autumn storms agitate its waters and once again "puff" oxygen into
the "dead zones" of the ailing Baltic Sea.

"Yet this is a long way from bringing the Baltic Sea back to health," observed Dr
Claus Valentin of Kiel University's Zoological Institute to STERN. "The next regres-
sion is already preprogranned. The mass death on the sea floor will start again as
soon as the water gets warmer and -- as was the case this year -- remains calm for

a longer period."

while beautiful late summer weather lured hundreds of thousands of vacationers to
the seashore. every life form beneath the seas's surface was dying over broad areas.
The process of decay had consumed vitally important oxygen to a degree never before
observed and had led to the generation of toxic sulfur dioxide with the stench of
rotten eggs.

At the beginning of October the institute for Oceanography at the University of Kiel
had reported. “below 20 meters the Kiel Bay is dead." In regions north of Fehmarn,
which had traditionally been regarded as good fishing grounds and where no lack of
oxygen had been observed earlier. the water at the sea bed had turned bad. Carl
Valentin could only note that the lack of oxygen between mid-Hay and late October
had brought about the extinction of every life form in large stretches of the Flens-
burg fjord.

The gravediggers of the Baltic Sea are recruited from nature as well as mankind.
Bacteria undertake the grisly job. They feed themselves primarily from tiny algae
and microscopic life forms which live in enormous quantities in the water, die and
then sink to the bottom. In the process of decay which follows the bacteria at
first consume all of the available oxygen. Then sulfur dioxide is generated in in-
creasing mcasure. annihilating everything that cannot escape.

a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UII OFHLIAL US}. ONLY

An important condition for the creation of such dead zones is the lack of exchange
between the oxygen-rich surface waters and those at the bottom. Several factors in
the Baltic Sea inhibit this life sustaining process:

--there are no high or low tides or oceanic currents in this nearly inland sea.
--its straits allow scarcely any inflow of fresh salt water from the North Sea.
~uthis heavier salt water collects at the bottom and is soon exhausted. The lighter,

relatively less salty Baltic Sea water collects in a layer on top and inhibits the
oxygen exchange.

--higher summer temperatures and relatively calm seas tend to stabilize this deadly
layering.

Given this situation. additional intrusions by humans can have devastating consequen-
ces. The seven countries which border on the Baltic Sea discharge their sewage into
its waters. This discharge contains enormous quantities of chemicals which pass
through sewage treatment plants almost unimpeded:

Now flowing annually into the Baltic are 36.000 tons of phosphates. They originate
in the garbage of the 140 million population of its coasts and in industrial wastes.

Residues of 130,000 tons of nitrates from agricultural fertilizer reach the Baltic
every year.

Phosphates and nitrates are nutrients for the algae, which react to such hugh quan-
tities at warm temperatures with a luxurient growth. The bacterial destruction of
these additional algae alone consumes some 3.6 million tons of oxygen per year.

Marine biologist Valentin was able to observe directly the effects of this massive
influx of nutrients in the Flensburg fjord, "at the same point, where the inner fjord
showed ocean floor fauna in 1978 at a depth of 15 meters, life has now been annihi-
lated at a depth of 9 meters." As a youth Valentin was so fascinated by the marine
life of the Plensburg fjord that he decided to become a marine scientist.

Yet man has not just stolen the last reserves of oxygen from the Baltic Sea. He has
also provided it with a system of lethal injections of sewage:.

--heavy metals by the ton. primarily from industrial wastes, are being dumped into
the sea. They assimilate themselves within the marine nutrient chain and lead to
diseases and deformations. especially among animals.

--herbicides. insecticides and the chemical PCB encumber the sea. PCB discharges
into the Baltic Sea have led to the fact that 80 percent of its seals are now infer-
tile.

--radioactive substances from a still undetermined source are reaching the sea.
--some 100,000 tons of oil every year flow as a result of accidents or negligence
into the Baltic Sea. In late November a tanker went aground at the harbor entrance

of the Lithuanian city of Klaipeda (Hemel) during a storm; 10,000 tons of oil were
released.

In the Kiel bay the firms of Texaco and Wintershall have proposed drilling for oil
starting in 1983. An annual production of 400,000 tons is projected. A drilling

mishap could have devastating consequences. especially in the ailing Baltic Sea,
since oil slicks would reach the nearby coasts very quickly.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The responsible politicians like to take cover behind the argument that the oxygen-
free zones in the Baltic will disappear in the fall like a bad dream. Yet the ”Bal-
tic Sea Commission", a group of marine scientists from all the Baltic Sea countries
founded in 1974, reported in a recently published study that the average oxygen con-
tent of the Baltic Sea basin has been steadily declining for some 80 years. Remarks
marine biologist Valentin, "Ways and means have got to be found quickly to filter
these substances out of sewage discharge. Even better would be not to let them be
discharged at all."

A first step would be the reduction in use of fertilizers in agriculture and the con-
struction of more efficient sewage treatment plants. But the scientists and poli—

ticians are still at odds on such points. Hopefully the Baltic Sea will survive
their conflict.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr AB & Co.

9878
5000/2045 END

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY