FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10250
11 January 1982

Vietnam Report

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

.ms publications contain information primarily tron foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also tron news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials iron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I) are supplied by JP”. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or folloving the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or trsnslitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by e ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body o! an
itee originate with the source. lines within itess are as
given by source.

the contents 0! this publication in no way represent ths. poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 11.9. Govermnt.

COPYRIGI‘I' IA"! AW REGULATION GOVERNING WEEK" 0'
“mums "PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DIIIENINM'ION

OF TRII PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL I!" ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/102

11 January

VIETNAM REPORT
(moo 1/82)

Cosmos

VIEW

'Voluntary' Rehabilitation in Concentration Gama Daacribed
(Bane Le van Due Intarviav; PARIS mm. 20 Nov 81) ......

Mn hmM-- own 0‘" a:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'VOLUNIARY' REHABILITATION IN WWII“ ems DESCRIBE

Paris PARIS was in trench 20 Nov 81 pp 3-10
[Report on interview with acne be was Duc by Jean Larteguy; date and place not given]

[rest] In the concentration cans of North and South Vietnsa.
250 .000 "voluntary" prisoners are discover: ng "rehabilitation":
Psychological torture is just as effective as physical torture.
Rene he van but. 61 years old. a former trench attorney and a
colonel in the "puppet any," who adnitted to his Jailera that
he had been involved in antico-uniat activities. has experi-
enced the hell of these canps. lie was released because he was
"old and sick" and too weak to take part in an active resist-
ance. The fact that he was in contact with 30 Chi liinh via the
French at the ties of the Paris negotiations no doubt facilitated
his release. he talks about his stay in cans in the mist
North and describes the ne‘hods used to break down bodies and souls.

I, Rene Le van but. a for-er colonel in the pwpet any. know Iy biography by heart.
I can recite it. I was forced to write it at least 30 times in the various cslps
where I was a prisoner. But I never changed its details. For a very siapla reason:
I had written it in French. a friend had translated it into Vietnaaeae for as and

I was forced to always use the seas phrases. which had been transcribed in a notebook

that I always kept with ac.

In the world of the Vietcong. there are two reasons for such perpetual self-criticise.
One is rational and obvious. The Vistas-see do not have photocopies and every agency
nust have a couplets file on every individul. whether or not he is suspect.

The other reason is Machiavellian. the can-ho. the cadres. always hope that a
prisoner. who is therefore guilty, will change a date. a sentence or a single word
fro- one confession to the next. Then he will be caught and forced to confess whstd
ever, that he broke the vase of Soissons or raped one of the Irung sisters (Vistas-ass
national heroines, M a.d.). I would have gladly e-hellished those biographies

with racy stories, but the can-ho wouldn't have appreciated it.

Their tragedy was that they were so linited and welded by the system that you could
not even resent then for it. Can you blame insects for stinging you because that's

r 1 i
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the way they are made? Can you blane a robot that has been program-ed to relent-
lessly try to destroy you?

During the nonth and a half following the fall of Saigon and the rebirth of Ho Chi
Minh City. the ca-unists did not ask as anything. I nanaged the Hotel Continental
for my first cousin, Philippe Tranchini.

On 16 June. after all journalists had been sent back to their various countries
of origin and those annoying witnesses were gone. the hotel was turned over to the
people. i.e.. to the new governnent. In any case. the last custoners had fled.

While returning hone one evening. I learned that the first decree on rehabilita-
tion had just been published. For privates in the arny. such rehahilitation would
be linited to 3 days locally; for junior officers. to 10 days; for higher and general
officers. to 1 month, but in the casps. I considered nyself to be Just a civilian
who had been discharged long ago. A can-ho from the chairnan's office authorized

as to go through the 3-day course. along with ny secretaries. stenopsphers and
orderliee. The course was uninteresting gibberish. For 2 days the can-be told

us why they won the war: thanks to the spontaneous uprising of the people of Saigon.
I was in Saigon and I had never heard of this uprising. It was absurd. They didn't
ask us to believe it but to pretend to adnit what is now the new truth.

They said the suns thing about the 1968 Tet. when the entire population of the
southern capital had risen up and had been crushed by the Anericaninperislists.
Totally false! There was no uprising: the Vietcong fought alone.

I had thus just entered the disconcerting world of lies. where trying to stick to -
historical truth can cost you 10 years in a concentration cslp.

0n the third day. a can-ho told us that all forner officers had to report to Office
No. 7. I had high hopes. The umber seven was always try lucky nt-ber when I bet
at the races.

Actually. I had bet on one hell of a nag that day. At Office No. 7. I was given
a slip of paper telling ne that the revolution was granting me "the favor of pro-
longing ny rehabilitation by l nonth.”

This still wasn't a disaster. I thought. if only 1 month of chatter was all that
was required to put Inc right with our new nasters. Like all Iy conrades. I let
nyself be fooled. Without fornally assuing us that this rehabilitation would last
exactly 1 month. we were asked to provide. in addition to a nosquito net and a few
personal effects. the sun of 6.750 piastres (which had not yet been changed to the
new dongs) to pay for our food; that would be our share of the expenses. which were
250 piastres a day. It was only necessary to divide the anount: our stay had been
planmd for only 30 days.

Reassured of this. I voluntarily went to the cap to which I had been assigned.

It was ironic that it was the for-er cap for Vietcong prisoners at Ten Wisp near
Bien Boa. where there were only soldiers or forner soldiers (nearly 6.000). fraa
second lieutenants to lieutenant colonels. Colonels and generals were sent to
Qusng Trung, near Saigon.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY

The Vietcong said that having worn the uniforn of the puppet stay. if only for a
single day. was enough to be guilty of a crine against the naases. And there I
was. a criminal. lost in that crowd. guarded by bodoi. We were counted and assigned
nubers. He were fed more or less properly: 600 pans of rice. boiled vegetables
and dried fish.

0n the ninth day. we were awakened in the middle of the night. we were being moved.
Naively. I thought that we were being sent back to Saigon, or rather. to Bo Chi
Hinh City.

We were transferred on foot to another camp at Song Hsu (River of Blood). dominating
the Rich Hoe airstrip.

At the end of 3 weeks. after reading ny first confession. they learned that I was
the only high—ranking officer there. I was transferred by truck to the Long-Ciao
camp, the quarters of the 18th division, the one which performed gloriously at Xuan
Loc under the orders of General Le Hinh Dao. who is still rotting in prison in a
camp. If all the other divisions had done as nuch!

I must confess. with much sadness. that besides the officers who had fought courage-
ously and never talked about the war. as though they had been knocked senseless.
others had become sad cases. asbezzlers. cowards. informers who stole from each
other. Hysalf. an incurable civilian sickened by their attitude. I stated during

a public session of self-criticise that it wasn't necessary to look very far for

the reasons for our defeat. I said that it was us. the officers. who were to blue
as much as the Aaericans or our leaders.

One month and then two passed, when we were supposed to be released at the end of
30 days. But we understood very quickly that there was no longer any question of
that.

At Long~Giao. I finally experienced the benefits of rehabilitation.

There were 100 of us in each hut. divided into groups of 10. we slept on mats laid
on a low ledge running along the side of the but.

He rose at 5 an. Exercises. work details (such as chopping wood); most of the tine
we didn't do a damn thing. Rationa diminished. At 10 am. the first meal: 200
grams of rice. cups of water and the some thing in the evening at 5 pm. Pros: time
to time. a little dried or fresh fish: about a mouthful.

Everyone was dying of hunger. Having the appetite of a bird. I suffered less than
my conrades.

Things got worse later. On the pretext of saving wood. the two meals were taken
closer together: the first at 10 an. the second 6 hours later. The result: our
stomachs stayed empty for 20 hoursat a time. Unbearable!

This was a tactical measure. of course. but let's get back to the rehabilitation.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The complete course included 10 lessons. with each lesson Lasting 1 week. The same
teacher conducted each lesson; he was a kind of itinerant parrot monk. carrying
the gospel from camp to seep. He always came iron North Vietnam. Everything was
programd; nothing was left to improvisation or to imagination.

These were the topics of the 10 lessons: the puppet government's leaders and their
crimes; military leaders, other criminals; the American imperialists; the Vietnamese
people's victorious struggle; their ancient. heroic traditions; their war against
the imperialists; the stages in the victory of the masses (even if they weren't
there); redemption through work, which is "glorious"; Vietnam is a beautiful, rich,
powerful. prosperous country (even if people are dying of hunger there) .... There
were two 3-hour courses daily. one in the morning and the other in the afternoon.
There were 500 of us. assembled in a large hall. writing nearly 20 pages on our
knees in each session. For me. these 20 pages constituted a dual labor because

of my poor knowledge of the language.

Those were my first lessons in Vietnamese. I had forgotten everything; at least
I managed to learn my native language.

But I paid dearly for those lessons; when I was released. I weighed 34 kg and had
lost some of my teeth from malnutrition. My comrades, who were often strong.
athletic young officers, suffered from hunger to such an extent that they were no
longer able to sleep.

we drifted in a world that was as unreal as the description which we were given
of our country's history. ~

Thus there were 6 hours of indoctrination for 3 days. Then discussion sessions

for 3 more days. The can-ho asked four questions about the lesson given-mot a
single one more-wand every lesson had to be discussed for a half-day, with each

one of us obliged to give our opinion. For example: the crimes of Vietnamese offi-
cers against the revolution, the people and the Vietnamese homeland.

without being concerned about the truth. we had to paraphrase indefinitely. but
in writing. That was called the harvest. which of course followed the planting '
of the seed of truth.

Then there was another discussion among ourselves. in groups of 10. which was
attended by a can-ho. who was impassive and silent. always a northerner who con-
stantly took notes with a stiff face devoid of all expression.

We were supposed to help each other make progress by asking each other questions.
In exceptional cases, the can-ho redirected the course of the discussion when it
began to digress. Unfortunately. such assistance sometimes seeaed like a denunciation.

The can-b0 very cleverly let us know that they knew everything about us.

Concerning the "crimes." ny comrades often admitted more than was necessary. But
I tried hard to dampen their seal.

Such as the couander of the third military region, who admitted that he had asked
to head a secret mission in which six important leaders of the Front had been killed
and others taken prisoner.

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The poor guy. stricken with panic. thought that the Vietcong were oniscient. But
they undoubtedly did not know about'that. the result: He underwent a severe in-
terrogation and gave them the names of all his comrades. When he regained his wits.
he burst into tears. lie had just closed the door to freedom on himself and on other
officers forever.

No torture. neither physical nor mental. was needed to obtain such a result; nothing
except hunger and fear and a can-ho staring at you with empty eyes.

The worst torture was still the uncertainty of our fate. Officially. end this is
true, we had gone to these rehabilitation caps voluntarily, but for 1 month. as

we had been led to understand. And the months went by. when someone asked a can-b0
how long our detention would last. he invariably recited the text of a law which
had just been issued: "The legal duration of rehabilitation is 3-yeers. But the
indulgent and hence revolution may permit those who. despite their past crimes,

are old or week and those who have made progress to be released before that time."
Implying that others (in good health) lacking enthusian would remain confined for
at least 3 years. And if they didn't reform. for an indefinite period.

Progress was evaluated according to two criteria: enthusiasm in learning your lessons

and repeating for your faults. Everyone learned his lessons and repented in order
to get good marks from the can-b0.

For nights on end, I thought about how to get out. To maintain this uncertainty
and the prisoners' zeal. the commute were necessarily obliged to release some
ofthem. Asenaxanple. Ihad tobeoneof thosemcn. Hyfilehadtobeexamined
and noticed; I had to be a special case.

So I mentioned. in one of my "biographies." my interview with Ho Chi Minh in 1956.
I was called in twice. I had not lied in my biographies; I had just added to them.

For example: To the question. "Why did you enter the army?". my comrades replied:
"We were mobilised" or "We enlisted in order to feed our families." But I wrote.
despite the opposition of my translator friend. who maintained that I was putting

a rope around my neck: "I was Pranch, reared in France from infancy in a religious
institution, the son of rich middle-class parents. In the Vietnamese Army. I earned
10 times less than if I had remained an attorney in France. I enlisted to fight
communism. which was logical. in view of my upbringing and social saviromaent. I
wanted to contribute to building an independent. but not com-mist. Vietnam."

To such candor. I no doubt owe the fact of having been considered special among

the mass of prisoners. My plan turned out to be right. but in the meantime I almost
died.

My chronic bronchitis became worse. weaker and weaker. I had come to think that
under those conditions life was no longer worth living. I stopped fighting. My
strength diminished very quickly. I could no longer even stand up and had to crawl
on all fours to my mat when my comrades didn' t carry me.

It was then, after lo months of detention. that the “masses" permitted us to write
to our families.

- 5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thinking that I was going to die and not wishing to give false hopes to those who
loved me, I refused to take part in that evil comedy.

The can-ho collected the letters. counted them. and counted them again: 97. 98.
99 one was missing. They fotmd the culprit; I was it. They tried to lecture
me. I didn't want to listen. I demanded that they leave me the hell alone and
leave me to die in my corner, among my comrades.

The can-b0 were totally bewildered because such a case was mexpected. They re-
ferred it to their superiors. I was taken against ny will to the infirnary, where
there were no drugs. I persisted, still refusing to write the letter, janing

the entire complex nechanism of the carp system. I disturbed them. I became a
special case: the one who had net Bo Chi Minh, who had died and become a god.

'I was that colonel who had never gone to war. that former French lawyer. one of
the few who dared to admit that he had engaged in anticoI-unist activities.

Nevertheless. they managed to find a rare and precious drug with which to treat
me: 20 cc's of streptomycin, which they injected into ne imadiately in that in-
firnary. where it was impossible to find even a single aspirin tablet.

That's how I regained my strength and, at the same time, the desire to go on with
that experience.

Almost well. I was sent back to the Tan Niap cenp in the company of hundreds of
lieutenant colonels.

I was unaware that there had been so many in the southern army. There were also two
catholic chaplains among us. About a hundred of us would meet secretly on Sundays
in a hut during rest period to attend a mass that lasted barely 20 minutes. There
were 2 candles and a mustard jar which served as a chalice. We were even able to
take commion with a tiny piece of host. We had returned to the age of the cata-
combs. As for myself, who had been a very lukewarn catholic until. then. I learned
again how to pray to God in such circmstances. And I continued to do so after

I was released.

while celebrating the holy sacrifice on Iloly Thursday, we were surprised with shouts
and cocked rifles. The bodoi surrounded. threatened and insulted us and arrested
the two priests.

The priests returned several hours later, looking crestfallen and avoiding conversa-
tion with their comrades. And there were no more masses.

Many prisoners thought of escaping. But they figured out how to make us forget
about that. Loudspeakers were installed throughout the camp one day. Until then,
we had been living in an atmosphere of silence, I should say of reclusion, without

any contact with the outside world: no nusic or slogans.

The loudspeakers started to crackle the next day at 7 am. They broadcast the trial.
within the camp, of two conrades who had escaped 5 nonths earlier and had been caught

immediately. They had resmd their usual liven among us and then suddenly, they
were confined in what served as a jail-oa cones. a container which had been used

by the Americans.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was a trial without any defense corneal. of course. The nen were accused of
belonging to the CIA and of trying to escape in order to join underground aaboteur
forces.

The verdict for the first man was handed down at 11 an: death. There was a burst
of gunfire 5 ninutes later. He had just been executed.

The second nan's trial began at 1330; he had heard his friend's whole trial. Be
tried to defend himself. he said he had wanted only to rejoin his family. The
verdict was handed down at 1600: death. Be.was executed inediately.

At 7 am on that sane morning. a work detail had dug the two graves.

I questioned one of their friends. He confirmed to as that they had only wanted
to rejoin their families. Volunteers for l nonth. they were not at all willing
to stay indefinitely.

But in North Vietnan I later heard about escapees who. having been caught after
2 weeks. received sentences of only 1 month in prison.

Here the Ten Niep executions neant to be an example? Or were they a result. which
is also possible. of the i-ense confusion. the absence of laws and precise regula-
tions governing reunified Vietnan. with each camp co-Iander acting according to
his own will or whine? Both theories are possible or perhaps applicable.

As for ac, sufficiently rehabilitated. instead of being released I was transferred
on 5 July 1976 to Yen-Bay in North Vietnam. on the Chinese border.-

Three thousand of us were saved to Haiphong in the hold of a large Soviet freighter.
Then we took the train. in terrible conditio's. One of ey friends. who had tubercu-
losis. died from heat in one of the cattle cars in which we had been piled.

He went down the Red River in rowboats at Yen-Bay to our camp. where we nusbered
(.00. It was in the middle of the jungle. He noved about only at night and excur-
sions were always at impossible tines: sidnight. l ar-all so we would not be
seen by the people.

Our entire baggage consisted of 2 satchels containing our personal effects. we
received nilitary uniforns. 30 Chi Hinh sandals made of a piece of tire rubber and
cone-shaped peasant hats. plus 2 red Chinese Army blankets of fairly good quality.
dating back to the period of brotherhood. I remained at Yen-Bay for 11 months.

There I encountered a new breed of can-b0. astonishing individuals fron another
universe. both admirable and frightening. hardened by war and hardship and totally
unaware of the outside world. Carefully selected. those lieutenants and captains
had been in conbst since the age of 15 and they were then 40. They all were the
same expressionless mash. But it wasn't stuck over their faces. it was incrusted
in their flesh. Sonatina there was a flash of anger in their eyes. but you still
had to catch them unawares to detect it ....

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There were 90 of us in each hut and this tine we had two of these extraterrestrial
beings who. free 0600 to 2100, were siaultaneously our instructors. our spiritual
fathers, the directors of our consciences, our co-anders. We called then quan-giao:
educators.

As the days went by, the food got worse and worse and its anount dininished. The
rice improved, nixed with nsnioc and corn which I spent Iy tine honking. alone.
all day long--a light Job.

He had fish once a week: 7 kg, including the head, bones and guts, for 600 men.

I would give wy mouthful of fish sway; there were too may bones and it was rotten.
Fortunately, my appetite was small! Several comrades, who fornerly ate 2 Chinese
soups just for breakfast, became ghosts, floating in uniforms too big for then.
Many others got sick: dysentery. nalaris and beri-beri. No drugs. no tobacco.

10 g of thuoe-lso for water pipes for l nonth.

A pack of cigarettes for the Tet. Por as. who was used to grey tobacco, it was
like smoking straw. Plus 1 biscuit and 3 bad candies!

The can-ho had the same food and tobacco ration as ourselves. They would refuse
when one of us would offer then a cigarette to soften then. They were incorruptible.
I couldn't get over it. As the blasted keeper of the camp's oxen, and then

its fowl, I was able to go into their quarters: apparently they were tightening
their belts as such as we were.

And during this whole tine rehabilitation through work went on, which did not exclude
indoctrination. The work was interrupted twice in 1 year for review sessions which
lasted 1 week each and during which.we recited, or rather we stubled through. our
lessons learned at the Long-Ciao canp.

But to get back to the work, when we arrived the cusp did not exist. He had to
build large straw huts, one for each group of 90. Everything was ends of wood,
bamboo and thatch in contrast to the south, where they used what the Anericans had
left behind: sheet metal and barbed wire, without its barbs. Bare, there wasn't
even a nail. He had to tie together the various parts with vines. The franc of
the but was composed of large tree trunks buried in the ground and walls of bamboo
that was crushed and then braided.

The camp was enclosed by a fence, which was purely eynbolic, as was the' watchtower
with a guard arned with an ARM, the Chinese sorbet rifle. There was no problem
escaping. it would have been easy! But where was there to go?

The night was total. There were no searchligbts because there was no electricity,
only three oil lamps per hut. Since the nonthly fuel ration was used up in a week,
we had no light for 20 days and lighted our laaps only for the 20-minute reading

of MAN-DAN, the party newspaper; the hut leader had saved a few drops of "strategic"
oil solely for that purpose.

He rose at 5 an. It was not yet daylight; it was winter and it was cold: 2' to 3'.
We were given a bowl of rice or corn: 50 g. cleaning, exercise. At 6:30 an: work.
The old and the sick stayed in camp. Everyone else left for the nountains to clear
then. First we brought back the wood and bauboo. Then we planted.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Everyone was provided with a kind of large knife which had the peculiarity of not
cutting at all. It was a piece of iron that was iapossible to sharpen. Thus it
did not really have any cutting edge. It was sore like a hauler than a knife.

with a neural knife. one-fourth of an hour would have been enough to cut down a
snall tree: instead. it took 3 to lo hours. And then there was only one of those
pieces of iron for every 3 or lo workers. But this did not prevent our can-ho from
bending Our ears with talk of production. yields and work scheduling.

At first I thought that it was deliberate. that there was a purpose: to force us.

to train us. to work with improper tools. No. it was only negligence and disorder.
Behind the rigid appearance of organisation. that was the whole tragedy of Vietnanese
comunisu: systematized absurdity. The wood was crushed rather then cut.

When the canp was finally finished. the Chinese cane in 1979 and destroyed it. But
I had already left.

we returned to canp at 11 an for the second neal: 200 g of rice and herbs, actual
strings that were impossible to chew. and a little fish brine diluted with a great
deal of water. There was another neal at 5 pm. After I left the camp. there was
finally no more rice. only sons Soviet sorghua and nanioc.

It was forbidden to fish in the river. The local Thai population was in a deplorable
state of poverty, even worse than ourselves. In rags. they walked barefoot even
though it was cold. They were not mistreated. but totally ignored by the govern-
nent. which waited for then to disappear. None of then spoke Vietneaese. Of course.
all contact with that “inferior race" was strictly forbidden. even though they saue-
tines crossed through the camp.

The winter clothes which we had been authorised to request from our fanilies did
not arrive until stunner.

Always absurdity! I also worked in the kitchen. There were 16 of us and only 6
knives for peeling the vegetables. Those knives were also the sane pieces of dull
iron which had been sharpened a thousand times and which inediately becane dull.

I maintain that there was really no Machiavellian purpose in this. but only incredible
disorder prevailing over enormus destitution. The 600 of us. including many strong
young men, represented a considerable productive force. But nothing cans of it.

for lack of a few sharp tools and the se-blance of reason.

Six pickaxes for a 30-1aan clearing teal! He changed shifts every half-hour! We
planted vegetables. But they rotted in the field. For a tine, there was too much.
During the period of abundance. the rations. although very inadequate. nevertheless
renained the same.

We didn't work to produce; we didn't work to eat. but to refora. Actually. under
such conditions of organized disorganization. we didn't have to strain ourselves.
we weren't dying of fatigue. but of hunger and of seeing such "voluntary" rehabili-
tation continue indefinitely.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When one of us got sick. he had to tell the group's nurse. who had no training; he
simply noted the sick man's name for a nedical visit. The patient was then taken
to the canp's nurse. a can-b0 this time, but he didn't know anything either. But
he did wear a stethoscope proudly and listened carefully to the chests of those
suffering from dysentery or stomch ailments. deciding at random that this one was
sick and that one was not. Anyone considered sick was given ... a slip of paper
granting him 21. hours of rest. but no drugs; there were never any. The most serious
cases were sent to the infirmary where there weren't any drugs either.

Sometimes a patient was sent to Yen-Bay by boat and truck. what happened in Yen-nay?
No one returned to tell us. As a rule, they died in the can). In my camp there
were 5 deaths in 10 months.

There were informers anong us. of course. but if some were quickly discovered and
ostracized, others continued their dirty work--to be favored. to get out quicker.
The idiots! When they were no 'longer useful, they kept then anyway.

It was impossible to steal a bowl of rice without being denounced. He were all very
careful in our conversations. But what could we say to each other? 1% were cut

off from the world. Our only source of information was the party newspaper, KHAN-DAN
(The People), which they read to us in the evening after returning fron work. The
newspaper reported only victories and triumphs in every sector. We couldn't have
cared less.

Our sole obsession was our stomachs and saving a little food to eat at midnight.
in order to cheat hunger and sleep. Hunger drove us wild. Afraid of being robbed,
everyone carried his pitiful wealth around with him: a pinch of tobacco. three
aspirin tablets brought from the south and a piece of soap.

One of us escaped in an effort to reach Laos, which wasn't very far away. For 2 weeks
he ate bamboo shoots and drank the water from vines. Exhausted. he sought refuge
among the nomtaineers. who turned him over to the nilitia. who brought him back

to the coup, where he died from dysentery 2 weeks later.

There was no internal clandestine organisation. at least not in my cup. Bgotiam was
pushed to an extreme. In order to survive.

The can-b0 kept to themselves and did not mix with us. I struggled to understand
what they wanted from us and what nade them tick. I was aware that their sole mission
was to destroy us morally, mentally. psychologically and spiritually, but not physically.

All of North Vietnam was hungry. Still no news from our families. Nothing to read,

no music; no ligha; at night. It was impossible to measure the time. Our watches

had been taken away in the beginning. Nothing but a gong pmctuating our ectoplasnic
existence and fear preventing us from speaking. And out-release postponed indefinitely!
Uncertainty!

There was never any punishment. Pour comrades came back from s 15-k- rice detail
with s 20—kg sack on their backs. They passed by a corn field and each one picked
two ears. They were denounced the next day. A conference was held. The camp's
entire staff was present. lined up like onions on a platform.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One after the other. every one of our conrades confessed. The camp cos-ands: gave
us a long speech. Their crime was very serious. They had stolen fron the people;
the worst kind of offense. It glaringly demonstrated their despicable nature. They
were not cured of "the pernicious influence of French colonists and American in-
perialists." who had taught than to exploit the people. They were rotten to the
core.

Finally. the sanction: this would be put on their records.

Those four nan were shattered. infinitely more than if they had been slapped in jail
for 6 months. They didn't dare to speak to us. They thought of thenselves as pariahs.
For two ears of corn! They imagined the worst. They would never be able to get out.
All that was left was for then to die. I tried to reassure them. in vain! For two
ears of corn. the merits acquired during 2 years of detention were wiped out. They

had not improved!

I never saw anyone punished a single time in my can in the North. But for each
peccadillo, the accusation was terrifying: having tried to sabotage the revolution;
the sanction was merciless: that would be put on the record.

The columnists had no intention of releasing their prisoners. But they let some
go as an example, to encousge others and. this say seem surprising, the was re-
leased were the highest ranhing officers, regardless of the charges against them.

The ones that they did not want to release, under any circumstances. were the yomg
lieutenants and captains. especially paratroopers. marines and rangers. who could

join the underground. reestablish a resistance and create networks: all real soldiers
who had fought and were ready to start over. whereas old men like myself , physically
weak or no longer aggressive in any way and. it one: be said, who had also lost all
prestige. presented no danger any longer.

The cam-ho never intervened in our quarrels. ‘hro prisoners would argue._ The can-ho
preferred not to know why. Who was guilty, innocent? Both were considered guilty.

I later learned that my particular case was the subject of a lesson in a neighboring
camp! During a study session. the can-b0 giving the instruction referred to that
lieutenant colonel of the puppet any. the one who didn't even speak Vietnasess,
only French, and to whom the Revolution. in its indulgence, had assisted the task

of watching over two omen-wthe easiest work-because he was old and sick. An or
had escaped no doubt that colonel had spoken to the ox in French and it

had not understood!

My release was nevertheless provided for by article 7 of the rehabilitation ordinance.
which permitted the release of the sick and elderly.

Initially. there were 20 of us to be examined by a nedical connittee. There were
10 of us remaining before a second co-ittee. Then there were five. Finally, only
four of us were released.

0n the second day of the 1977 Tet. 18 or 19 February. one of the two can-be in charge
of my group. finding me alone. crouched down beside me and pointed at the ground,
which meant that I was to do the same. without looking at as. he said: "nrother

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Duc. you are an example for the cusp! You are old. weak and sick. but you have made
an effort at rehabilitation. Us have put this in your record. Keep it up." he
rose and walked away.

I was definitely very surprised. I had not made so each of an effort and that was
the first time that I had seen a can-ho behave that way. Lying on my net that night.
after thinking about it a long tine. I thought I understood: that neant that they
were in the process of studying ny case and the can-be was urging no not to do any-
thing wrong concerning camp discipline or indoctrination.

Two weeks later while. having becone a breeder of rachitic pigs. I was walking throng:
the cup, the same can-ho sternly ordered me to follow him.

he told no to sit down, offered no a cigarette. poured us some cold tea in e regula-
tion can-ho cup. a soldier's cup with green enamel on the outside. I drank and snoked.
acre and more intrigued.

he looked at he. waited until I had finished and then told he to keep the cup but
to hide it under my clothes.

He had seriously violated the rules by that token of friendship. why did he make
no that present? I learned the next day that he himself had left to be rehabilitated.

Thus that being who had been trained to have no feelings. to display no anger or
feelings of sympathy. that machine, was still a nan. There was still hope for every-
thing. The terrible old nen of Hanoi. the engineers who created these robots. had

they lost if nan survived?

I then struggled to interpret his gesture tron a practical and bureaucratic standpoint.
I concluded that that can-ho. knowing that he would not see no again. that I was

going to he released. had risked showing no a sign of friendship. One month later.

I left the camp.

There was another gesture which would have been sternly condemned: on the day that
I was released. at 11 in the evening. a second can-ho secretly gave he a little
delicacy, some soybean curd. But still with an impassive expression on his face.

There were still five of us up for release and suddenly. the fifth nan was scratched
from the list.

A can-ho gave us a speech using the usual terms, as was the rule: "You are being
released because you have nade soae progress; this is only a beginning; once you
have returned to your homes. you must continue in order to again become an honest
citizen and also help to rehabilitate your families and those around you in order
to achieve perfection on the glorious path of Martin-uninian."

He continued: "One of your conrades (the fifth) should have been among you. but
unfortunately he demnstreted that his progress was inadequate."

He was the use who slept next to we. his attitude was exemplary for 2 years. That
was his crime.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One day. he caught cold and cone down with a bad flu; he had to be confined to Md.
lie was excused froe work. He nalingered a little. prolonging his convalescence.
It was 3' outside! No one told bin anything.

At the last minute. without being aware of the reasons hinself. for he had to die-
cover then hinself in order to reform ... he learned that he was not going to be
released.

With the can-b0. it was useless and even dangerous to display too such enthueieen.
‘l‘hat appeared suspicious, just as not displaying enough also appeared suspicious.

To avoid all the traps which were set for us. so that the can-b0 did not record then
in his notebook, we were like tightrope walkers in perpetual balance on a string.
risking a fall to the right or to the left.

Soneone night volunteer for a work detail to which he had not been assigned. he
said that he was volunteering. coepleted his work and thought he was entitled to

the sane rest as his comrades. But he had made a nistake and had toppled free his
string. As a volunteer. he should not ask to rest. And the can-ho opened his note-
book. The nan had just taken a step backward on the road to redemption.

Other traps set: our perpetual biographies. One word too much, one new fact re-
ported, another one forgotten. and you had to start all over. In this regard, my
lack of knowledge of Vietnamese saved as.

Such treatment, which was both subtle and simple, could not be withstood indefinitely.
Half of my comrades would leave the caps. if they nenagsd to get out one day. more
or less broken.

I was officially released under Article seven of the Charter of Concentration Cans
of the People's Denocratic Republic of Vietnam. "The merciful and banana Revolution
releases this officer, regardless of his past crimes. because he is old and sick.”
Which should be interpreted as follows: "Because he is not dangerous and unable

to participate in any resistance."

A few individuals definitely had to be released so that the charter was not a total
lie. I was a nenber of the first contingent to cone back from the north and that
event was given all the publicity that could be expected. Photographs and recordings
of the farewell ceremony were distributed to every (:le ... to encomage other
prisoners to continue their efforts along the radiant path of repentance and
rehabilitation.

It was a real surprise to my whole neighborhood.

The people's clemency was given out very selectively. Cao Giao, the journalist.
had also just been released after 6 years of detention. But he was dying.

In May 1977. our group of prisoners released from came in the North was composed
of 6S rehabilitated nen who were in rather poo; physical condition.

We were reassembled in another ceep, officially to get us back on our .feet. I never
slept as poorly or etc so little. At the end of 2 weeks, we took the train to Hanoi

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and then Vinh in a car reserved for us. Ten can-b0 and nurses escorted us: can-ho
without weapons, nurses without drugs.

At every station. a wild crowd tried to climb into that amll local train. The
steps were taken by storm.

We had ample rose in our car. but when a poor nha-que risked entering, s can-ho
calmly told him to leave. And he obeyed without protesting. without the least
nurmur. and remained sadly on the platform. Buses took‘ us from Vinh to Saigon in
5 days. I didn't have any noney. He had just crossed the former southern border.
arriving in Hue. the former imperial capital. when a can-be gave us permission to
get off the train and, for those with money. to satin a restaurant alongside the
road.

Suddenly it was a miracle, the niracle of the South. There were wonen in groups

on the sidewalks. A can-b0 forbade us to conunicate with them. There were about
20 of them, rather young vendors of soup and delicacies. They looked at the can-be.
came closer, understood who we were and where we were coming free. A rice-cake
vendor spoke to me. She wanted as to buy one of her cakes. "I'a sorry," I said.
"but I don't have any noney."

The young woman cane closer, took two cakes and offered them to me: "Take them."
she said simply. And since I refused. ailing, without caring about the can-ho,

she threw the cakes to me through the open window. Three other women came up and
each one threw me a piastre. The most beautiful gifts I have ever received in my
life!

I tried to give back the piastres! They refused. Then I dared to speak to them.
to violate the very law of the can-be to tell them not to lose hope and that their
husbands would return one day very soon. They smiled at me with tears in their eyes.

l we been told about those widows. those women dressed in blach. who indefatigably
walk around a square in Busnos Aires. Argentina. because they have no news of a
husband or son.

What square in Saigon would be large enough for the 250. 000 women who are also
waiting for a husband or son?

Finally we reached a canp near Saigon, supposedly to complete the formalities. which
actually amounted to a nedical visit. Nelve days! 0h, such btlresucratic red tape!
Our families were obliged to cone get us. to be given a final speech with us.

In order for my wife to survive. in order not to be labeled a parasite or a privileged

middle-class woman, she sold cigarettes from a snall cart in front of our house.
Out of sympathy. the entire neighborhood bought from her.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

11915
CSO: (0200/7 3ND

16
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY