FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10312
9 February 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 7/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SWITZERLAND

Trade. Econanic Relations with USSR
(Viktor Golubchik; FOREIGN TRADE, Dec 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

POLITICAL

FRANCE

Relations Examined Between Hitterrand. P5P Deputies, Party
(Raymond Arm: L'EXPRESS, 11-17 Dec Bl)................

PCP Purpose, Personnel in New Government
(Jean Cau: PARIS mm, 13 Nov 81).....................

Security Measures, Hiring of Guards at Hatra Examined
(Gilbert Maury; BE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR, 2 Jan 82) .......

SPAIN

PSOE Leaders Show Concern for Future of Democracy
(CAMBIO 16, 21 Dec 81)

Gonzalez: Rightwing Civilians Responsible
Guerra: UCD's Reaction. Ineffective

Perez Llorca Connente on Deeper Meaning of Entry in NATO. BC
(Perez Llorca Interview: CAMBIO 16, 28 Dec 81)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC SWITZERLAND

TRADE, ECONOMIC RELATIONS III'I'H USSR

Moscow FOREIGN TRADE in English No 12, Dec 81 pp 23-25

[Article by Vilttor Colubchik: "USSR-Strlitzerland: Trade and Economic Relations in
the Tenth Pive-Year-Plan Period (1976-1980)")

[Text]

The years, which have passed since the Final
Act of the Conference on Security and Coopera-
tion in Europe. was signed. have been marked by
the successes of political dctente. Its materializa-
tion is clearly seen in the further development of
all-round, mutually beneﬁcial relations between
states with dill’ercnt social systems. “Peaceful co
operation between countries of the two systems.‘
the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union emphasized, ‘is by and large, mak-
ing good headway... Economic, scientiﬁc. technical
and cultural lieu are expanding. and are taking on
new qualities."l

In this period Soviet-Swiss trade and economic
relations are cnnrztrtcri/cd. lirst and lotentost, by
their signi'ieatttly strengthened treaty and legal
foundation. improved mechanism of bilateral co-
operation ;tnd steatlv growth of mutual trade.

On January l2. I978. Bern was the place of
sipilllln! the ten-year Art-cement on the Develop-
ment of Iit‘onontic. Industrial. Scientiﬁc and Tech-
nuul ('oopi-mtion between lltt' two countries, ex-
pn-ssmgt lllt'll (ll'\llt‘ to mpzuttl economic relu-
tiuns mt the principles ol the Final Act of the All-
littt'opeain (‘unlcrent'u

' I..| [In-(liner. ”PIN", ul Ihr (‘rulml ('imnmllrc u! the
('I'Sl: In (In- .\’.\I'I ('unuu'n "I ”If ("mttmuuisl Pony ol
the Sui-Ir: Unmn am! Mr Immediate- 1min "I lltr I’uur m
Ilmur and Fun-um I'uln r. Vortnli Press Art-nu I'uhlisltin):
”HIIM'. thu“. I'll". [I II

1
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R00050003002‘l-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In accordance with this Agreement a Long-Term
Programme for the Development of Economic, In-
dustrial, Scientiﬁc and Technical Cooperation was
signed in Bern and came into force on July 9, 1979.
providing for a wider exchange of goods and serv-
ices. mutual participation in the construction, ex-
pansion and modernization of industrial installa-
tions and enterprises. and furthering scientiﬁc and
technical cooperation in various industries, agri-
culture, fundamental and applied sciences, environ-
mental protection and other ﬁelds. In its comments
on the signing of the Long-Term Programme, the
Swiss press pointed out that it would facilitate
the Swiss exportcn' activities on the Soviet market
for a long time and would in future enable the
USSR and Switzerland to gain more precise
knowledge about both eountries' requirements.
Since I973 the &ivict-S\viss Joint Commission
on Scientific, Tmhnologieal, lndustrial and Eco-
nomic Cooperation. entrusted with control 0? the
implementation of the I978 Agreement and the 1979
Long-Term Programme, has functioned successfully.
Since its establishment the Commission has held
seven sessions to discuss questions concerning the
progress and prospects of scientiﬁc. technological.
trade and economic cooperation between the two
' countries. The Commission is an important instru-
ment furthering trade and economic ties. Fully
speciﬁed problems and spheres of mutual interest
make its meetings purposeful.

The Joint Commission has set up six working
groups whose tasks are to ﬁnd ways of expanding
cooperation in such vital economic spheres as
machine-tool making, electrical and power engineer-
ing; the production of pharmaceutical and low-ton-
nage chemical products. the watch, textile and food
industries.

The I970s witnessed the establishment in Swit-
zerland of a number of joint-stock companies with
Soviet foreign trade organimtions. These com-
panies make a noticeable contribution to strong-
- thcning business cooperation between the two coun-

tries. They mediate in supplying Switurland with
oil and oil products (Sowoil), selling jewellery (Rus-
salnuul. tendering goods transportation services
(Sow-chart) and in banking operations (Woscltod).
In their turn, seven Swiss firms and Swiss Credit
Bank (Credit Suisse) have offices in Moscow. Their
purpose is to establish cluser contacts between
Swiss firms and Soviet foreign trade and other

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030021-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600030021-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizations, raise ellieiency and impart flexibility
to the solving of commercial and technical ques-
tions.

In accordance with the Agreement on Coopera-
' tion between the USSR Chamber of Commerce and
Industry and the Swiss Trade Promotion Bureau
(Office Suisse d'Expansion Commerciale) Soviet for-
eign trade associations conduct lively cooperation
with relevant enterprises and ﬁrms of Switzerland
and are active participants in international fairs
and exhibitions held in both countries.

Between 1976 and i980 nineteen specialized ex-
hibitions of Soviet export goods were held in Switz-
erland. Soviet foreign trade associations are regular
participants of the International Auto Salon in
Geneva and the international Spring Fair in Basel
among others. For instance. men: than 20 All-
Union foreign trade associations took part in the
I978 and 1980 fairs in Basel. In their torn between
I976 and 1980 Swiss ﬁrms participated in 64 in-
ternational fairs in the USSR and held 34 specializ-
ed exhibitions. In I978 Moscow was a venue of the
second successful exhibition of Swiss machine tools
at which the country's 70 firms displayed their
products.

In 1975 the USSR Chamber of Commerce and
Industry opened its office in Zurich. In 1980 alone
the ofﬁce helped more than 500 Swiss organim-
tions and firms establish contacts with Soviet for-
: eign trade organimtions by arranging their par-
! ticipation in exhibitions in the USSR and business
l trips to our country. Thus. in the last five years
. nine authoritative delegations of Swiss business-
men have visited the Soviet Union.

Within the framework of agreements between
the USSR State Committee for Science and Tech-
nologv and seventeen Swiss firms ever greater
signiﬁcance is being acquired by the two countries’
scientiﬁc. technological and industrial ties in such
lnanehes as machine-tool making. metallmnv, trans--
port. power. looms and Food-processing engineering
industries. automated information systems. the
manufacture of chemical, pharmaceutical and
aromatic products, chip-board. ships' automation,
the food industry.

For example, in powder metallurgy the Paton
lileeln'e Welding Institute of the Ukrainian
Academy of Scienrrs and the Byelorussian Re-
publican Research and Industrial Powder Metal-
lurgy Association maintain contacts. with the Swiss
firm, Castolin. Work on defining the problems for

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00060R000500030021-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500030021-0

FOR (”FINAL USF. ONLY

scientiﬁc and technological cooperation between
the USSR Ministry of Machine Tool and instru-
ment-Making Industry and the Swiss Aswciation
of Machinery Manufacturers in the production of
metal-cutting latbes for the period ending in 1990.
is nearing completion. In the field of experimental
and clinical study of new medicinal substances
as well as diagnostics and regeneration, success-
ful cooperation continues with traditional Swiss
partners, Ciba-Geigy, Sandoz. F. Holfmann-La
Roche. Cooperation is coming on with other ﬁrms
not parties to the agreements but which show in-
terest in joint research of a certain theme. To cite
an example. the USSR Ministry of Electra-technical
Industry and the firm lsola-Werlte of Switzerland
are iointly elaborating a programme of coopera-
tion in the field of electric insulating materials,
systems of isolation and casting of polymer in-
sulators. The USSR Ministry of Tractor and Agricul-
tural Machinery Industry and the Swiss firm. Duap.

- have signed a stage-by-stage Working plan for de-
celoping tcchnologv and making: equipment for
machining components of a diesel motor fuel sys-
tent. Cooperation has been established with the
l‘lasnrotechnika ﬁrm in the ﬁeld' of powder metal-
lunar. In I979 and Wilt) alone about 20 seminars
.tml umposiat were arranged in which the fol-
lowing $\\'--\ lirnrs lodth part: Mitt, llell, Kern.
Lamb. Lucerna, Maag, Ciba-Geigy. Ulano, Yacob
Miiller. besides others.

The Joint Commission's Seventh Session record-
ed its satisfaction with the two countries' scientiﬁc
an.‘ technical cooperation and noted the favourable
posibilties for its expansion and consolidation.

Contacts have been established with small and
medium-sized ﬁrms. Today, the All-Union foreign
trade associations have trade and economic rela-
tions with more than 300 such Swiss firms.

All the above has had a positive impact on the
expansion of mutual trade and constitutes an im-
portant indicator of the level of deVeloping eco
nornic ties between our countries.

Between l976 and I980 both countries exchang-
ed goods worth l80 per cent more than in the
l97l-I97S period. The Soviet Union delivered to
Swit/crland 1.3m tnillion nrbles' worth of com-
modities and its imports accounted for IAN mil-
lion rubles.

In 1980 the trade turnover between the USSR
and the Swiss Confederation reached nearly 850
million rubles. a rat per cent increase over the
l975 figure.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00860R000500030021-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500030021-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sovlet-Swlss Trude
(mln rubles)

me 1971 197': I979 mo

-' —__—_—————————__—

Tumover 37] .4 375.0 5l0.8 590.3 847 6
Soviet export l09.l 152.6 2862 3”! 445.1
Soviet import 263.3 222.4 224.6 215.9 402.5

———_——-——-F—'—'-—

The trade level reached was due. ﬁrst and fore-
most, to the wider range of goods and the in-
creased physical volume of mutual deliveries.

As compared to the previous ﬁve-year period.
between 1976 and 1980 Soviet sales of machines.
equipment and consumer goods to Switzerland
nearly doubled: Soviet export of chemicals increas-
ed more than 50 per cent. and that of furs and
articles made from fur. nearly four times.

During the same period Soviet purchases of
Swiss equipment and machinery grew from 171 to
189 million rubles in I980. including: chemical
equipment (from 6.4 to 9.0 million rubles) and elec-
trode products (from 6 to 27). food-processint!
equipment (from 2.4 to I70) and instruments and
laboratorv equipment—from 4.3 to ".2 million
rubles respectively.

Soviet imports of Swiss chemicals increased

. from 25.6 to 38.6 million rubles. and those of in-

°! secticides and pesticides. from 20 to 39.5 million
rubles.

The Soviet share in Swiss foreign trade and
Switzerland's proportion in the total external com-
merce of the USSR are relatively small: about
three and one per cent respectively. Nevertheless
the mutual goods exchange has deﬁnite signiﬁcance
-- for the development of the two muntries' eco-
II'IIIIII‘\

' lit-tm-cn I976 aml 19:40 Soviet csports lu Switz-
erland consisted mainly of oil-and oil products (on
the average about 60 per cent), chemicals (about
four per cent). machines and equipment (more
than two per cent), furs and fur articles. food-
sttllls, and consumer goods.

Within this period Swit/erland bought from the

Soviet Union almost 50 million rubles’ worth ol’
chemicals, 30 million rubles' worth of furs and for
articles. and also machines and equipment worth
‘ appmxitnately 30 million rubles. About 700 metal-
cutting lathes carrving thc trade-marks of Moscow.
Leningrad. (im'lty. Rvamn and Kolomna enter-
prises. are working at Swiss ﬁrms. During 1976-
l980 Switvcrlaml's tnotor vehicle fleet was re-
plenished with nearly 10,000 passenger cars from

5

5 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600030021-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500030021-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Soviet Union. Swiss buyers highly appraised the
Lada-Niva car which earned a fame of a 'reliable
and inexpensive. hard-we ' as car". In addition, the
USSR aiso supplies Switzerland with nearly all its
pyrite. more than 50 per cent of peat and one-ﬁfth
of the asbestos the country imports.

At the same time the Soviet Union is a large
and stable market for a number of Swiss indus-
tries.

The most important Soviet imports from Switz-
erland are machines and equipment (56 per cent).
chemical products (nine per cent), insecticides and
pesticides (about eight per cent), dyestuffs, and
consumer goods.

For many a year now every tenth or eleventh
metaleutting machine exported by Switverland ar-
rives in the USSR. The Soviet Union is a maior
purchaser of Swiss milling equipment. Switzerland
sells in the USSR one-third of multibased acids,
small-diameter steel pipes. considerable quantities
of pumping-and-compmssor equipment. geodetic,
topographic. navigational. geophysical and other in-
struments and devices. insecticides.

Stable links with Soviet foreign trade organiza-
tions enable Swiss ﬁrms to plan production
volumes and assure employment. Export to the
socialist countries. a considerable part going to the
USSR. provides Swit/erland with several dozen
thousand work places which is not a small number
for a country where the number of workers cm-
ploved in industry does not exceed 700,000.

For the Soviet Union the cooperation with
Switzerland is conducive. in some measure. to the
expansion and stream-lining of a number of Soviet
enterprises. thus raising their eﬂiciency, and en-

' suring the supply of basic materials for some in-
dustries and a wide range of consumer goods for
the population.

The Seventh Session of the Joint Commission,
held in Moscow I980, positively appraised the
progress and prospects oi Soviet-Swiss trade and
economic cooperation.

it should be pointed out. however. that the two

t'otlnlt‘ies' relations do not reﬂect many rte“ l-u‘ms
of cooperation which are being successfully used
in mutually advantageous ties with other indus-
trial countries of the West and which are recom-
mended by the Long-Term Programme of Coopera-
tion between the USSR and Switzerland.

The twu countries'cmperation on a compensa-
- tion basis is making its ﬁrst steps. Last September,

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030021-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030021-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet foreign trade organizations and the Swiss
ﬁrm interplastilta. signed a contract for the delivery
to the USSR of equipment for the Segczha pulp-
and-paper mill (Katelian ASSR) to process crude
tall oil and sulphate soap. The cost of services
rendered and equipment supplied on a commercial
credit basis, will be repaid with exports to Switz-
erland of crude tall oil and some other chemicals.

industrial cooperation. a modern form af co-
operation, has not as yet developed very far. Only
two agreements on production cooperation have
been signed with Swiss ﬁrms and these quite
recently.

The countries have gained experience. though
not large, of Soviet organizations’ and Swiss lirms’
joint cooperation in third countries. For instance.
the All-Union Association Energomachexport, jointly
with Brown Bovery. participated -in cooperated
deliveries of equipment for the Sigalda hydroelec-
- tric power station in leeland and with Brown Bo-

very. Mannesmann and EFT (Federal Republic of
Germany) on the ioint construction of the Kardia
electric power plant in Greece. There are every

prospects for furthering such cooperation.
Talks are under way on the deliveries of Soviet

natural gas to West European countries and on
purchases. on a long-term credit basis. of machinery
and equipment for the construction of a gas pipe-
line and the development of gas deposits. 'The
signing ol’ an Agreement betWeen both countries'
organizations on Soviet deliveries of natural gas to
Switlerland." reads the Protocol of the Joint Com-
mission seventh session.—"would he conducive to

‘ maintaining and expanding trade turnover between
the USSR and Switmt'land for a long time.‘

The Unite-term Programme has deﬁned the pos-
sibilities and spceilic dimctions for promoting
tntttttally beneﬁcial trade and economic coopera-
tion between the ttvo countries for a long time
ahead.

Proceeding from principles of peaceful coex-
istence of states with dillerent social systems and
the need to consolidate detente throughout the
world. the 26th Congress of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union conﬁrmed the USSR's in-
variable principled stand aimed at establishing
stable, mutually beneﬁcial trade, economic. scien-
tiﬁc and technical relatiorts with the capitalist
countries showing an interest in conducting trade
with the Soviet Union. These principles underlie
our trade and economic ties with Switzerland.

COPYRIGHT: "Vnesbnaya Torgovlya" 1981
English translation. "Foreign Trade", 1981

(:80: 3120/ 36
7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030021-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

RELATIONS EXAMINED RENEE)! MTTERRAND. PS? DEPUTIES. PARTY
Paris L'mRESS in French 11-17 Dec 31 PP 79-81
[Article by Raymond Aron: "The Sphinx. or French Socialism"]

Text} The constitution. the election of the president of the Republic by direct
universal suffrage. and the two round single member district system for the repre-
sentatives. force the political class and the French to divide themselves into two
camps. Today. the nostalgia for the /somewhere else/ Lprinted in italics] can be
found in well known territory. minister of Francois Hitterrsnd... In the final
analysis. the somewhere else served as a bridge between the two camps. Why should
this be surprising? Outside of the two camps, there is room only for spectators
or critics.

Suddenly, the debates or the battles within each of the two camps interest comme -
tators as much as or more than the dialogue of the deaf between the two camps. In
the past. one wondered about the relationships between Valery Giscard d'Estaing
and Jacques Chirac. and between Georges Marchais and Francois Hitterrand. During
the last presidential campaign. t was these relationships which determined the
outcome of the tournament; Chirac conclusively settled his score with the former
president of the Republic. and Harchais temporarily buried the hatchet. The former
majority. which has become a powerless minority. is still looking for a chief. a
style and ideas. The only thing left to populate the desert of the political scene.
is the government and the Socialist Party. both of them curious animals of the po-
1 itical bustier-y .

0n the eve of 10 May. the Socialist Party. which was born at the congress of Epinay
and which chose Francois Mitterrand as first secretary thanks to the rallying of
Pierre Mauroy. had about 200,000 active members. And it obtained millions of votes
(up to 9.h32.362 last June). The disproportion between the number of active mem-
bers and the number of voters is also found in other more or less socialist parties
in Western Europe. such as the British Labor Party. for example. However. followhg
a tradition which goes back to +he parties which called themselves social democrat
at the end of the last century -- revolutionaries at the time -—. the party. that
is to say the active members. does not give a free hand to the parliamentary group.
Leon Blum could not accept or reject participation in the government without getﬂng
permission from the party. For the time being. Francois Hitterrand has nothing to
fear from the party. which is administered by Lionel Jospin and whose factions have
committed a provisional hara-kiri. but he will not forget that he needed the left
wing. the CERES [Center for Studies. Research and Education] to hold a majority
against the Hauroy—Rocard alliance. True. by choosing Pierre Hauroy to be prime

mu nev'rrul us? mm?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

minister. Francois hitterrand rewarded. not someone who had always been loyal. but
a renegade from the opposition at the congress of Meta.

The parliamentary group resembles the party more than the government does. The
latter imperfectly represents the parliamentary group and the party. Graduates from
the National School of Administration have not completely disappeared from the paths
of power and. even though the wait seemed a long one to him. the minister of economy
and finance has taken a short cut in terms of the customs of the party. He received
a portfolio, but not a constituency. The setting up of the socialist state is going
full speed. but it is the president who makes the choices. Francois Mitterrand has
acquired the royal style as Quickly as his predecessors. He founded a Computer
Science Institute (with a 100 million French franc credit) despite reservations from
the experts. Hence. a press conference or a television interview constitute an

event, even when the president does not seem to have any big news to communicate to
the country.

In the area of inflation and unemployment. against which the current majority --
then in the opposition -- raged. there is nothing new. The number of job seekers
exceeds 2 million: perhaps the increase in numbers has a tendency to slow down.
The diagnosis is abOut the same in terms of price hikes: neither acceleration nor
deceleration. It goes without saying that, if we were to take the tone adopted by
today's masters to rebuke yesterday's masters. there would be no lack of arguments
to give the socialists a modesty of which they do not seem to have an excess.

But. because of the upheaval caused by the "change.“ the worst was to be feared. A
certain boost to the economy is taking shape. prompted by the purchasing power as
spread out after May. and also following the weakness of stocks last spring. Even
the figures relating to foreign trade. which remain mediocre. are not getting no-
ticeahiy worse. At the beginning of the year. exports were stimulated by the rigor
of the management of public finances all through the year 1980 and by stagnation.
At the present time. the relative reduction of the dollar (currency in which import
prices are quoted) is improving the terms of trade. The devaluation of the French
franc in relation to the nark filled a need and should improve the trade revival of
France within the European Economic Community.

If Pierre Hauroy would give up the incantations. if he would stop giving himself
over to an eloquence typical of agricultural shows ("the nationalizations, an ex-
pression of the French genius"). if he would work at Hatignon rather than running
around all over France. the impression of crisis or of a state of emergency would
dissipate.

Not that the socialist management does not lend itself to criticism, but the major
government decisions were included in its platform. even though Francois Hitterranis
campaign focused on the "calm strength“ rather than on the socialist project which
he bluntly refused to take responsibility for. The fact remains that the national-
izations. the division of labor. the increase of social expenditures and of the
budgetary deficit, the reduction followed by the elimination of the family quotient.
all these measures the French. consciously or not. approved through their vote.

I often explained, prior to the elections. that in my eyes there is no economic or
even political justification at all for the full nationalisation of credit, and that
the nationalization of large international enterprises can only be explained by an
ideology of archaeo-socialism. Now that Mitterrsnd and the socialists are in power,

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we are waiting to see whether these reforms will be carried out under conditions
which reduce their risks. In the battle of the nationalizations within the adminis-
tration. the moderates have been defeated. in intelligible and foreseeable outcome:
the list of nationalizations goes back to an agreement between the Socialist Party
and the Communist Party and has been maintained against all odds, thanks to the fan-
tasies and convictions of the president of the Republic. Hhat is the use of arguing?

The qua :rel over the "pause" iits into a different category. The word used by
Jacques Delors could equally be fortunate or unfortunate. Fortunate. because. on
the face of it. it enjoyed the support of a Iajor former party leader. Leon mun
used the word 6 months after having come to power. at a time when some of these
measures had boosted the economy. when others (the 1+0 hour law) had slowed it and
when his policy as a whole had upset half the country. Unfortunate, because today's
economic conditions do not resemble those of December 1936. Those measures which I
believe will be harmful in time -- the recruitment of 200.000 civil servants, the
reduction of the retirement age. the reduction of working hours -— have not yet pro-
duced any of the regrettable consequences one might have feared. A policy which
definitely increases the number of workers but not that of Jobs drops its mask only
in time. As for an end to the reforms. this is in certain respects impossible. even

if in other respects it is desirable.

Decentralization as Gaston Defferre understands it will lead to an additional re-
cruitment of civil servants. and thus an increase in the costs of the national ad-
ministration at a the when all countries are worried abOut state expenditures which
require ever greater demands on the economy. But the laws on decentralization re-
quire other laws which specify the distribution of functions among the three bodies:
municipalities. departments, regions. I deplore the politicization of local admin-
istrations. which will inevitably result fro- the Defferre decentralisation and the
metamorphosis of the prefect turned chief administrator of the Republic. As the
government wants to put the whole system into place by 1983. it is forced to have
the second set of laws relating to decentralisation passed.

As far as the reforr. of social security and of the tax system are concerned. two
econonic reporters -- one in LE nouns, the other on "Europe 1" -- expressed appa-
rently contradictory opinions: one of then noted that the reform of the tax system
would require extrene caution. that it is easy to criticize the housing tax and the
professional tax. a:- both of them are considered bad. but that it will be necessary
to find the approximately 60 billion French francs which these two taxes bring in.
The other commentator stated. in an equally convincing manner. that the reform of
social security and of the tax systen are not the result of a compulsion for refons.
but of constraints.

The increase of social security and family allowance expenditures calls for new re-
sources for which ordinary procedures -- removal of ceilings. additional points on
salaries -- will not be sufficient. Hence. we may expect a partial taxation of
social security. At the same time. the tax reform will not be limited to elimina-
ting bad taxes and replacing them with good ones; inheritance and income taxes
would be changed. By the spring or the fall of 1982. the cost of the government's
pol icy for the population as a whole will become apparent.

These problems of figures hardly lend theme] vet. to flights of poesy. The debate
on the respective merits of social democracy and socialism leaves more room for

rhetoric and vorbalism. The term social -Ireao-:rat was considered a pejorative one

'0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by the socialists. Two ministers. Jacques Delors and Robert Badinter no longer he-
sitate to call themselves social democrats.

we know socialism after the Soviet fashion: nationalization of all means of produc-
tion. a detailed and authoritarian planning of the whole economy. the country di-
rected by a single party and deprived of all personal and intellectual liberties.
Hell. Georges hrchais states that the overall balance sheet of this kind of social-
ism is a positive one. And comrades of lbrchais are members of the government of
Pierre Hauroy. who definitely does not judge the balance sheet of this kind of so-
cialism to be a positive one. In any case. Francois Hitterrand certainly does not
take it as a model.

Sweden. which was governed for M years by a party which called itself socialist.
ushes the redistribution of incomes through taxation further than any other country
state expenditures and redistributed sums approach 80 percent of the gross domestic

product). But the Swedish socialists did not nationalize the major international

enterprises. which are the driving force of prosperity. Francois hitterrand does
not take Sweden for a. model either. because it respects the head (or the heart) of
capitalism. specifically the large industrial enterprises and credit.

that then is the socialism of the president of the Republic? For the present. it
includes a certain dosage of nationalisations and a certain dosage of income redis-
tribution through taxation and social security. The last word has not been said yet
in either of these chapters.

As long as the government does not go beyond this framework. it does not basically
differ from the other mil-open countries which are also referred to as being social
democratic. Whether there are more or less nationalisations. more or less redistri-
bution of income. these countries. integrated in the world economy. submit to the
rules of the market. Everywhere. governments intervene in order to ensure overall
balance, to fight against underemployment or against deficits in the balance of £0-
reigl payments. or to encourage a branch of industry. In this respect. ﬁance has
for a long time been a social democracy. State expenditures and social security
together represent 1&3 percent of the gross domestic product. a 7 point increase du-
ring the 7 years Valery Ciscard d'Estaing was in office.

Up to now. the socialist government has stated on every occasion that France wants
to remain in the European Community and in the world market. hence that it is not
considering an overall planning of the economy; how could an authoritarian plan be
imposed when the workers in industry work 2 days a week for foreign markets. hence
for clients over whom the planners have no authority?

According to the socialist project. the party does not want to reform capitalism but
break with it. But what does such a break mean? Either it implies withdrawal from
the capitalist economy or else it only has a symbolic value. Let us assume the
second interpretation: the break with capitalist. devoid of a precise meaning.
refers to the nationalizations. and the themes of archaeo-socialism which have be-
come obsolete in the advanced nations of the European Community. Simultaneously.
France is embarking on a policy which implies an increased redistribution of income.
whereas all the European countries have noted that the welfare state also leads to
an impasse. The annual increase of social expenditures. which is higher than that
of the national product. remained at a tolerable level as long as the economy was

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

growing at a 5 to 6 percent rate. If this rate is reduced to 2 to 3 percent. the
so—celled social democratic system may well becone unbearable.

French socialism has picked up an idea which was fashionable before 1914. perhaps,
before 1939: the nationslizstion of a few large enterprises ands practice which
was connon all over the Western world during the "30 miraculous years." an increased
redistribution of incomes. Two old-fashioned ideas, even though honorable. do they
make an event of universal history. the revenge of Leon Blun over Lenin?

COPYRIGHT: 1981 s.a.. Groupe Ebrpress

8063
cs0: 3100/221

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

PCP PURPOSE, PERSONNEL IN NEW GOVBRMENT
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 13 Nov 81 pp 88-89
[Article by Jean Can: "The PCP's Holes "1

[Caption] A conversation (he won't contradict me if he
recognizes himself) which I had fraternally with a
communist official after 10 May and before the legisla-
tive elections. "Mitterrand has succeeded in his task.
You have just received a mighty blow with Msrcbais' 16
percent, and you're liable to get another serious one

in the legislative elections." "80 what? Do you think
that 2 or 3 percent more or less matters to us? no you
think we aren't familiar with Hitterrsnd's tactics? Do
you think we don't know what he is saying, what he wants,
and what he confides to some people and to others? But
that's not what matters to us." "Then what?" "Don't
you know? Between you and me, don't you know?" "Not
entirely, but...." "There is nothing secret about it.
What we want to do is destabilize the capitalist society
besiege it, and make it explode from within. That is
clear. And if Hitterrand offers us a wider range of
activities than Giscard, then we'll make use of
Hitterrand."

'Thanks to Its Ministers, It is Creeping in Everywhere
For Us, Hitterrand is a Means

[Textlwhateverhappens in the meantime, he has gotten the better of you. "That's
how you see it. But we don't. You are an adversary, but I don't take you for an
imbecile. Do the same for us. Do you sincerely believe that we are a party like the
rest?" "No...." "We are the party with the greatest number of militants. We can
stop 30 factories overnight. We are everywhere. We are also the richest party.

Have you read Montaldo's books?" "Yes." "Hell. Hontaldo is right. Except that
what he debits us, to break us, credit us with it to measure our strength. It's
true, we are very rich. Don't forget also that we depend on the USSR. For us,
Hitterrand is a means, a passageway, an opening. As long as he allows us to advance
and create the irreversible, we will not budge; if he gets a notion to give us the
sack, then you'll see our departure and the rioting. But we will have gone up another
peg. Re are patient and there is time for us." "Say wOuld you be willing, in broad

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

daylight, to give me an interview and say what you have just said, using your own
name?" "Why? What's new about what 1 have said? We've been repeating for over
50 years that we are Leininists, collectivists, pro-Soviet; that we are fighting
capitalism to destroy it in its various forms, and you're saying that you‘ll learn
that from an interview?"

No, we won’t learn anything. Except that people are still surprised--they are and
they aren't--when a communist tells them calmly, while they're in his company, that
his party wants to make the society and political system in which they live explode
from within. That his own type of democracy is popular; that his ”universally positive"
model is the USSR; that his ideal is the single party; that his Mecca is Moscow.

And that Hitterrand's policy is nothing but a means for creating the irreversible
and for advancing the pawns of his party a little further. Why are people surprised?
Because it is so clear as to be blinding. And if, as it was said not long ago. "the
Soviets are playing chess and the West, belote," what game is H Hitterrand playing
with the communists today? Reducing their numbers while integrating them? Well!

The bet has been lost. The wolf can never become the sheep dog. Even if it did,

it would remain a wolf and would devour the sheep.

The PCF or, yesterday, a substate in the nation (the_most legally in the "free"!
world, besides which our democracies most obligingly hold their doors wide open--
the doors to mayors' offices; general and municipal councils; unions; businesses;
various associations and movements; administrations; teaching institutions; etc.--
to those whose avowed purpose is to destroy their systems.) The PCP or, today, the
communist State in the government, which delivered four powerful spots to it. Four
ministries on which hundreds of thousands of civil servants depend. Four command
posts from which it can drill its troops at leisure. 0n the day it retires, whether
it be in 6 months or in l or 7 years, who cares if the commanders leave the poor
deck, if the faithful ones brought on the team remain on board.

Since 1947, when Ramadier. president of the socialist council, banished them from
the government, the communists have been waiting--weapon ready, and always polished--
to return. 0h, patience! When their adversaries remarked that it gave them the
jitters, the answer rang out: "Didn't we have ministers during Liberation? Didn't
Lhry do their job?” indeed they did. "After the war, when we had ministers among
the members of government, we could prove that they did not act in a loyal manner.
They did not behave like ministers taking part in a common task. They acted like
'Trojan horses' within the government, working exclusively for the Communist Party
and not for the country." Who wrote that? H Mendes France (LE HONDE, 28 September
1954). And, further: "The working class knows perfectly well that the Communist
Party is toying with it." Hho said that? M Francois Hitterrand, senator of the
UDSR [Union of the Socialist Republicans] (during a speech at the Mole-Tocqueville
conference, 6 June 1958). If men have changed and if H Hitterrand has become, 23
years later, the president of the Republic, the PCP-~the ”Partyi"—~remains. Faith-
ful to its hiatory, its leaders, its tablets of the law, which have never been
destroyed. Who say, "We are communisrs. We have to account to our party for the
way we have performed the task entrusted to us by the working class. To what extent
have you, communist (you, Fiterman; you, Jack halite; you, Anicet Le Pars; you,
Marcel Rigout; all of you ministers...and I will close the parentheses), appointed
through the trust of a mass organization, to what extent have you responded to this
trust and fulfilled your tasks? The Party has the right to ask us to do this
continuously," (Benoit-Frachon, then secretary general of the CGT, before the 13th
Congress).

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISl-I ONLY

in 1981, then, "they“ are in the government. honor to whom honor is due--that is,
to the Party‘s No 2 man after harchais. N Charles Fiterman, minister of state,
minister of transportation who, in that capacity, is in charge of ports, airports,
airlines, roads, the SNCF [French National Railroads], the RATP [lndpendent Parisian
Transport System], Supply routes and, in general, all of France's transportation, both
in the civil sector as well as...nationa1 defense! Flanked by whom, H Fiterman?

M Guy Braibant (charge for general policy, international and European affairs,
administrative organs and management personnel), 54 years old, RNA [National School
of Administration] graduate and coauthor (wiuxlhm Questiaux, how about that!) of a
book on "the control of administration and the protection of citizens." Alongside
him we have M Denis Coton and H Perrod who, for 20 years, has been known by everyone
in the bridges and highway department, where he is the only engineer who is a member
of the PCP. when his predecessor was fired after several hours, H Perrod was named
director of ground transportation, a huge section which the Party controls from now
on, not only politically but operationally.

He also have M Jouary, former head of the intellectuals of the Seine-Maritime
Federation (Roland Leroy's), and who was deserving of the name "prosecutor" for his
zeal in carrying out the purges during the PCF's internal crisis in 1978. There is
Porcu, communist deputy of Longwy, defeated in the legislative elections, who was
reappointed as parliamentary attache; Amelie Dreyfus, secretary of the communist
group at the European parliament, and former press attache at the Place du Colonel-
Fabien; etc. For the moment, M Fiterman and the communist machinery surrounding
him have been working systematically at consolidating his enormous ministry and
assuring the CGT's superiority everywhere over the P0 [Workers' Force] and the CFDT.

At Auteuil, there is even more vigorous control by the PCP, which is already in

power there, over the SNCF's electronic management system (card catalogue on all
personnel and salaries, files on tape, etc...). At the CGT level, all those officials
with the card of the Socialist Party have been ushered out and replaced by carriers

of another card. There is penetration of the CFDT, which is being pushed to extremes
by COT elements infiltrating it (there is a name for this: manipulation), so that

it can launch strikes, take over local grOups, stir up trouble here and there, actively
interfere in the nomination of regional directors (recently, in Rouen and Lille);
centering of the general management in the collimator to make it hang off balance,

for the purpose of showing its incompetence and, once they have done that, replacing
its members. As a grad finale, M Fiterman's loud cries accusing the CFDT--while he
coolly manipulates lt--of launching strikes, at first to discredit it, while observing
out of the corner of his eye what these strikes are doing; and secondly, once the
tests have been recorded, for launching a "general one" for which the CPDT would
guarantee recurrences. A classic case. In fact, M Fiterman's primary objective is
to use every means to "break" all unions other than the COT. Among the railway
workers, the F0 is the privileged prey, the F0 which, for example, is surprised at
seeing Plterman personally defend the ministry's point of view ("Never seen anything
like it!" exclaims the secretary general of the F0 Railway Horkers' Federation)
before the "joint statutory commission" which takes up regulatory problems every

year, and to hear Fitcrman state: "When it comes to unions' rights, we don't have to
wait for the law." (sic!) Another example of "the minister's guided impartiality"

is the Villeneuve-Saint-Georges conflict. We know that Fiterman spoke out vehemently
against the strike, but do we know that there have been dozens of strikes since July,
and that when Fiterman chose to condemn that one in particular, it was because the

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAL l'Sl’. UNI)

railway workers, none of whom is a COT member, had decided on that strike? He had
a good reason: the 10 CGT members had been thrown out by their central unit in
January and had since rejoined the ranks of the F0.

0n the Alert at the work Sites

As for M Anicet Le Pors, minister of civil service (it is useless to x-ray his team
which--from his director, Rene Bedouze, who heads the CGT workers' federation, to

his cabinet head, Mme Uzan, an intense militant, not to mention H J-J Philippe.
tenacious ERA alumnus of formidable ability--is no less replete with troublesome
militants than Fiterman's), they don't sulk at the infiltration either, not are they
idle in the struggle between the F0 and CFDT. It is an intense struggle because,
traditionally, the people in management have never been enamored of the cat. The
workers are social democrats, belonging to the F0 or the CFDT. This is where M Le Pors
gor the bright idea to allow politics free entry into the local organs of administra-
tion--in other words, to allow the COT forcibly to penetrate the strongholds which

up to now had been held by the other unions. Good idea, wasn't it?

But it is in the area of public health that the situation is perhaps the most
interesting, if not the most disquieting. First of all, M Jack Ralite, who, in

the communist group, was the man in charge of media and the intellectuals, is con-
sidered an "ace" at manipulating. Next, like his brothers in the party, he has
solidly surrounded himself. His cabinet director is M Jacques Latrille, doctor of
sciences and medicine, former professor at Bordeaux and for 15 years the official

and voluntary technical advisor of the Communist Party office for problems of health.
His cabinet head, George Herlhe, is a member of the PC with a permanent seat on the
central committee. As for the assistant cabinet director, the strong man on the

team, he is a former communist deputy of Card, Gilbert Miltel, to whom the hierarchical
structure has assigned "medical and paramedical affairs and training of the health
professions." One of the most recent proofs of the clever work of penetration or
infiltration was the accord reached at Elysee several days ago to nominate a new
general director of Health and Hospitals. The former chief, H Choussat, finance
inspector, hoped to be named budget director, and this was granted to him by H Fabius .
This therefore cleared the way for the nomination of Professor Roux, a urology pro—
lessor at Montpelier, but also a member of the Commuuet Party's Central Committee

for about 10 years.

M Rnlite stated that he was going to separate Health and Hospitals, which had up to

then been under the same direction. But right this minute, we know that, for Hospitals,
he has on his desk an order nominating a public aid worker who was active in the

COT study groups on hospital problems.

For the moment, the workers coming under M Rallte are arching their backs, but in

6 months the framework necessary [or the Communisr minister to exercise his authority
unchallenged will be established. "Thus," an official of the ministry stated to us,
"by Easter, no one will hesitate any more." At Place du Colonel-Fabien, the PCP
headquarters, the man who supervises all placement of personnel around the Communist
ministers is Philippe Herzog, a Polytechnical School graduate nicknamed Jojo's Attali.
(Harchais is Jojo.) Herzog, whom they are talking about for a nationalized bank
presidency, Suez or Paribas, is planning with Le Pors a bulldozer-style reform of the
ERA and the Normals Sup. [translator's note: teachers' training college in Paris] to
quash these cltadels of "elitism" which, as one communist official said, produced

the "brilliant guard dogs of the bourgeoisie."

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Does M Le Pors hope that, as a result of the reform, the new types of dogs coming
out of the major schools will be trained to bite other passers-by? No doubt he does.
Besides, in this regard, the battle in which the socialists and communists are so
engaged in snapping at each other, becoming regular, fierce and sneaky OPA [Public
Offer to Purchase], the nation's elite, does not lack coarseness. To us cry out the
socialists, the CNRS [National Center for Scientific Research], to us. the ERA, the
PCP lashes back. To me, to you...and everyone draws back onto the cover, with their
jaws shut.

Finally, M Rigout, minister of vocational training, is a happy man. "The bosses'
money will let us conduct vocational training according to our principles!" he

cries out rapturously. "According to our principles?" Yes, since the PCP was invited
to send the training centers staunch militants to train—~technically, of course,

but also politically--young people seeking employment and a career. Thus, vocational
training will become a type of clandestine school (aside from the official ones)

for the future permanent cadres of the party.

Aside from the "covert" methodical and governmental activities of its ministers, the
PCP is placing in businesses very special correspondents, thanks to its cells and

also the diversified planting of a network of voluntary informants in all milieus,
especially at the work sites. Recent circulars sent to the cells by Gaston Plissonnier,
Central Committee secretary, are asking the militants to be in a constant state of
alert at the work sites where they are evolving. Thus, every event capable of feeding
the party's propaganda is immediately spotted and pointed out to officials of the

local organizations, who transmit it to the Central Committee. Stsunch and well-
placed militants, chosen for 3 months by the local units, have thus become corres-
pondents for the Central Committee. allowing the PCP to keep abreast of everything
happening in businesses, but also in the administrations, and all the more rapidly
since the party has set up a telex system connected to its Central Comittee permitting
rapid response to the questions and problems that come up

As for the media (radio, television, newspapers), M Juquin, member of the politburo,
has been converted into a traveling salesman whom it is not good to contradict when
he comes to present his men. There has been one flop, however. he recently turned
up at an outlying station demanding that two journalists be placed there. The man
in charge of the station. after listening to him present his merchandise, asked him
softely, "Yes, Monsieur Juquin, yes, of course.... But what am I going to do with
your two journalists if they are barred from the party someday? Are you going to
ask me to lay them off?"

Thus, throughout the wheels of the state, we have comunist ferrets, moles or buffalo.
Already in control of whole segments of French society, the PCP has received a massive
dose of anabolite from the ministers' entering the government, which has allowed it

to strengthen inordinately its already formidable muscles. According to H Plissonnisr,
who controls the party's internal security and the outside activities of its agents,
i.e., in the ministries or in businesses, the PCF's power should increase considerably
by 1983, i.e., once the credibility of the sociocommunist power is consolidated and
its willingness proven to stay in control of things in any events. Where there is
resistance, they will proceed through acts of authority. They also rely on what a
socialist oificial bitterly calls "dacha politics," used to corrupt a certain number
of resisters and turn them into “fellow travelers." Dacha politics works well in the

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAI. USE ONLY

countries of the East. Why not France? Finally, there is opportunism, on the same
level with alarm and caution. An example of this: 3 weeks ago, after Anicet Le Pora
had authorized the workers to hold political meetings at the local administrative
units, workers in the Ministry of Finance were surprised to find in their drawers or
on their desks an invitation with a hammer and sickle stamped on the cover, which
said: "French Communist Party-—lst Arrondissement. Ministry Section of Economy

and Finance. You are cordially invited to a fraternal meeting on Tuesday, 7 October
at 6:15 pa in the Ministry Cafeteria (Block C), Rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs, in
honor of the nomination of five of our old comrades to various offices within thv

new government." The meeting took place. Many workers were present. And not all of
them were Coununists.

It seems that when M Mitterrand decided to open the government's doors to the PCP,

he considered that that would be the price he would have to pay for peace in society.
"It is necessary to walk through the fire...." Several months later, not war, but
bitter social guerrilla warfare broke out. As for the fire, as a pensive socialist
deputy put it morosely, "perhaps we have gone through the fire, but the Communists
are the ones carrying the torch."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

9&75
CSO: 3100/161

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

SECURITY MEASURES, HIRING 0P GUARDS AI HATRA BXAHINED
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATBUR in French 2 Jan 82 p 28
[Article by Gilbert Maury]

[Text] Penetrating the civilian or military secrets at Matra is possible for any-
one! That is what I discovered in the course of two singular nights in the so-
called inaccessible domain of the company's establishment in Velizy. No need to
paint one's face with burnt cork or dress up in dark clothes in order to cut the
chain link fence surrounding the plant and break into the buildings like a thief.
The commando tactic is out of style. As for getting one's hands on the key, it
would not be very useful: At Hatra, everything is open, except the front door,
however, where one has to be careful.

In order to understand the whole story, let us begin at the beginning.

looking for night work, at the beginning of November I contacted a security guard

company which summoned me to its offices near the Gare de Lyon that very day.
The interview was brief, so brief that I was astounded. Now I am less so. Since

the wages are so low - the hourly interoccupational minimum growth wage, even for
night work - those hired do not last long. Nevertheless, I was taken on as soon
as I entered the office of the head of personnel. I filled out a form, my picture
was taken, they gave me a suitable uniform: grey pants, blue coat with a shield,
light blue shirt and a green parka, and I became a night watchman. They did not
even ask for any identification. I was, or could have been, anybody.

The first two nights were spent in charge of the notebooks, keeping track of who-
ever came and went, vehicles and individuals. I made rounds outside, in a super-

market warehouse in the southern suburb.

The next two nights I was sent to the Hatra plant in Velizy 2. There, in a room
close to the entrance barrier outfitted with a coffee machine, refrigerator and a

few armchairs, I met a nice crew of guards. Young and not-so-young, some belonged
to a security guard company under Hatra, while the others came from the one that

hired me. One of then took me on my first round and, like a fascinating tourist
guide, showed me all the buildings. It was 1900 hours and we were supposed to

finish the first round at 2200 hours: three hours of walking through the corri-
dors and from 300 to 600 doors to open and close.

19

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We began with the office of the chairman of the board, Jean-Inc Lagardere, on the
eighth floor of Building A, an office paneled in teak, with a private bath and
adjoining board room. Models of automobiles and missiles decorate the room, a
privileged place where countless studies and projects know their fate. We went

from one office to another, that of the board members, the secretaries of board
members, the entire staff. But wait a minute! Drawers had been left open!

From the eighth floor to ground level, not one office was forgotten. While my
guide checked the windows, I closed the closets that had been left open, along
with some drawers stuffed with files.

Building B was just as rich in paneling and open drawers. I must admit that I
scarcely paid any attention. Hy guide was there. Accounting, management, design,
studies, projects, marketing: all big, long and laborious. But what do you know,
a blueprint!

Informers

Two hours later, we reached Building C. The first rooms we visited were filled
with electronic equipment. I went into the computer room and the photo lab. What

a surprise! On one door there was a sign: "White Room - Do Not Enter," but it

was open. My guide, aware of his duty, went in. He was constantly saying, "There's
a lotta dough here, right?" One would in fact be tempted to touch things and even,
absent-mindedly, try to operate them. Here a vacuum manipulator, there a blower,
and a few offices further on, design plates -- with the blueprints in place,

open -- then a room where we had to put on special shoes and where one cannot go

in without a shirt (shoes and white shirts are hanging in the entryway; we did
without them). Little pads were on the floor to absorb footsteps.

Another hallway, a huge door and then, incredibly, the ultimate: missile launchers,
rocket nose cones, devices and gadgets that were enough to make the layman go pale
and I did. Incredible but true, some might say, and yet, there was enough material

there to make the day of any self-respecting informer. And there were plenty.

One watchman told a tale: "One day, we noticed, thanks to the equipment that re—
cords telephone calls, that a certain phone was often connected with a North African
country. They went to see the individual who customarily occupied the office in
question and he said he had never telephoned overseas. A discreet investigation
was then made, watching everything that happened at night near the phone. They
caught a North African guard calmly talking with his country, the plans and docu-
ments open before his very eyes. Since he was speaking in Arabic, no one ever knew
exactly what he said." What a security system, you might say! And in fact, while
the guard is responsible for keeping watch, no one keeps watch over the guard!

There were other incidents: the disappearance of an attache case that was found,

after a laborious search, at the bottom of a garbage can; unauthorized telephone
calls to Reunion, but this was not seriova. It was only a cleaning woman.

In Building H, one cannot come and go at will. Some passageways are protected by
an electronic system operated by a red light. When one walked in front of it,

an automatic door like those in the Metro barred the way. Thanks to a blue and
grey magnetic map they gave me, I could keep the door open for the three seconds

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I needed to get through. Armed with that little marvel, I could go everywhere.
I visited the whole Building H, the "military security" building. Naturally,

many doors were closed, but others were open and, since most offices communicated
between one another by inside doors that were not closed, it was just as easy as

in the previous buildings. But on the ground floor, a door to the outside was
left open! "Oh, those are the data processing guys," my colleague and guide told

me. "They don't like to fool around with the magnetic naps, so they always leave
that door open."

That is why one has an "open-door policy" at night at Hatra!

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "le Nouvel Observateur"

11 .1064
C50: 3100/2105

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

PSOE LEADERS SHOW CONCERN FOR FUTURE OF DEMOCRACY

Gonzalez: Rightwing Civilians Responsible

Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 21 Dec 81 p 19

[Text] The Spanish position was described as "paradoxically difficult" by Social-
ist leader Felipe Gonzalez when his 2-hour conference with King Juan Carlos ended.
The crises in Poland and Nicaragua and the analysis of current Spanish politics
were main topics in the meeting between the king and the opposition leader. Accord-
ing to Gonzalez, the only one of the Spanish party heads who wanted to comment pub—
licly about the content of their conversations in Zarzuela Palace, the hazards for
Spanish democracy are not in the malaise of some military personnel, but come from
civilian sectors bent on "poisoning" a section of the armed forces. Felipe Gonzalez
strongly emphasized that for the first time in the last 150 years in the history of
Spain, 90 percent of Spaniards explicitly back a system of democratic liberties.

Political sources of various sorts have been positive in their evaluation of
meetings between representatives of the press and the armed forces which took place
throughout last week. In the course of a televised discussion, three military
leaders brought forth the idea that the army deeply respects the Constitution.
They indicated that coup-prone elements are a strict minority among members of the
armed forces and they asked the press to try seriously to dispel all suspicion to-
wards the military establishment on the part of public opinion. The controversy
concerning press-armed forces relations began with the publication of the so-called
"The 100 Manifesto." a document signed by 99 army leaders on the eve of the third
anniversary of the Constitution in which they demanded in a positive way freedom
of information on military subjects.

Guerra: UCD's Reaction Ineffective
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 21 Dec 81 pp 30-31
[Interview with Alfonso Guerra by Jose Manuel Arija; date and place not specified]

{Text} He opens his eyes. made even larger behind the lens of his big spectacles.
and he says: "With this dance routine Carlos Sotelo has put together with the min-
isters, what can be done?" Alfonso Guerra. number two in PSOE. believes little is
being done and nothing can be done. Another opportunity is being lost--"perhsps
the last." he adds--of leading the democratic system forcefully or firmly against
the coupist sector, "against that civilian plot which never materializes."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMBIO l6.--Why do you think the government isn't performing correctly?

Alfonso Guerra.--Because a government is needed which, in the first place. is

capable of tuning in to the main concern of the nation at this time: to guarantee
democratic stability. And that could come about if the prime minister of the govern-
ment put in practice the same attitude the presiding officer of the Congress of
Deputies, Landelino Lavilla, took in his speech. That is to say, as to that stand
let forceful action be taken against that 2 percent of the population who want to

end democracy.

C16.--Prime Minister Calvo Sotelo has also stated his decision to act decisively.

A.G.—-Calvo Sotelo's tone is one of arrogance, of not looking out the window to see
what goes on; because, how is he not going to be aware of what's happening in the
barracks? And, this arrogance can sink us. But, actually. this is a kind of Venice
where each day we are one centimeter deeper without realizing it.

Or. like the "Titantic" when the orchestra played Beethoven as the ship was sinking.
And a man came up and said: "It's sinking," and nobody listened because they were
listening to Beethoven. Hall, a bit of that is what this fellow is bringing on us
with that pianola he's playing on four keys as it sinks.

c16.--Hell, what do you propose for getting out of this situation?

A.G.--He have to make the House sensitive to the fact that right now a government
with a sizeable majority is needed. I mean either sitting down at the government's
table or, by parliamentary agreement, insisting upon a parliamentary pact that in-
escapably would have as a fundamental objective, reinforcement of democracy and of
not allowing an ultraright sector, because of its acts, to take over the nation.

But, the bad part is there is no sensitivity, because when we say these things there
are people who respond: "These socialists are in a big hurry to govern. They want
to be in power before their time." At day's end something happens like the manifesto
by the 100 military leaders and they say, "Look, P808 is right!" And the same ones
who first said no then later say yes. and by week's end they cool off again and
whatever warnings we might give about how bad the situation is, they again repeat:
"Those who want to govern are now back again."

Clé.--That is to say, in your opinion, the situation is serious and needed measures
against coupists are not being taken.

A.G.--Thc fact that after the attempted coup d'etat on 22 November they were again
allowed to go into the streets and thrash citizens is inconceivable for a government.
In any other country, those who failed in a coup d‘etat would probably have hidden
under the debris so that no one would know who they were. But, not here. They

come out in the open and say that I am the fascist. And 1,500 register, but they
are not made public, so that in each city they would know who the fascists are who
battered them. There is a kind of objective favoritism in this situation.

Cl6.--will the socialists, after the latest occurrences, again espouse the need for
a broader government or for a parliamentary agreement?

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A.(:.--Hut, look. we did that on 2!. February and got a no. The situation in which
we find ourselves of absolute weakness, of internal UDC quarrels-because, on the
contrary, Inigo Cavero stated his party's stand saying, "UDC is not a spare parts
cooperative in power"—-we again made the offer and Calvo Sotelo again said no.

But the situation still isn't resolved. For instance, they removed the defense of
democracy law from the parliamentary left with a tooth extractor. I've yet to see
them close 81. ALCAZAR. So, why did they want the law? As a cover-up for specific
persons who asked them for firmness? What must be done is to defend the democratic
syStem and not to allow the attack on it that is always being made.

A parliamentary agreement with a strong government is a must which does not guarantee
solution to the problems, but which permits thinking about what they can resolve.

C16.—-If that parliamentary agreement is achieved to end coups, would you support
this strong government?

A.c.--No, no. A gOVernment with competent people would have to be formed, which
they probably could not do from the UCD. If it weren't a coalition government,
they would have to find independent people, or whatever, but who had a guarantee
and the support of parliamentary groups. Because with the dance routine Calvo
Sotelo put together we aren't going anywhere.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacion y Revistas, S.l\.

9908
C50: 3010/61

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

paasz LLORCA COWTS on DEEPER mama or mm m NATO. ac
Madrid cmro 16 in Spanish 28 nee 81 pp 31-32

[Interview with Jose Pedro Perez Llorca, minister of foreign affairs, by Antxon
Sarasqueta of CAHBIO 16, in Madrid; date not given]

[Text] Jose Pedro Perez Llorca is a cautious cabinet minister. Be weighs every
word he says when answering a reporter's questions. he picks his way among

problems concerning domestic policy and the party. as well as the foreign policy
matters which he has been responsible for for 15 months as head of that ministry.

He almost never gesticulates. Seated in an armchair in the corner of his office
in the Santa Cruz Palace, next to the popular Plaza Mayor of old Madrid. Perez
Llorca has no objection to talking on any subject, but refuses to give specific
dates, either for joining the Common Market or for opening the frontier barriers
at Gibraltar.

In the background is the ministry desk. noticeably slanting because of the uneven
and creaking wooden floor. Perez Llorca does not either smoke or drink. He
concentrates on the questions and answers, and the reporter senses a "something"
which might be remoteness, coolness, suspicion. It is part of the personality

of a politician who does not appear to feel very comfortable with the press. but
who takes his "medicine" because it is advisable for him to do so as a professional

CAHBIO 16: One urgent and immediate problem. Hr Minister, is that risk of compli—
cations in our politics these days. which projects an image of instability to the
outside world. Could this, or "a further step" paralyze the process of joining
NATO and the Common Market?

Jose Pedro Perez Llorca: I don't believe that we have to go along with that
hypothesis. All Spaniards want to preserve democracy. But it is clear that if
those events should come about--snd this should be explained to a very small
sector of the country--all this process would be paralyzed and in ruins. But

I have faith in a Spain which is secure. preserving democracy, working more with
the west in every way, more consolidated.

CANBIO 16: However. how could the repercussions abroad from the trials for the
23 February events affect Spanish foreign policy?

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘FK'IAI. USE ONLY

Perez Llorca: I expect that justice will prevail; and furthermore. this is
essential for Spanish democracy. In this context I also hope that it will con"
tribute to casting some light on the scene before long.

CAMBIO 16: Couldn't this prejudice the negotiations on joining the BBC and the
Atlantic Organization, for example?

Perez Llorca: He just received a clear vote of confidence (in Brussels, during
the signing of the protocol on joining NATO). A meeting like the one that took
place on that occasion, with that unanimous warmth and support. doesn't happen
every day. I believe it must be emphasized that at this difficult time the
Western governments are showing confidence in the democratic system. As for the
Common Market, the difficulties or the slow pace of the negotiations to date are
not in any way attributable to a lack of confidence. There is political confi-
dence; and there are some problems. which can be overcome. Also, the democracies
of the West support the Spanish democratic system.

CAHBIO 16: What tangible impact could joining NATO have on Spanish society and
foreign policy?

Perez Llorca: Without giving up any possibility of action. without losing any
independence or sovereignty, our country will carry more weight: it is going to
be more respected and considered more effective by our friends and in the defense
of Our interests. Above and beyond this general result. joining means leaving
behind a period which was characterized by isolation, and this is very important
historically and politically.

CAHBIO 16: Can you be more specific?

Perez Llorca: Yes. it will be a step toward a policy of being present in a
series of political forums in which we shOuld participate if we want to discard
the political burden which our relations with the United States have involved

up until now. Up to now we have been in a unique position in Europe. He were
the only country which had defense agreements with the United States outside the
multilateral framework of the Atlantic Alliance. And this unique position--the
product of a situation which is now happily behind us--is ending. leading to

the normalization of our continent.

CAMBIO 16: There are those who think that it would be in Spain's interest to
strengthen its relations with the United States. instead of expending so much
effort in cooperating with a Europe which puts such great difficulties in its
way.

Perez Llorcn: That is not how I see it. I believe that it is much more in our
interest to normalize. to move on to that ordinary kind of relations which the
other countries of Western Europe have. The effort which Spain must make in its
policies with the Western European cultures is necessary. because it is an effort
to rise above a past. When Spain joins the BBC and NATO you will see that it
simply has made an act of historical restitution. returning to the place where
we should have been.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMBIO 16: Couldn't this, for example. change our relations with the communist
countries of the East?

Perez Llorca: The Eastern bloc maintains some privileged relations with the
Atlantic Alliance. It is clear that there are European countries which have
certain friendly relationships and policies with those countries (of the East).
although within logical limitations; there are Federal Germany and France. to
give some examples. Spain. during the time when it was outside the structure
of NATO, was not one of these. because this would involve an especially intense
and productive policy as regards the countries of the East. We are linked
defensively in another unique way to the United States, and we are now changing
this to a normal_way of interacting with Eastern Europe. and this is putting an
end to what we could call a propagandistic period on the part of one country of
that bloc.

CAMBIO 16: To what degree could the crisis in Poland limit those relations with
the communist bloc?

Perez Llorca: The government. the Congress of Deputies and the political parties.
as well as the forces of labor have expressed their deep concern over the risk of
foreign intervention in Poland. If this tragic eventuality should occur, it is
obvious that it could not fail to affect Spain's relations with the countries of
the East.

CAMBIO 16: Perhaps this type of crisis and conflict in certain areas of the world
can explain the failure of the Conference on Security which has been going on in
Madrid for more than a year?

Perez Llorca: Earlier. at the Helsinki Conference, there was a time which was
preceded and followed by enormous difficulties. which in my opinion were due
primarily to a greater inflexibility of domestic policy. The theme has continued
in the Madrid Conference. where there has been great inflexibility. although

the Western countries have made a tremendous effort to keep the conference going.
it is a window open to a dialogue between the East and the West. A hope.

CAHBIO 16: Do yOu think that the negotiations on disarmament and limitation of
nuclear weapons which are taking place in Geneva between the two great powers
can reach a solution within a period of, let us say. 2 years at most?

Perez Llorca: There are realistic proposals on the table. which give signs of
holding together. I view that process with optimism and hope.

CAMBIO 16: Returning to the subject of the Community. which is so important to
our political and economic interests; why is the date for entry being put off?

Perez Llorca: The truth is that none of the parties have been talking about
dates for quite some time. But the two news items that have come out this year

have been about support for the BBC and the wish to resolve the real problems
in the political negotiations.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

CAHBIO 16: France is one of the European countries which is putting the most
obstacles in the way of the Spain-Community negotiating process. In our relations
with our neighboring country. to what degree are the points of conflict concentrated
in European matters; or are they broader, and do they affect other areas of the
international scene such as Africa and Latin America?

Perez Llorca: I do not see that any basic relationship of conflict regarding
foreign policy exists with France in other areas of the world. There is nothing
in our position in North Africa. the Arab world and Latin America that could
produce that conflict. There could be certain rivalries, but there is no con-
frontation wihch could give rise to difficulties in our relations. They basically
arise from French domestic policies.

CAMBIO 16: In the case of our other neighbor on the continent. Portugal. it
appears that problems could originate from Spain's joining NATO. and a certain
competition between the commands. don't you think?

Perez Llorca: In our relations with Portugal we are giving that subject a real
political dimension in the multilateral European context. I am enthusiastic
about developing cultural ties with Portugal. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
has had various contacts with our Portuguese friends. and this subject has never
been a problem. The current position of Portugal. with a command which is not
integrated into the continental European area. but rather into the Atlantic and
North American area, makes for a situation where Portugal is the one who must
decide if it is suitable. And it appears they have already done so. We do not
make any pretension to command over Portuguese territory or its maritime area.
It is not one of our objectives; on the contrary. we believe that Portugal should
do it.

CAMBIO 16: Is it true that the dispute over Gibraltar will be favorably influenced
by Spain's joining NATO. as Lord Carrington has stated. and that they even may
Open the gates very soon?

Perez Llorca: it is true that our joining NATO is introducing a new factor into
Spanish-British relations and the problem oftthock; a dynamic which is going

to change things. and which is going to do it in our interest in the long run.

int we must not expect that there will be a radical change here in the near future.

CAHBIO 16: Hill Spanish policy regarding Guinea take a new direction?

Perez Llorca: The Spanish Government has a program for increasing our current
cooperation with Guinea. to plan a new and more important phase of that coopera-
tion and to try to put it on a course which would not only be educational. but
would help the Guineans prosper and be able to lay the foundations of a law-abiding
state.

CAHBIO 16: In recent months hasn't a greater Soviet and Cuban influence been
detected in Guinea?

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Perez Llorca: No. Cooperation is an activity which requires patience, tenacity,
knowing where we want to arrive at with our Guinean friends, and we are doing

thi. I have not detected any greater activity on the part of the Soviet and Cuban
experts in Guinea.

CAMBIO 16: From the Spanish Government's point of View, what is the situation in
northern Africa, and what is its role in the area?

Perez Llorca: Taking into consideration various principles, and friendship with
all peoples. Spain also has to safeguard some interests. It is essential to
work towards the stability and peace of the countries in the area. Spain views
with concern what could be some talk of conflict (in the Sahara), and welcomes
with support the steps taken by King Hassan in announcing the holding of a
referendum in which the Saharans may express their wishes.

CAHBIO 16: The foreign policy of Spain appears to have undergone a ahift-—at
least as far as economic interests are concerned-—and it seems to lack aggres-
siveness. Is this going to change, and how?

Perez Llorca: It is only possible to speak of a shift in Latin America, and that
stems from 1820-l830. After that, at this time, I do not see any shift. except
that at times attention—getting gestures are made by one country or another, as
France did a little while ago in Latin America (signing a joint document with
Mexico), which evidently has aroused very little enthusiasm. I don't believe
that we are lacking an aggressive Policy in political matters. perhaps we are.
yes, in commercial affairs. As regards the Arab world, our policy of presence

is clearer now than ever in all fields. More than a showy policy of gestures.
Spain need: a steady policy which constantly defends our interests.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8131
650: 3110/60 sun

29

FOR OFTWC1A1.USEibNLY