FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10589
16 June 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 38/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.ms publications contain ini’orntion priurily iron foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those iron Bnglish-langucge sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other ch. .'acteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and anterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. more no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was su-Iarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nales rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or runes preceded by a ques-
tion nark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes widxin the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGIT M98 AND REGULATIOB GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIOR
OF HIS PUHJCATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HEST EUROPE REPORT

(3000 30/82)

Coureu‘rs '

m0

MOB
main; Imports, Competition, lqninaent Create Problem in
Textile Industry
(L'm, 26 ””1 Apr 82) eeeeaeeeeeeneeaeoeeeeeeeeee
Effects of Inﬂation, Reduced Goneuption
Distribution, Ilerketing Affect Caspetiuveneee
Research, Innovation Efforts

Govenuent Uncertain on How To Finance Retirement at 60
(L'm, 9.15 m 82) I...OIOOOOOOOCOOO'OOOOO00......

ITALY

Gimpi's Report on Financial Problems of Industrial Sector
' (Guido 001115111311: m2]: m, 25 m 82) eeeeooeeeeoaee

POLITICAL

m REPUBLIC 0? SW

Implizations of Rise of Green Party MM
(semstim “Btu”; m, 6”” 82) eeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeee

lingers Fran Cantonal Elections for Hitternnd, Policies
(Arthur Con“; PARIS mm, 9 Apr 82) eeeeoeeeeeeeeaeeee

-a- [III-WB-ISO

m nmrm mm (mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

Opinion Poll Confirm U01) Slide, m Gains
(cm1016’ 26m 82) .‘O...CO0...OIOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOC

meu

IWATIGAL AFFAIRS

Briefs
Anti-ﬁeucopter lueene

MUS

banean, Mirage F—l'e Carry Out Delivery, menus Exercise
(m n m, 15 w 62)OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.00.0...

Briefs
Reconnaissance mum in tutu-1

mmmouu
MWMONLY

RISING mom. WITHIN. EQUIP!!!“ CREATE P3081335 ll! TEXTILE mm!
Effects of Inflation. Reduced Conauption

Paris L'muss in French 26 liar-l Apr 82 pp 97-100

[Text] Say the word textiles and i-ediately faces

fall. Crisis, layoffs. lsnkruptcy filings. end-sic

drop in consunption. products too expensive. loss of
foreign narkets, runaway imports—this is the litany of
conplaints. It's no use telling oneself that this sector
of the economy represents one out of every 10 Jobs in
industry, that we invest twice as such may in it as

in autonobiles. that it is essential and irreplaceable;
who still wants to invest in textiles? Bankers are
fleeing; the adninistratien is not enthusiastic. They
support this industry because it is necessary to do so
(550,000 jobs do count), but dress of all that they could
do with this noney for high tectuology. the sectors of
the future, in a word for inportant setters. The
textile industry is not serious. It is frills. fashion,
s plaything for housewives. A wossn buying a dress
doesn't care if she knows where it was rude. she wants
to know if it suits her and how such it costs. A nan
sets the sure way about his outfit. A consuaer is not
investing in textiles: he is buying.

So, is this the end of the French textile industry? Hell,
no. it is hanging on!

Just yesterday. the French textile industry had the rosy cheeks and bright
eyen of good health. No doubt it too has its highs and lows. who doesn't?
Its great experience and its spirit ever sparkling with new ideas enable it
to overcone cyclical crises every tine. It even finds in than another
reason to have confidence in the future: it has been in worse situations.

For, the textile industry is part of history. It is one of the oldest
activities in the world. The Jacquard loo- presidsd over the birth of the
industrial age which had not yet taken on 0% direction when the Lyons silk
weavers had the opportunity to show the world what the proletariat was nede
of. The less advanced countries are following the exasple: alaost all of
the want to achieve industrial developnsnt through the textile industry.

1
mammals“
roe OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

But, this time the warning seen more pressing. The French are using fewer
textile articles, inports are increasing, and exports are decreasing. You
don't have to be a genius to estimate the extent of the effects of this
triple pronged clamp on the activity, aploysant, and even the future of
the sector.

"Do we want s textile industry in France or not? Let tbem tell us!” Bow
nany tines has the trade posed this question in reply to those who,
frightened by the announcements of layoffs, bankruptcy filings, cupany
closings, have asked them: ”But, why? Why this sudden collapse?" As if
the future of the textile industry depended on sose external power which,
facing the fallen fighter, would have the power to turn his thusbs down or
to grant mercy. '

The textile industry's future is actually treeendous. Each year the French
spend Pr 120 billion on textile articles, two tines as such as on cars:

it is therefore difficult to consider this a ninor activity. Production
alone employs hail a million people. despite the toll of the past few
years. These days, the arguaent carries weight. Add distribution and the
80,000 sales outlets, and it is not out of line to consider that 3 million
French people are directly involved in this activity.

Cut Off One llead...

This would be nore than enough to bet on a long life ahead for the textile
industry. Besides, there is not Just one textile industry, there are
textile industries. Cut off one head, and two more will grow in its place.
A manufacturer of upholstery fabric, a jeans cutter, and a knit sweater
sanufacturer have nothing in cot-Ion. Neither do a wonen'a ready to wear
retailer and one who specializes in man's or children's clothing. These
are different professions with different production cycles and distribution
channels. Their interests and outlooks are different, even opposing. The
narket soaetimas promotes these rivalries: for exanple, when textiles for
the hones are doing well, clothing sales are generally down.

And, first as all, textiles and clothing lust be differentiated. One is

a supplier to the other, as the steel industry is a supplier to the autonobile
industry. Consequently, they are unaware of each other. although clothing
represents 51 percent of the textile market. Approximately 33 percent of
this narltat is donestic articles. The rest is primarily absorbed by
technical and industrial applications.

Past the textile stage, there is a second cistinction between personal
apparel and housewares. During the good years, in other words from 1965

to 1975 when ready to wear experienced its boom, the expansion of the
industry and of clothing distribution occurred in a disorderly fashion.

The needs to be filled were great. French society was finally gaining
access to the delights of ease marketing. These circumstances always favor
hoth inventive spirit and resourcefulness, and consequently a certain amount
of chaos. leashrooning companies nade a fortune in a few seesons. Stores
aultiplied. A return to order inevitably had to occur.

MWWMY
MWLIBEONLY

This happened when the rate of growth of const-ption slowed down. The
turningpoint was the year 1973: free spproxinetely 5 percent growth in
voluae per year since 1960. growth in consusption abruptly fell to sero.
Should the first oil crisis be blansd? It was indeed at this tile that
growth in household purchasing power gave way. households had to sake
decisions on their expenditures: clothing was sacrificed first. The
holding bake on purchases was even sore severe since prices had clinbed
greatly. At the ease tine. the great postwar population boon case to an
and. It didn't take anything else to cause an adjust-ant of supply in
the industry as well as in distribution.

Men‘s clothing felt it first. A nan, less affected by fashion and coopelled
to sake sore expensive purchases, reduces his clothing expenditures sore
quickly than a woman. It was therefore nen'e ready to wear that consolidated
itself first. Large groups were forned: bidernann, Hail-Bessncon. Vestra.
are leaders in this sector today. A ainilar but less extensive nova-ant
tool: shape in the woeen's ready to wear industry. "any stores closed, but
lore still opened.

A Little Balls for Rounded Hearts

The true crisis only occurred in 1979 when conaunption, no longer content
to stagnate, began to drop. A single point of decline in a sector that
has a sales voluen of around Pr 100 billion, is Pr 1 billion vanishing.
As a great nueber of boutiques have an annual sales voluee of less than
F:- l nillion, and as it is these snell stores which are nost inediately
affected, here you have the equivalent of the business of nore than 1
thousand boutiques wiped out in a single stroke.

In 1980, the awful year. the drop in consunption hit 3 percent overall,
and 10 percent in certain sectors such as nen'e clothing, and even 18
percent in the netting industry. An appreciable recovery was noted last
year: 1981 registered a growth of 3 percent. which has already been bell!
to the trede's wounded hearts, without however enabling then to regain
1978 levels.

Clothing sales will probably never again be what they were. For, during
the cirsis the consuner picked up new habits. First of all. it has been
known for a long tine that households in developed countries are alloting
s saaller share of incone to clothing. because other opportunities to
spend have appeared, starting with leisure tine activities and transporta-
tion. Finally, and this is the new factor. because consuaere have changed.

with the stagnation in incone, the French have been led to favor separates,
skirts, sweaters, blouses, T-ahirts. or little inexpensive dresses, at the
expense of coats, tailored suits and other large itens which until recently
constituted the nornal foundation of a wardrobe. This trend is particularly
true of wonen, who can easily and inexpensively update or "accessorize"

an outfit by neans of a few snail details. but this is also true of nan.
who are abandoning their classic outfit when social constraints allow.

“WWW?
'0I10FFKJAI.USE(MULY

They have replaced it with sportswear which, having conquered city streets,
is in the process of making its entry in offices. The cost per item of
sports shirts or pants is still rightly less than that of traditional
clothing, although there is nothing to indicate that it will always be so.

The established trends in France are found in all the industrialized
countries. It is interesting to note the following paradox: the decrease
in purchasing power (therefore the search for lower cost articles) as well
as the relative increase in income, make it less easy to confirm social
standing by means of dress (sociologists say "appearance"). Conformity

is overthrown, you put yourself together, add color to the outfit using
accessories, and comfort is favored.

In terms of personnel, the decrease in consumption since 1973 has meant
a loss of 105,000 jobs in the textile industry where employ-eat has thus
been reduced to 300,000 and of 60,000 jobs in the garment industry which
now has 250,000 employees.

A Painful Drain

This decrease has always been normal, since it is linked to improvements
in technology and productivity. After the war, the two sectors together
employed close to 1.2 million persons. The period of reconstruction, then
expansion, which followed enabled this change in the industrial apparatus
to be absorbed with no major problems. The drop in consumption aggravated
the phenomenon considerably due to dead losses in production. At the same
time, manufacturers were accelerating their productivity efforts to remain
or to become competitive again in the face of increasing imports. During
1980 alone, the clothing industry lost close to 22,000 Jobs, and 12,000
more last year, or a 13 percent reduction in staff in 2 years.

Faced with such figures, one may be surprised that such a drain, occurring
in regions which often lack other industries, could take place without

large scale union reaction. Only local. and generally brief, conflicts
marked the often significant mass layoffs and even permanent company
closings. It is obvious that these things are not done painlessly. It is
also true that the apparatus for unemployment compensation, early retirement,
incentives for "voluntary" departure, and reclassification operated to

the fullest extent, and that the mass layoffs were always negotiated as
closely as possible. The point has been reached where layoffs are discussed
lick the purchase of a carpet, based ca deliberately inflated or reduced
figures with each of the parties, including factory inspection, knowing
exactly how many jobs will have to end up being eliminated.

The fact remains that this apparent resignation on the part of the unions

is probably due to the nature of employ-ant in the two sectors themselves.
Fifty-five percent of the labor force in the textile industry is female,

and 83 percent in the gar-ant sector, where those who are under 25 comprise
close to half of the personnel. In textiles, on the other hand, the average
age is much higher and the layoffs then primarily affect the oldest
personnel. Early retirements at 55, even at 53, are not uncommon here.

IKIIIINNCIAI.UBI(I§LY
IO! OFFIOAI. US! ONLY

Finally. the textile industry, and particularly the gar-ant industry, is
asde up of stall, generally fanily businesses, where tough union action
can hardly develop. In fact, one of the characteristics of the gamut
industry (but this is also true of textiles) is its extr-ely splintered
structure. despite the consolidations brought about over the past few years.

Although reorganisation of asn's ready to wear—the 3 leaders together do

70 percent of this specialty'a business-as well as of very specific
branches such as the asnufacture of woolens where again 3 large conpanies
(Louie Lspoutre, Andre houdiere. Paul and Jean Tiberghien) share France's
basic output. can be considered complete. the sane is not true elsewhere.
Overall, there are 3,000 coapanies in the gsrnent industry and a sales volule
of Pr 26.5 billion. and only 60 of the conpsnies employ nore than 500 people.
The textile industry totals about 2.500 cupanies. about 100 of which

enploy lore than 500 people, and it does Pr 65.5 billion of business.
Knitting is included under textiles. although it produces finished clothing
products. It includes 600 cupanies with a total sales volu-e of Pr 6
billion.

So. there is no point in saying that we have not heard the end of
reorganization in these sectors.

COPYRIGH‘I: 1982 s.a. Groupe'Bxpress

Distribution, Marketing Affect Ceapetitiveness
Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 26 liar-l Apr 82 pp 100, 102

[Text] "The customs barriers are unfair. the dollar is penalizing us. the
down and out in the Third World are unfair coapetition, the French lack
civic pride and are buying foreign." These are the conplaints of French
textile manufacturers.

Gen-any, our neighbor and traditionally our nunber 1 customer, is rejecting
our products. The United States should be a logical export aarkst due to
its purchasing power and the co-on culture which links us. Besides, the
United States was captivated by Frmch clothing to the point of beconing
our nunber 3 foreign custoner at one tine. Today it prefers to buy else-
where. It is acting just like the French consuls: who-buys an Italian
sweater or a shirt fron Taiwan without any hesitation.

If inports continue to increase while our foreign markets cruable, it is
because our products are either not suitable or not coupstitive, or both.
One need only leave the country to note how French fashion retains its
aura. It is copied; the whole world rushes to Paris to visit the textile
showroons, to see the collections and the fashion shows. At least the
French textile industry has the advantage of having no other coopetitors
except the Italians as far as design is concerned. The proof: right now
Merican designers who are using Yves Saint Lsurent's or Thierry lingler's
ideas fro. 5 years ago are very highly thought of.

mammonu
M ”Dim 05!. Wt!

French fashion retains all of its appeal abroad as well as in the Chaussea-
d'Antin botiques. 0n the other hand, when it comes to buying its products.
the prices cause hesitation. Abroad, the French creations are limited to
the upper end of the range. In France. most consumers turn to imports in
one out of two cases.

Then where does the French manufacturer's handicap come from? Their plants
are no less well equipped than those of their competitors. They have the
same machines. and methods which are often more sophisticated as they are
heir to long experience. The labor force is Just as qualified. They are
obviously paid more than in Asia or along the Hediterranean. but still

less than in Germany, Belgium, Great Britain, and even Italy.

"wrong!" protests a chorus of our manufacturers. "The real foreign
manufacturers are experiencing the same difficulties. We have an equal
chance against them, and we know how to fight. Only the unfair competition
is harming us and leaves us defenseless.”

Could the "German" products entering France all be coming from Eastern
European countries via Bast Germany? Are there no hosiery factories in
Italy, and could benetton be operating on the black market? No. of course
not 0

In truth. the lack of competitiveness of French companies is due neither
to poorly suited products nor to lack of productivity. It is due to the
nature of teh French market itself and, consequently, its distribution
structure.

More than any other, the French market is subject to fashion. Only Italy
experiences this phenomenon to a comparable extent. In Germany, a woman
will ask her friend where she found her pretty dress and will go buy the
same one. here, two women wearing the same dress to a dinner party will
ruin an evening. In France, as in Italy. business integration ran up
against this diversity, while in Germany and other European countries,

an organized distribution network was developing. This made possible

the initiation of a fruitful dialogue with the manufacturers who,
strengthened by many large orders, found themselves in a position to invest
and to reach a truly industrial level.

Acrobatics and Poker Hands

The French ready to wear manufacturers, on the contrary and like their
textile suppliers, found themselves faced with a splintered distribution
network whose primary requirement remains to present articles which are
different than those offered by the shop next door. This results in orders
[or small lots which are expensive to assemble and which, when placed one
after the other. never make anything more than small runs.

This whole process is inflationary. The collections presented must be as

extensive as possible to get the largest number of votes; fabric purchases
becomes poker hands. For producing fabric is a realatively heavy industry

mammogram
MOFFICIALUSEONLY

whose production costs are directly related to the quantities ordered and
to production planning. Further-ore, its sales force nust be proportionate
to the distribution network: it .represents 60 percent of the cost of the
finished product. for example. the increase in the price of gas vas a

bad blow to the garnent industry sinply through the increase in sales '
representatives' travel expenses.

All these costs unite to unite French clothing a luxury product conpered

to an identical itus designed and sold within a truly industrial context.
Reedy to wear conpenies therefore rsnein snell and niddle sise enterprises,
generally fsnily business which put the-selves through acrobatics every
season to sake deliveries on schedule. The consequences: little inprove-
nent in productivity, little invest-ant. lack of capital, s narheting
strategy based prinsrily on instinct end experience-end no international
outlook at all.

It is e nirscle so far that an industry worthy of the name has been able
to develop in France within this context. It was forged slowly during
the expansion period, and then nore rapidly when the crisis cane. with
the stronger ones then picking up the pieces fro. those who succunbed.
Dis-ribution. by beginning to structure itself too, helped the novasent.

However. even among the laders. snall runs continue to plague production
equipeent. In fact. the French nenufactureres find thenselves sidlined
and conpelled to produce what the others don't want to nakeuin a defensive
position. therefore.

The first tenptation then is for each one to place hisaelf further on the
fringes. to becone unbeatable in his small area of specialization. You
raise your range, update collections nore often to outdietence the
conpetition, and offer a flexibility which is not available to foreign
nanufactu'rers who are too far iron the nerket or whose plants are too
rigidly set up. This policy nay appear logical and even astute. It only
results‘in higher prices.

The second tenptation is to increase the nunber of specialties to reach

a sufficient size. It has often led to dangerous and disastrous diversi-

f ication. There have also been successes. They have been achieved by

those who knew how to find a conson denoninator anong their specialties,

or to create a large potential for distribution by establishing a traduserk
or foreign markets. In both cases. success presupposes having the means.
because launching a tradenark and an export policy require heavy investnents.
In both cases. inflation is still winning.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groupe Express
Research, Innovation Efforts

Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 26 Her-l Apr 82 p 1110

MWMMY
I‘ll OIWNCJAI.IISE!OBHJV

[Textl Faced with the extent of the effects of the crisis on the textile
and garment industries, particularly on employ-ant, it was indeed necessary
to decide to study the question more closely. “ever have these two sectors
benefited from such great concern. In less than 1 year, three large reports
have summed up the situation, analyzed the problems and found solutions.

All that's left is to implement them.

The first two are reports of the National Aaseably and Senate investigations.
The third, called the Donnadieu Report and presented to the Economic and
Social Council at the end of 1981, takes up the larger themes of teh previous
reports again, further extending the analysis, in other words adding an
attempt at a middle and long term forecast giving full play to foreseeable
technological progress. "Only technological progress," states Gerard
Donnadieu in his introduction, "can give a future to an industry which,
without it, strongly risks merely hopeless develop-eat."

The verdict is severe and proves, if there is a need to, that the situation
calls for immediate decisions without which the patient will not survive

the decade. A comforting aspect: many innovations are in the wings.

"It's enough to record then in the laboratories. Their chance of penetrating
industry remains to be evaluated," says Donnadieu.

The French research laboratories are full of discoveries waiting to be
intorduced in plants. Unfortunately, it is the foreign manufacturers who
are seizing them and sending them back to us in the form of quality or
competitive inported products at a price against which there is no
protection.

Fortunately, some discoveries have been applied in France itself. For
example, this is true of the Novacore process, invented by IT?-Nord, which
enables more rapid production in spinning, a 30 percent energy savings,

and a more natural feel to the thread. In weaving, automization of the
shops should result in control of the looms (threads which break must be
repaired) from a single room where shutdowns and their causes are detected.
Bach loom can have a different production program, giving this heavy
industry the flexibility it needs so badly. We are therefore moving toward
automatic mills where 1 hundred looms will be supervised by a single
operator, while today for every 20 looms you need 1 weaver to continuously
run back and forth asont the machines in a deafening racket.

In the garment industry major turnsrounds are yet to be imagined. The only
real innovation that manufacturers dream of would be the possibility of
working with, and especially transporting, a piece of cloth as easily as

n sheet of metal. At her sewing machine, an operator spends two thirds

of her time not stiching, in other words handling the cloth. The day

when someone finds a way to make the cloth firm, to stiffen it for the
duration of the manufacturing process, and then to give it back its supple-
ness and all its original qualities, will revolutionize the garnent industry.

IIIIIIHHKIAI.UUI(IVLY
li'OlOl-‘II'IOALUSEONLY

Meanwhile, significant progress has already been made in the preparation
for the manufacturing process: more and more often computers are being
used for grading, for stenciling patterns, and for cutting, in order to
save tine and reduce cloth trinmings. There are even robots for assembly
which take over particularly painstaking operations: putting on buttons,
belt loops, pockets. Also, in hosiery, robots separate and turn around
fitted articles, and perform semi-automatic cutting of stockings. Others

can integrate rather complex assembly operations for simple mass produced
products such as underwear, shirts, or some sports clothes.

He Have Outwitted Ourselves

CETIH [Garment Industries Technical Study Center] had given itself the
single objective of doubling productivity, which would cut the number of

jobs in half, were everything else to remain the same, which is obviously
unlikely.

For, the inevitable consdquence of the race to innovate will be a reduction
in jobs. In fact, the alternatives are clear: either the textile and
garment industries succeed in increasing their productivity, and therefore
their competitiveness, by all means available and their future involves a
substantial reduction in personnel; or they disappear.

"It is obvious," realizes a textile professional, "that we have outwitted
oursleves because we did not invest enough compared to our foreign
competitors. And we did not invest when we should have because the low
labor costs did not encourage it. He had to conpensate during the crisis
which cleaned us out. Those who were unable to unwilling to overcome the
handicap in time have disappeared or will disappear."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groupe Express

9693
cso: 3100/557

FOI‘OIIICIAI.USI¢HNLY
MWLIJSBONLY

BCONMC . FRANCE

COW “CERTAIN 0" KW T0 FINANCE m M 60
Paris L'BXPRBSS in French 9-15 Apr 82 pp 56-57
[Article by H. 3.: "Retirement: Price to Be Discussed")

[Text] The bill for retirsaent at age 60 is about 17.5
billion francs. where will they cone free? The govern-
nent cannot satisfy everyone.

"Vith the little bit of money that I will get at age 60, how can I finish
paying for the country house that I bought for ny old age?" Rather than

being greeted as the pronised "great social advance," the law on retirenent
at age 60 is spreading panic anong nany of those who should be the first
beneficiaries as of April 1983. The plan is often seen by those involved

as a threat to their investnents, since it has not answered the hundrun
question of who will pay and how uuch. The unions themselves are wary;

ease of then have not hesitated to add their criticises to those of enployers.
This is enough to trouble the adainistration, which has already been burned
by the strikes that followed the law on reducing the workweek.

It was, however, to respond to a union clai- that the authorities too these
risks. During the seventies, the 061‘ and the 6701' made retire-eat at age

60 their priority issue; thousands of their nnbers sent postcards to the
Elysee. The theae was taken up by the left and francois Hitterrand, as a
candidate for president of the republic, gave it special emphasis in his
speeches and proposals. what was pronised has been delivered: the socialist
government is now acting on it. lhfortunately, the law sens to be hastily
put together.

The adninistration itself does not know how this change will be financed.

So that France can have the "great retirenent system" that Pierre Hauroy
spoke of recently, it is not enough to offer everybody retire-ent at age 60.
The "new retirees" nust have the seas resources available as former retirees
had at age 65. In other words, the equation is simple: fewer contributors
for nore money to be collected. This is a real financial headache because
of the conplexity of the retirenent system.

what, in fact, is the retiraaent pension? First of all, it is a basic pen-
sion, the Social Security pension. which equals 50 percent of the salary

10
summon“
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the 10 best years of the career, when contributions have been nede for
37-1/2 years. Then there is the supplenental retire-ent that is given to
everyone equally and that can be as high as 20 percent of the average career
salary. Finally, for professionals, there is the retire-ant linked to their
special syetaas. In sue, a nonprofeesional retiree receives, on the average,
between 60 and 65 percent of his salary, a percentage that professionals
often have difficulty reaching. To guarantee these advantages as of age 60,
a threefold effort will be necessary.

A Possibility for Everyone

For the Social Security retire-eat alone, 11 billion francs in new receipts
aust be found each year; to this nust be added 6.5 billion for the supple-
aental retirement, for a total of 17.5 billion. Although the goverment

has practically conplete control over Social Security, this does not hold
true for the suppluental systene, which are nanaged equally by nployers
and unions. It is up to the-"labor and mange-entm-to decide in the nonths
to cone if they will go along with the government decree. If they do not

go along, their workers will not‘be able to benefit free a fully paid retire-
nent at age 60. This would not definitely be serious for nonprofeesionals.
who would only receive a reduced pension between age 60 and 65.

On the basis of these financial realities, several concrete questions arise:

-Hill contributions be increased? Nicole Questiaus, ninister of national
solidarity, confidently states that the Social Security pension fund can set
its future obligations without difficulty. however, the ainister is actually
counting on a decline in unenploynent, which will result in additional re-
ceipts (an unenployed individual does not contribute). In any case, if
retireeent at age 60 is taken as a hypothesis, contributions for professionals'
retirement and supplaental eyetees should junp. Total new costs could

reach 18 percent for nonprofessional workers and 30 percent for professionals,
to be shared between workers and aployers.

“who will benefit fron retirenent at age 60‘! It will be optional, but open
to everyone that has contributed for 37-1/2 years. This will be an obliga-
tory condition, whereas now anyone, even if he has contributed less than

that length of tine, can retire at age 65 with a reduced pension. "The
change should primarily benefit those who have contributed the longest, and
who, on the average, die sooner than the others," uplained Nicole Questiaux.

—-Can you accumulate benefits if you work after age 60? Yes, but only until
age 65. Past this age, continuing to work will not increase the pension.
Now, retiraaent can be inproved by working until the age of 75.

«Hill you be allowed to work while collecting your pension? Yes, as long
as you change your professional activity. But this would result in a penalty
in the form of a contribution to MEDICnNational Union for hploynent in
Industry and Co-ercenthe unenploynent fund-when the salary surpasses the
minimum wage level.

11
"WNW?
”OFFICIALUSEONLY

-Uhen will the future of the supplenental systens be decided? Nicole
Questisux hopes to receive a prelinimry response from labor and nanagenent

as early as next July. But theoretically they have until 1 April 1983
to consider this.

This. in fact, is the date on which retirenent at age 60 should take over
iron the "incone guarantee." Created in 1977 by agreenent between the
owners and the unions, the income quarsntee up to now enabled 300,000 workers

to retire at age 50 with 70 percent of their last salary. Union leaders
regret that the new law is not as generous.

According to Nicole Questiaux's calculations, eliminating the intone
guarantee will ssve the state 15 billion francs, alnost the equivalent of
Social Security expenditures for retire-ent at age 60 (17.5 billion).

But there is one problenuit is not the sane noney. The transaction vill
balance nicely by transferring state expenditures to employees and firms.
A good reason for unions and nenagenent to conplein.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groupe Express

9720
($0: 3100/ 589

12
summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IMO I ITALY

cmm's anon on 11mm. room or mum. sauna
Hilan 11. 8013-26 on in Italian 25 Apr 32 pp 1. 2. u
[Articl‘ by Guido Gontili: "an Italian Syaton Is in Grovo Bangor")

[toxt] Rona—Callod to appear at a hoaring of tho Bouoo Induatry Co-iooion
loot Ihuraday. Carlo Aaoglio Ciaqi—covornor of tho Bank of Italy-wont wail
boyond tho aubjact: ."rinancing for fir-a in tho contut of tho outlook for
tho 1980's." Tho tort of hio addroaa. which waa nodo public yoatarday (and
which we publiah on pago II), can raaaonably bo conaidarod a aynthooia
anticipating tho final concluoiona Cialpi will road to tho annual aaoa-bly
of tho issuing inotituto at tho and of Ray.

Thoro aro at loaat four toy paaoagoa in Cimi'a roport which ahod light on
tho otratogy tho control bank will adopt in tho coning nontha:

1) A aloving down of tho rato of inflation. togothor with contaiu-ant of tho
sworn-ant daficit and balancing of tho balanco of pay-onto. io tho ”nocoa-
oary proroquioito for a gradual doclino in tho coat of nnoy and a full
racovory of financial Iarkota." According to Caialpi, it would ho on illuaion
to "oxpoct a roduction of intoroat ratoa to aolvo tho variouo prohlala ho-
ootting fit-no." In ahort, thoro will bo no chango in tho policy govorning
intoroat ratoa until a concroto anti-inflationary policy haa notorialiaod.
Purthorooro, Cimi addod. tho ”procarioua curroncy oquilibriul calla for a
prudont intaroot rato policy. but aonatinoo thia prudanco ia not onough, aa
wo ooo fron rocont ovonto which forcod tho Bank of Italy to intorvono with
adniniatrativo naaauroa."

2) “tho intornal couatraint of a coiling on tho ‘l‘roaaury'o danand atill
dotoninoa annotary policy to a largo oxtont. In this connoction Cialpi'o
ooaning waa cloar: aftor tho I981 oxcoaa of about 9 trillion with roapoct to
ootinatoa, for I982 "tho data on govoruant donand for tho first oontha aro
not in lino with tho oatintod coiling of 50 trillion.”

Ciawi aloo Iado a strong alluaion to tho ‘l‘roaaury'a checking account. which
ia ono of tho waya tho ‘l‘roaaury loota part of ita doland. According to

Cialpi, tho account ahould not go in tho rod by nora than lb porcont of tho
aponaoo docidod on by Parlialant. But thia unit. which ia noont to ho

roachod only ucoptionally. haa boon roachod ayatuatically. with a groat

13
momma!“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

degree of rigidity. Another itan which the governor nentioned that is cause
for concern is the fact that this debt (on which interest is charged at the
rate of 1 percent) is about 30 trillion today.

In this context, the "contain-ant of the governnent's deficit is a primary
need, and the objective should be the balancing of entries in the current
account; excess debts should be reserved for the capital account.

3) The outlook is anything but encouraging in the area of external con-
straints. here, too. Cianpi's analysis seasa to sound an alert which the
governnent and political group cannot ignore. Says {Zia-pi: "In the balance
of aonetary assets there is a balance which cannot be disturbed too long-or
too such. For 2 years now the balance of pay-ants (current account) has
shown large deficits: 8.3 billion in 1980 and 9.3 billion in 1981. Such
large deficits cannot be further sustained.” Nor is it possible to rely
blindly on indebtedness to procure financial assets on foreign narhats; this
operation. warned Ciispi, "is not always easy and is very expensive."

6) am. foreign desand still stagnant, the nargina of recovery of Italian
exports are "very nodest.” The only card left to play is cowetiveness. but
this cannot ”be pursued through currency develuations, since parity changes
unaccompanied by strict neasures designed to linit densnd and internal
costs lead to an acceleration of the inflation spiral."

Text of Governor Carlo A. Ciaspi's address to the House Industry CoIIission
The following text is the address given by Carlo Auglio bianchi,
Governor of the bank of Italy, to the house Industry Omission
regarding problens related to the financing of technological innova-
tion in Italian industry.

The vicissitudes of Italian industry in the second half of the 1970's re-
flect considerable efforts to adapt to the profound changes of the preceding
years in the development and structure of dsnand. the availability and

relative costs of the factors of production. and the nature and operation
of financial markets.

These efforts have been successful in the case of nany fir-s, especially
small and udiun-sised ones. They have not yet been productive for other
fir-s. especially large ones, partly because they are engaged in sectors like
steel and chemicals which are going through a world-wide crisis. It is
still doubtful how long this inprovenent will last, given sons of its
characteristics .

These brief conclusions are based on an analysis of trends in international
trade, the accmlation of capital, applied research, and the econouic and
financial accounts of enterprises.

International trade in nanufectured products left Italy with a credit
balance which increased frol $5 billion in 1973 to $19 billion in 1981, down
slightly fron $22.1 billion in 1979. This inprovanent is still not enough
to offset the oil deficit. which rose fron 81.6 billion in 1973 to $204

FOIOFFICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

billion in 1981. During the period covered. the balance for non-patrolm-
raw asteriala increased fron 8.7.5 billion to 8-9 billion; the balance for
services was practically unclnnged (going fro- $l.S billion to $2.3 billion);
the larger contribution fron tourian was offset by a worsening of financial
burdens. As the final effect of the above—nentioned changes. the balance

of payments on current account. which has a deficit of $2.5 billion in 1973.
had a deficit of $8.1 billion in 1981.

Industry's contribution to the balance of paynenta was due to contaiusnt of
inports and increased exports, which went froa 6.1 percent in 1973 to 7.1
percent in 1980 (after passing through a peak of 7.5 percent in 1979). The
increase in exports was due ninly to the so-called "nature" sectors, which
have a high nudaer of snsll and nediu-sised firna that were able to adapt
quickly to qualitative and geographical changes in dsaand. In particular,
the credit balance of the textiles. clothing. furnishings. and leather and
"other unufectured products” sectors rose from 1.7 billion lira in 1973 to
11.0 billion in 1981.

The inprovenent in the nanufactured products balance is evidence of an
sccantuation of the already highly specialised nature of our country's low
technology sector. whose share of total exports rose fron 38.5 percent in
1970 to M. percent in 1980. At the sale tine. the share of interlediate
tcclmology products fell from 50 percent to “.5 percent and that of high
technology products renained unchanged at the nodeat 1970 level of 11.5
percent.

‘l'hese opposing trends in Italy's productive specialization de-onatrate the
viability of nest of our industrial textiles and the possibility of our
naintaining cooperative advantages in the ao-called "nature" sectors as well
if enterprises are efficiently angst! and constantly updated with respect
to processes and products. On the other hand, the inadequate developnsnt
of our internediate and advanced technology sectors is cause for concern.
The backwardnesa of these sectors sea-s to indicate a widening. rather than
a reduction, of our country's technological lag.

This phenonsnon is partly related to the long-standing crisis of the large
enterprise, which in these circunstances is unable to adequately play its
irreplaceable part in the develop-ant and dissemination of applied research
and innovation.

One arrives at the sense conclusions if one considers the albeit linited data
svsilable on spending for research and development. Its share of GNP grew
slightly at the beginning of the 1970's, then renained at the nodest levels
achieved at the beginning of the decade: 0.9 percent, which is less than
hslf the proportion of incone reinvested in research and develop-ant in other
industrialized countries. Direct spending for research and develop-ant by
Italian fires also conpsrea unfavorably with spending in other industrialite
countries. Direct spending for research and development by Italian fires
also conpares unfavorably with spending in other industrialized countries.
with the exception of Japan.

15
M OHIO“. [SEONIJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Evidence of efforts to adapt to the changed conposition of demand and to the
new relative prices of the factors of production is also apparent in invest-
nent trends, which. while influenced in general by the modest otulooh for
developnent. reveal in their composition-Isiah oriented towards substitute
investments—e clear intention of rationalizing production.

Italian production at the beginning of. the 1980's seems to be marked by a
new for: of "d :slisn" between "flexible" fires (mainly small or nediun-sired.
many of them in the so-called mature sectors) and ”rigi " firms (ninly large
ones. most of th- in more capital-intensive sectors).

This dualism emerges from an analysis of the economic accounts end assets of
firms. In the case of the group of coqanies studied by liediobanca. we see
that in general they show years when they operate at a loss which although
it is lower than the 1975 level of b.2 percent of sales, reached at the
height of the recession which followed the oil crisis. is still between 2
and 3 percent. These losses can be attributed both to inadequate gross
operating margins (7-8 percent) and to the effects of financing burdens
(6-7 percent). which absorb almost the entire operating margin.

Capital formation renains modest for all fires. At the end of 1980, firms'
self-financing accounted for 15.5 percent of liabilities. averaging 13 per-
cent for state-owned enterprises and 18 percent for private enterprises.
This is largely the result of a decline in self-financing, which was 59 per-
cent of gross capital formation. on the average. for the period 1963-1968
(for the group of companies studied by the Bank of Italy), then declined to
51 percent in the next 5-year period and 67 percent in 1974-1979. The
decline was especially pronounced in the case of partially state-owned
enterprises: their self-financing accounted for only 22 percent of gross
capital formation, compared to 63 percent for private enterprises. The
resulting high dependence on external financing has increased the vulner-
ability of enterprises to fluctuations in financial markets: this dependence
is a further constraint affecting monetary policy.

In view of the high price instability prevail ing in the Italian economy since
the beginning of the 1970's, the financing of productive enterprises.
especially financing and investments. has been hampered by aevere' high
liquidity preference and by the demand for short term funds both at home and
abroad. Above all. because of the large government deficit, .tnsncing of

firms is "crowded out” by that of the Treasury.

The nain problem concern risk capital formation, the demand for long-tern
securities. and the cost of debt-financing.

l) Inadequate risk capital formation. which is a structural feature of our
production system, basically reflects supply shortages. since capital splits
offered to the public are often not those of enterprises with the best pros-
pects for profit. But demand could be increased considerably by greater
efficiency on the stock market and by a broadening of the type of instru-
nents offered and internediaries.

It should be stressed. at any rate. that increased capital formation of firms.
which is appropriate in times of stability. is necessary under circustances

16
F0! OFFICIAL use ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of wide cyclical fluctuations and high price and tax instability. The in-
crease in the daaand for shares. which began in 1980. resulted in the sale
of stocks worth about 7 billion in 1981. ccapered to an average of 3 billion
free the 3 preceding years: but the subsequent decline confined the fact
that tho structural problem of the stock narltet rennin nostly unsolved.

2) The shift in demand toward deposits and short-tern securities has in-
creased liquidity and therefore the instability of the whole economy, and
helpers investnant financing, especially for invest-ents with long a-orti-
ration periods. This is therefore one of the ways inflation aorta its
destabilizing influence and nisallocatea resources. To offset this trend and
bring the densnd for financial assets back to aquilibriua it is necessary to
encourage the oale of variable-yield securities with increasing margins as

a function of naturetion tine. increase the role played by fine and credit
institutions in the transfornation of naturations. and use fiscal policy to
induce the public to buy longer—tern securities.

The results of this policy have already begun to appear; narkat sales of
fixed-yield securities (excluding Treasury bills). which tell free 20 billion
in 1970 to 2 billion in 1980, rose -:o 12.5 billion in 1981. Not purchases
by the public, which were ninus nore than 1 billion in 1980. were above 7
billion last year. The recovery of the denand for securities. although it

is still linited for longer-tern securities. vas stimlated by the sale of
variable-yield securities. whose narhet sales rose over the past 2 years
fron 800 billion to about 7 trillion, equal to nore than half the sales of
all nediun and long-tern securities sold on the nerkat.

The greater receptivity of the bond nerkat to a search for new types of
financing has nado poesibla‘ a clear recovery on the part of special credit
institutions. their operations are still conditioned, however. by the
difficulty of providing credit on easy terns, as the nachanisns available do
not allov the for. of collecting preferred by the narket. at least until
Parliament approves the bill on facilitated credit recently subeitted by the
government.

3) The problen of the cost of debt-financing should be approached taking
into account the fact that the return on savings, especially in its nost
liquid forns, cannot be separated fron the rate of inflation. not only be-
cause of equity require-eats but also and above all because of considera-
tions of allocation of resources. since inadequate interest rates can lead--
and have led during periods of low interest ratesnto a decline in the pro-
pensity to save and/or a channelling of saving to speculate assets and
stores of value both within the country and abroad.

The total cost of indebtedness has fluctuated considerably in real term: at
tines it has even been negative. In 1981, due to the joint effects of a
deceleration of inflation and an increase in rates caused by the constraints
of operating on international nerkets, it reached siaeabla positive values.
but was always lower than the levels reached in the other najor industrial
ized countries, in particular the 0.5.

17
”WWW?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In fact, the incidence on sales of financing burdens for the group of enter-
prises studied rose only one point between 1976 and 1980. fron 5.7 percent

to 6.8 percent. although the coat of indebtedness only rose fron 10.5 percent
to 18 percent during the same period. This was possible because the inci-
dence of indebtedness on profits fe11 from 56.6 percent to 37.8 percent.
partly because of the affect of the rationalization of savings and capital
achieved by enterprises. but also to a large extent because of inflation.
which "depreciates" indebtedness while "inflating” taxes. It should also be
borne in aind that because of the correlation between interest rates and the
rate of inflation. financial burdens—given a certain level of indebtedness-
tend to vary not with the rate of inflation but with variations in the rats
of inflation. The increased incidence on profits when price inflation is
accelerating is therefore a physiological problen within certain limits, which
is offset by phases of deceleration of price inflation, when their influence
on financial burdens should fall.

Slowdowns in inflation, the containment of the government deficit. and a
balanced balance of payments are therefore the necessary prerequisites for a
gradual decrease in the cost of money and a full recovery of financial
markets. But it would be an illusion to expect lower interest rates to solve
the various types of problens besetting enterprises.

'iha present process of inflation has had a profound effect on production and
on the enterprises most heavily involved in investment projects financed
primarily through fixed-yield forms of external financing with long nature-
tion periods; these have had to be revised to take into account both trends
in credit policy and conditions on financial markets.

The high liquidity preference of savers has made it difficult to rely on the
bond market in traditional ways. Meanwhile it has been necessary to pursue
a diversified supply policy with respect to the maturation time. forms, and
yield of securities. In particular. given the high risk of fixed-interest
long-tern loans, there is plenty of room for bonds for financing, and the
voluna of their sales, in the case of personal credit institutions. in-
creased fron 1980 to 1981 from 27 to 53 percent of the total. '

high interest rates-which were positive in real terms in 1981—and expecta-
tions of further large fluctuations in the prices of investment goods induced
enterprises to aodify their real and financial management strategies.

In the case of real management strategies. enterprises have tended to shorten
the duration of their investment projects and rationalize the nanagenent of
inventories and, in particular. the sale of fixed-yield securities. This has
had adverse effects on the facilitated credit system and investments in
general.

In the case of financial management strategies, enterprises have anticipated
the demand for funds in accordance with an acceleration of the inplamentation
of investment projects and varied the coaposition of their financing sources

so as to tap new alternative circuits rather than traditional sources of
financing.

18
FORWUSEONLY
“OFFICIALUSEONLY

In particular. they have dssiped financing strategies to:

1) contain short-tern financing by rationelising the asnageasnt of funds;
this has often led to centralisation. Increase the velocity of circu-
lation of financial activiea; utilise. in the case of unsapected needs
for funds, anney asrhst instruents (bank acceptances);

2) chooee financing syst-s which liait present and future burdens and
reduce short-ter- indebtedness.

Thus there is extensive use of direct financing instrunents. libs stocks and
bonds. both convertible and with variable yields.

In 1981. sales of stocks leveled off at a little less than 7 billion-«bout
double the level recorded the preceding year. This turning to the stock
asrhet can be attributed to asny causes. Along then. iaportant ones are the
difficulty of obtaining funds through the banking systea, the need to contain
indebtedness. end expended stock aarket activity in the first aonths of 1981.
The conpanies listed on the stock exchange have had an increasing tendency
to obtain financing with risk capital due to the favorable expectations of
stock purchases related to rising quotations. In the first part of the year.
at the tine when easedlies were nesting to approve budgets. the principal
coapanies quoted on the stock exchange had stock splits, any of then
supported by bank quarantee consortia. The crisis the stock market suffered
froa in the middle of the year obliged my cowsniea to postpone projected
stock splits.

In the bond market. which was stilulsted by the introduction of tax mtions
on interest incone. there was increased use of convertible and indexed bonds.
and a strong tendency for enterprises to diversify the parensters of vari-
ability end their conditions. The bank of Italy. in order to ensure the
necessary availability of intonation about the aarhat. applied guidelines

to cowanies which were designed to avoid the use of par-enter that are not
easily identified.

The value of convertible bonds issued grew ten-fold in 1981 with respect to
the preceding year. The increase is due to reasons of expediency for both
savers and bond issuers. Investors attenuate the risk of currency deprecia-

tion. because together with the interest on the bond they acquire the
possibility of exercising an option to convert a band into a share. The
issuer can obtain financing without an i-ediate stock split, and can sell
securities at interest rates lower than the current rate. The lisitations of
convertible bonds are above all uncertainty as to when the option to convert
will be exercised and the resulting difficulty for the issuer in planning
long-tern financing.

Finally. state-owned enterprises have tried to inrove their financial situa-
tion by resorting to alternatives to traditional instrunsnts, for exaqls
leasing and factoring. These institutions asks it possible to use the teens
necessary for production without directly acquiring thn. and facilitate the
acquisition of co-srcial credits. asking it possible to contain the degree

19
MWMMX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of indebtedness and exercise a positive influence on the management of
liquidity; this has clear economic advantages, which increase with the size
of the gap between the cost of money end the return.on capital investment.

In this connection it should be noted that. in general. the expansion of
these operations can be considered positive in terms of their effect on
productivity. the final cost of investment. and the financial structure and
assets of enterprises. Given expectations that the rate of inflation will
not decelerata, leasing enables firms to limit the time and costs of invest-
ment decisions, thus facilitating an intensification of capital as a factor
of production. and benefiting their economic accounts due to the faster
amortization implicit in fiscal forecasting entailing integral deductions of
fees. The use of leasing and factoring also nakes asset and financing
manage-ant more flexible, reducing the proportion of rigid operations. in-

creasing the velocity of rotation of short-term operations, and limiting the
extent of indebtedness and hence of financial risk.

It should however he noted that the increase in the number of intermediaries
operating in the above-mentioned sectors. which is partly due to the for-s-
tion of companies without operational or patrimonial links to credit institu-
tiona. and extensive use of atypical securities can give rise to problems in
the efficient allocation of resources and be an obstacle to the availability
of market information and to the orderly development of capital markets.
These considerations indicate that financing systems other than credit
institutions should be carefully monitored, also for purposes of general
regulation.

m g
in

la) .(n ug‘neh(n _ In. all old
~ m m 1mm 12H» m m m

i?

use w: w: m m m
an ' as um ms us as
m w m an 3.: 0,9
m LI. nu cm 10.9 m
in. m 3.19: us. on
m an an ms am
m 2.937, m - m 0.:
m an no mo - «.1
m we can nuns 8.!
us son an m «a
«u in: nus no

ms nu ‘ ‘ 3.0.
_ in: in
nae-sum...“
hw-mm-.|.nem.m_

O

a: etzzzeeaezzaeezeee
||§i3§§§§§§§§

m
I”
I”
In
1'
I.
I'D
I”.
m
m
”N
I,”
I!"
we
I”
D.
u
m

e: reseatazaszszesen t}

at: centre: 5

z;

i

I
1?.
'2
:32
3

e

z
!

e

 

20
FOI<0FFKJA1.USI(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1) Extent o'. salt-financing of a group of 458 Italian nanufacturing fir-e.
(percentage of groan capital {oration and invantoriaa)

2) year

3) Fir-s. total

6) partly auto-owned fine

5) private fine

6) Source: ml: of Italy. Note: (*) group of 202 fine

7) Distribution of mediu- and long-tern credit and invent-enta in industry
(billions of lire)

8) year

9) Distribution

10) Facilitated

11) Not facilitated

12) total

13) Find grou inveeunentn
llo) percentage retioo

* Including export crodita within the firm (data partially eatinatad):
1978-961; 1979-829: 1980-1, 108; ”Bl-1,587.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Nitric. II Sole-2b Ore s.r.l.

9855
080: 3106/195

21
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? GM

IMPLICATIWS 0? R183 0' arm PARTY m
Balburg STERN in Ger-an 6 Kay 82 pp 216-220
[Article by Sebastian Knauer: "Parties; Green Have")

[Tut] By gaining further successes in legislative elections at the state
level, the Greens have been transforaing party politics in the Federal
Republic. New coalitions have been found with the fourth party. Do the
Greens wish to ally theIselves with the established parties and can they do so?

"There is a specter in the rederal Republic-«he specter of the Greens," noted
pollster Rudolf Hilde-sun at the ties of the last federal elections 2 years
ago. In 1980 the Greens won only 1.5 percent of the vote in the duel of
chancellor candidates Sch-1dr and Strauss. The political aanagsrs in Bonn's
parties sighed with relief at this pitiful result. This year the specter is
spreading new terror. At least since the surprisingly good showing of the
Greens in the legislative elections in Lower Saxony in ”arch (Greens-6.5
percent, EDP—5.9 percent), the entire structure of the party systen is being
tested. The traditional three-party setup is being powerfully shaken by

the Greens' winning seats in legislative bodies.

The role of the PD? "as the party holding the balance of power" (8?!) Executive
Omittee saber Bans-Jochen Vogel) "is in danger" if, as in Berlin, lower
Saxony and a nuber of city and town councils, the Greens succeed in heconing

the third largest party. .

The cnu/csu. which is far removed fron the election platform of the Greens
("an alternative to capitalise"). is hoping for indirect assistance fro-

the pro-environment party, which has up to now gained its votes free the
Social Democrats. A fourth party, which Bavarian Prime Minister Frans-Josef

Strauss includes in his plans as a prerequisite for a change of goverment
in Bonn, is beginning to establish itself, however, not to the right but to

the left of the governing parties.

For the SPD the Greens could be an ally in order to prevent a conservative
government fro. taking power. Of course, the Social Daocrats are issuing
harsh rejections. Says Federal Secretary General Peter Glotr, ”The Greens
are our political opponents, who. we are fighting against,” and SP1) head
Hilly Brandt, who predicts that the Greens will enjoy a 5-year career in

FOIOFFKIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

parliament, states, "They don't want to deal with us and prefer to show us
their naked backside."

At the federal convention of the SPD, Petra Kelly and Lukas necklann, nenbers
of the Greens' executive col-ittee who advanced with a peace poster, were
prohibited fru entering the hell. But the debate about red-green alliances
began a long while ago.

The Greens are expected to do well in the upconing elections for state
legislatures in Hamburg (in June), in Bessen (in Septaaber), and Bavaria (in
October). A senate poll shows that the Green-Alternative coalition can
expect alnost 10 percent of the vote in the Bansa city. Nevertheless ﬁaﬂmrg
layer and timber 1 SP0 nan on the ticket, Klaus von Dohnanyi, is ruling out
a coalition, “The Greens don't exist as a party for use."

That could change if the SPD and FD? are threatened'by further setbacks. It
is still open to question whether the Liberals will again be represented

in the three state parlianents or whether the Greens alone will take their
seats next to the SPD and the cou deputies. In that case, neither nolger
Boerner nor Klaus von Dohnanyi could continue to govern without aid fro:
the newconers.

But, if one sore state falls to the cm, the latter can for all practical
purposes block the work of the Bonn govern-ent with its two-thirds majority
in the upper house (Bundesrat). This would signify the end of the social-
liberal coalition.

Hill the Greens be the nail that finally shuts the coffin of the SPD and
FD? alliance? Bl‘hard Bppler, who was reelected to his position as a umber
of the SP!) Executive Coulittee, has presented an early recipe for survival.
Since "according to Adam Riese" (so Bppler) the (:00 with its 65 percent of
the vote can be prevented from coming to power only with the help of the
Greens, one will have to depend on the good will of the new party. ”Greens
here, Greens there," said Bppler, "the fact is that there is no aajority
left of the can that is in opposition to the peace nova-ant, to the pro-
environnent novenent.“

Red-Green coalitions have been working in the provinces for years. In
Bielefeld the four councilman elected on the ”colorful Ticket" aided the
Social Dasocrats in passing their budget against the votes at .the (:00. The
Greens gained 3 nillion marks for bicycle paths, hoses for wooen, and youth
centers. In Berlin the "Alternative List", together with the SPD, established
a plan for dealing with squatters. with 81'!) votes, an Alternative List
councilman was placed in charge of the construction departnent.

In Kassel, the Social Desocrat nayor was reelected with the votes of the
Greens, and until recently, the top official in harburg governed through
an alliance with the Greens.

In the Schleswig-ﬂolstein town of Uetersen, even the cm haggled over seats
on the various comittees with a Green-Alternative ticket. The condition:
that the Greens support CDO candidates for the town council.

23
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Of course, one must carefully investigate," advises federal strategist Erhard
Eppler. "what kinds of people comprise the respective groups, whether they are
capable of political action." And that is not so easy, since even after

several years of debate about platforas and personalities, groups and errors,

the Green cup is a motley. Their slogan: ”We are not on the right or the
left, but up front."

A hitherto unpublished study the German Research Association about the "Greens
in the Party Systa of the Federal Republic" documents the variety: 23
colorful and alternative tickets; a dozen—some of these have already wilted-
Green parties and working groups such as "Green Action Future," ”Action
Coll-unity Independent Germs," "Urban Indians," "Bicycle Riders," the Marxist
”2 Group," or the extreme right-wing "Affairs of the People/National
Revolutionary Reconstruction Organisation."

Berlin sociologist Richard Stoess, one of the authors of the study: "The
groups making up the ecological election move-eat enjoy the special estee-
of synpathizers, beneficiaries, and people going along for a ride.
Politically they are, however, also estremely controversial. are regarded
as right- or leftwing radicals, a short-lived protest novenent without a

political program or as an all-inclusive alternative to the existing social
order."

The green jungle cleared only when, on 13 January 1980, a federal party
"The Greens" which now runs candidates in all 11 states, was formed. Today
24,000 members subscribe to the party program "ecologically, socially, at
the denocratic grassroots level, and nonviolently.” A tenporary falloff

in maebership after the rise of conservative Greens such as Herbert Gruhl
and Baldur Springnann, who founded the rival "Bcological-Denocratic Party,"
has been canceled out.

The Greens are a rich party: over lo million flowed into their treasury from
the European election campaign; the federal party's total wealth at present
amounts to I)! 350,000.

The Green parliamentarians keep only about a third of a legislator's salarggo
in Berlin and Hanover, for sample, a skilled worker's net salary of In 1,
The rest goes into "Eco Funds" to support citizens' initiatives or is deposited
in bank accounts. In Swabia the Greens have invested half a million marks

at a good rate of return.

In Baden—Uuerttemberg the conflicts within a party that does not wish to be
one are clearest. There is internal trouble with the head of the Green state
party, teacher Harieluiae Beck-Oberdorf, who is denanding a fixed salary for
her political job and threatened to resign if it was not granted. The
menbership rebelled against paid professionals in politics. Freiburg deputy
Helge Bran, who publicly advocated subterranean atomic piles, demonstrated
little astuteness. he wants his astonishing statenent to be taken for a

"Trojan horse," since this method of construction is too expensive for the
industry.

FOR OFFICIZA‘L USE ONLY
PU“ UI'I'ILIAL U30. UNI-I

"He cannot avoid being more professional," says Green deputy Wolf-Dieter
ﬂasenclever critically. He sees opportunities for cooperation with other
parties. "Re don't care whether the can or the SPD turns off the atoaic

power stations." In order that the Greens do not becone a "party of
jabberers" (thus Essenclever), protests at the grassroots level will continue
to be supported, and emtraparlianentary protest is to be taken inside the
parlianents. be staging a hunger strike, the six Greens in the Stuttgart
legislature wish to force a whole day's discussion concerning the construction
of the nuclear power station at Hyhl.

The Greens see considerable obstacles to an alliance with the SPD. "Someone
that needs us only because our percentage points will enable his to renain in
power is not a suitable partner," says Secretary General Lukas Beck-ans. ”Vs
are going to accoaplish the goals of our platforn even if we don't succeed in
1986." Jutta Ditfurth, Green deputy fro. Frankfurt, attaches five conditions
to a possible coalition in Uissbaden: "ho western runway, no new nuclear
power plant in Biblis, no waste treatnent facility, no new notorways, and

no Prine Hinister learner." And Essenclever says, "He refuse to work
together with the SP1) as the party of growth."

The young party with its l7-nslber executive co-ittee, which is replaced after
a single tern. had to build a nationwide organisation in the space of a few
years. The Greens had a favorable start because of the support of acadenics
and Iany financially well-situated public school teachers. llaaenclever
considers a possible handicap the nevertheless sparse pernanent worship of
the party of protest with its above-average popularity with sensitive and
dissatisfied young voters. "If we share political power now, we won't be
around in a couple of years.”

In Bessen, the Alternatives are in the process of destroying the-selves.

The recently founded leftwing party "Denocratic Socialists" of Kanfred Coppik

and Karl-Heinz ﬂansen is running in addition to the Greens, and an "Alternative
Ticket" of runway opponent Alexander Schubart is seeking the support of the

ease voter groups in Frankfurt. The laughing winner is cw candidate Alfred \,
Dregger, who. the rival environmental groups, which will prevent one another

from obtaining the necessary 5 percent of the vote, night help to gain an

absolute najority of seats in the legislature.

Ila-burg, too, is giving a preview of the conflict within the "Green-Alternative
ticket." Only after they send representatives to the city state's legislature
for the first tine will one know whether the agreenents about the distribution
of seats and the replaceaent of the deputies after 2 years will last. Party
researcher Stoess: "To becone a permanent political force beside the three
historic parties, they will need a realistic appraisal of their own
possibilities and liaits."

Even so, the latest Allensbach poll, nade in April, says that the Greens
night win as such as 6.5 percent of the vote if federal elections were held

today. To accuston the fourth party to power, Green tactician Essenclever
wishes to sake agreenents with a potential coalition partner in areas like

transportation. energy, arunents, and ecology. As a quiet partner in a kind

2
FOR OFFICE]. USE ONLY
of ”Federal Goworuont, Inc.", the Greens could nuke their influence felt.
. If the lore powerful party reneged, Green support would be withdrawn.

These gm plane do not nuke provision for Green notables. maneuver: "He
cannot send lint-taro to Bonn yet.”

covrnlohr 1982 Grunor + Johr & co.

9E7:
cso: 310311.73

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe MIC!“ 083 OIL!

MOMS mohcu'mm EMOIS FOR MW. “10138
Paris PARIS HANK in Mon 9 Am: 82 pp 38-39

[Article by mm: Contes "Hitterrend To the hont: Fetal Consequence of
Defest of the Left in Cantonsl nections'ﬂ

[Text] All our infomtion end ell the signs egress the president of the
Republic does not st all underestinete the seriomess of the defest suffered
by the socialist govarnsent in the csntonal elections.

mum- with defest. hsving experienced nunu'ous specteculer sethecks in his
public life. having finally triumphed in tiny 1981 over the “jinx" only by
pure stubbornness end through the gift of dresdfully divided adversaries. he
certainly knows how to reset to e strong dieeppointsent. he has hsd to over-
cone quite s nusbecr of others. Moreover. the conquerors of the dny are wise
in evoiding em, show of triunph. not snowing the-selves to be carried say
by their victory. not interrupting their fidat for e single nonent end. for
their part. elso refusing to undmstinste the mess of the pertictnerly
tough individual who rules at the Elysee Pelsce. The uggest bottles are yet
to cone. beginning with the sonicin elections mich will take on en enornous
political significance. like no other cespsign of such e nsture. end which by
thesselves could put both the government end the president in s decisive check.
The fact rennin: thst on 110 end 21 lurch. there wss defeet.

Moreover. s sinﬂe sign would be sufficient to denonstrste thst the Elysee
Pelece cannot have fsiled to think thnt the osntoml elections have ctsnged
ssny things and hsve serioudy effected the eocielist saved-meat: the resc-
tion of Hichel Rocerd, end the equally pro-pt :weection of Jenn-Pierre
Chevenesent. No longer cen envone ignore the fact thst es of todey the so-
cieliets. end not the least ssong then. are convinced thnt st the rete things
are going. the econosic end political. disaster of the experisent is hardly
svoidnhle. men using the nost suhtle sentences and the lost celculeted ter-
sinologicsl precsutions. hichel Bocerd has left his cosredes no illusions ss
to prospects if the govern-cut pen-sevens in its errors. its contradictions
and its incoherences. It is up to others to begin»: thnt he could have nde
such e stetesent of reservation in sgreenent with the president of the Bepuliic
and that he say have figured on putting hisself in the expectetion of the de-
feet of the unfortunate Pierre Iburoy. To tell the truth, es of now. everyone
is working on the sseunption of the totsl defeat of Frencois nittenmd his-

2?
roe omcm. use owu
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

"after nauroy." Not that Hitterrand is being threatened for the noment. But

everything is already turning out as if the Hitterrand experiment could only
be a failure.

The good Mauroy has becone too truwparent. However sympathetic he may be.

he is no longer a shield. Moreover. the only people present at the very in-
portant luncheon which brought together Francois Kitten-and and Georges
Marshals at the Elysee Palace a few days after the polls. were. on the conmun-
ist side. Charles Fiternan and. on the socialist side. Pierre Beregovoy who.
by the way. has turned the office of secretary general of the presidency into
a basic cog. super-Hatignon. of the Fifth Republic. As if it were natural.
the prise sinister was kept away fro: such an important dialogue.

By spectacularly approving Hichel Rocard's reservations. Jean-Pierre
Chevenesent in turn only confined the seriousness of the defeat suffered by
the socialists. There is little love lost between the two sen and they do not
understand each other very well. may have always had a. different sensitivi-
ty to the majority of the problems. Chevanesent played a major role in
Hitterrand’s victory over Rocard at the tins of the nonination of the social-
ist candidate for the presidential election. Chevenesent is preparing hin-
self as such as Rocard for a national destiny. except that the sinister of
planning. a very conitted European and very conscientious Innager. has a ten-
dency to be responsive to centrist sylpathies. and that the sinister of re-
search. with a great deal of skill. has rather a tendemy to flatter the
Gaullist electorate. In a few months. the nan has cone a long way: he who
was the enfant terrible of socialism. the trouble-abet of CERES [Center for
Studies. Research and Education]. applies hinself prisarily. with the flexi-
bility of a virtuoso. to projecting the image of a statesman who does not allow
hisself to be led astray by the vanities of ready sade ideas. All the more
reason why the support given by Chevenenent to the reservations expressed by
his rival Rocard cannot have gone unnoticed at the Elysee Palace. as in all
the nain political circles.

Hho would believe then that it is the anchair of Heuroy that the two most
frisky chargers of the socialist future are coveting? Unquestionably. they
are maneuvering solely in the prospect of one day securing the real succession.
And the situation not really have become very pressing for both of them to
have wanted this early -- evan though with Florentine akillfulness -- to se-
parate their responsibility fro- the mistakes which have been comaitted! They
would especially not like to get lost in the expected shipwr: ~k. his is ob-
vious.

Hence. the president cannot have failed to feel very strongly the very serious
worsening of his position.

But. for him. there are greater causes of worry. Henceforth. not only is he
hisself the most exposed and not only does he becone the main target -- thus.
eminently vulnerable -- of his adversaries who. while respecting the law. only
break loose with sore enthusiass or detersination in all the departments. but
he is personally suffering an "unexpected" defeat here. Evidently. he did not
expect such an inpressive retreat. so quickly after his advent. He has seen
his troops surge back in disorder. his captains lose their heads. his qokesnen

28
FOR. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

panic on television. his generals attack television although it has never been
this colonised. and. in unacceptable statesents. attack an opposition which is
only doing its Job of opposition. Such thorough chaos had certainly not been

expected.

Fm-thermore. he is now faced with two obvious facts. pregnant with the nest
bitter thoughts -- one in the strategic area. the other in the area of history.

First. in the strategic area. Because it is clear that the French sea and wo-
men have Just unquestionably manifested a total allergy to a "orange of socie-
ty." You lust want to be blind not to see this. The major-socialist leaders.
with Louis horns at the top. explained to us: "But no, this setback is due
to the fact that we have not pushed far enough or not conducted the policy of
change energetically enough.” A major mistake. The contrary is true. One
only has to call on the nest elementary conon sense to explain it. Indeed.
if this were really the case. if the bench prissrily reproached the govern-
ment for being too lukewarn in its desire for change. they would have given
their vote to the party which. with the peatest consistency. cells for the
quickest change: the Comsunist Party. If the Conunist Party had been tri-
umphant in the elections. then yes, then we could draw the lesson from it that
our people are asking for an upheaval of society. But the com-unists did not
experience this triumph. Far from it. hence, the socialist leaders are com-
pletely wrong when they explain their failure with the basic reason that their
nose is not red enough.

This is all good and well. but the figures speak better than the Lionel Jospm:
the people of ﬁance do not want the enormously bureaucratic society which the
socialists-commute want to ilpose.

The French want to keep the liberal society which is theirs. except for greatly
improving it. They are perfectly well aware of the tremendous underground in-
fluence exercised by the comunists. in spite of their electoral weakening. on
nuserous aspects of socialist policy and absolutely reject the action of people
who. ifwearenotonourguard. wouldonedayleadustoasocialisninthe
Polish or Cuban fashion.

But it so happens that. in order not to displease the conunists, Francois
Hitterrand does not want to decelerate or shade his policy of frenzied change.
Suddenly he has become completely pinned down. Basically. he has suddenly
been caught in the trap he wanted to make his communist allies fell in. like
his adversaries of the center and the right. By pure skill. he thought he was
winning on his left front as he was on his right front. and he is oondesning
himself to losing on both. And he has no other solution than to persevere in
the "break" strategy which he heralud too inprudently fro- the first days of
his rule, that is to say to persevere in the error. There he is. condemned to
go round in circles in the cage he himself created.

Equally serious is the fact that the sen and groups susceptible to safeguarding
bridges between a certain liberal school of thought and a certain social deno-
cratic school of thought have been respectively weakened and eroded. Especial-
ly the leftist radicals have disappeared into obscurity. or becose a toy. And
what is the value of the groups of a lichel Jobert who promised to assenble his

29
ma 013mm. 083 can
EUR UI‘PLULAL use UNI»!

cohorts and who. hlase or ironic. has cone to prefer publishing a novel. which
was in fact written very poetically? Even better: virtually all the radicals
and social denocrats in the opposition have cone to the conviction that, fol-
lowing its failure. hitterrandisn my be so danaged or discredited that any
dialogue with anyone having served it would be impossible. The whole opposi-
tion is bracing itself in the lost uncompromising anti-socialism. All the
last bridges between liberalism and socialisn are falling by the-selves.
Bluntly speaking, this means that hitterrand no longer has the opportunity for
a positive dialogue with a sizable center left. Considering the untiring in-
sidious undermining of the conunists, it nay as well be said that a head of
state has never found hiaself in such a tragic solitude -- and he hiaself is
more aware of this than anyone.

Furthermore. for him. the depth of bitterness: he thought he would be able
to get a lot out of the reaains of the UDF [Fremh Deaocratic Union]. which
all the socialist leaders had predicted to be boned to dispersal and ruin.
but the UHF. once again fully confident in itself. has Just manifested an ex-
ceptional vitality; he believed he had blocked Jacques Chirac's y on the
extreme right. and not only does the Era [Rally for the Republic reveal the
nest beautiful resources in terns of depth and manpower. but it easily plays
at being extreae liberal in the face of socialist-conunist sectarianisa: he
may have believed that he had dismantled the opposition. but the alliance be-
tween the UDP and the RP]! turned out to be perfect. , when the tine cones.
there will be no lack of wise men to lead that alliance at all levels. Anew
the new generations it is even the opposition which. contrary to all the fore-
casts. presents the men of greater value. we cannot list all the names. but

In any case. this is the main result barely 1 year after the socialists took
power: an impossible strategy -- and a disoriented president.

Unfortunately for his. the prospects are not any better in terms of history.

He who dreamed of a freer an‘ more Just society will leave us the nest fear-
soae dictatorship of all: the bureaucratic dictatorship. This apostle has
opened the way to an army of inquisitors. Never has the bureaucracy been king
to this extent. It would be impossible to go acre conpletely against the
current of history. Because. in the future. the main world struggle for the
fill dignity of nan will be waged against the dictatorship of bureaucratisn,
of which we are discovering the appallixg effects in the East. This esthete.
so much in love with roe-1m and strolling. runs precisely the risk -- and
further. undoubtedly against his deepest callixg -- of being written up in the
annals of history as one of the major servants of this dictatorship. This
born writer. who is fiercely attached to his originality. is in the process
of giving full support to the technocrats and the computers over the creators
of life and energy. 01‘ course, suddenly, and in spite of the brilliance of
his vocabulary, he is reduced to the coldest ideology.

I
have cultivated and savored the highest ambition. up to the point of dreaming
of hinself as the inventor of a kind of socialism.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1b tell the truth. he must have set his golden dreus too high or else he must
have made a mistake about the time. He must have forgotten that. at their ad-
vent. the really great sen of history or tne most valmble statesmen "during
uncertain times" were the most modest: Poricles. Octavius Augustus. Sully.
Hashington. Adensuer. human. John XXIII. It takes vast storms to make the
giants of the epic famous. from Alexander to Bonaparte. from Churchill to De
Gaulle. Under all circumstances one should be wary of the clan of ideologues.
of all servants of verbal excesses end of impossible religions. after the
fashion of Cromwell and Robespierre. agents of the most infernal divisions who.
in the name of the universal good. always ending up -- cold blooded assassins
-— with the vsinest cruelties. are the most diligent in contributing to their
own ruin and leave only a menory of blood. low. we are not in a storm which
in itself could call up an epic or giVe an opportunity to the inventors of the
futm'e. The universe and France have reached a point where they will have to
cross a dark, difficult and marshy passage. as long as the red old nen of the
Kremlin haVe not moved over for a new Russia.

Kitten-and should have armed himself with the wisdom and the patience of those
who assemble. and not with the ideology of those who divide. The courage was
to be found in simplicity and not in excess. Glory would have cone by itself
to his who could wait. It will in all likelihood deny itself. and sooner than

he expects. to the one who has sought it too systematically with the illusion
of a few soulless words.

Let us say: for a destiny. a magnificent opportunity has been wasted.
The future of Francois Hittarrand is a difficult one...
COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipa-esse SA

81*63
cso. 3100/63),

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

091nm you. calculus ncn amt. rsor mus
Madrid c0310 l6 in Sponieh 26 Apr 32 pp 26-27

[Text] The oociolieto would win the genorol eloctiono if the Sponioh
people were to go to the hollot hoxoo right now. At leoot thio io whet io
indicotod by on oxtenoive poll on voting proforoncoo token oorly thin yeor.

Pollo oro o hero-tor of public opinion which ore ohle to reflect the
weather—of politicel preforonceo. in thio coooo-juot ot the tino they oro
token. Pollo oro uooful for ooooooing tho eituotion ot tho nonent of
neoourenont.

But thingo will hove to chonge o greet dool for tho UCD [Donocrotic Center
Union]. which hoo 16 percent of tho pooeihlo votes. for it to he ohle to
overcono the 3‘ percent of tho P803 [Sponioh Socioliot Dorkoro Porty].
Pollo olwoyo loovo one unknown rector unrooolvod: tho ”don't knowo. no
onoworo.” who loter. on tho doy of tho election. do know. end con oven
:anoge to tip tho ocoloo, to one oide or tho other. Ao of now. 11 percent
of thooo polled do not know for who- they will vote end 5 percent do not
onowor. Thio ropreoento nony thouoondo of otill-undocided votoro.

(Io-poring the infornotion in tho poll with the rooulto of tho loot gonerol
electiono (l lurch 1979) tho firot thing thot otrihoo tho eye io tho poo-
eible decline of tho Center. Proepectiwo votoo ore olipping owoy tron tho
goverment porty like water through o oiewe.

P80! sung.

Sono of thooo votoo would end up with Populor Alliance. ond oone with the
P803, but the vent nojority would go to the occount of tho undecided.

If the way tho Center hondloo thingo tron now on through the nontho which
rennin before the electiono nonogeo to reotore the trust of these poroonou
tho nojorityof who- oro d0 yeoro o£.ego end older. end who oro noinly
wonen-tho DOD would he ohlo to recover o greet deal of the ground it hoo
loot.

Another porty which hoe oloo loot out in the cmieto. Votoo oro flying
owny fro- tho PCB tree like o flock of frightened hirdo. The PC! hoe not

32
l-‘OIOFFIGALIBEONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

worn itself out governing. like the for-er party; its decline in prospec-
tive votes in the inaginary election is due to sons other cause. Perhaps
it is because of its recent internal crisis; to the extent that we aove
away free the date of those events. their situation also could inrove.

To It. up. two of the inportant parties are losing ground and two are
gaining. Both the P803 and the AP [Popular Alliance] are to be congratula-
ted.

The socialists have nore then a third of the population in their pocket.
They are out in front and on top. although by too snll a. percentage for
an absolute najority. The younger votersnfroa age 18 to ‘0--are the ones
who have the greatest confidence in the P903. not to nention the salaried
workers and the uneaployed. where the percentages rise to 46 percent.

However. they don't have the grand-others. Honen 60 and over prefer the
Center. It is the only age and sex category where the socialists lag
behind the ow.

Popular Alliance does well anong the different ages, whether nan or wonen.
True. people of advanced age like the AP nore. but this party is nain-
taining a good balance throughout the different age categories. They
always say that governing wears down the party in power. although the
opposition always replies that being in the opposition burns up your
resources. and besides. you don't stay in power. In short. this is
denocracy and liberty: every east hears its sail. and the crew decides

it. But is is only fair to recall that during these last years the govern-
ment has not lacked for mats. and problens. Did it solve the latter well?

In the opinion of the people polled. h—.... that is "pretty well."
according to the najority (48 percent), "badly." according to 33 percent.
and 15 percent thought the government did "well." The truth is that not
neny are very convinced that the 000 is going to clear up the picture if
it continues to govern. Things would stay the sane.

The P803 however is given a broad neasure of trust: 61 percent believe that
it would solve our current problens. 33 percent think that things would
rennin the sane. and only 7 percent think that the situation would get
worse. Therefore it appears that there is no fear of change. of an alter-

nate group caning to power.

If the Spanish people had to elect the president of the governnsnt right
now. there is no doubt about who it would be: Felipe Gonzalez would be the
one. Forty percent would vote for hie. A very favorable inege. even
better than that of his party: 6 percent of the voters who would not vote
for the P803 would. however. vote for its leader. The other "presidential
possibilities" are far behind; but there is one inortant surprise: Praga
would defeat Calvo Sotelo. In spite of his efforts. Celvo Sotelo only
aanages to get the votes of 11 percent of those polled. while Frags obtains
alaost 14 percent. The Alliance leader too would get sore votes than his
party would. Adolfo Suarez cones in fourth in the preferences. and is mch
better liked by wonen than by sen. he is the only leader where such a
large difference between the sense is registered.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pinslly, there is snother inportent piece of dete which it is well to
point out. when the people polled were noted who they believed would win
the codng olectims, the nejority plecod their hots on the P803 (46 per-
cent) end only one-fourth thought thet the current governing perty would
ropoet its victory. This shows e low level of confidence. which is still
euro disquieting if the onll percentege ohteinod by the Centriot loedor
is token into sccount.

Pleco Your lets

It last he understood thet the 060 is not rejected out of head by the
people polled. end in their none. by the electoreto. Only 12 percent
sseert thet they would never vote for the nan. The P803 (only 5 percent
would never vote for it) end the UCD-£ollcwod by the AP-osro regerded es
hroed-spoctruo perties which people like.

This is not en unfounded stetenent. heceuso the politicsl orientetion of the
citizenry gonorelly enconpesses the ideologicel positions covered by those
two perties. When the people who were polled were shown e lino grsph on
which they could elign thenselvos politicelly. the extreme on the Right end
heft steyod vecent. The Left end left of Center node up 61 percent. end
the Center/right of Center 25 percent.

If sfter going over ell the infer-scion in the brood hopublice poll. with
its note then 10.000 interviews. we could sketch e cowooite picture of the
person who votes for ooch psrty in the country. the one voting for the P803
would be e on between 26 end 59 yoers of ego. end the wonen between 18 end
39. who live in lsrge cities. ospecielly over 300.000 in populetion. who
ere selsried workers in the lerge canenios. or nediun-levol personnel. dsy
lehorers. or ore unenloyed.

The "CD voter. whether o nen or e wonsn. is older then 59. lives in s very
sosll town. end is elso e husinesmn. fernsr or industrielist. The AP
voters elso ere prinerily persons of en edvencod ego. hut. in contreet with
the centrist. they live in nediun-sieed towns. of between 50.000 end 500.000
inhshitents. Socielly. they sro siniler to the 060 voter. with e higher
incidence of husinessoen. directors end industrielists. The conposito
picture of the co-unist voter is thet of e Inn of 26 to 39 yoers. living

in s city of more then $0.000 inhehitsnts end by profeeoion e skilled worker
in s sosll plent or en unskilled worker. elthough he elso noy prectico e
profession.

Technicsl Feetures of the Poll

Population: individuels over 18 yeers of ego

Field: people residing in the poninsulo end the islsnds

Ssqle Sine: 10.362 personel interviews in hoses

Ssqle Error: 1 in 100 in tho nost mfevorshlo cssoe of 50 percent. end
with s reliehility fector of 95.5 percent

Nunher of Seqling Points: epproxinetely 700

Dete of Fieldwork: Pohruery. 1982

Corried Out By: hopuhlice end Selto Institute. 8.A.. Consultente

3h
m omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“to Would You Vote For?

Snead Age

Gen Total Age Over Total Age Over

 

 

 

Part2 Total ”an 18-25 26-39 60-59 59 "can 18-25 26-39 60-59 59
P803 36 36 37 61 35 30 32 - 63 38 28 22
000 l6 l3 8 9 -17 19 18 ll 16 19 25
AP 8 9 6 8 9 ll 7 5 8 7 9
PC! 6 5 6 8 3 3 2 6 2 l 2
Nation- 7 7 l3 8 6 6 6 8 7 5 6
allots
Others 2 2 6 2 2 2 2 3 1 l 2
Don't know 11 7 S 6 9 8 16 8 11 17 17
Blank 2 2 3 3 2 3 2 3 2 2 1
'dould not 11 ll 15 10 10 11 12 12 11 12 12
vote
No answer 5 6 2 3 6 6 5 2 5 7 6
Population
been 2.000 10.000 50,000 More
than to to to than
Part: 2.000 10.000 50,000 500.000 500.000
P803 28 31 32 35 62
DC!) 23 19 15 15 9
AP 7 8 7 9 8
P08 3 3 3 6 6
Nation- 5 5 8 7 8
allots
Others 3 2 2 2 3
Don‘t know 12 13 3 10 5
Blank 3 l 3 3 3
Would not 11 10 12 ll 13
vote
No Anawer 5 6 6 6 6
What Party Would You Never Vote For?
Sala- Unn- Buai- Stu- llouae-
Partz Total Lie; “om rted glazed Retired neu denta vivee Answer
P803 6 5 6 6 3 5 7 6 3 5
DC!) 12 15 10 15 20 12 9 l6 9 12
PCB 27 27 27 25 18 32 33 21 28 29
AP 15 17 12 20 21 13 9 21 11 16
at 25 30 20 36 30 20 18 65 18 20
35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

6
FOR OFFIChL USE ONLY
50.

I4!“ UI'I'ILIAI. 03l- UI‘IL)

General elections

Voting preferences and opinions of those polled
“be they would vote for. and how they voted
hopublics poll

General elections

Nationalists

Others

Don't know

Blsnk ballots

would not vote

No answer

Invalid and blank bellots

Who would you prefer ss president of the govern-mt?
None of these

Don't know/no answer

Hen

ﬁlo-en

who do you think will win the next election?
Others

Don't know/no answer

Hen

Honen

Towns of less than 2.000 population

Towns of lore then 500,000 population

who they would vote for. by occupations
National totel

Salespeople

Skilled workers

Service personnel

Unskilled workers

Day laborers

Business people

Agricultural workers

Industrialists

Liberal professions and high executives
Independents

Medium-grade personnel

Unemployed

Retired people

Students

Housewives

Confidence in the “CD (Govermsnt) end in the P808
Honen

Hen

Opinion of how the govern-ant has handled letters
Hell

Pretty well

Poorly

Can the DC!) solve our problems if it continues in power?

Yes. it will solve then

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
51.
52.
53.
5‘.
55.
56.
57.

58.
59.
60.

. 61.

62.
63.
610.
65.
66.
67.
68.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“ﬁxings will stay the sane

Things will be worse

If the P803 wins. will it solve our problem?

Yes. it will solve the-

Things will stay the sale

Things will be worse

Note: the total of less then 1002 is because of the ”don't knows]
no answers."

How the people polled classify themselves politically
Hen

Hanan

Extrene Left

Left

Left of Center

Center

Right of Center

Right

Extreme Right

Don't know/no answer

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Infomcion y Revistu. S.A.

8131

050:

3110/ 133

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IllltﬂﬂﬂtJAl.U§£IMNLV

HILITARY INTERﬂATIONAL AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

ANTI-HELICOPTER HISSILE-—The Franco-PRC group Buromissile has started the de-
signing of a proposed helicopter-borne missile for interception of antitank
helicopters. This is the first air-to-air missile project conceived by the
Euronissile group, whose parent companies, HEB [Hesserschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm]
(FRO) and Aerospatiale (France), have, however, already developed some airborne
missiles (air-to-ground and air-to-sea). The Fakir-ﬂ project involves the de-
signing of a new antihelicopter missile that will be interchangeable with Euro-
nissile's uot antitank missile. The hot is currently in production for the
armed forces of 13 countries (cf AIR ET COSMOS, No 895), including France, and
the Gazelle, Dauphin, Lynx and 80-105 helicopters are equipped with it. The
principle of the new weapon system is therefore that it offers very high operav
tional flexibility to light-helicopter units by enabling them to be equipped
with Fakir-h antitank missiles. It is planned for it to be possible to carry
three Pakir-H nissiles in the same transport and firing container-tube as that

missiles. The Fakir-R will be an infrared-guidance missile derived from the
concept of the Croundéto-Air Very-Short Range (SAICP) missile that Aerospatiale
had designed within the framework of the competition organised by the French
official services and won by HATRA [Hechsnics, Aviation and Traction Col (cf
AIR ET COSMOS, No 866). The Pakir-h should therefore be an antihelicopter nis-
sile of about 6,000 meters range, which seems conpatible with the conditions of
antihelicopter warfare in relatively linited zones of terrain such as those
that Europe has. [Text] [Paris AIR ET COSROS in French 15 Hay 82 p 57] [COPY-
RIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982] 11267

080: 3100/695

39
llﬂltﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USlilVLY
IKIICHNNCMKLIJSEGMVLY

MILITARY PKANCE

TRANSALL, MIRAGE P-l'S CARRY OUT DILIVIRY. fUELIlG EXERCISE
Paris All ET COSMOS in French 15 May 82 p 70

[Article by 1.6.: "The Air Force Demonstrates Its Ability to Carry Out Rapid-
Assistance Operations"!

[Text] On two occasions in 48 hours, two major commands of the French Air
Force have given proof of their ability to carry out rapid-assistance opera-
tions at distances very far from aetropolitan Francs.

Air Defense

0n the first occasion-it was Thursday, 6 May l982--four Mirage F-l's of the
5th Fighter Hing, which is based at Orange and is one of the units of the Air
Con-and of the Air Defense Forces (CAPDA), took off from the Solensara (Corsi-
ca) base and flew nonstop to Djibouti after being refueled in flight by a
C-l3S-F four-jet airplane of the Strategic Air Force. The flight's duration
was 5 hours 30 minutes. These four combat planes returned to France nonstop on
Monday 10 May, after being refueled in flight again. As it happens, this was
not a "first" for the Mirage P-l. The first time was 29 January 1980: a non-
stop flight over the sane distance (5,000 ha) was done in 6 hours, with four
in-flight refuelings for each plane, by four Mirage P-l's of the sane wing.
Since then, other operations of this type have been carried out without mention
being made of them; they are part of the normal training of the Air Force's
conbat pilots and demonstrate concretely the possibilities of deployment of
Mirage F-l's for rapid-assistance operations.

Tactical Air Force

The Tactical Air Forces Command (PATAC) has for its part demonstrated, on sev-
eral occasions since 1977, its capacity for long-distance deployment of the in-
(light-refuelable Jaguar tactical-support planes.

Air Transport

0n the other hand, what has been done routinely in recent times by Air Force

fighter pilots and combat pilots has not until now been able to be done by the
Military Air Transport Command (COTAM), since the Transalls it previously had

ho
mmmmv
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

available to it were not refuelable in flight. This deficiency has now been
remedied.

0n the night of Saturday 8 Hay-Sunday 9 May 1982, at 8 pa, a new-series 0-160
Transall bearing the markings of the 64th Transport Hing (Bvreux) and heavily
laden with freight took off fro. Lorient for Cayenne (Guiana). After being re-
fueled in flight some 6 hours later by another second-generation Transall 0-160
--this one assigned. though, to the 61st Transport Wing, and having taken off
from the Azores--the plane landed at Cayenne-Rochanbeau at 12 noon Paris tine
on Sunday 10 May. It had flown some 7,000 kn nonstop in 16 hours of flying
time. The in-flight refueling as such lasted about 30 ninutes. A look at the
nap shows that Cayenne is farther fron Lorient than the southern coast of Great
Britain is from Ascension Island.

The same 0-160 refueled on the outward flight was to return to its base in
France on Thursday 13 May, after a second in-flight refueling operation on the
return trip, under the same conditions as on the outward trip.

More Transalls?

To date, the Air Force has ordered 25 refuelable Transalls, 10 of which are al-
so refuelers. The credit-coaldtnent stage has not been reached for any addi-
tional order of transport planes of this type. These current exercises give
solid arguments to those who consider that the COTAH should be able to have,
among other things, a larger number of second-generation Transalls.

COPYRICBT: A. 8 C. 1982

[1267
050: 3100/695

F0I40IFK3A1.0831MNLY
ova v. sows-u vw vane—a

HILITARY PEARCE

BRIEFS

RECONNAISSAI'CB “18811.3 18 AUTUMN--The Preach Air Force will receive its first
CL-89 reconnaissance uissiles in Autumn 1982. This pilotless missile (RPV) de-
veloped by the Canadian fifll Cansdair is already in service in the PEG and in
Crest Britain, and it has been ordered by P’rance and Italy. A total of lore
than 500 CL-89's have been ordered by these four NATO countries. In France,
Aerospatiale has been assigned pri-e contractorship for the reconnaissance sys-
ten for the Air Force. Several other French firms are also participating in
the program, including sintra for the ground control station, 581) [expansion
unknown] for the direction-finding radar, SILAT [expansion unknovn] for adapta-

tion of the carrier vehicle, and seem Aeronautical Haterial mintenance

and Repair Coupany or the Gironde for too cal assistance and personnel-
tralning. Vs mention that the 89 control station is used only for peace-

time exercises; in operational use, the an is c letely autonomous. gen
[Fmsmmcomosinrrmchumezpsg mom: A.&C.l 2

cso: 3100/695 m

mammoum