FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10059
21 October 1981

Worldwide Report

ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY

(FOUO 6/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the polio
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10059
21 October 1981

WORLDWIDE REPORT

Euvmouneum. QUALITY
(P000 6/ 81)

CONTENTS

IBSR
Soviet-0.5. Environnntal Cooperation Prouotes Mutual Understanding
(0. S. Kolbasov, H. I. Kuzyr'; VBSINIK mm: NAIR SSSR,

A“ 81)....00'0000000o...so.oo'oocoaoooooooocoonooooooooo0000.009

1

WEST EUROPE

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF cam

Lower Elbe Devastated by Power Plants, Industry
(mtistim melut: 5mm, 17 sep 81)...‘OOUIOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOQ 9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

SOVIET-0.8. mmommml. COOPERATIW PRMOTES m MWING

Hoscov VESTNIK AKADEMII NADK $88!! in Russian No 8, Aug 81 (signed to press
4 Aug 81) pp 102-109

[Article by Doctors of Law 0.5. Kolbasov and M.l. Rozyr': "Cooperation of Scien-
tists of the USSR and the United States in Legal Protection of the Environment"]

[Text] In the latter half of the 20th century environmental protection has becone s
most serious problem of a global nature whose successful solution demnds the con-
certed efforts of all peoples.

and devote constant attention to this issue.

Article 18 of the USSR Constitution proclaim: "In the interests of the present and
future generations the essential measures are being adopted for the protection and
scientifically substantiated, rational use of the land and its interior and water
resources and flora and fauna and for preserving the purity of air and water, ensuring
the reproduction of natural resources and imroving man's environnent." The "thin
Directions of the 0853's Econonic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and the Period
Through 1990" adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress have a special section devoted to na-
ture conservation. and the section naling the main tasks of the country's econonic
and social devalopnent for the inpending period records: "To strengthen conserva-
tion of nature. the land and its interior, the atnosphere. water-storage basins and
flora and fauna. To ensure the rational use and reproduction of natural resources."
The Soviet Union actively supports the further development and extension of interna-
tional cooperation in environnsntsl protection. Constructive proposals on this issue
are constantly being put forward at party congresses and USSR Supreme Soviet ses—
sions and in the speeches of Soviet representatives at various international 5M.

A great deal of work on nature conservation is being performed in the United States;

considerable experience has been accunulated there, particularly in refine-cut of the
law and administration in this sphere.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Taking into consideration the tremendous importance and acuteness of the problem and
also the need for the unification of efforts in nature conservation, the governments
of the USSR and the United States signed the Agreement on Cooperation in the Sphere
of Environment Protection on 23 Hay 1972 in Moscow.

Soviet-American cooperation is aimed at solving the basic aspects of the problem of
the environment and elaboration of the principles of regulation of the influence of
man's activity on nature, with regard, of course, for the differences in the two coun-
tries' socioeconomic and political systems. The following are the main aspects of
this cooperation: prevention of pollution of air and water (including the marine
environment); and the protection of nature against the negative impact of agricultural
and other works, an improvement.in the ecological environment in the cities, the
organization of reservations, earthquake prediction, study of the biological and
genetic consequences of environmental pollution, regulation of the influence of cli-
mate control, research into the singularities of Arctic and sub-Arctic ecological

systems and an analysis of various legal and administrative measures to preserve
environmental quality.

One or several joint projects and collaborating organizations were earmarked for

each of the above problems. Forms of work were determined: the exchange of sci-
entists, specialists and those on special tours and also scientific-technical infom-
tion, documentation and the results of research. joint symposia. conferences and meet-
ings of experts, joint development of individual research programs and so forth. The
plans of this work are adopted at annual meetings of a Soviet-American commission.
joint leadership of which is exercised by the chairman of the USSR State Committee

for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Control and the director of the 0.5. EPA.

Taking into account the fact that the elaboration of legal and administrative mea-
sures of environmental protection affects many general problems of state and law, the
USSR Academy of Sciences Institute of State and Law (a department for legal problems
of environmental protection has been operating in the institute since 1972) was de-
signated the head organization on the Soviet side. The Council for Environmental

Quality under the jurisdiction of the 0.5. President was designated the head organ-
ization on the American side.

During the period of cooperation five 2-week meetings of experts have been held (in
the United States in 1973, 1976 and 1980 and in the USSR in 1976 and 1978), two
American specialists have spent a 5-month tour of duty in the Soviet Union, litera-
ture and information on legislation and its practical implementation are regularly
exchanged, expert opinion has been given on individual questions of law and admin-
istration in the sphere of environmental protection and nature-conservation public
organizations of the USSR and the United States have been helped in the establish-
ment of direct contacts. Personal meetings of specialists at the meetings of experts
have also, of course, been of great significance.

The meetings of specialists have discussed such important topics as the correlation
of international and national law in environmental protection; correlation of the
law and administration at different levels (all-union-federal, republic-state and
so forth, right down to individual enterprise level); and the legal forms of USSR
and 0.5. public participation in nature conservation.

2

F0ﬂ.0l1ﬂ(lAl.USE¢3NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The exchange of opinions, experience and informationon these pertinent issues and the
joint development of theoretical concepts in the sphere of law and administration
are contributing to the mutual enrichment of the theory and practice of both sides,
the dissemination worldwide of the nature-conservation experience of two major in-
dustrially developed countries and the strengthening of the spirit of mutual under-
standing of the Soviet and American peoples.

During the visit to the country in which the meeting of experts is being held the
scientists of the other side acquire an opportunity to familiarize themselves with
the organization of nature conservation in the host country, with the nature of the
activity of the nature-conservation organizations and with the work of the reserve-
tions and national parks.

Thus American specialists who visited the Soviet Union in 1976 and 1978 familiarized
themselves with the activity of the state authorities and public organizations in-
volved in environmental protection issues in Moscow and Hoscow Oblast, the Kazakh SSR,
Kiev, Baku and Tashkent and in Vladimirskaya and Rostovskaya oblasts. They visited,
in particular, the Botanical Gardens of the Azerbaijan SSR Academy of Sciences In-
stitute of Botany imeni V.L. Komarov, the Kanevskiy Reservation and the offshore
oilfields in Baku. They had talks with employees of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presi-
dium, the chairman of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet Nature-Conservation Commission and
employees of the AzSSR Supreme Soviet Presidium, representatives of the USSR Supreme
Court, USSR Ministry of Justice, RSRSR Ministry of Agriculture, the Vladimirskiy and
Rostovskiy oblispolkoms and fish conservation and hunting supervision authorities
and with leaders of the All-Russian and Kazakh nature-conservation societies and
also the Rostovskaya Oblast organization of the Ali-Russian Nature-Conservation So-
ciety and so forth. An agreement was reached in 1978 on the establishment of direct
contacts between the All-Russian Nature-Conservation Society and the American Sierra
Club, and in 1979, in accordance with this agreement, the first visit to the USSR of
American public figures involved in nature conservation took place.

American specialists and public figures who have visited the USSR evaluate highly

the work being performed on nature conservation in our country. Such an evaluation
was heard in the speech of [Dzh. A. Basterud], member of the Council for Environmental
Quality, at the Expo-7b World Exhibition in Spokane. Prof T. Schoenbaum, who stu-
died organizational-legal measures for the protection of reservations in our country
over a period of several months, published in 1976 in an American journal of compara-
tive law the article "Protected Areas in the Soviet Union and the United States. A
Comparative View," which illustrated our achievements in this sphere and recommended -
the use in the United States of certain elements of Soviet experience of the legal
regulation of the protection of reservations. The representatives of American public
organizations who visited the USSR in 1979 evaluated highly the provisions of the
USSR Constitution devoted to nature conservation.

Soviet specialists, in turn, had an opportunity to familiarize themselves in 1923
and 1976 with the organization and content of the work of the Council for Environ-
mental Quality and the EPA and some of its peripheral subdivisions and with the
activity of permanent commissions of the 0.8. Congress, the departments of justice,
interior and agriculture, the Atomic Energy Commission, the 0.8. Supreme Court and
certain other district and state courts and nature-conservation organizations in
Hashington, New York, Boston, San Francisco and Los Angeles. They visited the
Grand Teton, Yellowstone and Grand Canyon national parks,, familiarized themselves

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'ros omcuu. use ONLY

with the work on recultivation of the land at the collieries of the Decker Nine
Company (Montana) and the protection of water-and the atmosphere at the ”KOHDOCOC
Coppet“topper~molybdenum enterprise (Utah) and participated in seminars in Denver
(Colorado) and Salt Lake City (Utah).

The fifth meeting of Soviet and American specialists in the legal and administrative
aspects of environmental protection was held in December 1980 in the United States
(Hashington, Miami, Atlanta and New York). The American delegation was headed by

P. Knight, acting principal attorney of the host organization--the Council for Environ-
mental Quality. The delegation included the following prominent specialists: N.
Yost, director of a presidential work group for the preparation of a global ecologi-
cal forecast up to the year 2000, J. Hoorman, chief of the U.S. Justice Department's
Land and Natural Resources Division, 6. Hidman, deputy head of the Department of

the Interior's Solicitor's Office, B. Greenberg, head of the Solicitor's Office of
the Commerce Department's National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration,

W. Smith, chief economist of the EPA, N. Robinson, member of the Sierra Club Board
of Directors, 0. Book, vice president of the National Wildlife Protection Federation,
H. Futrell, president of the Institute of Environmental Law, and K. hall, 3. Bramble,
H. Osherenko and D. Shea, employees of various departments and agencies.

The Soviet delegation included 0.5. Kolbesov (leader), ".1. Kozyr', Yu.S. Shemshu-
chenko, A.H. Kaverin and Yu.A. Starikov.

Opening the meeting, P. Knight emphasized that cooperation between the United States
and the USSR on a very complex problem affecting the interests of all countries-
environmental protection--had proven quite fruitful.

0.8. Kolbasov noted the importance of Soviet-American cooperation in the nature-
conservation sphere and pointed out its place and role in the system of measures to
preserve peace and improve the general political climate and also people's living
conditions. He informed those assembled in detail about the environmental protection
measures which have been implemented in the USSR in recent years and emphasized that
a place of particular importance is assigned nature-conservation measures in the
draft "Main Directions of the USSR'a Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985
and the Period Through 1990".

During the meeting the Soviet and American specialists discussed questions connected
with the need for and the obligatory nature of the consideration of ecological aspects
and questions concerning the environment in the elaboration of construction plans
and with an analysis of the role in this process of the 0.8. EPA and analogous na-
tional organizations. In particular, the question of the extent to which the agency
takes account of economic factors in its decisions connected with environmental
protection was inquired into. The agency's position betrayed concern at the fact
that at the time of the 1980 election campaign in the United States allegedly unduly
strict laws and also EPA rules pertaining to environmental protection which were
allegedly holding back economic development had been criticized and that the opinion
had been expressed on the need to strictly set EPA officials "straight" and reduce
expenditure on environmental protection.

Global environmental problems were also examined and international mechanisms of
environmental evaluation and questions of nature conservation worldwide were discussed
during the meeting.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FLR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The American specialists familiarited the Soviet scientists with a synopsis of a
report to the 0.8. President published in July 1980 which contained an ecological
forecast for the year 2000.

In the opinion of the authors of the report. the Earth's population in the year 2000
will constitute 6.35 billion. and the developing countries will be responsible for

90 percent of the population increase. moreover. Pood production will have almost
doubled by this time, but its increase per capita will constitute less than 15 percent.
There will be an even greater discrepancy in the economic provision of the population
of the developed and developing countries: the industrially developed comtries
(one-fourth of the world's.population) will, as before, consume three-fourths of the
world extraction of mineral resources. The water shortage will increase in certain
areas of the world. Reserves of growing timber of commercial proportions: will
decline by 50 percent (per capita); approximtely 60 percent of remaining forests will
have been felled in the developing countries. Up to 20 percent of existing anilal
and plant species could possibly have disappeared forever in connection with consider-
able changes in habitat. It is expected that the concentration of nitrogen dioxide
and other ozone-depleting chemicals‘ﬁn the atmosphere will have increased at such a
rate that by the year 2050 they will have appreciably altered the Earth's climate»
Despite the fact that ever increasing efforts are currently being made with respect
to environmental protection, they are, the authors of the report believe. manifestly
inadequate and incapable of changing the negative ecological trends. At the same tine
the authors of the report have not taken account of the real economic and political
difficulties preventing people organizing their relations with nature more intelli-
gently, which increases the seriousness of the impending problem even more.

‘Ihe report does not put forward any concrete plan of action to rectify the ecologi-
cal situation (work on its third volume, which will contain reconsndations on be-
havior models for the 0.8. leadership in the realization of ecological policy, has
yet to be completed). It merely lakes recouendations of a general nature: display
greater initiative in tackling ecological problems and create global comprehensive and
long-term environmental protection program which should "initiate an era of the’
unprecedented cooperation and self-sacrifice" of all peoples of the world. The.
authors of the report assert here that there are currently all the opportunities and
coupelling grounds for the United States to become the world leader in the movement
for environmental protection.

The Soviet specialists recognized the report as being very interesting and its mater-
ial as meriting attentive study. At the same time they emphasized that while. through
the fault of the opponents of detente. the real threat of a thermonuclear war still
exists and the arms race is intensifying it is difficult and unrealistic even to talk
of "unprecedented international cooperation" in the environmental protection sphere.

As far as 11.5. leadership in an international nature-conservation movement is con-
cetned, it could he accepted by the international comity only in the event of it
being exercised not to the detriment and not at the expense of other nations and

it being a leadership of good example and assistance to peoples in need.

The scientific papers of the meters of the Soviet delegation made an in-depth and
diversified analysis of various aspects of current Soviet nature-conservation legis-

lation. including preventive nature-conservation measures, and noted that there is
all-around consideration of questions of environmental protection and thorough

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ecological appraisal by experts of construction plans in our country at the time of
their elaboration. Those who submitted papers illustrated in detail the content of
the new Soviet laws on protection of the atmosphere and the protection and use of

the animal world and described the procedure of planning the rational use of nature
and environmental protection in the sphere of agricultural production and legal guar-
antees of land protection and of an improvement in its fertility.

The American participants in the meeting received with great interest information on
the development and application of nature-conservation legislation in the USSR and
showed an interest in a strengthening of Soviet-American cooperation in the environ—
mental protection sphere.

During the visit to the United States the Soviet specialists held thorough talks with
the American specialists which touched on legal and administrative questions of
environmental protection in the USSR and the United States in the EPA and the interior,
commerce and justice departments and also in the Keenan Institute and the Institute

of Environmental Law in Hashington. They discussed with H. Wilkey, member of the Fed-
eral District of Columbia Court of Appeals. the question of the role of the 0.8.

courts in the sphere of environmental law. They held talks with officials of the

of the application of federal and state environmental protection laws, rules and pro-
cedures, with representatives of U.S. public organizations involved in nature conser-
vation, particularly activists of the Sierra Chi: and the National Wildlife Protection
Federation. and also with prominent practicing lawyers dealing with legal problems of
environmental protection and with professors of the legal faculty of Pace University.

The members of the Soviet delegation visited the Everglades national reservation, a
fern near Miami (Florida). the heat and electric pover plant and the regional BPA
office in Atlanta. the Environmental Protection Department of the state of New York
and a gas works near Calvert Cliffs (Maryland) and were received by the mayor of
[Grinburg] (New York state).

During these meetings the American figures in the nature-conservation sphere displayed
great interest in the Soviet experience and evaluated it highly. Thus .13. Hoorman,
deputy attorney general for environmental protection, expressed to the Soviet special-
ists his admiration for the well-armed protection of nature in the US$11, and

Prof N.A. Robinson in several of his speeches characterized as positive the coopera-
tion of the USSR and the United States in legal and administrative problem of environ-
mental protection and repeatedly cited articles 18 and 58 of the USSR Constitution

as a model of a responsible attitude toward nature conservation and called for the
further expansion of cooperation in this sphere. The top American specialists R. Yost
and 0. Hook made similar statements.

How can we evaluate the current state of American law and administration and their
role in environmental protection?

In the Soviet specialists' opinion, definite progress has been observed in the United
States in the last decade in legal protection of the atmosphere and the offshore

continental zones of adjacent seas (in previous years measures had been implemented
mainly to protect waters and regulate land use on the basis of territorial zoning).

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experience of the effective application in the United States of a new legal
institution--"Environmental Impact Statements"-upon the construction of various in-
dustrial projects and installations (gas mains and pipelines, dams, hydropower sta-
tions, irrigation canals and so forth). which is a comparatively strong means of
preventive control which, the American specialists believe, has helped in increasing
considerably the ecological justification of economic decisions, avoiding mistakes
and increasing environmental protection effectiveness, merits particularly careful
study, we believe. American specialists recommend the use of this form in the prac-
tice of other countries and also in international relations.

This system of preliminary ecological control in the production sphere is implemented
in accordance with the National Policy in the Environmental Protection Sphere Act
(January 1970) and the analogous laws of certain states. The laws stipulate that
within a certain period prior to the start of the construction or modernisation of
enterprises and other operational facilities businessmen and state authorities are
obliged to make a public "environmental impact statement" concerning these facili-
ties. The contents of the statement are analyzed within a certain period of time by
federal inspection authorities, public organizations and the local population, which
may put forward objections to the implementation of this project or the other as a
whole owing to environmental considerations and propose alternative versions of or
amendments to the project. The businessmen and federal authorities are obliged to
examine the amendments and within a certain period of time publicly announce their
acceptance or rejection. If the authors of the observations and proposals are not
satisfied with the results of this examination, they can strive for their compulsory
implementation through the courts. As of now several tens of thousands of environmen-
tal impact statements have been examined at various levels of the American federal
structure; up to 5 percent of them here have been challenged in the courts.

However, we have succeeded in studying far from all essential aspects of the legal
protection of the environment in the United States in the years of cooperation. The
system, functions and interaction in environmental protection of 0.8. federal authori-
ties, which include, inter alia, the U.S. Justice Department, the Council for Environ-
mental Quality under the jurisdiction of the 0.8. President and the EPA, are still in
need of more in-depth study.

There has also been utterly inadequate study of the system of preventive nature-
conservation measures in 0.8. agriculture and also the negative influence of the in-
dustrialization and, particularly, the chemicalization of agriculture on the state
of the natural environment.

Study of the practice of the hearing of nature-conservation cases in the American
courts and an analysis of the measures of property liability for harm caused nature
(for example. the imposition on those found guilty of large fines of the order of
$25,000 for each day of infringement) is also of great interest for Soviet legal
experts-scientists and practitioners.

The United Statea' international nature-conservation measures and their place in this
state's overall policy and in its application to various regions of the world as a
whole, particularly in connection with food aid to the developing countries, also
deserve to be studied. It isalsonecessary, finally, to study the aspects of American
theory and practice which are connected with the development of an international law
of the environment.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As far as an evaluation of the current status of Soviet-American cooperationﬂnlegal
and administrative problems of envinsnmental protection is concerned, it was formulated
thus intheseeting'a summary protocol: "The sides observed that the fifth meeting

was successful and that the exchange of information and experience was satisfactory.
The specialists acknowledged the need to continue the exchange of opinions, informa-
tion and documents and observed that cooperation on environmental issues on a world
scale is of great significance and merits increasing attention."

The protocol also formulated the main areas of cooperation for 1981-1982. As before,
the exchange of information and opinions concerning the elaboration and application
of legislation on environmental protection in the USSR and the United Staten will be
continued. There will also be a continuation of the exchange of information on a“
study and evaluation of environmental impacts both within each country and on the
Earth as a whole, on the collation of economic factors with environmental factors and
on the implementation of laws on the environment. The exchange of scientists and

those on special tours studying legal and administrative aspects of environmental
protection will continue.

It was also decided to study the question of paths of the further cooperation of the
USSR and the United States in tackling the long-term tasks of environmental protec-
tion and making rational use of natural resources internationally.

It is proposed to discuss all these problems at the sixth meeting of Soviet and
American specialists which is to be held in 1982 in the USSR.

The participants in the meeting agreed to ascertain the possibility of the joint
preparation and publication in both countries of a collection of articles devoted to
an evaluation of environmental protection at the national and international levels.
the application of legislation and also an analysis of administrative measures in the
sphere of environmental protection being implemented in the USSR and the United
States.

In speaking of the results of the 9 years of Soviet-American cooperation in legal and
administrative problems of environmental protection it should be mentioned that its
main result has been deeper knowledge of the theory and practice of legal regulation
in the sphere of nature conservation in both countries and in the system of interna-
tional law.

In addition to its immediate professional usefulness, cooperation has contributed to
maintaining a spirit of trust and mutual understanding between the Soviet and Ameri-
can peoples.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Vestnik Akademii nauk SSSR". 1981

8850
cso: 5000/1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? GM

mum use smears!) a! scum ms, mum!
Hanburg STERN in Gersan 17 Sep 81 pp 53, 51., 56, 60
[Article by Christian Jungblut: When a River Dies, the Min Are the First To 0037

[fexg Blood-red tumors swell from the southe, gills and flesh of
eels in the Elbe [meg]. Pidlerncn have to throw back a third or
their catch. An official study found higher anounts of aercury than
the food laws allow in 61 percent of the eels caught.

01d Harm is telling he to hun‘ry up. I'The water's leaving us behind,“ he calls, and
casts off the lines. As the tide starts to go out, we leaVe Friedrichdroog harbor
and set out for Trischen - the island bird sanctuary opposite the south of the
Ezlbe. Hy ferryman' 9 real nane is Hmann Thonaehlm, but everyone on the coast
just cells him Han. The fidnernm born in Finkmwerder has spent nest of his 80
years on the lower Elbe.

Few people how the 100 kilometers of river betwem Halbm‘g and the North Sea as
well as he does. Harm has seen how this original river landscape was devastated by
a gigantic industrialisation program within a period of 2) years. It began with the
nuclear power plant at Stade, 30 ka below Humrg. Hhen the atomic reactor was ‘
built in 1970, they said that private households needed nore electricity. Shortly
thereafter, two large users of electricity moved in 10 ha domstrean near the vil-
lage of Buetzfleth: the Anerican Dow Chemical Company and the United Aluminu- Works
foundry. The neu Elbe tenants were in a hurry. long after the two plants had
started producing, not evm a construction permit was in evidence.

A second alunimm plant was rising out of the ground at the use time on the cut-
skirts of Hamburg, the American Reynolds company plant. nor was there a permit
when Hamburg' s savor at that tile, Herbert Ueichnann, ceruonioualy broke ground
for the building in 1970. The Hanseatice even got around the prescribed soning pro-
cedure and overrode the residents' veto rights by sisply declaring large parts of
the island of Finkenwerder to be part of the harbor expansion district by law. The
city' 3 own Hanmrg Electricity works purchased a one-third interest in the Stade
nuclear power plant so that it could supply Reynolds with electric power.

The wave of construction spilled over to the other side of the Elbe and descmded

upon Brunsbuettel, a provincial town in Schleewig-Holsteln. The first structure to
be built at the spot where the North Sea-Baltic Canal flows into the Elbe was a

W“! I‘WVFYAV "C9 “WV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quay. A nuclear power plant soon followed - the second one on the Elbe. Construc-
tion of the large Bayer, ﬁnals and Schelde chenical plants began soon thereafter.

And finally, last year saw the beginning of a third tonic reactor, the Brokdorf nu-
clear power plant, 15 km downstream in the Hilster Harsh. And once again the alleg-
edly rising electricity consumption by private households was cited as justifica-
tion.

Scarcely a wad: has passed since the beginning of industrialization without new
horror stories about the decline of the lower Elbe: toxic wastes, cooling-water
that gives off heat, dying fish, corrosive aluminum sludge, lethal waste gases, mis-
haps at the nuclear power plant.

"This River Is Too Precious for Idylls"

Hermann Thomaahlen, the fisherman they call Ham, asks whether this Elbe is till a
river at all or has already become the industrial canal which {lambm-g's former econ-
omics senator Helmuth Kern probably had in mind when he declared: 'This river is
too precious for idylls."

Something of an idyll still ruains at the spot where the Elbe flows into the sea
and the broad mnnel of the estuary opens to the north. 01d Harm is guiding his
snall motorboat along here. Leaving Priedrichskoog as the water receded, the ebb
tide drew us out into the almost endless gray expanse. The opposite more at Cun-
haven was not to be seen. But now, after 1; hours under way, the as has shrunk to
the size of a channel. Sandbanks swatch out around us as far as the eye can see.

Anyone can stick a flag in the sand here and establish his own state. There is
enough room for a kingdom. At low tide, more than 100 square kilometers of land
loom up out of the water. Monaco has only 1.8 square kilometers. But the conquer-
or' :2 reign would last only until the next flood tide.

For thousands of years this kingdom has been surfacing in rhythm with the ebb and
flow and sinkig again after 12 hours like an eternal Atlantis. But already there
are plans to rescue the land from the tides forever. They intend to pour vast
quantities of sand on it. A gigantic artificial mainland is to arise — land for
new industry to build on.

"Do you think there'll still be a Trischen than", asks Harm, when we reach the
island that rises out of the water even at high tide. I jump out on land — sudde-
ly the keeper of the birds stands before me. He lives on a kind of raised platform
and has seen us coming from a long way off. He now bars the way in a threatening
manner. "I bring you the mail,"says Harm; "so let my guests go ashore with me."

with his thid: black beard and tattered trouscrs, the custodian gives the impres-
sion of being shipwrecked on a lonely island. Yet he stays here only in the suner
half of the year to count the birds as they brood and rest. For Trischai is one of
northem Europe's most important landing grounds for nigratory birds. Close to
150,000 birds stop over on this sandy spot every year on their way to far-off lands.
Sometimes up to 8,000 pairs breed here. The island is one of the last great oases

10
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

of nature on the lower Elbe. This is why keepers of birds here are always hunters
of men as well. They defend this sanctuary against all intruders.

But what can they do if one day suction dredges love in to sluice up sand in front
of their island and perhaps build a levee? They will be as helpless as old Harm,
who today carries nail and supplies to Trischan, and who for a long tine has been
unable to make his living from fishing the way his father and his father'sﬁther
used to do.

liarn' s grandfather had become a wealthy man on the Elbe. Once he put out his nets
and in a single sweq) pulled from the water a catch worth half the actual value of
is cutter. He collected 1,800 marks for the 60 sturgeon. A new boat cost 3,000
then,

Only a Handfulcf the Elbe' 3 10,000 Fidnernan Rensined

At that time the Elbe still tamed with snipe eel, pike perdn and pike, breanl,
stuart and sturgeon. There were catches like the legendeary sturgeon that weighed
180 pounds, including the caviar, and brought as such Ioney as a hog weighing 3 cent-
ners. llam' s grandfather spent the money on a fur-trialled winter coat that was

even worn by his grandson.

Rarely a handful remain of the Elbe fidnerlan who used to nulber 10,000 -— nan like
liens-Heinrich Becker, who in the evening at the Neufeld village in counts up last
week's catch for me: Monday, 40 pounds of eel; Tuesday, 12 pounds; Hednesday, noth-
ing; Thursday, 32 pounds of eel and 8 pounds of flounder. Friday was the best day:
60 pounds of eel. Nothing again on Saturday. 0n annday the Elbe belonged to the
sailboat enthusiasts and weekend skippers -- he tamed right around and came back.
Yet Elana-Heinrich Becker was lucky that week; he had to throw back only half of his
catch -- the fish with the ulcmus growthso

The fishermen know what is causing the fish to be diseased: the filth that comes
from industry. The chemists call it game hexadnlorine-cyclohexane, tin, chmnim
and phenol, polychlorinated biphanyls, dieldrin, heptaehlorine and cadaiun.

The water is no longer fertile. Nor is the land. Pros tine malarial, the Elbe
has repeatedly wadned the land in front of the levee, has fertilized and irrigated
it. Generations of farmers dug ditches to provide drainage for their lush fields.
Now new levees separate the headland from the river in many places, and the farmers
often do not know where to find enough water for their livestock.

Only the old-timers still tell of the ought-after land, of the rich grazing land in
front of the levee, where cows used to be sent from the hinterland to be put out to
pasture -- even horses from Hestphalia. There are tales like the one about the
knights of Kehding who once invited the peasants of Krunlneudedch to a feast in
Stade; they then made sure in their fashion that only a few of then returned to
their farms. Thus, in accordance with ancient law, their land passed to the nobil-

ity.

11

M“ Rw'~TQI "on 0"."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Modern Levees Turning the River Into an Industrial Canal

The modern robber-barons stand at their drawing boards. They tinker with flow
models, do computer calculations and build levees around the headlands — as was
done at Heui‘eld, where the old levee jogs in two directions, toward Friedrichskoog
and Brunsbucttel. This is the site of Delf Jane's house, a village inn frequented
only by coastal folk. Delf is from Dithmarsdxen, and -— as the saying goes — Dith-
marschmers are hardhcadcd. People whom Delf Jens does not like will not even get
an egg grog at his place — the punch made of beatm egg yolk and hot straight run,

a drink that you can take only in snall sips but still gives you hot fladles.

I used to go to Neufeld quite often for an egg grog, following the beads of the in—
let downstream in my boat through the broad headlands, past grazing dieqa and
geese to the house on the levee. At high tide during a atom, the water sometimes
surges almost to its doorstep. Then a ultehes‘ cauldron rages in the headlands.

But the levee has always hold.

A levee like this is more than just a piled-up well of earth. It is a bulwark, a
complicated set of defenses. "The levee is life for us all," says Delf Jane.

In earlier times, when everyone still had to lend a hand, anyone who did not do
proper work on the levee was run off like the Pastor of Hollern because he was m-
dangering them all. And the annual levee review, at which tine its condition was
assessed by experts, was more important than any church festival.

Delf Jane himself used to help build levees in his younger years. But today he
grumbles: "They're planning to build a new levee that will close in the whole head-
land." '.-!hat is his objection?

Did he not once acquire new land himself by building levees? “That's something
entirely different," Delf Jans informs me. "At that time we built levees that were
in keeping with nature. But they inth to Just lop off a corner. No one who's
from the coast does something like that. Thsoe who are doing the planning may have
studied at the university, but they don't know the Elbe."

A look at the map shows what “the university men" have already done with the largest
levee construction program in the history of the lower Elbe. In recent years they
have built more than 300 km of the new levee. Tributaries were simply walled off,
as at liaseldorf, 30 km below Hamburg. Old Elbe ports have beat filled in or blocked
off; islands became part of the mainland. In many places the new levee is situated
miles in front of the old one and is forcing the once wide-branching riverbed of the
Elbe in on itself like a canal.

The waves from the tides used to play thmselves out on the comers and edges of the
old angled levee. Today the snooth walls of the new one conduct the rising tide
upstream via the shortest route. The new reeves of the levee have made a funnel out
of the lower Elbe, an mormous hydraulic press that can be manipulated by any nar-
row-breasted northwest wind.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rmarkable Elasticity of Pollution Linits

A atom has already given the levee planners their comeuppance. Yet it was not near-
ly as strong and persistent as the one during the catastrophic flooding in 1962.

But when this northwester on 3 January 1976 pudxed the massive waves out of the
North Sea into the Elbe, the water rose even higher — so big) that the people of
namburg feared that their downtown area would be inundated.

But the construction progru will continue nevertheless, until the mtire river has
been straightmed out into a streamlined waterway. Levee builders like these once
would have been hounded out of town like the Pastor of Hollern. In those days lev-
ees were built to protect people, land and livestock. Levees are hilt today to ob-
tain dry land for industrial construction projects.

lieu levees and chemical plants, atomic reactors and aluminum works -- this is how
the lee is being surgically destroyed. In this case the scalpels, clamps and swabs
are called "area planning," "development model for the lower Elbe," "land planning
in Schleswig-Holstein" and "development program in Lower Saxony." The head physi-
cians are to be found sitting in parliaments, the operating surgeons in industries
and the ancsthetists in government agencies.

Dr.i-2rnst Hinze of the Harburg Health Office was one of then. When the Reynolds
'hluninum plant was about to be built, and concerned citizens were eating (bout the
' highly toxic fluorine waste gees, he informed them: "Fluorine in small doses is
even good for the teeth."

Professor Hubert Caspcrs of the Hamburg Hydrobiological Institute sprinkled his
expert water opinions over concerned fiaemen. When the Bayer plant at Bruns-
buettel was in the planning stage -- a facility that in its final phase of devel-
opment would put 1.8 million tons of waste water into the river every day — he had
this to say: Yes. “But this infusion will probably bring the Elbe up to its pol-
lution limit."

But when the issue arose of building the Brokdorf nuclear power plant only 15 km
downstream - a plant whose cooling-water will raise the taperature of the river
in the future — Professor Casper favored this project as wall, but here again he
added this proviso: "This infusion will probably bring the Elbe up to its pollu-
tion limit.‘I

"The Haste Hater Has Properties Like Those of "coal Hine or Sauerkraut"

And when government experts are rendered truly speechless with indignation, awixon-
mental specialist such as Dr Hans ﬂotsam: Haber of the Bayer company step in. He
had this to say about the acid content of the liquid wastes that are to flow into
the Elbe when the Bayer plant at Brunsbuettel is completed: "The waste water has
properties like those of Mosal wine or sauerkraut." He was talking bout these
quantities: 1,330 kg of mercury; 130,000 kg of lead; 1,300 kg of cachium and 2,600
tons of iron every year.

The planners thus go around pulling the wool over everyone's eyes, and more and
more factories spring up. When they draw near, a flood usually precedes thu —

L3

one nwvrnl "SP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a flood of sand. Sand is ﬂooding the outskirts of Hambm-g harbor again right now.
Altcnwerder, the island in the Elbe, is to be covered with sand so that a container
terminal can be mthroned upon it at a later date.

The sluicing area is mm a bare wasteland crossed by a pipe that eoctmds down to
the water's edge, where the pumping ship and the sand-lads: barges lie. There are
gurgling and rustling noises in the tube. The pipeline spews out the barge's load.
An mending deluge pours over the green meadow. Het sand floods ditches and roads,
pulls doun trees and fences. A village is being entombed here. Only the church
and the canetery are to be spared, for the dead have a right to 25 years of peace.
Residents of the village were laid to rest there only a dzort time ago.

But the living are pulling out. Not only in Altenwerder but also in Buettel, not
far from the North Sea-Baltic Canal. From the Elbe levee, Buettel looks like many
a village in Sleepy-Holstein. But the quiet in Buettel is a deathly silence.
Houses still stand here, but only the wind moves the curtains now. Where a door
stands open, as though someone had forgotten to close it a few minutes before, a
wider spins its web. In the farmer' a garden the weeds are taking over the last of
the blooming dahlias.

The residents of Buettel had to make way so that the ehaical industry in nearby
Bruns'ouettel can continue to blow pollutants into the air. Farmer loft now has a
new farm in the wilster Harsh. But construction is due to begin there again as
well -- the Brokdorf nuclear power plant. And farmer Ioi‘t does not know what else
is going to happen and whether he will be able to rennin there.

Expellecs of 1981: Becker, the Elbe fisherman, has moved to Pinkenwerder from Alt-
cnwerder where the sluice field is growing. But sand is already being sluiced up
right across from his new home so that industry can expand. It is driving the
iofts and +he Backers before it. And it is consuming the mobbels.

New Jobs Are Already Being Rationalized Away

Lrwin Dubbcls was a baker in Krummendeich. He is now a foundry worker at the
United Aluminum works in Buetzfleth. Many colleagues used to be his wstomers —
agricultural workers and part-time farmers for whom he baked bread. Now they bake
little rolls together. Only the most menial Jobs are for the local unskilled work-
ers. The companies brought their fo caﬂght with them to the coast. The locals
switched profession: because ind regular working hours and secure posi-
tions. Operations are now being rationalized, people are losing their jobs and
others are having to work overtime.

0n the way home to Kmmmendeidl in the bus, they argue vehemently over whether it
would not have been better to give companies the government subsidies to build light
industry. Or perhaps they should at least have imposed stricter conditions on the
big factories.

After all, says someone, these plants cane here not only because the water is deep
enough for oceangoing ships and land in front of the levee is cheap. They came be-
cause no one would have than anywhere else.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr Ag a Co.

7658
080: 5000 /200 7 END

14