FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10683
23 July 1982

_ West Europe Report

(FOUO 45/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforaatioa was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

Untamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF TRIS PUBLICATION RE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EURG’E REPORT

(pom ‘ 45/92)

Cameras

30030410

MC:
Aerogetieble President Ammo» Profit, Reamer! Debt for
19
(AIR 31' cm, 8, 22 m 82)eeeeeoeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 1

Investment, Remvetion Help
Helicopter Selee

ITALY

Interview with 0013'! I‘ll on WP}! P0116!
(“01.310 I‘ll. 111%", Film, 2" m 82) eeeeeeeeeeee 1‘

SPAIN

Labor Afﬂuent hue Booms ottloreening Rom
mlo 16, m Jm &) .O.........U....‘O................. 10

POLITICAL
FRANCE

I-‘ornei- Prime Minister Seee Deterioration in Tiee with Anion
(Pierre ﬂees-er Interview; 1.! 90m, 2!; Key 82) .......... 15

Heating of Sooieliet Rediceliution Mined
(Wm, an 82) 0.00.00.00.000000COOOOOOIOOOOOOOOCOO 18

Position of Coneeo'vetive Clubs, nor am Wed
(Colette Ian-1; m, m 5

2) .0....OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOCOCO 25

- e - (III - we - 150 ram

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M omcm. USE ONLY

HAL!

Interview mu: mum on P81, P01 Relations
(Giorgio mum Interview; rum, 2!. m 82)....

Public Opinion m on PCI. 0383 Pol-ice
(PM, 213 m 82) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

mum

n:- Beeee Conduct Regulu- wer Scenu-io Mine
(m E'meu‘m’ m &) OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Beee Detenee rated. by Jeoquee Boichot

mote‘ lleeotion ﬂue Tested, by Theodore Hahlberg
m Mien Conducted, by Roger Retain

”WINCH!”
AEIOSPATIALB mm m mum. WED m Ion 1981
Invest-ant. Renovetion Help
ParisAIRl'l‘COBFDB inhthlhy82p9

[Article by JJL: "Setisfeotory Situetion at MAW: psaenges enclo-
sad in slantlines. printed in mama]

[Text] On 3 April. the president of manna: [nation-.1 Industrial Aero-
space Company]. Mr Jooquoo mtterrand. as the guest of the Association of Pro-
feesionnl Aeronautics and Speoe Journalists. save an overview of the act1vi-
ties of his company. In our last issue we provided our readers. as stop-prose
news. with e few signiﬁcant figures taken iron that lecture, which. however.
deserves to be reported at luoh greater length today.

/'lhe results/. before taxes. or the 1981 accounting period are largely posi-
tive. and the sane will very likely be true for 192. This eetisfaowry re-
port is in keeping with a perspective of recovery which wee started as of 1978.
In 1977, the losses reached 1 level of M7 nillion (runes. or lees than 10
percent of the turnover (approunetely 10 billion francs). In 1979. the ba-
lence had been restored with 8 aillion trance in positive reeulu for an

11 billion franc turnover. -

In 1%0. MAW registered a 119 I11an fra: c profit for a 13.169 bil-
lion franc turnovers in 1981. the latter resohed epmodntely 16.5 billion
francs for the ooapany. and‘1?.5 blllion'frence for‘the group. /with the re-
sulte 1711:; between three and four tines those for the 1980 amounting pe-
riod. . .

“The trade situstion wee good in 1981; it presents itself as eetisfectory
for 1982. The Maine“. having gotten rid of its under clinkere. is of high
uality." Other positive elenente: an already very advanced and V»; clear
7nnovation/ of the ente no as a whole. and specifically of its [industrial
plant/s the /investeent policy hae recovered very actively: 1;) union
francs in 1977. 238 nillion francs in 1978. #93 11111011 francs in 1979. 7%
million !rancs in 1980 and lots nillion francs in 1981/. m. moo-ea
1n the 1982 ”midget onount to epwoxintely /1.200 Iillion franc 1 160 to
115 percent of thee invest-sate were node in the 'Airplaned'nivision. in con-
nection with the development of the Airbus program in spite of the launching
of the /A‘l‘R-l&2/ program in oooperetion with Aeritalis. /the winery tack of
the Airplaneo Division is to conduct the Airbus postal.

1
m OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

[The indebtedneea/ has been significantly reduced. In 1977. it waa 0.011
billion francs; in 1978. it had been reduced to 3.663 billion francs. and in
1979 to 3.290 billimfranca. in 1980 to 2.236 billion francs and /by the end
of 1981 to 677 aillion francs/. nut President Hitter-ram believes that this
level of indebtedness ie alsoet sufficient and that in all likelihood it will
be greater in the casing yearn...

‘lhis situation is due to significant down psysenta being aade on certain con-
tracts. to the relative reduction of erpendituree. to the amtarity of the u-
nagesent. and of course to the reeulte of the buinese activities.

However. there are various worrisone elesents: the need to renew the range
of products. the narginality of the Reach dosestic nrket. hence the need
for siyiificnnt /exporta/. lilited however by the serious crisis experienced
by the airline cospanies. the sluggishness of European cooperation. the etag-
nation of sons aarkets. the growing effort be sade in tens of aelf-finano
cing for study and future progran developnent in the face of a snowing bud-
getary austerity). the evolution of cmencies. and the lack of control of
inflation. The increase in the value of the dollar was rather favorable. but
it is difficult to contain trench inﬂation. and President Hitterrand is M
that serioua problesa may arise. which are tied to the evolution of cmency
exchange values and of the lack of control of inflation.

/In the social area/. an increase in contributions is to be noted. which
threatens to becose even greater. ‘nte seaaures of solidarity which have been
taken will entail 220 to 230 aillion francs in supplesentary wages and social
contributions. or 3.5 percent of the aggregate animation of elployeee (5
to 6 percent over a full year).

Prior to the sigiing of the /solidarity contract/ with n: Auroux. as 3.000
individuals seesed theoretically interested. they were countiu on 1.500 de-
parturee. but there were 2.5“? candidatee...

an 31 Decenber. the personnel strength was 35.390 individuals (parent cospany).
as against a goal of 35,396. In 1%2. natural attrition should produce ap-
proxiastely 500 departures: the reduction of we hours by 1 hour per week
and the fifth week of vacation represent. in order to restore/ the ten-
tial. the hiring of about MO individuala. Taking into account the increa-
ae/ in potential which in being consi . that is 570 individuals. and the
effect of the solidarity contract. the 1%2 hiring perspectives ultiutely
involve 3.390 individuale. or sore than 10 percent of the cment personnel
etrengtn. But experience shows that /it 1e difficult to find the neceeeary
peroonnel/. eepecially in the ekined and highly skilled categories. including
engineer-a. Coapetition with the other industrialists ie intenae...

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
Helicopter Belee
Paris AIR 31‘ 008108 in French 22 my 82 p 15
[Article by 1.11.. "WAMI: 1bre then 7.000 micoptm Sold"]

[Text] 011 30 June. MAM! ennounced the following belenco shoot for its
helicopter eeloo:

- 15.332 "Super Pun": 1M unite oold in 1'6 countrioe (of which 59 for the

1981 eccountine period):
- 31.365 mm m. 1m unite oold in 26 countriee (of which 125 in 1981):

-981§.350 "Bcunuil/ASter": 9115 unite eold in 21 comtrioe (of which 207 in
1 1 1

- 15.3538'vacurcuii II/‘l‘win 3m": 1161 unite oold 1h 21 countries (of which
210 in 1 1 1

- $1.3uo/ 1/ 2 ”Gazelle”: 1,060 unite com in 36 countries (of which 123
31.312 in 1981 s

- 91.315 "been“: 369 unite eold in 29 countries:

- 5363;6/319 "Alouette III": 1.“)9 unite eold in 71} countries (of which 15
in 1 1 1 ‘
- SL321 "Super Frolon": 99 unite eold in 8 countriee.

0r e totel of b.9216 Mlicoptero: by adding the 680 "Pt-e” which have been
delivered. the 1,305 Alonette III. end the 159 8A.1221 "Minn." one errivee
at e pend totel of 7,000 unite oold in eone 100 oomtrieo.

‘lhe noet remkehle pointe in theee etetietice ere obviouely roletod to the
significuit dewelopeent in the eeloe of the three new eneretion helicoptore:
Super-Pun. Deuphin 11. end the feeily of tho Bcurouil ASter; the letter,
with 1.1106 unite eold. hoe elreedy wooded the Alouette II . end ie coming
within a. heir'e hneedth of tho Alouetto 111. There ie e reeeonehlo chance
that. es of thie yeer. imam will go beyond the nth of the 1000 A8350
end of thet of the 500 “.355.

Let us recell that in 1961. mums acid 769 new helicoptere ee epinet
6391111980. 511 1111979. 363m1978end3b31n1977. Aeoftheniddloof
1983. the action rete will roech 75 to 80 helicopters per eonth. of which
50 A8650 A3355. 16 Dauphin II end 6 Superﬁne.

COPYRIGHT! A. O C. 1%2

8963
CSO: 3100/ 707

3
IO! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
INTERVIEW WITH CGIL'S LAMA ON CONPIHDUSTRIA POLICY
Milan PAlORAMA in Italian 24 May 82 pp 214-217

[Interview with Luciano Lana, secretary of the Italian General
Confederation of Labor (CGIL) by Kasai-o Riva: "And on the
contracts, let there be warl'j

[Text] "There's aaneuvering going on in Confindustria,
and it's ained at cutting the workers' real
wages,“ the CGIL secretary charges. The union
will agree to the lt-percent cap, he says, but
as for any discussion of changes in the COL in-
dex, the answer is a flat “30' until inflation
has been brought down to tolerable levels.

If Confindustria wants war in the upon-ing contract negotiations,
it will get it. In response to the truapets Vittorio Merloni
sounded at Confindustria's asaeably on Tueaday ll May, Luciano
Lana sounds the no less warlike tocsin in his union's stronghold.
The quarrel would seen to be over the pro-negotiation deaands
laid down by industry: first we reach an agree-eat on labor coats,
then we start talking renewal of labor contracts, which expired
several aonths ago. The real stakes in these preliminary bouts,
though, are a lot higher'than that. In the interview granted -
PANORAMA, Lana warns that the core issue is the question of the
workers' real wagesc Confindustria is out to slash then, and the
union is equally deter-ined to protect then.

Even so, the leader of Italy's biggest labor organization adaita
that another heavy risk hangs over the contract negotiations:
that battle could change to political war between political par-
ties and special-interest groups that could divide both the na-
tion and the political najority that keeps Spadolini'a governaent
in office. Lana openly accuses Confindustria of seeking to heat
up the labor-aanageaent conflict to a point where it could bring
down the govern-eat and precipitate a general crisis in the sys-
true

Labor is ready to agree to a lt-percent cap on inflation in 1982,
but will reject any attespt to cut the real purchasing power of

FOIIﬂFKJALUSE(Rﬂﬂ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the pay envelope. Therefore, Lana warns, any chance of labor's
consenting to review the cost-of-living index will be postponed
until such tine as inflation has been brought down to acceptable
levels. In any case, any audit of the costs of labor's denands
sust be conducted as part of contract negotiations: In Lane's
view, there is no other bargaining table.

Herloni says he is fir-1y deternined not to agree to contract
negotiations, while Lana states his own determination to insist
on then. As the opening shots in this contract war were fired,
the conflict see-ed wholly inpatient of sediation: one or other
of the conbatants oust lose. Luciano Lesa' a public statenents
reflect his boundless assurance that he is in the right. But
will that suffice to give hin victory in the end? Here, anyhow,
is what he is doing to prepare for what will probably be the
bitterest and lengthiest labor battle in this postwar period.

Question: Confindustria is standing pat, and Merloni said it
again, to loud applause, at its latest assenbly: no contract ne-
gotiations without prior agreenent on labor costs and the COLA.
What is Luciano Lana's response to this prior condition?

Answer: That nobody has ever got very far by laying down prior
conditions, either on his own behalf or in the interests of others.
there is a tendency these days to portray Confindustria's stub-
bornness as a great act of heroisn. Iou would think that Mer-
loni's words were the last word of the youngest of the ﬂoratii! .
By rights, Confindustria ought to have the courage to say straight
out what is hidden behind this sudden flight to pro-conditions.

Question: It seems to us, though, that industry has sade it clear
what it wants: to avoid shouldering the contract cost in addi-
tion to the costs it nust pay as a result of such autonatic ad-
Justnent nechanisns as the COLA. Isn't this, then, the real risk?

Answer: And we shall check to sake sure about that risk when we
sit down at the negotiating table. But no! Confindustria won't

do that. Therefore I interpret its refusal as proof that there

are sane things hidden behind its pre~conditions that have nothing
to do with noney natters: and I seen political saneuvering against
the govern-ent and against organized labor's role in the nation

and in its institutions. They want to bring about a clinate that
would be propitious for a reactionary change of course. Of course
they are laboring under a delusion, but that won't keep then fron

trying.

Question: It is, indeed, a rare occurrence for a president of
Confindustria to attack a governsent the way Merloni has. And
yet, the burden of his char s does not seen to have been cut fro-
whole cloth. In June of 19 l Spadolini sponsored negotiations on
labor costs, which led absolutely nowhere. Is is so surprising

5
roe omcm. use any
that, after so many months, Confindustria should declare its
disappointment'with such "inconclusiveness?"

Answer: And what do we do about Confindustria'e own "inconclu-
sivenesa'?In June 1981 there were two major commitments made:
first, that both sides would base their behavior on respect for
the assumption of a l6-percent rate of inflation in 1982; se-
cond, that the fight against inflation would not be waged by re-
sorting to policies conducive to recession. At this point, it
is we who are disappointed, not Confindustria.

Question: What has organized labor done or preposed over all
these months, though?

Answer: We've done a lot. Borinstance, we have tried to set up
talks with industry people on the matter of labor nobility and
working hours, but they refused to talk. And again: we were

the first to raise the issue of severance pay, which now has
Confindustria howling both against the referendum and against the
law to avoid it. Here again: flat refusal. But how can this
be? In 1976 we reached an agreement, and now it is impossible

to reach a new one: why? It's clear, though: somebody wants a
head-on confrontation with organized labor, at all costs.

Question: And yet Confindustria has put the question of the COLA
on the table, and you have refused to discuss it...

Answer: Of course we have, and we shall go right on refusing.

In the June 1981 agreements there was the commitment to defend
the real purchasing power of wages. But then, by laying hands on
the COLA, they wanted to wriggle out of that commitment. So far
only one industry spokesman has said it out loud: real wages will
be cut. Probably what Mandelli says is what a lot of people in
Confindustria want, but won't say so. In that case, it is they,
not we, who are going back on the 1981 agree-eats.

Question: Are we ever going to get labor's opinion, once and for
all, on this blasted cost-of-living index? You can't get very
far by laying down pro-conditions, true: but you can't get far
with taboos, either: right?

Answer: There are no taboos: the cost-of-living index will have
to be modified. It is simply that we don't want any changes or
reforms until inflation rates come down...

Question: So we're right back where we started: but isn't the
cost-of—living index one of the reasons for high inflation?

Answer: Who says so? I can see countries that have no such ma-
chinery, and are sick with inflation just the same. I'm think-
ing of France and Great Britain, for example.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\
FOI(HWKJALUSE(NHJ

Question: The fact remains that our situation is full of flaws
and rife with negative consequences. Let se give you one in-
stance: inflation has been dropping of recent sonths, but even
so the next trigger-point will be around 12 points again. How
do you explain this contradiction?

Answer: Sinply: contrary to what a lot of people have always ar-
gued, the index catches up with inflation, rather than running
ahead of it. In other words, it does not raise wages exorbi-
tantly. Further-ore, you have to remember that the trigger point
is still where it was 2 or 3 years ago. And we all know that
2,300 lire in 1982 is not the sane as 2,300 lire in 1979, either
in corporate costs or in the workers' pay'enVOIOpOB.

Question: There are other drawbacks, too. For example, the COL
index also reflects price increases due to increased taxes. When
you do this, aren't you gutting Parliament's taxing power, and
aren't you, de facto, ha-pering the governsent's freedom to take
fiscal seasures against inflation?

Answer: That's true, but only on the surface. The index is one
of the defenses around wages, and then there are contracts, too.
What you don't get from one side, you try to get on the other.
That's what is done in all countries that look at consuser prices,
without distinguishing between the gross and the net after taxes.
Even in Sweden and in Germany... ‘

Question: Actually, it seess to as that in Ger-any they have
signed contracts for 1982 with increases below the inflation rate...

Answer: very true: in Gersany, the unions have agreed to a cut
in workers' real wages. Precisely what we are not prepared to
accept in Italy. This is a fundasental point that nust be sade
clear to all parties, beginning with the govern-eat and Confin-
dustria.

Question: But then, in these conditions, how do you get out of
the stonewall-to-stonewall deadlock over the contract issue?

Answer: There is only one way out: get Confindustria to back
down on its pro-conditions, and go to the table on national con-
tract negotiations. This nust be the place for lira-by-lira
verification of the claimed cost of labor's desands.

Question: In the June 1981 agreenent there was a lt-percent lid
placed on inflation, to which labor contracts were also to be sub-
ject. Does labor intend to stand by that cos-itsent?

Answer: Of course. we are perfectly happy with the lé-percent.
Besides that, though, there sust also be sane allowance nade for
the productivity increases that sight be achieved: these, too,
must show up in the pay envelope. In any case, we nust get into
the serits of the contractual platform, and that is where we sust
talk about the overall costs.

7
FOItHWﬂJALlﬁﬂEONLY
Question: Are you planning to ask the government to step in to
get negotiations with industry started?

Answcr: we're not going to ask anybody for anything. We shall
push Confindustria into negotiations by means of union action, and
by showing the whole country the futility and the danger of pre-
conditions. As for the government, we expect it to be consistent
in its behavior....

Question: In other words, to pressure the state-owned companies
into breaking ranks with Confindustria and opening separate nego-
tiations?

Answer: As for public employees, the government has dealt with
the unions without laying down any pro-conditions. I see no rea-
son why the state-owned corporations ought to behave otherwise.

Question: Well, though, there is political disagreement on that
score right now among the parties and among cabinet ministers.
From many quarters, one gets the impression that the contract
issue is getting to be the central one in a lot of large-scale
political maneuvers, some of them aimed at Spadolini's government.
How does organized labor view these moves?

Answer: I am very much concerned about them, indeed, because we
do not want to see this clash become politicized. The danger is
that a matter of labor's interests could be manipulated to foster
ends that have nothing to do with protecting the earnings of work-
ers. The fact is that Confindustria, first and foremost, doesn't
play around when it comes to politicizing, and that it is sniping
at us and at the government alike. This proves that its objective
is to turn the country around, politically, and thus to diminish
the clout and the voice of the social classes represented by or-
ganized labor. This is the most alarming aspect of their resort
to pro-conditions.

Question: There are people, even in Confindustria, who are hold-
ing out a hand to organized labor andurging both sides to put aside
traditional antagonisms. what is your answer to these people?

Answer: For the time being, I say to them that they should get
down to work at convincing Confindustria as a whole of the need
to sit down around the table and negotiate. The only place to
test good intentions is in bargaining.

Question: What if the loser in this showdown turns out to be the
Spadolini government?

8
FOI(NWK1ALI£REONLY
FOI1H¥KJALIBEONll

Answer: That will be the final, incontrovertible evidence that
some forces are determined to twist this whole process for po-
litical destabilization. Organized labor has no interest in
stirring up confusion and disorder, and the workers will Judge,
with all due severity, those who try to use the contract issue
for partisan political purposes.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Bditore S.p.A. Milan
6182

cso : 3104/21:

F0l(ﬂWKJALUSEONLY
summon“

BOOM“: SPAIN

LABOR mum PAIIS 330.083 0? mm m
Madrid mm 16 in Spanish 1‘ Jun 82 pp 66-68
[News co-entary: "The at: That Never Use")

[Text] A year ago, during the afternoon of 9 June, a historic pact was
signed in Spain. the National hploynent Agreuent (All), which was touted

as the philosopher's stone for all the problene of the Spanish econony. The
strategy was sinple: the workers would lake a wage concession. with increases
between 9 and 11 percent, and the .ployers would neke invest-ants creating
350,000 new jobs and reectivating the econoay.

One year later. the nechanisn has not worked. The workers have seen their
wages reduced within the agreed-upon range (the average wage increase has
been 10.29 percent); however. uneqloynent has continued to grow (279.000
sore unenploynent since the All! was signed and as of the beginning of April)
and prices continue out of control (a 5.2 percent increase in the first 6
months. even though the gowernnent's prognostication was 12 percent for the
entire year).

Douhtleee this will force an [upward] revision of wages in Sept-ber-October.
when the rise in prices for the firet 6 nonthe is know. As a guarantee
clause inpoeed by the unions. the an established the following proviso: if
prices rise nore than 6.09 percent in the first 6 aonthe (they are expected
to increase between 6.5 and 7 percent) "an [upward] revision of wages will
be effected equivalent to the excess above the figure cited. with coaputetion
of double this excess to allow for the behavior of the consumer price

index [CPI] for the entier lZ-aonth period."

Rage Revision

Thie increase will be effective retroactive to 1 January 1982. pursuant to

the ANB, indexed to the wages used as the reference point for this year‘s
increaeee. This [upward] revision could preeege a "long hot su-er," with
none eaployera who never had faith in the All being beset by a couple: of
problems, with unions which have suffered a loss of wages and their own
inability to asks a serious offset of Jobs in exchange for the wage concession.

10
mementos“
momaumonu

"The All! is not the problaa. as it was and is necessary. It is instead the
fact that the All! was not acconpanied by other reeediea. given the delay in
international reactivation, the drop in consuption and sconoaic activity
and the absence of private invest-ant," CAIIBIO 16 was told by a distinguished
P803 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party] econuist. As a letter of fact, the
socialist executive canittee has just described the econoeic situation as
"of great concern.” and critici- is muting within the P80! of those who
defended the wage reduction as the answer to all problens. ”Us have seen
that the bright idea of sons us: [General Union of Workers] leaders and a
PSOE econonist. who said that two percentage points less in wages are equal
to 350,000 jobs, is somewhat unrealistic. except in a planned econoey,"
added the socialist expert. for who. "the A!!! has not done the job."

The employers signed the A!!! under govermental pressure and a few eonths
after the fateful 23 February; however, they never agreed with its philosophy.
Now, Jose Antonio Segurado. the "hawk" of the enployers' organisation. the
CEO! (Spanish Confederation of Business Organizations], is stating it very‘
clearly: ”He enployers will not sign another All. We favor agreements
between social parties without govern-ant intervention." for experts of the
business sector, the principal problen of the Spanish econony on this first
birthday of the AN! is the public deficit. "The public deficit is

destroying the m. It is preventing naterialization of the hoped-for

effect of the wage concession," an expert fro- the private bsnk‘lng sector
told this Isgssine.

The worst. the Deficit

In his opinion. the deficit in the public sector is pushing up prices. is
forcing the Bank of Spain to adopt a policy of contaiment of available
credit ("the fact that interest rates have not cone down in the last few
years is due principally to the deficit”) and reinforcing the upward thrust
of the peseta's rate of exchange.

"This is serious because it encourages the purchase of foreign products
instead of national products. which scans that we are exporting Jobs; and
that the deficit is destroying employment. Therefore, the P808 has for the
first tine attacked the public deficit because it knows that it is working
against anploynent.” he added.

In fact, Joaquin Alnunia, s nanber of the P803 executive co-ittee. has said
that the increase in the public deficit is now 1 billion pesete1 and that
there is a lack of control and rigor on the part of the government. ”The
increase in this deficit will have negative repercussions on all the country's
econonic sectors," Almnis added.

For the esployers and the political right, the deficit has becoee the
principal offensive weapon against the goverusent's econonic tesn.

Jose Antonio Segurado, vice president of the cm. has accused the govern-ant
of ”not having the political will to control public spendiu.” There are
also indicatins that the subject of the deficit is an offensiwe weapon inside
the UCD [Deaocratic Center. Union] itself.

mammouw
roomimmv

"Anyone who says that the govern-ear does not have the political will to
reduce public spending. if he knows what he is “1108. is lying and. if
he does not know what he is saying. he is irresponsible. I call upon
whoeever it nay concern to go over the [budget] actions taken line its:
by line item," Finance Minister Garcia Anoveros stated inclusively as he
presented the breakdown of the 1981 [as published] Iudget, which had a
hotton-line deficit of 618 billion pesetes. a figure which appears to have
been reached already.

Garcia Anovoros. with a stern look on his face after a television interview.
added that the government was all alone in the public deficit sector.
"There are any people conplaining; however. requests for spending cone
fro. all sides. Pros the right, for ample. the AP [Powlar Alliance]

has presented an illegal fanily allowance proposal to Congress which would
entail the expenditure of 680 billion peaotas. And fron the left, even
though the figure is sleller. there is also a rquest for nore spending."

If , for nany experts. the public deficit is the nunhor one ocononic problon.
for nost Spaniards unaploynent is the Iain worry. And there is a certain
aliquot of pesaiaisn because. in spite of the wage concession. the nunber of
unemployed continues to rise. The nest recent figures from the National
Statistics Institute (nus) speak of 2,062,600 unenployed at the and of
March, 76,000 acre than at the beginning of the year. And 279,000 eore
unonployed than when the All was signed.

”We have to be careful with figures. It is true that unanploynont continues
to rise; however. what is nore inportant is that the enploymt situation

is inproving. For the first ties in the first 6 nonths of 1982. anployraent
has increased," CANDID 16 was told by a high official in the Ministry of
Econoay. in fact. during the first 3 amths of the year, the work population
increased 0.29 percent.

aaploynent laproving

"This gives no cause for hope, as it confiras the trend of the last three
quarters. naaoly that the rate of job losses is dropping. Although this

has still not halted the increase in unaploynent, there is reason to hope

that the increase in eqloynent will absorb the growth in the work population,”
the edninietration expert added.

At the beginning of 1981, the rate of the drop in aaployasnt was b percent;
at the and of the year it had only declined 2 percent; and in this first
quarter it has increased 0.29 percent. for the first tile. The iapression
is that the increase in un-ploynont is no longer being produced by the loss
of Jobs (except in acne specific rosligrnonts) but instead by an increase in
the work population, by those 150,000 young people entering the job aarkat
every year. But that increase in the work population cannot be stopped by
the m. which has to be given credit for the rise in aploynent, according
to govern-ant sources.

12
summon“
”WMONLY

Even ao. enplcyncnt will not be reactivated until the econony recovera. And
that dependa a great deal on the international econony. which ie not ilproving
ae expected. The forecaeta nade at the beginniu of the yeer by the cm
[Organization for Bcononic Cooperation and Dmlopnent] for ita 26 countriea.
a growth rate of 1.25 percent thie yeer. will not be net; and now there in

an eatineted growth rate of between 0.3 and 1 percent.

Spain elao hee revieed its 3 percent downward. to 2.5 percent. which. for
buoineea eector experte conaulted by thie nagaeine. "ia a dreu.”

The very depreeeed international econaey affecte the level of econonic
activity. but very fundamentally Spanieh pricee. "9e are paying the
coneequencee of Anerican policy which for a year and a half ha been
devaluatim the peeeta. Thua the factor of inported producte. which are now
nore coetly. ie neking the CPI riee lore then expected." thie negatine wee
told by aourcee et the Hinietry of Econony.

For other experts. pricee have riaen nore then expected became of the

food factor (increaaea in agricultural pricee) and becenee of the devaluetion
of the peeeta. although it could be e factor in greater econoeic activity.‘
given the way in which the narhet .operatea in Spain. All the experte are
confident that if the dollar doee not continue to riae. wagea noderation

can begin to cone into play and pricea, at year‘e end. will not have increeeed
nore than 13 percent.

There are indicatora of econonic activity to euit ell taatee. One of the
experta points out that inveetnent and econonic activity are atagnated.

while othere eay that they ere beginning to be reectivated. It all depende
upon what aide theee factora ere viewed fron. "The econoey in in the proceae
of noderate expanaion. Bxporta md public inveatnent ere picking up. while
privete inveatnent ia not now negative at in previoue yeare." ainietry of
Iconony eourcee naintein.

The noet recent aonewhet revealing percentage figure. for January (oh.
etatiaticei). epeahe of a 3.3 percent drop in the induatrial production
inder. Not eo. eay experts of the bueineu aector. "Be careful. The nonth
of Jewelry had one leee work day; therefore. in reality there waa a 2 percent
increaae." an adniniatration expert pointa out. h‘het ia nore. the pricee

of durable gooda are increaeing et a rapid pace. which ia interpreted ae
indicative of a certain mat of reactivation of private coneunption.

waiting for the Bcononic Takeoff

The year 1982 wee going to be the year of "the worat ia over." the beginning
of reectivation. However. the leteat figuree on unuploynut and pricee have
darkened the picture. at leaat at the public opinion level. "Everything aeene
nore negotive becauae the government hae given the country very inflated
expectatione which are now turning ageinet it. in a 'boonerang' effect.” The
econoey ie going along note or leae ae predicted at the beginning of the

year. He knew that it wee going to be a better you than 1981. and it ie;
however, we hed no reeeone to expect a rapid reactivation and we have not

had one.” an expert cloee to the banking eector points out.

13
momentum“
momaumouu

The oociolioto think thot thin“ on not going bottot bocouoo tho gown-mt
to not toting tho boll by tho homo and dooo not hovo on ovoroll ocooooic
policy. Jooquin Almoio hoo ooid. "Tho only woy to oworcooo tho oconooic
ctioio to o policy of coordination."

Confront“ by both pooitiono. tho :ovoruont continooo to dioploy oodototo
optioioo. "‘rho ocooooy io rooctiwotins oo had boon prodictod. hployoont

io inctoooinu ocono-ic octivity hoo picked up What: ond thou no
inprovo-onto in oxpotto and tho totoun doiicit. ‘rho only thinao not going
woll. ond wo fool thot thou will bo corroctod during tho you. no inflotioo
and tho public doficit. which not bo cootrollod." mm 16 woo told by o
huh officiol of tho Hiniotry of Scope-y.

C(I’YIIGIT: l982. lnforoocion y Miotoo, 8.A.

8163
080: 3110/1610

momma“
Pom "Ill mime 838$ DI'I'IRIOIAIIG turns "11'! AFRICA
pamumminmznmupu

Unterview with Here hen-er. tor-er prine nininter end Africen nffnirn
npecieliet. by Mireille Duteil; date end plece not given: ”Mt Hen Arinen
Between Africa nd Irma

O'exa At a tin who Prencoie )litterrend in nekins hie tiret otticiel tour
in bleck Africe. Pierre linen-er, tor-er governor of French Vent Africe end
epecieliet in Africen effnirn et the m. coneidern that French policy in
viewed with increeein; dinepprovel in Africe.

Eierre )Ienennﬂ At firnt, Prencoie Hitterrend'n election wee well received
in nont Africen countriee. Within 1 yenr, however, I nee thet thin tevornble
reaction hen declined everywhere. In certnin countriee it hen even been
repleced by en mfavoreble attitude.

[It POW how do you explein thet?

Enema Thin chenoe hen neverel ceueen. Tho firnt hen to do with the prenent
goveruent'e policy end itn ideology. Socielietn have n third-worldint policy
that in ainnd et all underdeveloped countrien, whatever they ney be. The
recent reorgenieetion of the liinietry for Cooperation illuetretee thin. Sud--
denly. Africenn feer thet the privileged reletionn they ere need to heving _
night naein be chellenaed. Thet in one of the reeeonn for the dodat thet hen
erinen in Africe.

The necond reenon in nore politicel. Socielintn end co-Ininte in power are
eonewhet nuepicione of regimen that for the nont pert heve been born at
nilitery coupe d'etet. Such mermntn do not neen good to then. There in
no naturel nyqathy between then. tether, I nhould here neid there in a
neturel entipethy beanen than. All thet in dincuened end repented in Africa.
end the fevoreble ettitudn et the mtnet hen ﬁnch dinininhed. the core no be~

ceuee there here been oertein notion.
Eucntioﬂ What do you sent

[Index] There were effortn et denmilieetion. there in no doubt thet. den-
pite govern-not denieln. the Petene‘ etteir in mm was one of then. The

15
momenuseolm
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oubengui govern-eat bouts of heving eeieed docuente containing explicit
proof of it. At Libreville there ie eleo e leee eerioue letter but neverthe-
leee of the “he ltind. I could cite lore of then.

[meeting Should there not be a difference between P8P ectione end thoee of
the goveruent‘?

(Innueﬂ Thie dietinction ie eeey for e European to underetend. but it ie
meccepteble for en Africen, in vhoee eyee the P8! in ebove ell the petty of
the preeident of the Republic. Africene wonder hour the preeident could ellov
hie perty to conduct e policy thet in different froe hie own. For then: it
in either duplicity or lack of euthority. In either ceee. it ie not good.

ﬂeeting Co one deel, under the pretext of reelien, vith govermente thet
tr-ple on huen righte?

Enueﬂ Hy reply in thet the goveruent ie doing it in Ched by furniehing
em end mitione that ellov the mediene to neeacre each other.

Eueetioﬂ Let us diecuee Chad. You cannot deny thet the deperture of the
Libyene ie e poeitive develop-ent.

ﬂuency Quite on. But thet ie only e firet etep.. be objective ie peace.
I eee thet it hee not been etteined; on the contrery. I think the policy to
follow ie not to intervene militarily, either directly or indirectly. cur:5
rently, direct eilitary intervention bee ended. 1 bed elreedy criticieed it
under Giecerd. but, through the furniehing of em. indirect Iilitery inter-
vention continue. In my opinion the trench ought to confine the-elven to
huneniterien ectione, acting through de fecto euthoritiee wherever they ewe:b
ciee their power. Hith [Ce-30800. in the eouth; with Gounomi, et Port

Leny; with llieeein Bebr‘, et Ab‘ch‘. for eagle. Prence doee not have to
chooee eidee with the different Chadian groupe now teering the-elvee epert
to noise power.

@eetioﬂ Your eolution enounte to legalizing on ethnic Ched...
mueﬂ He tried in vein in the colonial period to elininete it.

meetiqﬂ but it wee the Geulliete who eterted thinge in Ched by eupporting
Toﬁeleye...

maven You ere ml: end it ie beceuee of thet defect thet I etopped eupport-
ing thet policy. For the peet 10 yearn l heve conetently propoeed another one.

Queuing todey it ie eeid that note denocretic goveruent-to-govern-ent
reletione euet replece the pereonel reletione between chiefe of etete. Ie it
not tine to cleen up Prencoe-Africen reletione? You cannot deny that in the
paet Bolteue'e eviction end Dacko'e errivel in e french plene deeply checked

Africen people. And yet Poccert left only good maria...

MWUSEONLY
Jung Govaruont—to-govarnnont ralations aro no nro dsnocratic than
personal onos. I do not boliavo that this ia namsorily s atop forward.
Criticism tho porsonsliaotion of political tiss botvoon Franco and Africa
betrays imrnco of African psychology. Mr. can not never ha a prisoner
of those tios; do coullo nd...avan Poqidou voro not; but '63 Uol‘ry

Giscard d'lstsinﬂ and Rangoia littorrand aro, in a way, priaonoro.

mania Hittarrnd?

ﬂ'nsvoﬂ I do not vantto- toll you how, but I know. And I havo proof of it.

ﬁnstiqﬁ In your opinion mt ara tho sroatost corront donors to Franco's
African policy?

M ‘l'ha aroatsst currsnt donors are tho disintorast of tho Socialist
government and tho indifforonoo of a largo port of tho tronch p‘blic opinion.

WYRIGT: L8 PODI'I' 1932

9772
(:50: 3100/730

17

NIOI'I‘ICIALWEONLY
NI OFFICIAL US! OIL!

POLITICAL MOE

W 0! W MIMI-12A?!“ m
Paris mm in ﬁnch Bus 82 pp 276-280

[Krticle result of a discussion anon; persons of various professions and
political views who have adopted the pseudonym 'Xenocratej

The word "radicelination" is a quite recent neologise. for it appeared lest
miner in the wake of the left‘s installation in power. It was particular-
ly linkcd to the June legislative elections. which gave the P8, as we know,
the "ilpoesihle chamber,“ since with 269 seats the Socialists alone have an
absolute njority in the Palias Bourbon. thus the concept of "redioelina-
tion" does not in itself have a concrete or precise content. It proceeds
at once fron a reflex of fear by the different omservative and liberal
families. and fro. a politiciene' tactic by m and our, leaders. It belongs
to synbolio discourse: the idea that the whole state appantns will break
with pluralien and drift towards ever sore planified and bureaucratic prec-
tices. with the Socialist-0min coalitim henceforth doninating our .-
jor institutions-othe presidency, the National Assembly, the trade union
group. In a word. "radicaliution" would nean inposition of state control
and hureamratination m the country, a "soft revolution" in the uses of an
ideology celled socialist. '

After a year in power, it is now of interest to as whether this ”radical-
ination" is more than a scare word or slogan. and whether it has found a
foot-hold in our political and adninistrative reality.

It is evident that such a phenonenon can be seen in a. thousand ways. de-
pend on whether one is a eenher of the am [French National hployers'
Counc or a Per militant. Vs oan nevertheless strive to pinpoint the
objective indicee which contradict or confire the process of "radioelin-
tion." and ask this question: do the changes effected since 10 he: tend
toward ranpant station?

The First Decisions

Several decisions taken and laws voted purulent to the 110 Proposals for
France—also known as the hitterren‘l prop-uncontain nothing in the nature

18
I“ OFFICIAL US! MY
or station. 0n the contrary. we are seeing a determination to disengage
the state: by departmental decentralisation; by regionalirstion in a typi-
cally liberal form; by a special status for Corsica; by abrogation of such
exceptional procedures as resort to the State Security Court, pernnent
arsed forces tribunals, or special anti-demonstrator laws; by deregulation
of private associative activities, etc. Concerning the broadening of the
nationalised sector, we can legitimately ask what differentiates the mie-
sicn of general administrators chosen by the governmant fros that formerly
assigned to chairmen co-opted by a "capitalist" board of directors. Indeed,
if it is considered in terms of the injunctims addressed to the 51 admin-
istrators appointed by their supervising ministries—Economy and Finance or
Industry—that sissicn is based on all the key words of triumphant liberal-
ism: competitiveness, ear-singtcapacity, profit, strategy, efficiency.

The spirit of the refcras completed or in progress is not therefore synony-
mous with "radicalirstion," and it is soreover runrkable that those in pow-
er stress their desire to liberate society so as to return to each citizen
all his responsibilities. The PC? leaders are not alone in insisting heavi-
ly on that goal of liberalisation.

Fundamentally, the first acts of the government in power have seldom flowed
from the logic of a coherent system. They have resulted either from cot-nit-
ments side by Francois Mitterrsnd,by chance, in the tribulations of his long
march to the highest office-«s is particularly the case with the national-
instion program-or from the interests and aspirations of a certain elector-
al constituency, as in the case of the proclaimed determination to abolish
the free schools; or from a rather Keynesian analysis of the economic cri-
sis, which runs counter to that mde in most Western countries, but which

in itself is in no way "radicalizing."

why then fear that the Socialist governsent is tightening the net of bureau-
cratic statics?

A Return to Dogsatiss?

In truth, "radicalintion"—if it should occur in a country as developed as
ours-will not emerge from a series of texts or reforms, but from a reintro-
duction of dogma, of ideology, into the practices of power. From a know-
ledge born of experience, we would pass insidiously and slowly to one based
on doctrinaire certitudes-Jsocialist" in this instance. More funds-antel-
ly, the gover'wnant, to insure its legitimcy, would start from the follow-
ing postulate: the French opted in May 1981 for a Socialist state, very
specifically for Socialist bureaucracy, as the caste best able to guaran-
tee the survival of technological society.

Such a return to domtisn, which is never without regression or obscurant-
iss, would inevitably proceed through a rehabilitation of the "party" as
the instrument of instigation, initiative, and governmental action. The
"party" would not only outrol but accompany the executive in msgeaent

of state affairs.

1?
m OHICIAI. USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Rereading Augustin Cochin

To understand the progression of that influence, it is not without interest
to reread Augustin Cochin. Recently revealed to the public through a new
edition of his works and throng) the studies devoted to him by Francois
ﬁrst, Cochin is the great historian of revolutimary dynamics. It is in
the name of the nation, he explains, that philosophical societies speak.
In principle, then, democracy would be unlimited. In the shadows, however,
inner circles prepare decisions: a mall minority, with mstery of the me-
chanisms by which is expressed the "national will," anintes a process
which intervenes to authenticate the demcmtic ideal to which it appeals.

This mechanism is not static; in the course of successive siftings, it pro-
pels to the top a certain type of man; from Mirabeau to Robespierre, from
the Constituent Assembly to the Convention, it tends necessarily, and in-
dependently of the leaders, towards an increasing "radicalisaticn." "In
deliberating political clubs as in philosophical societies, writes Augustin
Cochin,"not all members are equally assiduous, active, zealous, or fitted
for work. A spontaneous sorting operates in favor of certain temperaments
better gifted for the operation in question. Out of a hundred members,
there are hardly five effective ones, and they are the asters of the group;
they are the ones who select new members, appoint the secretariat, make the
motions, same the votes ... Thus within society at large informed ano-
ther society, smaller but more active and unified, which will no trouble
directing the larger without its knowledge. It is composed of the most ar-
dent, least scrupulous, and most adept at the cuisine of votes. hch time
the larger group meets, those few foregather in the morning, see their
friends, concert their plan, give the word, excite the lukewarm, and bear
down on the timid. Since their entente is of lung standing, they hold all
the trumps. They have cowed the secretariat, dmed aside the trouble.-
kers, set the date and agenda....The "general will" is no freer than a lo-
comotive on its rails."

Although Cochin's thesis applies primily to the PCP, which is rather close
to what the Jacobin Club and the philosophical societies were like, it ap-
plies as well to the P5, in which the essentially Jacobin tendency has now

won the day.
The Party Regime

In other words, and according to Cochin's reasoning, "radicalination"-
statics—will become effective if the crossed ideologies of the PS and PCP
succeed in irrigating the minds of the establishment. From a regime of
consensus legitimized by the idea that the president, once elected, is the
representative of all Frenchmen in their diversity and plurality of thought,
we would then pass to a dominant party regime founded on the principle that
the president is first the representative of the Socialists: a regime in
which the philosopher's stone is given priority, if need be in contempt of
the foml rules on which the republic is founded. It was Claude Bstier,
in L'UNITE of 22 January, who questioned the "ostensibly legal arguments"

20
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
m the Constitutional Council against the nationalization bill; it was
Lionel Jospin who declared in October that "never have great waves of re-
I‘orm allowed themselves to be stopped by any supreme court"; it was Andre
Laignel who said in a parliamentary debate: "Iou are legally wrong, for
you are a political minority"; and it was Louis Herman, speaker of the Na-
tional Assembly, who predicted: "Benceforth, it depends on us that there
be an alternation between the only forces of the future...."

Francois Hitterrand's septennate has in fact inaugurated a ritual without
precedent under the Fifth Republic: the weekly rendez-vous every Tuesday
morning at an Elysee breakfast of the head of state, his prime minister,
the first secretary of the PS, and a few barons of the Socialist apparatus.
If this "emit." free of all formality, is not in itself a decision-making
group, neither is it a mere gathering for mundane conversation. Whatever
the intentions of Francois Mitten-rand, such a meeting, when institutional-
ized, objectively gives the PS leadership the means to bring its weight to
bear on the functioning of the public powers: the means to influence-if
not to determine and control-oustional policy.

It would be a mistake to underestimate the impact of this very select com-
mittee, with the "party" readily asstming the title of ”representative of
the people of the left." The head of state, it will be said, intends above
all to keep the upper hand over the troops of the P8. or course. Francois
Hitterrandwill not, however, prevent a debate from arising between him,
Pierre Hauroy, Lionel Joepin, and a few others. Who, in the end, dominates
whom? The amwer is difficult, since Prancoisﬁitterrand, no latter what
one says, has a very artificial public image: in him the personage masks
the person. In the course of months and years, in proportion to the "char-
isma" of each, it is likely that a balance of power will emerge between
the Elysee, Matignon, and P8 headquarters-none in which socialist and par-
tisan ideology will not count for nothing.

It is conceivable that the deep finalities of the state apparatus would
then in time experience a shakeup. And the focus used above with refer-
ence to regionaliaation, nationalisations, and various reforms would be

very suspect.

Ideology and Archaism

Certainly, the process by which the ideology of one party, in a country
such as ours, could mesh with the govermnent's policy to the point of over-
whelming democratic pluralism would clearly be very subtle. There are,
nevertheless, certain warning signals which testify to a degree of exasper-
ation on the part of Socialist leaders in the face of what they call the
"soft" line followed until now. For mmple, Christian Goux. chairman of
the Finance Committee of the National Assembly, warns that ”we must final-
ly apply our policy, and with men who believe in it." He is a statist, an
advocate of economic planning, a true believer in strict control of prices
and incomes. Other signs are the theme of "democratization of nationalized

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprises," that of "representation of political parties in enterprises,"
Hm dulmte provoked within the majority by the Anroux report. In a word,

'1 number of PS leaders aspire to "ideologize" the social fabric, to reinvent
n "citizenship" the French are held to have lost. A specious, groping un-
cuver grounded in reactiOn; one which presents itself as ideologically re-
volutionary, but is essentially reactionary in the face of modernity: in
time, it would institutionalize a permanent balance of forces in all the
mechanism of social life; to the informational, technological, and scien-
tific complexity of the contemporary world, it would oppose a dogmatic, set,
and simplistic language. If the next few months were to confirm this P8
ambition to impose its tablets of law on the representatives of the state,
the'famous ”archaism" formerly denounced by Michel Rocard could find room
to spread.

In nationalised enterprises the logic of realism and pragmatism would be
rapidly led astray, with social objectives regularly being put ahead of eco-
nomic imperatives and requirements of profitability. Indeed profitnthough
not becoming the ultimte and, and though achieved with a concern for social
progress—still remains the best instrument for measuring the quality of an
enterprise. But it is a datum scorned by socialist ideology. It belongs
on the list of banished words, with "money," "boss," "large," and "bourgeois."
Such a vice of the play of economic forces would not fail to influence the
conduct of leaders, and we could see a slippage towards expediency, towards
increasingly frequent recourse to public funds. That would be followed
shortly by the vicious circle of inordinate budget deficits; protectionism-
for there are those in the PS who went to reduce our foreign trade to 20
percent of our GNP; a marked increase in the burden of taxes and special
levies; and a weakening of our international competitive position.

It can already be noted-to the extent that reduction of social hazards,
and consequently of social performnce, serves as the philosophical founda-
tion for reduction of inequalities-that the authorities direct their main
attack, by means of tax and income policy, against "productive inequalities,"
that is, inequalities between individuals. On the other hand, they permit
continuation, and even expansion, of "collective inequalities" which are
the vehicles of economic Halthusianism, and which are embodied in statutes,
vested rights, and guaranteed minim clauses. The decision promulgated
by the Elysee on the "39-hour" question is a perfect illustration of such
conservative and statutory practices. The brightest jewel of bureaucracy
is "statutory" society. A "social" or socialist economy is the most ela~
borate form of a "statutory" regime favoring a permanent mass of people of-

ten mediocre and irresponsible.

It is difficult to conceive, however, that "radicalization" could make real-
ly appreciable gains unless economic difficulties take a sudden turn for
the worse. It is when faced with adversity that a partisan government ra-
dicalines itself, by imputing its vexations to this or that socio-profes~
sional group, and by cleverly appropriating all form of discontent: in a
word, by attributing to itself the noble role which would consist of de-
nouncing corporate egoisms-othe expression is in the air--or a reactionary
"plot," "sabotage," all things which would serve as pretexts for extremist
measures.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Scenarios
In terms of political strategy several scenarios are conceivable:

The PS could progressively yield to the PC? without a fight. That would
mean a soft "radicalization" which would proceed by a series of apparently
minor concessions, whose cumulative effect would gradually lead to a trans-
fer of power favoring the "pure and hard" ideologues of the Socialist-
Comunist coalition;

Or the PCP, while avoiding harsh defiance, could strive to weaken the gov-
ernment by opposing the "left wing" of the PS to its "right wing." That
tact ic, dubbed "Hungarian salami," would adopt the goal of denouncing all
those who "compromise with reaction," and of shifting the center of gravity
of the PS leftward;

0r thirdly--if this can be imginedua direct confrontation between the PCP
and PS could lead to the latter's capitulation, with the armistice between
the two parties resulting in "Finlandization" of France.

It will be noted that the general resolution presented to the Z‘tth PCF
congress fits into the concept of a "Finlandised" Europe. Dismemberment of
NATO and the EEC, gradual neutralizaticn of ﬂeet Germany, and military dis-
engagement by the United States would reduce Europe to a mere cluster of
more or less autonomous principalities on the mches of the Soviet empire,
and whose bonds of vassalage would be reflected by economic and technologi-
cal tribute. In such a situation, the Soviet interest, in a country such
as France, would not lie in actually seizing power, but in insuring the
docility—msked by democratic forms-of those vested with national sover-

eignty.

Beyond these most pessimistic hypotheses, another must be considered: the
government could set up a facade of "radicalintion" behind which it could
carry out a discreet socio-econoaic reorientation. Did not radicalism,
early in this century, break with socialism by putting forth new secular
and republican slogans, thereby keeping the appearance of a party of the
left? Secularism, the battle over schools, and antimilitarism in the Drey-
fus affair allowed Haldeck-Rochet and Combes to break away from the con-
scrvatives while following a very prudent social policy. Tod” the Social-
ists, by speaking in a very leftish language on appropriate themes, could
maintain a political excitation and premre as a means of letting off the
steam of the militants. The resurgence of the battle over schools is a
good enample of this method of compensation. In foreign policy, the diplo-
mcy followed towards Latin America fits the same scheme. It is always
possible to put a Phrygian cap on a relatively prudent policy: that is
simply a matter of allowing the development, here and there, of permanent
personality conflicts which the government can arbitrate with the desired
degree of harshness. A few dissidents-heads of enterprises, journalists,
and the like—can occasion admirably orchestrated figurative "encecutions."

23
roe orncm. use cum
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

That theatrical "radicalisation" of the left, which consists in concealing
a return to opportunisa beneath the cloak of a highly accentuated class
vocabulary, reverts to the tradition of the right. vhich wraps its conserva-
tive policy in fine unaninist speeches. In that category, the Oscar winner
is Mexico, which make a plutocratic society behind an ostensibly revolu-

This sketch of a "radicalization" of socialism in the French manner in no

way pretends to prophecy. It is but one among some ten other possible
paths of evolution for the present septennate.

It is likewise by deliberate design that no analysis has been made here ei-
ther of the evident risks of a "radicalisation" of rightist political forces
in response to that of the left, or of the powerful obstacles the government

before the public any possible threats to civil liberties. On the trade
union front. the lead rs of Force Ouvriere, the m0, 060 ﬁeneral Hanagers'
Confederatiog. PB! ational Education Federatiog7, and cm, moreover,
proved at the tins of the Polish crisis what their attitude would be if our
fundasental rights were one day threatened. As for the media. print or au-
diovisual. they maintain a salutary critical distance. although they are
the systeaatic target of resent-mt by Commists and five or six P8 lead-

ers including Poperen, Estier, and Rousselet. Ruling out the worst case.
it appears that "radicalisation" would lead to growing isolation of the
holders of power from the organisations which brouglt then to office.

This much remains, which should be remembered: in a relativistic. unstable.
zinc cybernetic world, the ideological certainties which guide Cousinists
and a number of Socialists are not without their dangers.

COPYRIGHT: 1982: S. A. Cementaire

6116
080: 3100/761

2h
roe orncm. use our
POSITION 01' CONSERVATIVB CLUBS. UM. m mum
Paris mom in French May 82 pp 587-597

[Article dated 26 Harch 1982 by Colette stal. Center for the Study of
Conteepotary French Politics (mt): ”Opposition Group Situations"]

[Text] The results of the recent cantonal elections (16 and 21 ”arch 1982)
show changes in public opinion. The right. very nuch a ninority in Hay and
June 1981. finds itself a slight najority 10 nonthe later.1 The conservative
parties. which had announced their intention of setting out to regain power
starting with the local help, saw their wish fulfilled. They the-elves
were doubtless surprised by that. In fact. the paradox is that this
electoral success is based on no reel strategy and on institutional and
progra-atic deficiency.” ‘l'en mnths after the election of Francoi-
Hitterrand to the presidency of the republic. the opposition has nanaged to
channel discontent. But it has not yet overcone its structural weaknesses.
weaknesses that its changeover fron nsjority to opposition had exposed.

The Flowering of Clubs and Colloquia

During the weeks following the legislative elections there was disarray,
which was expressed in the proliferation of ”clubs" or study groups.
Undoubtedly the conservative parties, still neeeerired by the left, were
rushing to adopt proven recipes as their own. They too are discovering
their powerlessness in the face of a govern-ant that no longer belongs to
then, in the face of an overwhelm parlianentary .jority and in the face
of their own are or less highlighted nonexistence. In Septenber 1981. two
Rl’ll [Rally for the Republic] leaders started The 89 Club, end Jean-Louis
Berthet. for-er nenber of Jean-Pierre Soisson'a cabinet [of advisers]. brought
together several dozen people close to the 0D! [Union for trench Denocrscyl
in the Pact for Government and Liberal Action (PAGE). In early Decenber
1981. Charles Pas’qua, with about 10 0D? and m cofounders rallying around
hie. introduced Solidarity and Liberty to the press. In January 1982,

sons individuals close to the national Center of Independents joined together
in Independent and Liberal Presence, a Future and Liberty Association held
its first press conference and the Republican Action Co-ittees (CAR) nade
itself known through a poster consign. Finally, during the sale period.
well-known people were reviving already existing structures. “that was the
case with Olivier Stirn. nseber of the Radical Party. who revived his
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ibvensnt of Social Liberals, and with the CD8 [Center of Social Decorate],
which put new life into its France-Foru- CIub, naaed after the sagasine
founded in‘ 1957. -

with the exception of the lbvenent of Social Liberals, which says it is
seeking "Trench-style social denocracy," all these organisations clais to

be antisocialist. however, the Iain thing is not so such their doctrine

as their strategy. ‘For all of then, whether they are close to the m or
the up! or are outside those two political for-nations, it is a question
first of providing the-selves the neans of regaining their ”educative power"
tron the left prior to any recovery of political power. hence. the success
of these study groups in beconing involved in debate on ideas and providing
an opposition with plans and with a sore stirring "ideology" for French-en
than sore eanageaent questions. however, these clubs are also a way of
insuring a reduced presence. They address the-selves easily to people who
are not politically active, who at any rate were not so before 10 my, and
who, as the CAR's posters say, "feel the need nowadays to get involved and to
act without joining a party." The political fornations are present in the
fora of their representatives, if only to nonitor the operations of the clubs.
But even if those fornstione are a little uneasy, they are thankful for
initiatives that seen to be a good for-ula for the right, since t aversion
of conservative voters for involve-sot in the parties is so great.

The targets are relatively obvious: people who are naturally hostile to
social isa, first and fore-oer independent workers and professional people,3
but also those categories over which the left and the right have been
fighting for about 10 years, especially professionals who, according to the
opposition, co-itted the sin of voting Socialist in my and June 1981 but
will have quickly gotten over their illusions. It is significant that any
prise covers in these clubs are til-selves high-level public or private
sector professionals.

Getting ”educative power" back iwlies the organization of colloquia and
seninars. These have increased in amber, in particular with the organising
of two big events: ”For An Alternative to Socialism" (Paris. 5-6 Decenber
1981) and the 'Treedoa Meetings” put together in LyOn on 29 January 1982.
By so doing, the parties of the opposition see-ed to draw closer to the
groups of the "new right": the latter groups the-selves, reviving era-sci
in passing, extol the ”power of ideas" and asintain that renewal cones
through revolution in nental outlooks. Alain Groitterey. Lionel Stoleru
and Alice Saunie-Seitr-seobere of the Republican Party-participated in
the ”For An Alternative to Socialisa" colloquis in which 6336! [Research
and Study Group for European Civilisation] was a price lover; Alain Juppe,
Main Criotteray and Alain lhyoud (DD!) led the Clock club's political
seninar (12 Deceder 1981)...

The Parties of the um Searching for Their Identity
These suppleuentary or parallel activities not not, however, hide the fact

of the crisis of the parties theuelvesv-e crisis of which those activities
are the expression, at least in part, and a crisis that undoubtedly effects

26
memusrmv
the 007 acre severely than it does the PRP. It is quite understandable that
the our and the parties that cowrise it up were the soot affected by the
hay-June 1981 events. Their status as goveth parties. or "the president's
parties.” had deprived than of any doctrinal or strategic autonony, since
they were only there to expand on the decisions of the president of the
republic. Hith Valery Giscard d'lstaing‘a defeat. the not lost its natural
leader and found itself orphaned. Lastly. the very structures—weak and

not very de-ocraticuof each of the parties scarcely predispose the. to
converting theeselves into instrueents for nobilisation of the masses or into
tools for freeing conservative opinion. So such so that the on! parties
appear to be once again searching for their identity.

Upheaval of Structures and Lack of Activists

Sieilar proble-s beset the Republican Party (PR). the Center of Social
De-ncrats and the Radical Party-«all rushing to becoee the spearhead of the
”liberal” opposition. The first problens concern structure and nodes of
action. Each party has been well aware of its ineffectiveness or lack of
preparation for confronting a new situation. That is why inevitable
reflection has rec-erged regarding party statues, which both the ODS and the
P8 are conteqlsting changing in the near future. To increase activisnnto
have aore participation in decision by party eastern. who insistently'called

political fornations—to institute at all levels the principle of elections:
such things are now the watchword. But. for the meant, all of this has
becone a dead letter, as has the quest for new nodes of action. It is still
just as difficult to find the staffs or the federations of the Republican
Party and the cos, and still just as difficult to follow the activity of
their activists in the field. Their organizational activity, which is quite
often organized around national elected representatives. is in abeyance for
lack of nilitants. Perhaps for want of financial manna. no big poster
camign (except for the cantonal elections, of course) has been undertaken.
Finally. political activity has reuined centered on the Parlianent or the
ruling bodies of the parties. Hith the exception of the Radical Party. which
has held a congress. no party has called its activists together to include
thee in decisions to be taken or already taken. It is only the party bureaus
or political councils (in which party activists are a minority) that have net.
Once again in October 1981 the Republican Party changed the teen surrounding
Secretary General Jacques hlanc at the sole discretion of the latter and his
close associates. . . ‘

Leader Absence

The most current issue, however. is that of the party leaders. and the
divisions to which that gives rise or which it naintains. There too each
party clearly feels the need to provide itself with a leader who is not
discredited in public opinion, who is capable of coneting with Jacques
Chirac and "electable to the presidency" in 1988 and who is also able to lead
the party renewal. but who? In the CDS, the succession to Jean Lecanuet is
bringing different views of the party and its policies into conflict. Amng
those who are best situated at the assent. Bernard Stasi. decked out in a
POI OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

center-left ieage. sea-s closer to the party activists and seems nore
favorable toward asserting the cos outside the "DP, whereas Pierre
Nehaignerie. are concerned about surrounding hinself with tecl'micisns and

experts. appears to b: closer to the um and hopes to lead the latter toward
"centrist" positions.

however. it is within the Pl! that the issue arises lost sharply, for there
lurks the ghost of Valery Ciscard d'Bataing. The Republican Party suffers
fron two handicaps. The first is not having control over the forest president
of the republic's possible political return; the second is not even being
unaninous about the appropriateness of that return. In fact. in the
Republican Party nobody hnovs what the new Chanelieres County councillor

is going to do and nobody knovs what he should do. On this last point

there are at least three grOups coexisting in the party. First. the group
of the faithful. such as lhnbart Basset. Claude Wolff and Hichel d'Ornano. who
stress that Valery Ciscard d'lstaing is the natural leader of the
Ciscardians. that he nust return and that in that event the party eust. as
hna always been the case, put itself at his service.

without being hostile to Valery Giscard d’zstaing, others. on the other
hand. Isnaga nicely without his being around and think that the Republican
Party aust be transfer-ed and have autonoey and its own prograa vithout
delay; these are the ones called the ”young deputies" (Charles Hillon.
l'rancois Leotard. Francois d'Aubert). Finally. the last group wonder about
the appropriateness of calling once lore on the for-er president of the
republic. They are afraid that the spring 1981 defeat discredited hie as
an individual. however. they ask thenaelvaa in a note profound way if it
is not Valery Giscard d'Bstsing's political theory itself—the liberalis-
put forward as codified by ”De-ocrstic francaise”-vbich was conde-Iad in
$1.1, 273:. and if it is not in the search for other political solutions that
the PR will find its salvation. he that as it nay. this vacuu- does not help
the Republican Party's public inaga.

Political Iornations Without a Progrsa

The third set of problems that the 0D? parties eust confront concerns their
progran. Up to now. the three political fornations have confined theuelves
to parliamtsry debate. asking use of all legal procedures (notions of
censure. anend'nents, mving the previous question, appeals to the
Constitutional Council) to hold up changes sought by the Socialists. In both
Parliaeent and the nedia they have aade known their unrelenting opposition

to socialise and have criticized goveth action. But the art of criticise
see-s to be easier for than to handle than that of asking specific and
concrete proposals. Hhat would the parties of the our. driven froa power.

do if they nets to return to power? That renains, for the sunset at least.
an open question.

During its Noveeber 1981 cangress. the Radical Party reaffirned its desire to
go back to radicalisn's roots and equip itself with a refora doctrine,

one resolutely so. in particular by rethinking the Radical Manifesto
published under the aegis of Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber. For its part.

28
”WWMY
the (:08 asserts, as it always has. that "hope is the center" (the then: of
its new posters). and it wants to rediscover the inspiration of a liberal
and social issues doctrine suitable for the heirs of Christian Demcrats.
nominees are working within the (1)8 to cone out with proposals and texts
with a view to the congress planned in Hay 1982. For the mnent, nothing
[me those reflections has yet been revealed. As for the Republican Party.
it has just nade its "Republican Manifesto” pilot study public. As the
thle indicates, it is a eatter of s declaration of principles are than of
a progran. In addition. care than half of the text is devoted to a criticis-
of socialise. which has nothing new and in which catsstrophisn prevails
over analysis; the other half is a pure and siqle repeat of "Deuocratic
frahcaise.” albeit stripped of the latter'a analysis of French society and
social develop-ants.

ln sumry. the three parties have not really known how to extricate
the-selves fron three pitfalls. The first is to believe that sonething new
not necessarily be nade out of sonething old. or to he so lacking in
inagination that everyone is proposing to go back to their roots without
asking the-selves if those roots correspond to the present state of french
society. The second is to confine oneself to talking in overall and general
terns. The third is failing to avoid the trapsutrsps for those who are in
opposition-'0! facile denagogusry. Should we snile when we read that only
liberalise will sake it possible to fight unenploynent and inflation?

What are we to think when we learn that after 7 years in power during which
it blocked any change the Republican Party wants "reforn in cowanies" giving
nore power to wage-earning ewloyees?

"hat Future For the UDP?

The crisis of the parties goes hand in hand with uncertainties concerning the
future of the 00? itself. Does the use confederation-wrest“ in February
1978 to oppose the m with an eye on the March legislative elections-«till
have a function. and what is that function? nobody see-s to question the
need for the raw on a strictly electoral level for harmniring candidaciea
and. if possible. arriving at single "liberal" opposition candidacies.

But beyond that. how should the 0D? stand in relation to the parties that
conprise it? Vhat is its right place? what purpose should it serve?

tire: of all. it is a latter of deciding whether the DD? should or should not
rennin a eere confederation of parties. In fact, only Jacques Blane.
secretary general of the Repwlican Party. has proposed--hs did this in
Septeeher l981--s nerger of the parties. which would, whatever the
circunstances. be beneficial to his particular party organization. It is
his organization. in fact. that is the strongest of all the organizations

in the WP. inasmch as it has perhaps the greatest nuﬂer of nesbers,
definitely the not were of parlianent and local elected officials, not

to nention the pool of nen and ideas that asks up the Outlooks and Realities
Clubs. Since the nerger solution was rejected, the (ID! will reeain a
confederation. however, the centrifugal tendencies in it are growing; and
each party holds the others more or less directly responsible for the [1981]
defeat and demands its own identity and autonoly within the DD? organization.

29
FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
MWLISEONLV

It is within the Radical Party that discontent is greatest: one faction.
nascdwled behind Brigitte Gros. proposes that the party just plain leave the
UDP. Whether or not that argument prevails in the end. the 00! is finding
itself treated as being sore conservative than centrist, and both the CBS
and the Republican Party are accused of having constantly delayed the
necessary reform. The CBS as well is sorry it was not listened to enough
between 1976 and 1981. and it barely conceals its reservations proqtad by
both the sen and the ideas of the Republican Party. which are suspected of
regarding social issues as totally insignificant. The result is that the our
cannot speak with a single voice and cannot substitute for its parties. each
of which nsintains its own troops and principles.

The latter are undoubtedly less distant fron one another then they think.
But the debate over structures and political viewpoints is intensified by
the leadership issue. The chairaanship of Jean Lacanuet is not i-ediataly
in question. But. as he has said. if the our wants to exist in actuality.
it has to draw fron within itself a credible candidate for the neat
presidential election. The day of reckoning seens a long way off . but it

is also true that it takes tine to lake a uses for oneself in public opinion.
The wllnle field should not be left free for Jacques Chirac either. The
issue of Valery Giscard d‘Bstaing reensrges here. The 0D! is no aore in
control of the decision than is the Republican Party. Dbreovar. the former
is Dre divided than the latter. Neither the Radical Party. which counts
for little. nor the CBS in particular seen disposed to leave it up to the
forner president of the republic. In an interview in PARIS-film. bernard
Stasi ends it known in diplonatic terns that "Valery Giscard d'Bstaing is not
the only band-ark (of the cos) and is not (its) natural leader for ever
and ever." Other claiaa carry weight: Raysond barre's—he renains very
reserved about the UDP-oand perhaps Rene honory's. Finally. certain ssnbers
of the css would like a new nan fros another generation. but belonging to
which party? Even though necessity knows no law. will the different
political fomtions that denand their autonony and their own identity

agree to gather together behind a single nan without sental reservations?

The Cal- and Masterful RPR

By coaparison, the RPR appears such caller and nore nastarful. It is true
that the RPR enjoys advantages superior to the UDP'su-advantages that allow
it to adapt itself better and are quickly to the present state of affairs.
Its first advantage stens fron its structures and its organization. The
RPR's activist potential met not be ovarestiaated. but unlike the
constituent parties of the DDP, the m seas well entrenched all over

the country and scene able to mbilise nan for political action who are

rel inbla; dedicated and accustoned to "classic" activisn. even if under
difficult political conditions. So the m's problea is not to create an
organization but to inprove the perfornence of the one that exists. In
particular it has to aake sone very authoritarian structures nore de-ocratic
«structures that currently convert activists into cheer-leading squads

but keep thee away free decision-waking. An effort has been node to give
party ne-bers a greater share in decisions and iwrove the cohesion of the
whole. In fact, the RPR Party Conference, held in Toulouse on 23 and 210

30
M WI. IS! ONLY
January 1982. was preceded for the first tine by an overall consultation
of party activists by questionnaire with regard to progras; for the first
the as well. this conference was not just a "high sass" in the Gaullist
tradition—in fact, foruee were organised in which the party nesbers were
able to express their views and discuss the final notion. which was put to
.1 vote.

An Undisputed Leader: Jacques Chirac...

The m's decisive advantage. however. is having a sole and undisputed leader.
Jacques Chirac. who was reelected chair-an at the tine of the Toulouse Party
Conference by 99 percent of the recorded votes--a leader who. in addition,
has sanaged to change his inge. One rue-hers that at a press conference
Valery Giscard d‘zstaing had introduced his for-er prise sinister as a
hurried and restless nan; one reneebers as well the Ian of "coups"-the
sunicipal elections in Paris. one that he pulled off, and the Cochin appeal,
one that dauged his in public opinion. New Jacques Chirac has changed into
a "cals powerful figure” confident in the future, a responsible politician
avoiding overweening behavior as anathema. This was clearly seen at the
tine of the cantons]. elections when, in contradiction to the opinion of
certain ”k and DD? friends, he declared that the results of those elections
did not constitute a challenge to the national governsent. that governeent
being based on another electoral legitincy... In addition. the m chair-an
is anxiOus to ispose this new style on his whole party, as if he dreads

the schenes of slightly irresponsible party officials or activists. At the
tine of the Toulouse Party Conference, he reco-endad in particular that

all aggressiveness toward the govern-eat and all personal attacks on nen

in the govermsnt be avoided. Sticking to policy criticisn-that is the
watchword.

...But a Pussy Progra-

By doing the above, the m wants to assuee the role of opposition party. It
still has to find itself a policy and a progran. In that respect, things
becone less clear or less easy. The m's first current objective is to
present itself as a fresh political for-ation of the future. For the m.
that isplies standing definitively aloof fron ”historic Gaullisn." ‘l'he
TouIOuse Party Conference sade a real break with a whole body of synholias.
For the first tine there was no portrait of Charles de Gaulle or photo of
Georges Po-pidou in the conference hall. Also for the first tine. none of
the historic leadersuthe ones called the "barons"--appeared on the platfor-
or spoke. ‘l'he teas that surrounds the chair-an and secretary general,
hernard Pour-in particular the 26 "official representatives" nosed on

24 February l982--is ends up of sen who did not experience either Free France
or the RP? [Rally of the French PeOple} or even the beginnings of the Fifth
Republic. So trust is being placed in Jacques Chirac'a followers. of

course. but also in a new generation that has no use for solidarity born of
past struggles. In the us there is no talk any-ore except about the future.
and it is not asking appeals any-ore except to young people.

31
”WWW?
MWLUSEONLY

That description of the future was et-ed up at the ‘l'oulouse Party Conference
under three the-es: ”Nation; Republican Ideal; Progress." Making the
coeperieon with the traditional options of the m and even of Gaullise.
none of the the-res is really original. All of the- stand as a total
rejection of socialise or co-misn. Everyone is quite sure that Marxis- is
not a French doctrine and that the Co-Inlsts included in the govern-ant
are foreign agents. In a note practical vein. the government's foreign and
defense policies were. after what was a wait~and~eee period, condaned.
without it being very clearly realized whether that reproach stena froe a
supposedly excessively ecco-odating attitude toward the USSR or from s
sub-ission to Aaerican interests that is considered excessive.

The rehabilitation of the "Republican Ideal" is in a way only a new
incarnation of the Gaullist teqtation to appropriate the republic for
the-selves and deny others the right to invoke it. Between 1966 and 1958.
General de Gaulle did hardly anything else; besides. the republic was always
a part of the Gaullist acronyls in the fifth Republic: Union for the ﬂaw
Republic (m). Union of Demcrats for the Fifth Republic IUD/VII]. Union of
Deeocrets for the Republic [use], Rally for the Republic [m]. The new
eleeent. however. cones froa the shift fro. the question of institution.
which the left does not threaten as such. to a question of society. which

is certainly never absent but is are topical now. It is no longer a letter
of defending an institutional fora but of defending a type of society that
was thought to be defined once and for all in the principles of the eiddle-
clsss revolution of 1789. The Socialists and. a fortiori. the Meta are
not republican. for they do not derive their inspiration iron the store-
aentioned principles or at least not froe the interpretation the are gives
"I“. '

As for "Progress." it is still a enpty slogan that gives hardly any specific
indications about what the us would do if it case back to power. One
finds in it the voluntarisa characteristic of the m fro: the ties when it
was opposing Valery Giscsrd d'Bstaing’s policies. Grmh lmstl [in
italics] be high, uneqloynent least] {in italics] be fought. inflation
Inust/ [in italics] be steeped out-«ll that based on a liberal credo. One
can. to be sure. sake out a picture of the social strata that the m wants
to keep or win over: the farmers. the nanufacturers. the business-en and
the craftsaen, the professional people and. lastly. the nsnsgerialclsvel
people, who are deliberately flattered. However, the conflicts between
these different strata are hardly resolved. ﬂow is one to reconcile the
hynn to freedon of enterprise and to the respect owed to leaders. which are
being proposed to sons people. with participation in decisions. which is
being pronised to others? Also. how is one to reconcile the values of
order. discipline and authority. which appeal to sons. with the ideas of
general responsibility. whict attract others? Is relentless denunciatiOn
of bureaucracy and collectivise enough to combine all these aspirations

0n a long-tern basis?

Imminent
The Opposition and Its Unity

watt-vet the problans the opposition has had to confront since 10 May, it
mnagcd to silence its dissensions and cone to an agree-ent, in appearance
at least. in order to face its first election deadlines. Unity on candidacies
at the tins of the June 1981 legislative elections, the Jan. ry 1982
by-elections and the cantonsl elections-muons of censure jointly signed
and voted for-repeated declarations by the 001' officials closest to the
center-left, Olivier Stirn and Bernard Stasi in particular, that their
opposition is unrelenting—everything leads one to believe that the evil
spirit of dissension is not about to take hold of the no! and the RPR
again. And yet nobody can ignore the fact that the question of leadership,
which the various political groups will approach in different positions or
with different advantages, mat be faced at a future date.

Up to now the us has not been able. or rather has not wanted, to press

its advantages. On the contrary, by agreeing to respect—especially at the
tine of the cantonsl electionsugains in political situations within the
opposition. it has avoided setting itself up as the spearhead of the
opposition. however, despite having had fewer candidates than the 001', and
however vague political labels in that kind of election say be. the RPR
seems to have been the nain beneficiary of the election. Mare inortant,
without a doubt, is the ”3's specific situation conpared with the political
groups in the GDP. The are actually exists, whereas the GDP is searching
for an identity. The am has a leader who was already a candidate in the
last presidential election, who achieved a respectable tally in it and who
is certifiably "electable to the presidency," whereas the 0D! is likely to
be searching for a candidate for a long tins yet. Even if the m is
sosething vague and broad. it has a single doctrine, whereas each party in
the "D? is trying to find its own in different ideological traditions...

in short. one does not have to be an expert to foresee that with the passage
of tine the m and Jacques Chirac will be in a position to enarge in a
leading role within the opposition.

Pros this perspective, the not appears to be in an untenable position. On
the one hand. it is difficult for the OD! to put itself under the leadership
of the m if one takes the past as arch as the UDP's "centrist, liberal.
and social logic" into consideration. So the no? finds itself either faced
with the risk of splitting apart or forced to counter the m in deliberate
fashion. llut in that case the III)! would be fostering division that the an
would be able to make use of and that night put the 001’ back into a
subordinate and urginai role within the opposition; that situation would be
even sore serious within a new majority. Here it to call on Valery Giscard
d'Bstaing or Raynond Barre for help, one would see a confrontation of the
[981 type again at that point, since it is so hard to i-gine Jacques chirac
stepping aside.

Should the leadership issue he settled, however, the opposition would still
have to clarify its political positions or work out programs to meet
deadlines in national politics. For the nossnt, whether we are talking about

33
ms OFFICIAL [Bl ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”w mw'u constituent groups or the m. we have seen that those progress
aeount to criticises of govern-ant action, funds-ental opposition to the
society they suspect the Socialist of being in the process of establishing
and general principles teeeing with contradictions. All of that lay
teeporarily be enough to win conservative voters and attract ealcontenta
fro- all sides. But what will it do when it is a natter of presenting a
govern-eat prograe? It is true that there is no rush, since legislative
elections are elated for 1986.

P.S. Valery Giacard d'ﬁstaing has since been invited by Jean becanuat to
sit on the 001's Political Bureau, and when that group had its parliamentary
aeeting days. Jean-Claude Gaudin. the group's chair-an. revived the idea of
a nerger. however, those two mves gave rise nore to reservations than to
enthusiaae. Attesting to that were the silence that greeted Valery Giacard
d'Bataing's return and the irritation of a nude:- of Radical and CD8 ushers.
Many would prefer that the our concern itself for the meant with i-ediate
election deadlines and as far as anything else goes give itself tine to
reflect.

room

1. Without getting into the controversy over the results. one can say that
the voters who did not vote for the tar leftuthe PC [Co-mist Party],
the PS [Socialist Party]. the m [Left Radical lbveeent‘!) and the
true ”eiscellaneous lett”—represent about 50.5 percent of the recorded
votes.

2. Besides, there are precedents: the Outlooks and Realities Clubs, the
Grenelle Club. Jean-Pierre Prouteau's Republic and Dencracy. ldgar
Paure's New Social Contract...

3. Let uanote that the structures for «co-Mating people in these
catepries are increasing in nuder in parallel fashion without one
always being able to apecify the exact relations those groups eaintain
with the parties of the opposition. Let us aention Justice and
Republic. for jurists; Horizon 86, established by and for attorneys;
and Future and Freedoe, in which doctors get together.

4. Let us reeeaber that lane Honory. Jacques Barrot and Jean-Marie Caro
also figure as possibilities.

COPYING“: ems, 15, rue ll.-!1archeron. 92170 Vanves April 1982

9631
080: 3100/6100

”WISCONLY
INTERVIBV VITH NAPOLITANO 01‘ PSI, PCI RELATIONS

Milan PANORAMA in Italian 24 May 82 pp 73-75

[Interview within-Party opposition leader Giorgio Napolitano
by Chiara Valenti: There Is an Alternative. This One.]

{fsxt Often pointed out as Berlinguer's man antagonist,

as he leader of his lsborite and soderate oppo-
sition, Giorgio Napolitano, 57, born in Naples, is
in any case one of the CP's most visible ipokesmen.
In the Chasber, where he is PC party whip, he stub-
bornly pushes his own good-neighbor policy toward
the socialists. 0f recent weeks he made a lengthy
trip to the United States to tend the connections
he had initiated in recent years. In a tine of
confusion and apparent crisis in the PCI, confirmed
by, asong other indications, the findings of PANO-
RAHA's poll published directly following this inter-
view, we asked Giorgio ﬁapolitano for his views on
what is happening inside and outside his party.

[Question] Mr Napolitano, there is talk about the Cosnunist Party's
losing its grip and its credibility. Along the various sysptons
reported, the survey findings we publish in this issue of PAﬂORAMA
point to this conclusion.

[Answer] I should not be one to attach'overnnch importance to
those findings. Looking at our party's political success most
recently, such as our victory over the Mafia in Sicily or over
Coniso, I should say on the contrary that we have gained ground.
I feel I can say the sane, if I an to judge from my observation
post, about the.Chanber of Deputies, where we connunists are in
contact with different and even hostile groups. There has been
growing approval of the PCI's attitude , precisely on the issue
of individual and collective liberties, and on the issue of deso-

cracy.

[Question] And yet people seen to be lost baffled on this very
ground. After the tough polesics with the USSR over the last few

35
non omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

months, for example, the Politburo's spokesman, Vadin Zagladin,
reinstated you in an interview in LA REPUBBLICA, calling you
"n great Communist Party, a brother Party."

[Answer] Hot-and-cold showers are no answer to problems as grave
and complex as those surrounding relations between the CPS" and
the PCI. We have never been in favor of liquidating those rela-
tions. Breaking off diplomatic relations is not in the general
interest, and primarily the interests of détente. We continue to
be in favor of direct and frank discussion, but it will assuredly
take more than a somewhat self-critical admission of error to make
us set aside basic issues and positions. Or to make us return to
relations bound up with a set of ideological reference points we
cannot accept.

[Question] You have just come back from a long trip through the
United States, where you net with intellectuals and experts close
to Reagan. What do the Americans think of the "breakaway"?

[Answer] In all politically informed American cirCIes, the posi-
tions we have taken since Decesber have made quite an impression,
and have been appreciated for their unquestionable authenticity.

[Question] In short, they had an even greater impact there than
they did in Italy?

[Answer] As for Italy, I should not confuse two different levels.
Here, in my opinion, our international positions have gained in
credibility and in conviction. Even so, there is still none argu-
ment and uncertainty in areas of public opinion as to the actual
possibility of communists‘ getting into the cabinet.

[Question] This is another sore point. Your proposal of an al-
ternative seems unclear to a lot of people. Some of your very
positive opinions in the aftermath of the Christian Democrats'
convention have certainly evoked the ghost of the historic compro-
misc.

[Answer] While there may have been some misunderstanding, it seems
to me that Berlinguer effectively dispelled it. Having said that,
I fail to see how anybody could imagine that we could be pinned
down to a position of pure indifference and inertia toward what is
happening in the DC. I believe that the Labourites in Britain, too,
are greatly concerned over the conflict between Mrs Thatcher and
other forces within the Conservative Party. Are we to take no no-
tice when the line adopted in the preamble of the procedings at

the 1979 convention was shouted down? Are we not to perceive in
this a portent of the fall of acne hoary illusions and prejudices,
like calling the conmunist question closed?

36
FORIOFFKJALIEEZONLY
[Question] And yet the socialists, who were supposed to be your
partners in an alternative government, seem to think otherwise.
Claudio Martelli accuses you of fishing for deals with the DC:
and now the two of you are at daggers drawn.

[Answer] I resent this description of our relations with our so-
cialist comrades as if there were nothing to them but irreconcil-
able conflicts. You have to look a little deeper into things if
you want to understand them. The attack, based on a flimsy pre-
text, like the rest of the polemics aimed at us, are thoroughly
typical of the present PSI leadership. They are, I should say,
an all-but-inevitable function of a strategy designed to maximize
the PSI's role, vis-a-vis both us and the DC. This is clearly
not what we would call the alternative strategy, and we have al-
ready put our finger squarely on the ambiguity of it all.

[Question] In other words, Hartelli is attacking you just to get
attention.

[Answer] All I am saying is that I see his charges as a maneuver
calculated mainly to cost us communists as unenthusiastic propon-
ents of the alternative. Yet there is always the possibility that
there is a real obsession at work here, with the idea that the

the ever-dreaded deal between the Christian Democrats and the com-
munists will be reached over the heads of the socialists. And

yet that is a ridiculous and utterly groundless fear.

[Question] You, Mr Napolitano, seem to be very possibilist,
yet UNITA has taken a very different tone.

[Answer] I should look more at the facts. And I should not for-
get that, along with all the noisy polemics, there is also colla-
boration between us and the PSI.

[Question] Could you cite me some practical examples of that?

[Answer] After'aperiod of widespread tension, we have built good
working relationships in the governance of such great cities as
Florence, Milan, and Turin. Furthermore, I maintain that the very
fact that we did not insist -- beyond a certain degree -- on June
elections warded off serious tension between PSI and PSI and.op-
cncd the way to convergence on goals to be pursued in Parliament
as well.

[Question] Did you have any direct influence on this socialist de-
cision?

[Answer] I believe the socialists took our adamant opposition
into account, yes.

[Question] The new DC secretary, Ciriaco De Mita, has said that
the PCI is not so much a different party as a confused party.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I find this smug tone from the secretary, even the new
secretary, of a party like the DC, whose chronic confusion is
legendary, altogether uncalled-for. Besides, they have been
calling all along for sore debate and less doctrinaire attitudes
in the PCI, yet now here they are practically complaining that our
party is not the repository of absolute, ismovable certainty. The
truth of the matter is that sons of our fundanental positions are
spelled out in very precise and clear-cut terms. On other issues

there is some soul-searching going on, and it is very serious in-
deed.

[Question] In short, you nean that different lines are stirring
in the PCI these days.

[Answer] I as not talking about hard and fast opposing positions.
0n the alternative line, there is unity in the party. And, just
to make things clear, I an in complete agree-eat, too, with what
Berlinguer and Sulnona have to say about the way we form our at-
titudes toward the DC.

[Question] Let's try to sum that up one more tine, for the bone-
fit of those who are not experts in the subtleties of political

issues. You say you don't want to join in a government with the
DC, but you also talk about an alternative in which there are se-
veral poles, among then a Catholic one. What does that scan, in
practical terns? That you are still hooked on the old drean of

splitting the party of De Gasperi, Panfani, and Giulio Andreotti?

[Answer] That is a hypothesis that cannot be ruled out, but one
on which we are very cautious. We think, first of all, given an
alternative governnent, we night advance the traditional bounda-
ries of the left forward a little, so as to nake roon for part

of the Catholic forces, which could be made to flow toward the
PSI, the PCI, or the other lay parties. And we believe that we
must be nindful of the existence and the positions of najor Ca-
tholic organizations. We are also thinking in terms of a DC that
is not forever doomed to renain a conservative party, in the
strict sense of the tern, but rather as one that can change under
the prodding of the sore progressive portion of the catholic elec-
torate and that, some day, night turn into the noderate opposition
to a govern-eat based on the left.

[Question] That sounds like a delightful prospect. Reality,
though, would seen to be pulling in the opposite direction.

[Answer] Of course our proposal for an alternative presupposes
sone profound changes, not only in relations among the political
parties, but in the nation as a whole.

[Question] Mr Napolitano, you have always had the reputation of
an honest reformer. How do you envision the future of your party?
Do you think that the third way coincides with the social-desecra-
tic way?

38
FOI‘OFFNJAL.USE(NNLY
[Answer] About that 'reforniat" tag, I rene-ber what happened to
Fornando Santi, who was always known an a refer-int, but who wound
up to the left of the PCI. I believe that we are a party deter-
nined never to abandon the noat vital and atill valid core of con-
nunist tradition. A party at the cane tine deter-ined to cone to-
gether with the noat advanced poaitiono of the European socialist
novenent. One night well ponder: in is mainly we who are thinking
about the connuniat experience, or the French aocialiata, who are
re-thinking the aocial-denocratic experience? I say this merely
to underscore the fact that, if we are to judge ourselves and
others in these ti-ea, we einply nuat break out of the old pat-
turns.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore S.p.A. Milano
0182
cso: 3104/212

39
FOR¢NTKJALLBE(HHN
FOI(NWKJALUSEONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

PUBLIC OPINION SURVEY ON PCL USSR POLBHICS
Milan PANORAHA in Itlliln 24 May 82 pp 75-76
[Survey results: “It's better not to trust then...']

[Text] The PCI's break with Moscow is not changing nany
ninds. For a lot of people, the Connunist Party
is still a party to be kept under a ban. there
you have the lost unexpected findings in the
PANORAHA/Denoskopea survey. why this attitude?

On 15 Decenber, 1981, Enrico Berlinguer stood alone before the TV
caneras and touched off a revolution in the PCI's history: the
sudden, total "break" with the Soviet Union. Shortly thereafter
cane Moscow's savage response, the rebellion of Arnando Cossutts
and, with his, an entire wing of the Party, and the long, lacer-
ating internal strife of recent nonths.

what did all this nean to ordinary people, to the voters? to what
extent was their opinion of the PCI altered by the stunning col-
lapee of one of the goat cogent argrnents in the anti-co-nunist -
arsenal, the PCI's ties to Moscow? To find out, PANORAHA cos-is-
sioned Denoskpoea to conduct a survey, interviewing 2,000 people
selected as representative of the Italian population. The find-
ing -- quite unexpected -- is that the breach has chansed very

few sinds, and that for nost people, the PCI should still be barred
fro. govern-cut.

In reply to the question: has your confidence in the PCI increased
or dininished since the I'break" with the USSR? 49 percent, practi-
cally half the people interviewed, said they trusted it exactly as
such as they had before. And against 20 percent who trust it sore
spoke another 20 percent who trust it less. The substance of that
opinion is borne out by the response to another question, which
asked whether or not the con-unists can hope now for a place in
governnent like any other party. For 36 percent who said they
sight, therewere‘45 percent who were convinced that “the PCI has
yet to prove that it is genuinely denocratic and independent."

ho
mammonu
“Sane As B.er, More Than Ever...'

The PCI's recent positiona on events in Poland
and its heated polenics with the USSR have led
to a break between the PCI and Moscow. Can
Italians trust the PC! now that the break has
cone? And if so, how nuch?

 

Responaes (by political preferences) in S, left to right.

Answers (top to botton): More than before; Lean than before;
Sane as before; No answer.

 

What's going on between PCI and P81?

Now that the PCI has pulled away fron
the USSR'a positions, do you think the
split between the PCI and PSI still
nakee senee?

Answera, top to button: Yes; lo; lone.

 

 

Social Denocrats? No Hay!

Since its break with Moscow, do you think the
PC! will becone nore like the European Social
Denocrats (those in Scandinavia or Gernany),

or do you think it will go on being the kind

of connuniet party it has always been?

 

Responses, by schooling (Colle , high school, elenentary or none)
and by political preference (i , left to right.

Answers: Like the European Social Denocrata
fhe sane connuniet party it has always been
Don't know.

bl
FOIIIWKJALlEECHHX
FOR(NWKJALIEEZONLY

If the respondents are broken down according to their political
preferences, we find that asong Christian Desocrats the percen-
tage of nay-sayers jusps to 64 percent, asong Republicans to 60
percent, asong Social Desocrats to 70 percent, and asong Liberals
to an astounding 81 percent. Respondents giving favorable replies
reacted in an unexpected way to another question, to wit: if it
would be better for the country if the PCI formed a coalition
cabinet with the DC or without then, 49 percent answered I'with

the Christian Desocrats' and only 44 percent answered "without.“

0n the whole it is a negative picture, one that shows us us that
the PCI has never stood so low in the public estee- as it does
right now.

What is going on here? According to one young and brilliant stu-
dent of politics, Gianfranco Pasquino, who is in favor of the left
alternative, the blase for this franc of sind along the people

lies squarely upon the PCI itself. ”The decline in confidence is
the initial reaction to confusion, to uncertainty. Once they had
node the break, the cos-unists gave the impression that they would
like to send it again. The likeliest assumption is that they don't
have enough intestinal fortitude, or unity enough in their leader-
ship, to sake it stick. And people can sense this,‘ says Pas-
quino. Sosewhat sore ironic in his assess-ent is Alberto Ronchey,
the inventor of the "K factor.'I “Where the nisunderstanding arises
is in the choice of the word 'strappo;' which seans a rending or
tearing apart only if you're talkin about cloth or paper. This
however, turned out to be a sprain a second meaning of the word .'
In Ronchey's view, all this sistrust toward Berlinguer's party
stcss less fros international issues than from its having opted

for the left alternative. "A PCI that wants to for. a government
only with the Socialists is far scarier than a PCI that is sons-
how tased by the historic cosprosiae. And it is this very fear
that I call the K factor.“

Further confirmation that the PCI's new decisions have not gone
down too well cones from a set of questions about its getting to
be nere like a social democrat party.

Only 20 percent of respondents, a slim ninority, sees the party
going down that road. "The fact is that this party can't seen to
come up with new images, new points of reference," says sociolo-
gist Franco Ferrarotti, a PCI syspathizer. "The basic attitude is
conservative, stand-pat, and the third road fails to saterialize.'
This is a loss of credibility that carries in it some electoral
repercussions as well. Asked, "do you think that the PCI will get
more votes fro. now on?" only 14 percent answered "yes." When the
sane question is asked about the PSI, the I'yes" replies shoot up
to 49 percent. Then there was one curious detail. This optinisn
as to the success of Craxi's party is shared by Just about half of
the connunist voters.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Editors S.p.A.

6182

cs0: 3104/21: 1.2
FOI€NWHJALI£HEONLY
mmmmv

HILITAIY PEARCE

All BASES CONDUCT REGULAR HA3 SCENARIO EXERCISES
laee Defenee ‘l'eeted
Paria ““388 D'AUJOURD'UUI in French May 82 pp 28-30
[Article by Air Force Brigadier General Jacquee Boichot: "Tactical Evaluation”

[Text] The tactical evaluation of an air baee hae the «un-
tial ain of heeping the co-and periodically inforled about
the unite' ability to carry out their varti-e nieeione and
aleo nieeione in tine of crieie or in peacetine.

The air baeee carry out daily coin-training activity in order to be ready to
cope, in tine of crieie or in vartine, with nultiple aggreeeione or nieeione.

In order to sake an overall evaluation of the ability of the baeee, and aleo of
the operational unite etationed at then, to carry out their aieeione, the con-
nand periodically eete up "tactical evaluatione.” Thue, an evaluation teen,
conpoeed oi officere and nonconieeioned officere fro. the general etaff and
directoratee of the air region and iron the najor ueer co-ande concerned, ar-
rivee at the baee unannounced to obeerve the reactione to the varioue exercieee
and incidente introduced at a high rate. for a block of tine that can be nearly
a week.

For the baee co-and and pereonnel, the fund-ental principle then coneiete in
"playing out" the plane and directivee at all levele and in the noet realietic
way poeeible. In effect, the only way of reacting leade to thie queetion in
each inetance: ”If thie incident or eerioue event were really occurring today,
what could be done with the neane at our diepoeal?" During thie tine, the
evaluatore etay at the poete aeeigned to then, without impeding the activity of
the pereonnel. and they record the different reactione obeerved vithout con-
ncnt, unleee eafety ia at etake.

A Realietic Scenario
The varioue incidente and evente initiated during the evaluation have been pre-
pared for very thoroughly eeveral veake in advance, in accordance with a coor-

dinated and coherent ecenario that calla all of the baee'e unite into action.
Such a ecanario can. for example. unfold ae follow.

memusaonu
“MALUSIONLY

0n J day at 2300 hours, the evaluation teen, which has previously net in the
:trcntest secrecy for a preparatory presentation, arrives at the gate of the
base chosen and inediately issues an alert that calla for the personnel to be
called out and the base to be put into an operational posture, notably with
camouflage and reinforcenent of defense, and also for the air conbat unite to
be activated. The airplanes are prepared and i-ediately dispersed and enou-
llsged. The first two planes ready take orf on alert for e night-interception
mission. At dawn the next day, the base undergoes a heavy air attack that
starts a serious fire and causes serious danage to the electric~pover plant and
to the neans of co-unication.

The air-watch network, activated fro. the beginning of the exercise. signals
any air raids that put the base's antiaircraft defense to the test and cause
several serious incidents: for ample, destruction of the uses, so that field
kitchens are activated, and an exercise in neutralization of an unexploded
bonb.

In a following phase, the rescue teens have to save a pilot wounded during a
eission and then get his damaged plane, which is partially blocking the landing
field, out of the way. At the ease tine, the Medical Corps has to set up a
field nedical group to acconodate nany wounded.

Ac t ivi ty Cont inuee

After night falls, co-ando units carry out harassment of sensitive points of
the base and ettenpt to penetrate its defense systen. The entire base is
placed on reinforced alert and weapna are distributed to all personnel, who
take up their assigned cenbet positions.

During the entire day following, the nechanics nust nevertheless continue to
prepare and ar- the airplanes, which take off at an accelerated cadence for as-
sault missions and real firings on the firing ranges. The results of these
firings deter-nine the success of each pilot's niseion.

In the afternoon, the task of the personnel is further complicated by radioac-
tive contamination due to fallout free a nearby explosion. On this occasion,

the know-how of the specialised tens for receiving airplanes in a radioactive
environ-ent has to be denonetrated.

During the following night, the co—andos, who have tested the alertness of the
beee's defenses, attenpt actions in force, including helicopter-borne raids, in
order to lay siege to the field.

1he last day is devoted to a "hot“ debriefing on the couando actions, the
shooting by the personnel with individual weapons, and a detailed inspection of
the barracks and technical installations to check whether the base has the
means best-suited to its nieeione and to study what inprovenenta are possible.

The evaluation is new conplated. but the co-ander of the air region and the
major ueer co-ends concerned now have a very detailed report, everitable "pho-
tograph" of the base and its units. This docunent brings out the points on

”WWMY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080067-6

FOI‘0’F‘C1AI.IEIE(IULY

which the base co-ander will have to concentrate his efforts, but it will also
Iw exploited at the various levels of co-and, to renedy the deficiencies re-
uurding the neans, to amend the operations directives and orders if necessary,
at to take advantage of the good ideas and interesting actions taken that will
be forwarded to the other air bases concerned.

In effect, it is not a natter of knowing whether an evaluation has been success-
ful or not, but it will certainly be "useful." for the essential thing to be
obtained fro. its definition is the word "capability." This word relates, of
course. both to the neans available to the base and to the know-how and motiva-
tion of the personnel. but also to the deficiencies and the progress to be
achieved in all areas and at all levels.

Thus it has been possible to note, at all our bases. an inportant netanorphosis
that has been going on for the last several years: shelters for airplanes and
personnel, enclosures, canouflsge, sntiaircraft protection--to nention only the
most spectacular achieve-cots. These results are not, of course. exclusively
the fallout fro. the evaluations; but only exact knowledge of the situation can
enable us to progress, and the evaluations thus contribute to inprovenent of
the conditions of preparation of our air bases and coubat units. with a view to
continually increasing the operational effectiveness of the Air Force.

General Jacques Boichot, a graduate of the flight Training
School (class of 1952), has nade nest of his career in opera-
tional units. Ila co-andad the 2/11 fighter squadron. and
later the fourth fighter ring. In 1976, he co-snded the B.A.
[expansion unknown] of ‘roul. and than becane chief of the
third bureau of the MA [Chief of Staff of the Air Force].
At present he is director of the First CA'l'ac [Tactical Aerial
Corps]. General Boichot totals 5600 flight hours.

COPYRIGRT: 1982 Revue des forces arnees francaises "Arnees d'aujourd'hui"
Pilots' Reaction Tine “rested
Paris ARMEES D'AUJOURD'llUI in French May 82 pp 31-33

[Article by Air Force Major General Theodore Hahlberg: "Putting Units in Pos-
ture"!

[Text] In peacetine, an important part of air activity is de-
voted to training of the squadron, with the sin of ensuring.

on a priority basis. the cosibat pilots' progression toward high-
er qualifications. This forls of training. though indispensable,
is not sufficient for obtaining truly opertional units; it is
also necessary for then to be capable of reacting rapidly to the
least indication of alert, and, particularly for the tactical
units. capable of maneuvering within sizable formations and op-
erating in a coordinated nanner within an interbranch franework.

The Air Force has a linited nunber of combat airplanes capable of carrying a
wide variety of arn-sents and of taking action in highly varied zones of opera-
tions. Because of its characteristics of speed of intervention and flexibility
of use, the air arn is a favored neana of battlefield action. It is therefore
necessary for the units to have the ability to adapt to varied situations and
to balance out their efforts in such a way as to be capable of intervening
rapidly where the need is manifested.

nonmalignant
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLV

lntvrvuning Rapidly

Rapid intervention supposes firet of all a reaction in the ahorteet timee poe-
sible. Thie capability is indeed an eeeantial condition in order for a unit to
he declared operational. lt requiree reflection beforehand on a certain number
of ecenarioe. and imagining their development. Secondly, regular practice of
activation exercieee makee it poeeible to “break in" the reflex actione that
make the phraee "putting into poeture"* almoet automatic. Thue. depending on
the miaeion aeeigned to the unit, what ie involved ie. on the one hand, the
arming of the planee with bombe. rockete or air-to-air mieeilea, and on the

' other hand. fitting them with extra tanke appropriate for the range of action
anticipated. Furthermore, frequent changea of configuration are practiced ea
or to create automatic routinee among the technical pereonnel and thua reduce
the rieke of error.

It ie important. during thie delicate and fundamental phaee, for the work of
each peraon involved to be done in good order and to be wall-coordinated. it
ie by long practice that the time-periode can be effectively reduced to the
minimum.

Rapid reaction aleo neceeeitatee a permanent alert etructure, at both the com-
sand level and the level of the meane of execution. Continuoueneee, which ie
the rule in the Air Force, involvee both the air-defenee chain, the operational
centere of the central general etaff and of the big commande, and the alert
teama or the teame taking part in eecurity and protection at the air baeee.
Thue. for the Air Force an a whole, thoueande of men and women keep a watch in
addition to their normal activity or are on alert ready to take action. The
unexpected mieeione that could be triggered can take verioue forma: eetting up
a Jaguar patrol thoueande of kilometere away, where a preeence mieeion ie nec-
eaeery; interception of an intruder who penetratee the national air epace;
tranaport of equipment in humanitarian-aid eituatione; medical evacuation in
Iiaieon with the SANU'e lexpaneion unhnown]; aeeietance to military or civilian
airplanee in trouble; etc.

Finally, the capacity to intervene in ehort timee requirea appropriate modee of
action. and the eucceee of any diatant operation ie mainly dependent on in-
flight refuelling theee daye, becauee it makee it poeeible to eliminate etope
and givee the poeaibility of operating at long dietancea from home baeee.

Flexibility of Uee

Thia ie the eecond quality to be maintained and developed in our unite. lt ie
indeed fundamental. in view of our available potential airpower, to take the
bent poeeible advantage of the flexibility of uee that the airplane offere.

The nobility of the unite ie a deciaive factor in thie area. The exercieee in-
volving all the tactical unite gneerally entail deploymente and redeploymente
thatnakeit poaeible to vary the formation and adapt it to the evolution of the
threat. In metropolitan France, it ie uaually the combat equadron that doea
euch novenent. Ae for external action, amaller unite are often need to adapt
the air eupport to the particular conditione of each operation.

 

* ”Putting into poeture" ie an expreeeion need in the Air Force to mean put-
ting the unite on a war footing.

us
IOI10IFIJMI.UBIIMNLY
1hrro is the same quest for nobility in the routine training of the units.
which regularly deploy outside their home bases to do firing exercises at spe-
cial centers or combat exercises at sea. These nunerous trips put heavy bur-
dens on the personnel. who are frequently absent from their homes; but this is
the price that has to be paid in order to have operational units.

Flexibility of use depends also on the naintenance of a certain multipurpose
character in our combat squadrons. Air missions are usually grouped in two
large fanilies--tactical support and air defense; the for-er has the offensive
character of attack on ground targets, while the latter, related nore particu-
larly to air combat, therefore takes place at generally high altitudes. For
each of them, aircraft with specific performonce charactersitics are needed,
and crews that have had appropriate training.

As regards the airplanes. in view of the relatively small nunber of them which,
because of costs. a country like France can provide itself with, the best coo-
promise between high-altitude and low-altitude perfornance characteristics is
generally sought in the design stage.

As regards the crews. the growing complexity of the equipment and the linita-
tion of air activity to 180 hours per year per pilot. because of the rise in
the cost of fuel, no longer make it possible to have conbat pilots capable of
carrying out missions of a highly technical character in both of these two
fields of specialization at the same time. However, in order to be capable of
carrying out a strong effort in a particular area or one that requires consid-
erable concentration of means, each air unit will have to maintain--in addition
to its main nission, which certainly takes priority in the training process--
the capacity to carry out one or even two missions designated as secondary, in
a simplified version and within a linited framework. Thus a unit whose main
mission is, for exanple, all-weather penetration, will be assigned a daytime-
interception role on a secondary basis. Day-to-day training will be propor-
tioned in function of the degree of priority assigned to each of these activi-
ties.

The tactical re-ction exercises have resulted in considerable progress in the
conditioning of the units. They make the personnel break out of the base
training routine by crystallising the efforts of everyone toward a common pur-
pose and generally permitting the activation of the entire chain of command,
from the operational staffs responsible for mission conception to the units
charged to carry them out. They periodically place the units in fictitious
crisis situations that are as realistic as possible in order to evaluate the
activation procedures and the application of the dispersal and camouflage pro-
cedures. Thus, the putting-into-posture exercises ordered several times per
year at the level of the PATAC [Ar-y Light Plane Division], lst RA [Air regi-
nentl, will involve one or more air bases of the region, or even all of then.
Others, of broader scope, such as Datex, will involve the entire Air Force.
This practice, which has proven its worth, is to be continued.

Air ?orce Major General Theodore Nahlberg has done a large part
of his career in operational units: Fighter Squadron 1111, 5th
Fighter Wing. In 1973 he was commander of the Dijon air base,

117
FOI‘OIIHCJAI.I!IE(IULY
FOIIOIIICIAI.USEII'LY

then chief of staff for air defense, deputy chief of Air Force
general-staff operations. and he is presently second in con-and
of the FATACIlst IA and con-ander of the northeast air-defense
cone.

COPYRIGHT: l982 Revue des forces arnees francaises "Arnees d'aujourd'hui"
Firing Exercises Conducted
Paris learns D'AUJOURD'EUI in French hay 82 pp 36-36

lArticle by Air Force Colonel Roger Hathieu: "Toverd the 'Direct nit'--Checking
Conhat Pilots' tiring and honbing Ability")

[Textl For any conbet pilot, the end purpose of a flight is
destruction of the objective. Through the "firing exercises,"
tactical evaluations. intersquadron conpetitions and training
nissions, the Air Force nonitors the operational level of its
units end its pilots' ability to put their shots on target.

At l0.0001neters altitude. off Corsica: four Hirage 1113's nake a live firing
pass. with 30-.- cannons, at an acoustic target towed by a hirsge IllC.

0n theCaptieuxair-to~ground firing range, north of Hont-de-Narsan. four other
Mirage 1112's cone in at low altitude for an operational rochet-firing pass.

These patrols have taken off fron their base field in the course of a tactical
evaluation: placed in conditions as close to a real nission as possible, the
pilots will be judged on their firing results in particular. for destruction
of an objective in the air or on the ground will alvays rennin the end purpose
of conbat aviation.

Honitoring of the firing and bombing ability of the pilots in operational units
is a pernanent concern of the con-Ind: it is present daily in the course of
training nisaions, but especially during the special periods of the "firing ex-
ercises." the tactical evaluations and the intersquadron conpetitiona.

Firing Ability: Daily checking

Whether’afireepower-support niesion with conventional weapons, the firing of an
nir-to-air or air-to-ground nissile. or a very conventional dogfight is in-
volved. the pilot returning fro. his flight in peacetine nust know with naainun
certainty what would have happened "if he had really fired." Indeed, the nia-
aion is considered successful only after detailed restitution of the firing
phase.

The recording ain canera, which runs during the period of simulated firing,
maker auch precise restitution all the easier to achieve in that our airplanes'
"head up" visualizations present all the essential persnetars today.

The tape recorders on board present valuable supple-entary infornation by re-
cording the pilots' "live" con-ents and any radio exchanges that nay occur.

he
roamuseomx
nut Nothing Takes the Place of Live Firing

The cost of modern armaments, which has only increased with the sophistication
of the munitions and the missiles, is well-known. The combat squadrons are
therefore being allocated only a limited amount of real munitions and "exercise
nunitions"* annually.

Each full squadron carries out an operational assignment of 3 or 0 weeks at
Cazaum or Solensara in order to do an annual "firing exercise" oriented primar-
ily toward air-to-air cannon. but also toward conventional air-to-ground fir-
inn.

These exercises are tle concrete focus of the Air Force's effort to maintain a
high operational level among the combat-unit pilots:

--trsining of young pilots under simplified firing conditions;
--perfecting of older pilots under limit conditions of use of conduct-of-fire.

In air-to-air cannon firing, for example, an acoustic target is towed 500 me-
ters behind a fighter that gradually maneuvers into conditions close to those
of a dogfight. The firing pass is tricky. demanding the firing pilot's entire
concentration: often at supersonic speed, under considerable acceleration, a
very short burst, of half a second. is fired.

There is an immediate confirmation report, for the pilot learns at once, by re-
dio. how many shells passed within a radius of 3.5 meters around the acoustic
target.

For the purpose of standardizing the level of firing skill required of the pi-
lots, they undergo "qualification" tests in the course of three missions in
which a certain minimum score has to be achieved; this is the case for the
unit’s priority and secondary missions.

Apart from these firing exercises, regular training in air-to-ground firing
(cannon, rockets, bombs) makes it possible to keep up the level achieved and
also to pass certain qualification tests: on return froma ground-attack mis-
sion. the airplanes do live firing on one of the authorized firing ranges.

Aerial Firing: the Operational Goal above All

1he combat pilots' motivation for this aeronautical discipline has always been
very sharp: indeed, the entire stakes of-a 1-hour flight are in the balance in
the few seconds in which the objective is sighted and the pilot takes position,
aims and fires. Thus there is a latent competition among the pilote of a
squadron and between the squadrons themselves; and this wholesome emulation
plays a part in maintenance of the highest level for the results achieved.

* An exercise munition (shell, rocket) has no explosive charge. An exercise
bomb is a simplified projectile but has the same ballistics.

IOI1OFFKJA1.UQI(MNLY
F0.‘DFFKJA1.USE¢MULY

Among the exercises having the character of competitione organized to this end,
the most celebrated is indisputably the "Comet Cup." which, every 2 years, pits
all the French fighter and reconnaissance squadrons against one another: each
is represented by two pilots, one of whom nust be the squadron con-under (or
second in co-and). who thus have to denonstrate their abilities publicly.

The tests. in two flights, include an attack on a ground objective, air-to-
uround cannon firing, an interception and air-to-air cannon fire.

Hhat better opportunity could there be for judging the firing ability of our
pilots?

The range of our armaments is diversifying and is becoming increasingly coher-
ent with the airplanes and the conduct of fire: in addition to the conventional
munitions, there are the scatter weapons, the guided munitions, the niseiles.
The coste of these sophisticated munitions rule out the possibility of a great
deal of training firing in the units: this firing coaes only in grouped exer-
cisee that note it possible to confirm the areas and procedures of use. 0n the
other hand, simulated firing. in the air or at the ground, ensure a satisfac-
tory level of training for our pilote.

Monitoring of the firing and bombing ability of the combet pilots is. in the
last analysie, a constant factor in all missions, whether they involve live
firing or not.

The main guarantee of the level achieved will always remain notivetion for fly-
ing—-and for firing!

Colonel Roger Hathieu entered the Air School in l958, and has
conmended Fighter Squadron 1/13 and the 30th Fighter Wing. He
has graduated fron the ESCA [Higher School of Air Warfare], and
is currently chief of the "operations" division of the 3rd De-
psrtnent of the EHAA [Air Force General Staff].

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forcee armees francaises "Armees d'aujourd'hui"

11267
CSO: 3100/713 END

FOI'OFFKJAI.USIIMNLV