FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10345
22 February 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 10/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600030054-4

-' son OFFICIAL use ONLY

- . WEST EUROPE REPORT
(POUO 10/82)

Cameras

HEATER PORGS

ITALY
Socialist Journal Cor-lento on 'Zero Option.' 'Ooupl
(Francesco Poleoella; mumpzmro. the 81)..
TERIDRISK
ITALY

Repentant Ter-or13t Clanfanelll lbscribaa Life With
(Antonio Carluccl; PANORAHA, 21 Inc 81).....

ENERGY ENNOHCS
FBIERAL REPIBLIC 0F GERMANY

New Method for Ut111z1ng Haste Heat Developed
(Karl-Heinz Seyfrled; CAPITAL, No l, 1982)..

BMOMIC

ITALY

Coldirettl'c Lobianco Attacks Financial Law
(Arcangelo loblanco Interview; PANORAHA, 21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030054-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rivalry Between Aeritalia, Augusta in Air Sector
(Giuseppe Oldani; PANORAHA, 21 Dec 81).....................

POLITI CAL
FRANCE

Labor Unions Protest New law on Arbitration Boards
(Francoise Glimt; L'EXPEESS. 110 Jan 82)...................

ITALY
Demoskopea Survey on Spadouni. Previous Covernlnents
(miara Valentini; PANORAMA, 21 the 81)..
NE‘DIERLANDS
Dissident Group Arises within 0'66 Party
(Max Van Heeze1;VRIJNElERLAND. 16 Jan 82)................
TUMCEY
Article Scores Policies of Military Regine
(San Corbin; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 9-22 Nov 81).
' MILITARY
FRANCE

Submarines To Be Armed With New Emcet SH 39 Missile
(Pierre Lsngereux; AIR & C(SMIB. 16 Nov 81)................

WITED KINGmM

UK's Not: Reaffirms Defense Spending Plans
(THE TIES. 27 Jan 82).....................................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
socnus‘r JOURNAL comms on 'zno onrou,‘ 'counmo'
Rome HONDOPERAIO in Italian Dec 81 pp 16-17

[Article by Francesco Polesella: "Zero Year for Disarmament“; Slantlines
denote italics as published.)

[Text] The "zero option" has restated the Western negotiating
position in Geneva, placing on the USSR the onus for an ef-
fective response in terms of European public opinion. But
even bilateral elimination of Euromissiles would not affect
Soviet preponderance in conventional weaponry, with the risk
of accentuating the importance of the N-bomb.

Negociations on theater nuclear force reduction in Europe were opened on
30 November in an atmosphere of optimism, which, though tempered by various
considerations, would have been impossible to imagine only a few weeks ago.

The Americans, who were suspected by more than one of wanting to sacrifice the
appointment in Geneva in order to regain what thcy felt to be supremacy in terms
of a hard-line confrontation with the USSR, have made a spectacular turn-around:
Reagan's speech on "zero option" restated the Western negotiating position, and,
for the first time in a long while, has shifted onto the USSR the onus for an
effective response in terms of European public opinion.

This is an important factor for Europe, and not only because of the political
debut of "zero option." Schmidt's Germany--apart from polemics about its "twin
tracks" towards negotiations--sees, after Breahnev's visit, its central position
reinforced with respect to any negotiating hypothesis referring to the EurOpean
continent; it becomes, in this sense, first of all, the "interpreter" of the

most important needs of Europe included in the diacussion--by means of the neces-
sary tutelage of German interest, because it is more exposed--and of the interests
of its other components in an organic and balanced view. The security of Germany.
in other words, is proposed in the negotiations as the prime motivation and
guarantor of the security of all of Europe.

The peace movement brings about, by means of a more balanced position from the
negotiating platform, a new motive for enriching its own position, which should
permit it to make a contribution remoyed from dangerous manipulations to political

debate in European public opinion.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIX
FOR (ﬁ-‘PICIAL USE MN

The hostage Effect

After all, Europe needs successes. The continuation of international hotbeds, such
as the aggravation of the Polish question. despite temporary ameliorations, brings
close to the Old Continent the hypothesis of a bipolar recompoaition of inter-
national assets, which would reduce drastically the margin of maneuverability,
forcing us still more to delegate the management of crises to the superpowers and
adding to the hypothesis of the "militarization of relations" in Europe a much more
dangerOus reality. In this picture. the search for peace assumes a basic value,
and the fact of the negotiations on theater forces must be accepted even before its
implications on the level of the renewal of the detente process as an important
opening.

The objective of "zero Option" acquires. under the European aspect, a central
political significance: the measure to which it is carried out will be in the
ability of Europe to recuperate its own proposing capability on a general level.

The negocisting path is, in any case, complex and assumes variations which are
useful to examine.

An essential point of the speech on theater nuclear forces is to obtain arms
reduction and at the same time maintain a degree of security which is at least equal
for the Hear. This means two parallel objectives: the raising of the "nuclear
threshold" in Europe and the reaffirmation of Euro-American Icouplingl, (on

the principle. that is. according to which a Soviet attack in Europe should in any
case determine a reaction by the entire alliance, and therefore, in the first place,
the United States).

The theater missiles--or LRTNF if one prefers--are considered in this light. That
is, because they counterbalance the Soviet threat of the 88-20 with a strike-back
capability of the United States in Europe, they tend to accentuate the "hostage
effect" of American policy with respect to Europe and to reduce the risk of
lde-couplingl. The logical conseQuence of this set-up is obviously that of an
increase-~and the possibility of spiraling--of nuclear arsenals in Europe:
certainly a high price, and one which seems unacceptable to many.

The solution, however. cannoc be found in the simple removal of problems or in the
wishful denial of data which still exist, such as the imbalance determined by the
deployment of the Soviet SS-20s. 0n the contrary, the quest for peace must pass
through a realistic evaluation of existing alternatives. and tend-~internally-~to
maximize the results in the interests of Europe.

The "zero option" could produce, in an extreme hypothesis, contradictory consequences.
Total elimination of the Euromissiles by the two sides, which would leave the im-
balance of conventional arms unaltered, would not affect the Soviet preponderance

in Europe, which. especially in tanks, would seem overwhelming. It would determine
the Western need to attribute still more importanceo-in order to compensate for con-
ventional inferiority-~to tactical nuclear weapons, such as the N-bomb. from the
"battlefield" and consequently running the risk of lowering the nuclear threshold

in Europe and rendering less credible the Euro-American /coupling/. This because--
beyond official assurances-~the hypothesis of a Soviet conventional attack in Europe,
followed by a "tactical" nuclear exchange limited to the European battlefield with-
out involving the superpowera could become credible. Obviously, we are dealing

with hypotheses, but deterrence is based on such hypothesis, and they seem, in any
case, not to create little worry for European countries, and above all for those such
as Italy and Germany which would be chiefly involved.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Rebalancing of Conventional Forces

One essential point to such a scenario, then, is the rebalancing of conventional
forces. The objective of a EurOpsan defense policy is or should be this: by
adequately strengthening its own conventional response, Europe would be capable

of recuperating its own margin of autonomy in the elaboration of the alliance's
defensive scenarios. if not otherwise, in the "intermediate step" of deterrence,
by committing itself with equal dignity and attributing a different value to the
autonomous" Anglo-French deterrent. The proposals recently made in the Colombo-
Genscher plan for an extension of European political cooperation on security could
find fertile territory for thought here and might be immediately operational.

UndOubtedly, given the financial situation of Europe, even more than the political,
it seems more than problematical to speak of massive conventional modernisation
these days. The problem, however, is /not rearmament, it is equilibrium/z Europe
can resolve it my aiming decisively at the objective of a substantial reduction

of Soviet conventional arms.

This does not mean rejecting the "zero option" or approaching it with reservation;
on the contrary, it must remain at the center of a Western political position,
through which a careful evaluation of objectives can be achieved.

The Euromissiles are not in themselves "good" or "bad“ depending on how and by

whom they are deployed. If matters concerning the relationship of forces should
no: change substantially in Geneva, the solution of deployment-~although unpleasant--
would be the only solution capable of guaranteeing a sufficient degree of security
to Europe, even if Europe witnessed a growing dependence on global American choices
in defense matters. A dependence. which anyway would correspond to a reality of
facts which are difficult to dispute.

In the present state of relations. a unilateral reduction of Western Buromissiles
w0uld not bring about the result of stabilizing Europe and advancing the cause of
peace; rather, the contrary would be true. Equilibrium. as we have said, does not
in any case always exclusively assume higher levels of nuclear presence It is
compatible with a revision of internal relations in the alliance. in order not to
modify the total reactive capability to the Soviet threat.

For Europe, this means a decisive effort for equilibrium of conventional forces,
thanks to a greater direct commitment and to negotiations aimed at reducing the
weight of Soviet preponderance. It could be in the interest of Europe to link
together the same theme of tactical nuclear arms with this high-priority
objective: a reduction in tactical nuclear arms which would not alter the overall
"on the battlefield" equilibrium would have, above all, the effect of increasing
its political-strategic weight. apart frOm negotiating hypotheses.

In this scenario, the mutual reduction-~or even disappearance: "zero option",

in short-~of European theater nuclear forces could demonstrate fully its effective-
ness as a factor for peace and rationality in the policies of those nations which
create. with armaments, conditions ever increasingly intolerable to the free
flowering of their own capabilities for civil and humane growth.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Mondoperaio Bdiaioni Avanti!

9941
C80: 3104/79

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM ITALY

RBPENTANT TERRORIST CIANFANELLI DESCRIBES LIFE WITH BR
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 21 Dec 81 pp 63-66

[Article by Antonio Carlucci]

[Textl A repentant terrorist tells us of every step along the
fatal road that, over 13 years, led him from the 1968
demonstrations to the most savage acts of the BR.

At 17, in mid-1968, the first strikes, the disorderly rallies, and the
throngs of high-school students marching. Then joining and becoming
active in the extreme left, amid Splits, reunifications, drifting from
one group to another. Always the meetings, the mimeograph machines,
the pamphlets, the processions. A lot of verbal violence, though some
of the people opted to carry a pistol in their pocket or a Molotov
cocktail in their book-bag.

At the university he first fell in with the Red Brigades (BR): the
first cautious, tentative approaches, the reading of a few "strategic
resolutions," passing out pamphlets stamped with the S-pointed star.
After the murder of Aldo Moro came full-fledged membership in the or-
ganization, first doing minor errands for the "logistics sector," then
into rifle practice, and lastly an assignment to an operational cam-
mando group. A lot of "armed propaganda" action, but there was one

murder, too: that of Judge Girolamo Tartaglione.

With the Red Brigades, though, there is nothing like an armed mass
movement. And so there was another wave of migration toward nearby
groups who might be willing to engage in terrorism, but were not pre-
pared to obey the iron rules of an underground organization. In the
intervals between the occasional armed attack and numerous armed rob-
beries, the dream of an impossible revolution faded into nothingness.
It was no chore to go back to living a normal life. Then one morning
in June 1981, the police knocked at the door: once arrested, the pri-
soner made the decision to tell all about his 13 years of illusion,
but mainly years of violence and death.

Massimo Cianfanelli, 30, a non-degree student at the university, told
his story to magistrates Perdinando Imposimato and Rosario Priore. It
was 11 days in the telling. In more than 150 pages of transcript,

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cianfanelli revealed many of the darkest secrets of the Brigades, of
the Revolutionary Communist Movement (Valerio Morucci founded it after
he pulled out of the BR), of Autonomia's armed groups as well as those
of METROPOLI, the magazine published by Franco Piperno and Lanfranco
Pace.

"From 1968 to 1970," testifies Cianfanelli, I was present at meetings
of the rank-and-file committees at the Cavour lycée. In all the schools
they were coordinated by organizations with no permanent structure,

and operated only on an ad hoc basis when there were demonstrations and
strikes." Massimo Cianfanelli was involved in the same concerns as
tens of thousands of students all over Italy: protesting everything
about the way the schools were run, demonstrating over Vietnam, impas-
sioned debates over the revolution.

Upon graduation from the lycée he enrolled in engineering school. And
in politics, he picked one of the smallest groups: the Revolutionary
Communist Nuclei. "We didn't have party cards, but if you count sym~
pathizers there were more than 100 of us." Operating money came from
voluntary contributions: "1, as a student, paid 3,000 lire a month,
but those with jobs gave more." Leader of the group was Franco Russo,
under investigation for his activities at Calabria University. Among
the members were Paolo Flores, today a socialist intellectual, and
Sergio Petruccioli, brother of UNITA's managing editor, both of whom
swiftly set out on different roads.

Two years later, in 1974, the Nuclei merged with another minuscule
group known as Long Live Communism. "We did it out of political oppor-
tunism," Cianfanelli recalls. "Both organizations were very short on
numbers." The new party was baptized Communist Vanguard. Among its
leading lights were Patrizio Panzieri, in prison for the murder of
neo—fascist leader Mikis Mantakas; Roberto Martelli, who fled to Por—
tugal during the investigation of the Communist Combat Units; and Marina
and Stefano Petrella, brother and sister who wound up in the BR. Other
members were not so easily seduced into the armed struggle: Rosa
Giolitti and Giusi Mancini, daughters of the former Socialist cabinet
ministers, were two who were not.

In 1975, the first pistols. Cianfanclli saw Martelli firing blindly
during an attack on an MSI office. "Afterwards," he told the magis—
trates, "thr rumor went around that Martelli and Panzieri had been
authorized by the group leadership to carry weapons in protest marches
to protect us against attack by the fascists."

Cianfanelli discovered something more than weapons, though. "Inside
the organization, you could see a pattern of mafia management taking
shape: one small group was in on everything that was going on, and
they made the decisions, while the rest of us were left in the dark
about the really important things." And that is why he quit Communist
Vanguard and joined Workers Vanguard (A.0.).

There he spent 2 years of peace: in A.0. everything was out in the open.
This group, though, like the others, was under constant surveillance

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um urn-K MI. (-3}. UN Y

by the BR (as were many others like it) as a promising source of

new recruits. What decided the matter for Cianfanelli was his encoun-
ter with Emilia Libera, 3 BR "irregular," meaning she had not yet

gone underground. "Why don't you cover your face during demonstra-
tions? You think you're at a concert or something?"

Later on, the woman opened up a little more during a rally: "Did

you see what happened?" The police had just shut down the Roman HQ

of the Autonomi, on Via dei Volsci. And Cianfanelli replied: "That's
serious." But Emilia Libera was thingking of something else. In
Turin, there had been an assault on the assistant managing editor of
LA STAMPA, Carlo Casalegno. "One for our side!"

From her university claSsmate's reaction, the Brigade member knew she
could press harder. "I knew instinctively that she was in contact
with the organization," Cianfanelli told the magistrates. But from
her attitude I knew I daren't ask any more questions." That first
communication was just the beginning. It wasn't until April 1978,
though, at the height of the Moro kidnaping case, that Libera openly
acknowledged that she belonged to the Red Brigades.

That was the necessary move to recruit him. Cianfanelli, fascinated
by his fellow-student, hesitated very little before accepting his
first assignment: passing out hundreds of pamphlets on campus. And
at the end of April he joined the campus Brigade. That was the start
of the rendezvous typical of the underground life (times and dates
set far in advance, meetings invariably staged in student haunts).
One after the other, he met the top men in the organization: Bruno
Seghetti, Antonio Savasta, Francesco Piccioni, and Valerie Morucci.
Even Prospero Gallinari, the head of the column, wanted to meet the
new recruit and subject him to a political examination before assign-
ing him to the task of picking out targets on campus.

On his first assignment, though -— drafting a document on the situa-
tion on the Romecampus-—Cianfanelli flunked. He failed again when
ordered to post his men beneath the house of the professor the BR
wanted to hit. After a severe reprimand, he was transferred to ano-
ther sector: the logistics front. "They said I would be assigned to
the antenna sector, that money would be no object, that I was to buy
all the specialized publications, and scout the city and pinpoint all
antennae on military installations."

The assignments grew more sensitive as the months passed. First,
though, Gallinari decided to give Cianfanelli a driving test: How
would he handle himself in an unplanned, high-speed escape? In the
fall of 1978 came his baptism of fire, at a road-repair site on the
Via Flaminia ("We were firing from inside a big pipe, and the noise
was so loud I was deaf for 2 days afterwardsi"). At last came word
from Piccioni, the Rome column‘s armorer: "Be ready: you'll be the
driver on our next operation.“

6

FOR OFFICIAL IZSE ONLY
The summons came right at the beginning of October. At the meeting,
in addition to Gallinari and Piccioni, Cianfarelli found a fourth man:
Alvaro Loiacono, a former member of Worker Power (P.O.), Morucci's
protege, who had been a fugitive for months and who had been sentenced
with Panzieri for the murder of MSI boss Mantakas. He was introduced
as an irregular who was picking targets among the "Triple Alliance"
(meaning magistrates, carabinieri, and policemen). At that meeting
they decided to kill Judge Girelamo Tartaglione. A couple of checks,
another round of firing practice, and the commando was ready: in ad-
dition to Cianfanelli, it included Loiacono, Adriana Faranda, and
"Camilla," 3 BR member he met only on that one occasion, and whom
Cianfanelli has never managed to identify.

It was 10 October 1978. They decided to prepare the ambush at 1430
hours, the time when the judge usually left his office at the Justice
Ministry. Cianfanelli, wearing a fake mustache, waited in the car

for his accomplices. When the shooting was over he saw them coming on
the run, "Camillo and Loiaeono quite cool, and the Faranda woman up-
set." Only next day did he learn the details of the action: "Camillo
told how he had gone ahead of Tartaglione onto the landing, had moved
in on him, and fired two shots from a Glisenti revolver at point-blank
range. Loiacono had a Smith and Wesson and the Skorpion submachinegun
to cover the courtyard, but he didn't even have to fire a shot: when
the doorman stopped him ("I heard shotsl") he replied that he hadn't
heard anything. Faranda, with an M12 machinegun and a pistol, was in
charge of covering the outside of the building."

With Tartaglione dead, Cianfanelli was tapped for another action: to
bushwhack a police car. Morucei devised the plan: a fake phone call
to 113, the emergency squad ear rushing along Via Nomentana, and fall-
ing into the trap. Within a few seCOnds came a couple of bursts of

machinegun fire, shuts From a pistol ("The wounding of a policeman
was neither planned nor wanted"). Cianfanelli strolled calmly away.
"I walked a ways, and than I stole a scooter that was tied to a light-
post."

The poliee had been hit, and now it was the carabinieri's turn. With
the same technique they thought they could lure one of their officers
into the trap and kill him. That action was a bust. 50 they switched
to another plan out of the guerrilla manual of arms: kidnaping Gen
Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa, and setting his car afire.

But during that same period of easy military victories, the climate
inside the “R was at blood—heat. "Seven of us left the organization
over an ideological and political dispute that had been brewing for a
long time," Cianfanelli recalls. He changed camps once more, going
along with Mirucci and Faranda, who "kept pressing the need for concen-
trating<n10perations closer to home, to the job, to services." The
split, which had begun over the Moro kidnaping and killing, was not a
painless one. Cianfanclli was ordered by a scowling Gallinari to get
back among the ranks and help recover the weapons Morucci had made

off with. "Gallinari told me they were bandits who had let themselves

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l 8}: ONLY

be manipulated by people like Piperno and Pace." Not even another

meeting with the BR (with the seven dropouts present) sufficed to heal
the schism.

And that was how the Communist Revolutionary Movement was born, destined
to become a ragtag patchwork of neighborhood fringe-groups. Without
hideouts, without a structure, and without funds the "movement" limped
along until the end of 1979, even losing two of its leaders, Morucci
and Faranda, who were arrested in June. In the early months of 1980
the action started up again: a couple of armed robberies and two
breakins at gunpoint. Communications were tightened, too, with the
Autonomy and Prima Linea LFront Line; groups. Even so, for every new
recruit there were more who chose to defect. Cianfanelli began to
travel around Italy, from Bergamo to Padua, from Milan to Genoa, to
keep his contacts alive. But the pickings were slim. To make up for
that, thoug , he picked up some interesting morsels of information:
for instance, that Andrea Morclli and Domenico De Feo, both from Milan,
were part of the METROPOLI organization, but their assignment was arms
deals in the Middle East. He kncwMarco Donat Cattin, met him again

in Rome, and heard his suggestion that he join other armed groups
(Donat Cattin was one of the leaders of Prima Linea). "At those meet-
ings," Cianfanelli recalls, "the talk was of joint operations. Never
of mergers, though, because in Rome the possibilities were limited and
besides, the Prima Linea people were ready by then to leave Italy."

The man who set about getting the Communist Revolutionary Movement back
on its feet was a free-lance who had Just been released from prison

(he shared a cell with MOrucci). With 50 members in all, the organi-
zation devoted itself mainly to armed robbery ("For apartment jobs,

the individual cells handled the whole bit, but for banks the leader-
ship made the decisions"). The money was used not only to finance the
group, but also to pay salaries (350,000 per month) and help individual
terrorists to open high-ti stores, import-export companies, and alter-
native restaurants.

Some of the money also went to pay for vacations in the summer of 1980.
With the fall came more bank robberies. Then, on 13 November, they
ended with the killing of two terrorists (Claudio Pallone and Arnaldo
Genoino) in a shoot-out with the carabinieri.

His political illusions in tatters, and the stakes in the game already
too high, Cianfanelli decided it was time to go home. Just as he had
wandered into terrorism, he was free to walk out of it without so much
as a by-your-leave, taking advantage of 1 period when the major units
were breaking up. Nor did he lose all contact: some of his erstwhile
comrades met him again, some by chance, at a casual party (at the home
of an unwitting newsmen, for one), or in the halls of the university.

The police got to him almost by chance, while they were investigating
a neofascist group that had had indirect contacts with red terrorists
(their weapons came from the same source and at times their targets

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
were very similar). For several days he held out and refused to talk.
Then he began: "Some time ago I made up my mind to pull out. Now
I'll tell you where my political odessey took me."

In Naples, a War of Words

The Naples BR column and the BR prison front to the BR executive:
"Your style ranges all the way from insolence to arrogance."

BR executive to the Neapolitan column and the prison front: “With
your stupid attitude you are a serious handicap to the organization."

During May and June 1981 -- at the height of the public furor over the
kidnapings of Ciro Cirillo, Remo Sandrucci, Giuseppe Taliercio, and
Robert Peci -- a furious dispute broke out within the ranks of the BR.
Charges and counter-charges, threats and expulsions, and insults un-
heard-of between BR brethren, even during the stormy months in 1980
when Milan's "Walter Alasia" column decided to go its own way.

The events that triggered the May-June row were the Cirillo and Tali—
ercio killings. The executive opened hostilities (that was the BR'e
eight-man summit, according to Patrizio Peci's confession). In four
typewritten pages dated "May 1981," smuggled into the maximum secu-
rity prison at Palma, the Neapolitan column found itself charged with
"questionable judgment in the Cirillo action." "You have endangered

a tremendous Opportunity," wrote the executive, "having to do with a
series of follow-up targets involving the government." And it went
on: "Just to shut people up, you are fighting political battles in the
name of action" (a reference to the wounding of two Naples city coun-
cilmcn; Ed.). And it wound up: "We called a meeting of the strategic
leadership to talk about this, and you didn't even bother to show up.‘'

The Neapolitan column and the prison front fired off a 16-page counter-
hlast. It centered on two major charges: the executive was sticking
its nose into every issue; and it had stripped the strategic leader-
ship, which includes all column-chiefs, of its proper role as ”a forum
for political discussion of divergences." ("We did not come to the
meeting because you wanted to turn it into a disciplinary hearingﬂ).

Most significant, though, the resolution dated nJune 81“ contains the
charge that the whole Taliercio business-was wrong from start to fin-
ish. There is no complaint about the murder of the company director:
the fault was in not persuading him to ncooperate," and in failing to
make even one recruit in the company plant. "The lack of ambition was
the clue to the operation's most egregious shortcomings."

There is no clue in either of the documents as to whether or not the
breach has been healed. One carabiniere officer, though, has some
hope: "Maybe something has happened at last that we have been waiting
for a long time. Maybe some of the BR brethren are dropping out of the
organization because they are fed up with the power struggles among
the column leaders."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Hondadori Editore S.p.A. Milano
6182
cs0: 3104/83 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NEH METHOD FOR UTILIZING WASTE RENT DEVELOPED ‘
Hamburg CAPITAL in German No l, 1982 p 129

[Article by Karl-Heinz Seyfried: "How Industrial Waste Heat
Can be Utilized." Industry Wastes Large Quantities 0f Heat
Each Day That Are Contained in Air and Hater. This Could
Be Used To Heat Many Homes. A New Process Hay Put An End To
This Waste--Cold Conducters.]

[Text] The waste is without parallel: from joint sewage treatment plants of the
city of Ludwigshafen and the BASF chemical plant enough energy flows unused into
the Rhine to heat a city of 80,000 inhabitants. A similar and equally depressing
balance could be drawn up for all areas of industrial concentration in the Federal
Republic.

Until now no one knew exactly what to do with the discharge and cooling water from
factories, electrical generating plants and sewage treatment plants since this
water attains a temperature of at best around 40°C. In order to feed a regional
heating network, much higher temperatures are needed: at least 80°C or better even,
180°C. Superheating the water, most experts agreed, would be uneconomical.

The study group Planning-Energy-Architecture (Plenar) seems finally to have found
one way to end the wastage. Highly respected city planners, engineers and the
Rhenish-Hestphalian Electrical Works in Essen have joined forces to develop, under

a contract with the Federal Ministry of Research, a new type of regional heating
sySten for the area on the left bank of the Rhine between Speyer and Horns. The
specialists were not at a loss. The way to attack the problem was not to be found
in the conventional delivery of extremely hot water under high pressure to customers,
but instead lukewarm waste water.

Heat pumps would superheat the heating water at the point of use. Such pumps
operate on the same principle as that of a refrigerator: like the latter it also
withdraws heat from its interior and transfers it by way of condensor coils at its
rear into the air of the kitchen. The heat pumps can thereby generate at least
3.2 times the heat as its requirement for operating energy--electrical current. gas
or heating oil. The remainder comes from the waste water.

To be sure, heat pumps can also absorb energy not just from waste water. but also
from their immediate environment--for example from the air, the ground or subsurface
water. Yet the initial temperature from these sources is lower in winter than is
the case with waste water, which brings about higher installation and energy costs.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, a heat pump using air delivers only 2.2 times as much energy as is
invested in electrical current. The construction of waste water pipe lines is
justified, if [or no other reason, by the fact that they are inexpensive compared

with the pipes required for high—temperature regional heating systems. One kilometer
of insulated regional heating pipeline, laid underground, costs more than DH 10 million.
Using the simpler cement pipes for "cool regional heating," the costs are reduced

to DH 2 million.

Because the lukewarm water does not reduce substantially in temperature during
transport, as Plenar associate Andreas Krebs of the Frankfurt Office for City Planning
explained. even relatively long distances between the source of the waste heat and

the ultimate consumer can be dealt with economically. This will allow the discharge
heat from large power plants which are generally located at some distance from
population concentration centers, to be used for heating purposes in the cities.

One block of the Biblis nuclear power plants could heat all of the more densely
settled regions along the left bank of the Rhine between Worms and Speyer using
pipeline approximately 45 km long. The second block of the atomic pile could similarly
serve the Frankfurt area. .

The Plenar Plan has one hitch however. Such a regional network would only be
economical if all dwellings were hooked in to the regional heating net. But this
assumes legal compulsion to do so. In the light of this difficulty Plenar proposes

to serve only districts with short distances between the waste heat source and the
consumers, using the proposed system. Traditional heating systems could serve as

an emergency reserve and be maintained for periods of peak need.

Even at this moment the proponents of waste heat are certain of one thing: their
solution wOuld not only spare the environment and reserves of energy, but also the
pocketbooks of consumers who are increasingly plagued by price increases.

Comparison of Gas heating With Haste heat

The 20° to 28° C discharge water of the large-scale sewage treatment plant at
Ludwigshafen can, by using a gas-driven heat pumps coupled with gas boilers for peak
production, heat the 300 private homes and 850 apartment dwellings of a new housing
development some 4.5 km distant from the plant. Investment costs: DH 8 million.

The municipal utility authorities plan gas boilers for the individual houses which
will entail hookup costs of some DH 4 million for homeowners. Nonetheless the balance
comes out in favor of waste heat use:

 

Annual Heating Costs For Gas Heat Waste Heat
19¢ Entire Development in DH 1,000

Energy * 1,716 838
interest (10 percent) and Depreciation 630 960
Maintenance __1_(&_ 190

Total Costs 2,306 1,988

*0H 0.66 per cubic meter for gas heating, DH 0.57 for waste heat system.
COPYRIGHT: 1982 Cruner + Jahr Ag a C0.

9878
C50: 3103/215

11
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
COLDIRETTI'S LOBIANCO ATTACKS FINANCIAL LA"
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 21 Dec 81 pp 210-215

[Interview with Arcangelo Lobianco, Naples deputy. president of the independent
fanatfs association ((bldiretti) by Tina Oldani: "Look Out For the Farmers!"]

[Text] Farm organization president points the finger at Prime
Minister Spadolini: he raises taxes and then kicks
out even the basic financial aid.

“The budget bill as passed by the senate is a punitive measure aimed at
those who till the soil. If it is not improved in the Chamber, members
with ties to our organization will vote against it." Arcangelo Lobian-
co, 52, Christian Democrat deputy from Naples who has headed the inde-
pendent farmers' federation for a year now, has decided to take the
field against Giovanni Spadolini's government. His is going to be a
tough, frontal attack that may well imperil the first [postwar] govern-
ment coalition that does not include the DC: in the Chamber, DCndepae
ties with 1005 out to the independent farmers number 35, more than the
PRI's 15 and the PLI's 9 put together, and a force bigger than even
Pietro Longo's Social Democrat (PSDI) contingent of 21 deputies.

A man to watch these days, one who heads an imposing organization which
his predecessor, Paolo Bonomi, used for 35 years as a pool for DC votes
(1.2 million member families, 11,000 sections, and 20,oooof its canJ
didates elected to local and national office), Lobianco has devoted
the first year of his presidency to breaking down the walls the Coldi-
retti had built around themselves through their all-or-notbing stance.
”Now," he says, "the hard part begins: our political and cultural re-
newal." His first move -- to the general astonishment -- was his swift
back-off from the DC: at the Christian Democrats' November gathering
at Rome's EUR, Coldiretti registered among the "non-party" (outsider)
groups, along with intellectuals like Pietro Stoppola, Luigi Pedrazzi,
and Achille Ardigo. Lobianco talked to PANORAMA about his next moves.

Question: What is it about the budget bill that the Coldiretti doesn't
like?

Answer: A lot of things. But there are two provisions that threaten
more than any others to snag the farm sector in a punitive bite: first,

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it calls for very large hikes in our social security and health costs,
and then, with one stroke of the pen, it takes away basic government

financial support for agricultural investments. I am referring to the
700 billion lirc in the "4-leaf clover" bill already appropriated for
1981 and now deferred to 1982; the same fate was meted out to the ad-

them to the funding for the current fiscal year. If these measures are
not changed, the farm worker's income, which is already less than 55
percent of the average income of all other workers, will be pared to
even meaner levels next year. And 1982 already looks like a horrible
year, following on this year's 2-percent drOp in farm production.

Question: You're not going to claim that the increase in social secu-
rity taxes is unjustified: the Coldiretti have been pilloried precise-

Answer: The Coldiretti have never opposed a gradual increase in Social
Security taxes, so long as it was accompanied by an improvement in farm
pensions, which are far below those of other workers. We are squarely
opposed, though, to the indiscriminate increase in per capita contri-
butions: you can't ask every farm to come up with the same amount, be-
cause a lé-hectare farm planted to vinyards pays a minimal sum by com-
parison with the 10 hectare spread planted to profitable cash crops.

It would be fairer to spread Social Security costs proportionally, ac-
cording to the amount each farm can pay, and to adjust pensions to match.

Question: What will happen if your demands are not met?

Answer: That's obvious: those deputies in the Chamber who are with

us will vote against the budget bill. And it would be wise not to for-
get that, in addition to the 35 deputies who come straight out of the
current middle executive levels of Coldiretti's national and local of~
fiCes, we can also count on other deputies elected with the votes of
our organization.

Question: Just how many are there -- senators and deputies together -~
who have close ties to Coldiretti?

Answer: When we all get together to talk over something really impor-
tant, there are no less than 60 of us. Like it or not, we represent
almost 4 million votes.

Question: What you're telling me has all the earmarks of a DC torpedo
with Spadolini's name on it.

Answer: Torpedos always arrive unannounced, sometimes even from behind.
But we have told Spadolini personally about what we want, at least three

different times. Our latest meeting with him, unfortunately a disap-
pointing one, was held no later than 1 December.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Question: Probably with a government headed by a Christian Democrat
your attitude would be a little more malleable.

Answer: I rule that out absolutely. Last year, on this same issue of
the budget bill, I took on Arnaldo Forlani, who at the time was prime
minister. And I looked horns with Treasury Minister Nino Andreatte,
too, even though he is a Christian Democrat too, citing the same cri-
ticism as I had the year before: the farmers are no longer willing
to submit to punitive [tax] measures, nor yet to indiscriminate cuts
in the funds for productive investments.

Our spending on agriculture is already the lowest in Europe: for every
lira granted in Italy, they spend 3.3 in Germany, 4.6 in France, and

4 in England. So let the Christian Democratic ministers not toy with
illusions: Coldiretti intends to become increasingly a union that

will stand up for the rights of its members, wholly independent of

the DC.

Question: How are your relations with the other unions?

Answer: For years we haven't spoken a word to each other. Now, though,
we have a constructive dialogue under way. A lot of our moves are de-
termined in conference with the Confcoltivatori, which is close to the
PCI and PSI. After I sat down to lunch with Lama, Carniti, and Benven-
uto we also established relations with the national unions. Right now
at the National Economic and Labor Council (CNEL) there are three

joint working groups on which Coldiretti sits along with the CGIL,

CISL, and UIL, set up to investigate three areas: the 3-year plan,
revision of the EEC's farm policy, and social security.

Question: What did you say to Lama, Carniti, and Benvenuto when you
met them for the first time?

Answer: I explained that agriculture will no longer stand for being
the rear wheel on the cart. At a demonstration we staged in Piazza

San Giovanni in Rome, there was one poster that read: "HEY£ CGIL!
Cisll UIL! Stop a minute! Wait for us!" Today there is a gulf of
misunderstanding between the farm world and that of industry: the fac-
tory worker and the office worker are completely ignorant about the
men and-women who work in the fields, while the farmer looks on the
people who work in factories or offices as privileged classes. The
disparity between the two sectors is enormous.

Question: For example?

Answer: An independent farmer often works land that is not his own,
under conditions not all that different from those of a factory worker.
Yet if a farmer's wife who works on the family farm has a baby, in
place of the 6 months leave that other working women get, she gets only
a $0,000-1ire check from the government, or just about what the EEC
pays farmers for the birth of a calf. Yes, the list of privileges the
farmers envy workers in industry is a long one.

14
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: Have you also made some changes in Coldiretti's relations
with the left-wing parties?

Answer: The facts are there to show that we have: on practical issues,
like farm agreements, our positions and those of the PCI coincide. Why?
Because both of us represent real forces in our society. And we behave
responsibly. Maybe this is why we can't seem to get along with the
social democrats.

Question: Could you clarify that a little?

Answer: It would be a very easy thing to ride the anger coming out of
the country for political gain. And we refuse to do that. We cannot,
however, hide our deep concern when we see behind the grape revolution
in Barletta or behind what are tantamount to subversive incidents in
Tuscany and Tarantino, not only the fascists (MSI) fanning the flames,
but a party that is actually part of the government, like the Social
Democrats. Our opting for a place in the ranks of organized labor is
also motivated by our determination to defeat this ridiculous line of
empty -~ not to say Poujadist -- protest for protest's sake.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore S.p.A.Dulano

6182
C80: 3104/83

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RIVALRY BETWEEN AERITALIA, AUGUSTA IN AIR SECTOR
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 21 Dec 81 pp 215-219
[Article by Giuseppe Oldani]

[Text] The battle between Aeritalia and Augusta goes on,
no holds barred. And even though their feud spoils
international agreements that would mean billions
to Italy, the ministers act as though nothing were
happening.

There is one sector of Italian industry that derives practically its
entire living from government: money for financing, money from the
sinking fund to bail it out of rough going, money for support of its
foreign marketing, and money from purchase contracts. And yet, de-
spite this unique feature, it is the sector where you find the least
concern with resource planning, with investment coordination, or with
joint projects. 0n the contrary: international experts look on the
Italian aviation industry as a savage jungle where, in spite of the
ministers on the Interministerial Economic Planning Committee (CIPB),
it's every man for himself -- not just private against state-owned in-
dustry, but IRI-controlled state-run industry against SPIN-controlled
state-run industry.

To read it, one would think that the plan CIPE laid down for the avia-
tion sector should have restored some semblance of order there. But
instead the struggles of the hostile interests have clearly been so
violent as to force the architects of the plan to confine themselves

to generalities, sound enough at the strategic level, but nothing
spelled out to bring the warring corporations back into line. So the
plan says that the corporations must cooperate, assigning priority to
joint ventures in Europe wherever possible, falling back on the Ameri-
cans for bigger and more costly aircraft, but says nothing about the
specific cases of companies which are already flouting those guidelines,

The chaos became too noisy for comfort with the personally embittered
struggle between the heads of the two state-controlled companies in
the sector: in one corner you have Pietro Pascione, vice president
of BFIM's Augusta; and in the other Renato Bonifacio, president of
the IRI-Finmeccanica subsidiary, Aeritalia. The former reportedly has

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socialist leanings, the latter proudly wears the Christian Democrat
brand.

State Participations Minister Gianni De Michelis has already let it
be known that he intends to settle the issue by merging the two com-
panies or by putting both of them under the wings of a special finan-
cial corporation for the aviation sector. He had nothing to say,
however, about the fate of the two men, who are battling tooth and
claw for the most impregnable power base.

There have been episodes that border on the silly. There is a story
making the rounds in Milanese industrial circles, for one: "Since
Augusta owns a little foundry at Benevento, Bonifacio is moving hea-
ven and earth to get one of his own, and is scattering bids right and
left for a comparable share."

On his part, Fascione is bulling ahead in some very ambitious plans.
Rumor has it that Bonifacio's Aeritalia might be interested in buying
Aermacchi, a Varese company still in private hands, whose prosperity
is based on the MB 339, a training craft that has been adopted by
several countries. And so, not to let the grass grow under foot, the
Augusta subsidiary, SIAI, has another trainer on its drawing boards,
to be known as the S 211, and of course is asking IMI for the money
to finance it, despite the fact that the Defense Ministry has turned
it down on the grounds that it is "of no interest."

Yet another episode: the German and Italian military have called for
proposals on an anti-tank helicopter and, by some happy chance, the
German requirements are almost line-for-line identical with the Ita-
lian. There was talk of collaboration which would involve Augusta on
the Italian side and Germany's MBB on the other. Augusta turned that
idea down, and plans instead to do the whole thing on its own, design-
ing a model -- its A-129 -- based on the civilian A—109 and equipped
with an engine manufactured by Piaggio under a Rolls Royce licence.
The upshot is that the Germans are going ahead on their own, with MBB
doing the helicopter's airframe and Motoren Turbinen Union (MTU) doing
the engine, and voluntarily offering to work with FIAT Aviation in
Italy and Turbomeca in France.

The large-scale maneuvering for slices of the aviation pie is not
confined to on~again, off-again international agreements. There is
worse to come: right here at home there is guerrilla warfare going on
for control of this or that company. Aeritalia has already laid co-
vetous hands on PartenaVia. Now Fascione's Augusta is negotiating a
takeover of Breda Nardi, a little company making helicopters under
licence from Hughes, a tiny outfit which is 40 percent owned by the
Nardi family and 45 percent held by INSUD, a holding company in which
most of the stock is held by EFIM, of which Augusta was a subsidiary.

Apparently Fascione is asking for a financial dowry package of 20 bil-
lion lire to take over Breda Nardi, but, above and beyond all this,
there has already been a little "thriller" at the ministerial level.
Looking Gianni De Michelis straight in the eye, Fascione declared that

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that should hredu Nardi come into Augusta's hands there would be con-
siderable economies of scale, and it could go on building Hughes heli-
copters undisturbed. Emanuele Nardi and the old private owners, how-
ever, showed the minister a letter from Hughes informing them that the
Hughes licence to build would be revoked should Augusta take over the
company. Who will win? While we wait to find out, it is certain that
Breda Nardi, which the military selected to receive a large order,
will die by drowning in a rising tide of debt.

"If this is the way we straighten out the aviation sector,‘l say many

experts, "then it is clear that the Italian taxpayer will be made to

pay dearly for the lack of production and marketing coordination. In
aviation, the fact is that every new takeover battle simply makes the
long-standing maladies worse."

Those long-standing maladies, though, were made more acute precisely
by an excess of parochial chauvinism. The latest instance is still
merely a rumor: right now, there is a world-wide boom in commuter
aircraft -- planes carrying 30 or so passengers designed to serve the
less heavily traveled routes which have been abandoned by the major
airlines. One of them is the ATR-42, which is a Franco-Italian pro-
duct (Aeritalia on our side, Aerospatiale in France). Despite this
presence, the story goes that Siai -- an Augusta subsidiary -- is in-
tent on designing another similar model, a commuter aircraft which re-
portedly already has a name: Kangaroo.

Is this rumor true? Or is it fair to suspect mischief here? Will the
battle between Aeritalia and Augusta really go to such extremes and
damn the consequences? And when it's all over, who is going to pay for
this mess? The only sure answer would seem to answer another question:
who is not going to root the bill? 01d Count Corrado Augusta, that's
who. Until a year ago, Corrado Augusta owned 50 percent of Augusta.
Now he has decided not to subscribe to the planned capital increase,
and has let his share drop to 20 percent. "Now," they say, "he is ne-
gotiating to sell another big chunk of his holdings, maybe a bloc of

[0 percent, maybe 20 percent. Then he will leave Italy and head for
the United States, for Houston, where he plans to go into the banking
business. What it all boils down to is that he has no intention of
paying other people's bills.

COPYRIGHT=1981 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore $.p.A.lﬂlnno

0182
cso: 3104/83

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LABOR UNIONS PROTEST NEH LA" on ARBITRATION BOARDS
Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 1!» Jan 82 p 78
[Article by Francoise Chirot: "Arbitration Boards: More Change"]

[Text] The bill to reform the boards had won virtually unanimous support. But
then the Council of State put in its 2 cents' worth.

After the lapse of 3 years, President Francois Hitterrand has disavowed Socialist
Party Secretary Francois Mitterrand. The 6 January cabinet meeting deleted the
article in the arbitration board reform bill that gave the national labor unions
(CCT, CPDT, CFTC, P0, and CCC) a monopoly on nominating candidates for seats on
those boards. True, the governent had been intensely lobbied by the Council of
State to do just that. The fact remains that, in 1978, the Socialist Party had
cited this reason for its refusal to approve the reform bill sponsored by Raymond
Barre's government.

"Wholly unacceptable," say the unions, which plan to ask parliament to attach
some amendments.

Bad news for Labor Minister Jean Auroux. Helped with a pinch of workers' rights
and a cauple of provisions drafted by the Daocratic Confederation of Labor
(CFDT) to settle operational problems, his bill for reform of the arbitration
boards was expected to sail through with virtually unanimous support. Even the
employers approved of it. on the whole. What, exactly, was Auroux trying to do?
Merely to put the finishing touches on board reform proposals begun by one of
his predecessors. Robert Boulin, in 1978. These boards, created by Napoleon.
are the venue for aployers and wage-earners in the private sector to meet as
equals and resolve disputes staining from union labor contracts: wrongful dis-
missals, discrimination, overtime pay, compliance with contract provisions-
100,000 cases a year in all. Union workers are fully aware of the salutary na-
ture of the boards' activity: 63 percent of all those eligible to vote made the
trek to their city halls to elect 13.572 board councilmen in December 1971.

The Barre government's bill called for elections to replace half the board mem-
bers every 3 years. Before the truth ever dawned on him that doing so would,

in effect, give the edge, in the long run, to the biggest of the labor unions.
the 661‘, Jean Auroux made a few changes in the systal. From now on, all board
members will be elected at the same time and will serve a 5-year term. The same

19

mommrustomv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system will apply nationwide. That means no more special by-law for Alsace and
Hoselle, where the "echevin" [alderman] system still applies. An echevin must,
by law, chair all tribunal session. there; the rub is that there is no such
worthy in communes with less than 200,000 population. "Half the wage-earners,"
explains the CGT, "were thereby disfranchised."

Furthermore, the new bill improves the board members' job security. Similarly,
the system of compensating them for days spent on board duty will be more effi-
cient: they will draw their regular wages from their employers, who must then
apply to the government for reimbursement. "High time, too," say the labor or-

ganizations. "Some of our people have lost thousands of francs by serving on
the boards."

Under a decree issued on 11 December 1981, Jean Auroux had already satisfied one
of labor's demands in relation to their councilmen's training. The unions had
been protesting a decree handed down by former Justice Minister Alain Peyrefitte,
assigning responsibility for their training to the appeals courts. From now on,
provided agreement is reached with the Labor Ministry, the unions will have the
money to pay for that training.

With that out of the way, though, Auroux found his hands tied by a ruling from
the Supreme Court of Appeals, and he could not solve the problem of the foreman
and supervisor section. Despite protests from the CCC and the CGT, foremen and
supervisors will still be barred from the arbitration boards. They will have to
register in one of the four other sections: industry, commerce and commercial
services. agriculture, or miscellaneous activities.

That still leaves the problem that cannot be settled by law: operational prob-
lems. These arise out of a shortage of staff and office space. In Orleans,
for instance, the arbitration board sits in the circuit court chamber. It is
no easy matter to try a murder case and a plea of wrongful dismissal at the

same time.... In Paris, where there is a backlog of 22,000 cases, the number
of councilmen could handle as many as 50 cases a day but, because of a shortage
of office space. only 32 are actually heard. In all the big cities, staffing
is inadequate. There is sometimes a wait of as long as a month for a typed
transcript of a ruling. Only one thing can set this state of affairs to rights:
more money.

For 1982, the Justice Ministry, which is in charge of arbitration board opera-
tions, has asked for 68 million francs more than last year. But will that be
enough? Elections are slated for the end of the year, and that will cost more
money. "There really wasn't any rush." says the COT: it would have preferred
elections to the boards of directors of the Social Security Funds.

To put it briefly, elections to the arbitration boards require a great deal of
organization, planning, and propaganda effort on the part of the unions-efforts
concomitant with the stakes involved. These elections are, after all. the litmus
test of their standing among the workers they are assumed to represent.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Croupe Express

6182
C80: 3100/253

20

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
DEMOSKOPEA SURVEY ON SPADOLINI, PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTS
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 21 Dec 81 pp 49-54
[Article by Chiara Valentini: “How Do You Like the Lay Government?"]

[Text] Italians have a deep desire for change: they are glad
there is no longer a Christian Democrat running the go-
vernment, they don't put much stock in the DC or PCI,
and they would like the president to have more power.
Oh, yes: and they would like to be able to elect their
mayors directly.

Should Prime Minister Giovanni Spadolini fall some time within the
next few months, as seems increasingly likely, Italians would be angry
and disappointed, and would lose what little faith they were beginning
to have in politics. These are the conclusions that emerge from the
latest Monitor poll, the quarterly survey the Demoskopea organization
conducts for PANORAMA, on a sample of 2,000 representatives of the
Italian population.

This time, the Monitor shows that a lot has changed in the 7 months we
have had a man from a lay party running the government. First of all,
the attitude toward those who govern us. There is one basic question
that is asked in each of these surveys (see table) as to opinions of
the performance of the government in office. For the past year that
question had evoked extremely negative responses, expressed in a truly
disastrous rating index: minus 23 for the last Cossiga government,

and minus 21 for the Forlani government.

With Spadolini, the picture has suddenly reversed, and all of a sudden
the approval rating has jumped to plus 15. Why? First of all because
the new prime minister is not a Christian Democrat. To the question:
"Was it good or bad for the country that a non-DC prime minister has
been appointed for the first time in 30 years?" 46.7 percent replied

"A good thing," and only 8.4 percent “A bad thing." That is an astound~
ing figure, when you stop and think that there is another 44.9 perCent
out there who will duck the issue with a "Don't know."

"What this means in other words," says sociologist Giampaolo Fabris,
president of Demoskopea, "is that the overwhelming majority of those

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run unlum. use ONLY

who take an active interest in politics is pleased with this changing
or the guard.“ Among those pleased is the Christian Democratic rank
and file ("A good thing" for 39 percent of DC voters, who went on to
reply in the identical proportion, that it was "A good thing" that the
man appointed was Giovanni Spadolini).

Even when you ask people in practical terms about the way Prime Minister
Spadolini has done his job these past months, the attitude does not
change much (see table). For 40.9 percent, the prime minister is doing
"pretty well," while only 13.9 percent judge his record as “pretty bad."
If we now look into these answers, and break them down according to age,
social class, and where they come from, we find that Spadolini's popu-
larity is highest among the educated and affluent citizens of the big
cities in the Center-North (61 percent of those with some secondary
education are for him, but only 36 percent of those with only a grade-
sehool education.. Forty—five percent of the North likes him, as against
36 percent of the South; 75 percent of executives and businessmen do,
too, but only 44 percent of workers fancy him).

As for political preferences, Spadolini, curiously enough, finds almost
the same approval rating among Christian Democrats (47 percent), and
communists (46 percent), but rates still higher with the center parties:
63 percent among socialists, 64 percent among social democrats, and 78
percent among liberals.

From this particular Count we see one of the aspects emerging most
clearly from the survey: there seems to be a gathering consensus around
the first lay-party prime minister in 30 years, and it seems to be sof—
tening the DC-PCI polarization.

To the question asked in every survey, whether it would be better to
have the Christian Democrats or the communists in the government, the
mean index for those who prefer one or the other drops for the first
time among both groups. (See table.) If you look then at the political
preferences of reSpondents, the most striking fact is that a very large
slice of the socialist rank-and-file -- no less than 53.7 percent --
wants the PCI in the opposition. "There is proof of how far we are in
Italy from achieving unity on the left," says Stefano Rodota, an inde-
pendent leftist member of the Chamber of Deputies.

An attitude of moderation and pragmatism, impatient with the subtleties
of high polities, also emerges from a list of questions about institu-
tional reforms. At first reading this might look as though people were
longing for authority, for instance when they answer the question about
increased powers for the president: 31.9 percent say they favor it, and
of those 56.8 percent of.Christian Democrats, 52.6 percent of commun-
ists -— thus bolting their parties' stance -- and a stunning 62.3 percent
of the socialists. While the exclusionary clause recently proposed by
Bettina Craxi, the rule that says no party that fails to garner 5 percent
of the popular vote could sit in Parliament in its own right, finds fa—
vor with 50.9 percent (51.9 percent are actually registered communist
voters, despite the fact that the PCI inveighed bitterly against the idea).

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It would be over-simplifying, though, to read these responses as merely
indicative of voter backlash or of the "plague on both your houses"
stance. For one thing, only 35 percent of respondents answered "Yes"
when asked: "Would you like to see more power vested in the prime minis-
ter?" At the same time, almost twice as many, 61.9 percent, would like
direct elections for mayors. "We have by now a very strong personaliza-
tion of office, a confidence in personal power, personal government, that
seeks increasingly to detach itself from the parties, as in the ease of
mayors, " observes Rodota.

Impatience with over-complicated political alchemy, expressed in approval
of the 5-percent clause, does not mean a willingness to suspend dcmocra-
tic law. A kind of catch question slipped in precisely to see if this
was indeed the attitude, asked opinion as to a majority premium for the
party that polled most votes: only 19.6 percent of respondents said they
thought it would be all right.

Far more out of touch with the real issues and influenced almost solely
by rumor and long-standing convictions, though, was the Italian think-
ing that emerged in connection with the biggest and by all odds the most
arcane scandal of recent years: the case of Masonic Lodge P2. Asked
to say which party, in their view, was most deeply involved in the mat-
ter of the secret lodge, 36.8 percent pointed to the DC, 6.8 percent to
the PSI, and a paltry 2.0 percent to the PSDI nan by Pietro Longo, the
only party secretary named in Licio Gelli's lists. A very high per-
centage, 49.9, subsequently admitted that they "did not know," that they
couldn't make heads or tails of it, that they couldn't get any clear
idea of that colossal intrigue. "The slight amount of blame attaching
to the socialists and social democrats is disconcerting, and it goes to
show that in these cases people reason only on a presumption of guilt:
when there is a scandal, people in general tend to believe that nobody
could be responsible but the Christian Democrats," remarks Gigi Melega,
a radical MP, who has long been engaged in his own battle with the so-
cialist whip in the Chamber, Silvano Labriola, one of the Ien on Gelli's

list.

Though Italians may be at sea when it comes to the freemason scandal,
they know exactly where they stand on the matters that most concern the
average Italian in everyday life. Comparing the findings with those of
past months, we see a sharp rise in interest in such matters as drug
abuse and health, housing and inflation, while there is less concern
with crime, particularly terrorism.

Zanone: "Budget Bills Are Fatal to Governments"

Valcrio Zanone, Liberal Party secretary and a major proponent of the
lay-cum-moderate alternative, had this to say when PANORAMA asked him
Just what it is that makes the lay parties and Giovanni Spadolini so
popular:

Question: This survey shows us that the one-on-one war between the
Christian Democrats and the Communists, along with their two-party mo-
nopoly on politics, is running out of steam. It also shows us that

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people are beginning to show favorable interest in the lay parties in
the center, and in third forces. What are the reasons for this?

Answer: It is a trend that started in 1979 and which is going to grow.
I think we are just now beginning to get the first signals, but they
are enough to deliver the message that the de facto two-party system,
which reached its peak in 1976, is already dead.

Question: Why?

Answer: Up until 1976 the DC and the PCI fed on one another. Anger
at the Christian Democrats would show up in big protest votes for the
Communists, and those big votes would scare people into voting DC next
time around. And then if either of the parties showed a drop at the
polls, the extremists moved in to exploit it —- the H51 on the right
and the extreme left. Now that cycle has ended, too. Right now, but
even more so in the future, the crisis in bipolarism, in ideologies,
in extremism of every stripe will work to the advantage of the lay
parties and the liberal-socialists. People want practicality, a prag-
matic approach. And we are offering it to them.

Question: Why do you think Giovanni Spadolini and his government rate
so highly with the average Italian?

Answer: They like Spadolini first of all because he is the personifi-
cation of a very specific myth, as is Sandro Pertini, for that matter.
People see Pertini as the good-hearted, curmudgeonly grandfather, and
they percieve Spadolini as the brilliant uncle, the one who always
brought home "A" grades and took honors at the university, the one who
won all the competitions and all the prizes. As for his government,
part of its charm is its new faces, which earn it far more confidence
among the voters than the ones that went before it.

Question: You Liberals, though, even though you are part of this coa-
lition, don’t seem to be overly smitten with our first lay-party pre-
mier.

Answer: We are simply supporters, not fans. But because of something
in our nature, we have never allowed brawling, unseemly quarreling, or
the laying of sneaky snares for the unwary. Of course it is easier,
in words, to get along with a lay-party prime minister. But when we
actually get down to business, there is no guarantee that there will
be any great difference from what we have had in the past.

Question: Do you believe, as a lot of people in politics now do, that
this government is doomed to fall within the next few months?

Answer: I should suggest that you look at the coincidence we have al-
ways had, in the past, between the introduction of the budget bill and
the fall of the government. And it is certainly highly unlikely that
the Spadolini government will escape that coincidence, since the king-
pin of its policy is right there in the budget bill. That bill is, in
some ways, like the amaryllis blossom. The plant pours every bit of its

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
juices and every ounce of its strength into getting that flower to
bloom. Once the bud opens, the plant dies.

Question: And when the plant dies -- to stick to your metaphor --
will you Liberals insist on another lay-party prime minister?

Answer: I don't get the feeling that the Christian Democrats will be
very enthusiastic about letting a lay-party man into the top spot
again. But that isn't the basic issue. It is far more important that
we manage to hammer out real cohesion among the other four parties in
government, that we take these faction-ridden, ramshackle, unruly lay
parties and somehow make them the true soul of the new coalition.

TABLE 1. A most a Crush on Spadolini

 

 

Last June Lhe president, for the first time in 30 years, chose a poli-
tician who was not a Christian Democrat to be prime minister. In your
view, was that decision, on the whole, good or bad for the country?

 

 

Total Men Women
A good thing .O'IOOOOOOOOOCOIDOOO. 46.7 5700 37.1
A bad thing loses-toaoeootooasoeev 8.4 8.9 7.9
Don't mow .......'IICIO..I.DO.'O. 44.9 34.1 55.0

 

What about the decision to name Spadolini to the post? Was that, on
the whole, a good thing or a bad thing?

 

A good thing...................... 3807 4702 30.7
Abad thing..'...‘............... 9.2 10.2 8.3
Don't know none-ooaooonocsno.eoooo 52.1 ‘206 61.0

 

How would you rate Spadolini's performance as head of the government?
Geographical Area of Residence

 

Total Northwest Northeast Center South*

 

Very g00d................ 3.6 201 4.7 503 3.3
Pretty good Cooioaalreooo 40-9 4407 49.2 4007 3206
Pretty poor poo-osoo-uooo 13.9 17-4 809 1106 1502
very bad OOI'OOIOOOOIOOO' 205 141 0-1 3-1 5.0
Don't know oouoooaaeooeoo 39.0 34.7 3701 39.3 43-9

 

 

* South includes the islands.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

TABLE 2. Get the Big Parties Out of the Government

 

In the national interest, do you believe it would be better for the
Christian Democrats to be in the government or in the opposition?

Oct 79 Feb 30 Jul 80 OctENov Feb 31 Jul 31 Oct 31
12 0

In the government 49.3 50.2 45.5 51.4 48.2 49.4 41.0
In the opposition 20.4 23.2 26.5 20.9 24.6 30.3 29.3
Don't know 30.4 26.6 28.0 27.7 27.2 25.2 29.7

What about the Communists?

In the government 26.2 28.7 29.7 25.4 28.1 29.9 23.8
In the opposition 38.7 40.1 39.8 43.5 41.2 42.4 44.6
Don't know 35.2 31.2 30.5 31.2 30.7 27.7 31.6

 

TABLE 3. Andreotti Was So Nice, Though...

 

Among the heads of government listed below, which would you say were
the most ... ?

 

 

'H g 2 a g 3
‘d

3 ~n c w c o h m o 5

o n .a H a a o 0.0

o In H o (u a 5 a

n o u v c o o a

U u o o a H m = o -
m a m o 0.: c

5 m o 2.9 8

 

6.1 0.9 24.1 31.2
6.4 0.2 9.4 34.9

Honest.......... 7.1 4.8 4.8 17.9

Qualified and
capable.......

20.0 4.3 3.9 14.3-

o~<x a. o~ e.
O

ha<n H H c
(n
O
U\

Nicest..........12.l 5.8 5.9 13.4 0.8 19.7 29.9
Learned0000000001706 208 2‘6 1308 0 6'6 1.3 6.0 3909
Energetic....... 9.9 5.0 4.2 21.1 . 6.7 1.1 9.1 36.2

Basically
well-meaning.... 6.0 5.4 4.5 27.1 2.7 4.8 1.0 14.1 34.3

Typical.........12.1 4.9 $08 9.8 601 12-0 108 1006 3700

 

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE 4. A Firm Hand, and Down with the Parties

 

There has been talk for some time about “major reforms" in our institu-
tions through which we could make some changes in the Constitution, to
make the country more governable. Which of these proposals do you agree
or disagree with?

 

Broaden the powers of the President Abolish the Senate, and keep only

Agree 0 O . O O D O O O O I I C O O 51. 9 the Chamber Of Deputles

Disagree .OOOCOIOOO'. 20.6 Agree COOOCOOOOCOOO 3005
Don't know IOIIOCOIOO 27.4 Disagree UOCCOCOCII 3008
Don't know ........ 38.7
Broaden the prime minister's power
Hold direct election of mayors
by the voters, not by the
communal council

Agree................ 35.0
Disagree............. 33.1
Don't know .......... 31.9

Agree ...'..'...... 61.9
Disagreeoo-ouoooaao 1337
Don't know ........ 24.4

Keep minor parties which fail to
get more than a given share (3
to 5%) of the vote out of Par-

liament Grant a majority bonus of a cer-
tain number of seats more than
Agree........o..oo... 50'9 those won in the elections to the

Disagree............. 22.6

Don't know........... 26-5 party getting most votes

W Agree ............. 19.6
TABLE 69 Masons, yes, but some Disagreeoaaaoooaaoo 43.4
of the DC, too... Don't knOWoooooonoo 3700

 

 

Aside from the individuals involved TABLE 5. At Last a Plus!
what party do you think was, on the
whole, most deeply involved in the Could you rate the government now
P2 scandal? in office as good or bad? (opinion
expressed in pluses or minuses

 

 

DC ooococoacoaaoaaaooo3008 on the approval index).
PCICUCCCIOCOOIIDICCCCC 1.9

Pslcoouoooaoaaaaaaoaaa 608 Gobober 79 COSSiga -10
PR1 (Republicans)..... 0-4 February 80 (Cossiga) - 22
PR (Radioals)......... 0.2 July 1980 (Cossiga) - 23
P501 (Soc. Democrats) 2.6 February 81 (Forlani) - 21
PLI (Liberals) 0.6 October 81 (Spadolini) + 15
MST/0N oouoaooonaaoonn 007

PDUP (Proletarian UnityD.1

DP/New cht-.......... 001

Don't know............49.9

W

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Hondadori Editors S.p.A. Hilano

6182
3104/83

27
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
DISSIDBNT GROUP ARISES WITHIN 0'66 PARTY
Amsterdam VRIJ NEDERLAND in Dutch 16 Jan 82 pp 1, 2

[Article by Max Van Heezel: "The Timid Rebels of D'66, The 'Rappel' Group Peels
That ’the Base' Is No Good]

[Ten] It: seems as though 0'66 (the Democrat. of 1966) are becoming
a real political party. A real Chamber delegation, three

ministers in the government, three secretaries of state
and members. Not so many, true but the members the party
has are sorely ambitious, all the same. So sorely, in
fact, that a group of dissatisfied 0'66 members has arisen.

Unfortunately, we could not follow what was happening on the other end of the
line. From the conversation, we could make out that the person who had just called
was named Laurens-Jan.

Cees Spigt: "We have had a first nonbinding contact (. . .). we did not agree on
that (. . .) I do understand the significance you attach to that name, but we

found him quite nice (. . .) Yes, outstanding, thanks, Laurens-Jan."

Let it be clear: Political leaders other than Laurens-Jan Brinkhorst have certainly
attacked subversives with a firmer hand. And even those who are fueling the dis-

content are doing their very best to radiate reasonability. Ceea Spigt, until this
past November still the deputy chairman of 0'66: "He do not want to be a recalci-
trant group. Re are not a HBSP [(Labor Party) Work Group for Socialist Policy].

Ernst Van Altena, noted composer and ghostwriter of D'66 printed material for as
long as anyone can remember: "We are certainly not a group which is out to set
itself up as dissident."

Spigt: "He would rather form something like a think tank. It must not become a
wild movement.

And once again, bordering on the superfluous, he adds: "I would feel it to be
unjust if this were to be explained as a motion of lack of confidence in this
cabinet. I have no doubt of our ministere' progressiving thinking."

let this be clear, too: many party leaders have certainly faced fiercer opponents.
Still, it is something else. Naturally, viewed superficially 0’66 has already

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shown some similarities to a real political party (a Chamber delegation! three

ministers!). But now that process seems to have received the definitive seal: ﬂow
a group of dissatisfied 0'66 members has even arisen.

Wave of Success

The founders are Spigt, Van Altena, and one of the men who has even occupied the
post of publicity coordinator, so strategic in 0'66, Ad Van Thiel. Last Monday,
an appeal proposal was sent out to a select company of Chamber members, municipal
council members and local 0'66 leaders. A first meeting is to take place Saturday
30 January at the Evert Kupersoord in Amersfoort, the union hall not far from Jan
Terlouw's residence, a closed meeting: "It is to exchange ideas, so it cannot

get too big." (Spigt)

The name has already been decided, too: the Rappel group. That is a play on
words which refers to the Appel [appea1, call from the French] with which Hans Van
Hierlo, Hana Gruijters and roughly thirty other dissatisfied Dutchmen sought in
1966 to incite the people to arise against the musty party system of those days.
The similarity is no accident: the Rappel group is calling for the fight to be
resumed once again. Hith one difference: now the fight is directed against their
own fellow party members. In other parties it sometimes happens that the young
guard takes up arms against the calcified elders, in 0'66 it is just the other way
around. Spigt, Van Altena and all the others are worried about that disastrous
phenomenon: the new 0'66 member.

Spigt recalls: "In 1966, 0'66 was established as a reform movement. Our present
concern is that elan still be maintained. He must not sacrifice our profile to
gray compromises."

"I think that it is always the case," Van Altena laments, "that people who see
that a party is growing simply do not keep trying so hard.

The firmly-principled Democrat's manifesto warns against "rudderlessness" and
"course deviations." And unusual consequences are attached to that for 0'66: "If

clarity produces a smaller electorate, that is the price that ought to be paid for
it."

It is still not entirely clear-for they remain 0'66 members--just what principles
must be preserved. "The outward image of the party," says Spigt, "the image
formation, that is one of things with which we must concern ourselves."

Van Altena does not see enough of the urge for constitutional reform reflected
in the 0'66 now: "0'66 must make it clear that we will not just go along with the

current course of events. The elected mayor, direct input from the people-~it did
not reach the agenda in the cabinet formation."

Upwards

0'66 should become an environmental party once again. Spigt: 'Mb have a very
good secretary of state in Ineke Lembers. We must bring that profile to light.
Even if that should conflict with economic interests." And: "We must leave no

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
doubt that 0'66 is a progressive party. We are progressive and leftist, and we
must have that made clear. He must not let there be any further misunderstanding
about that . "

This message is intended primarily for those who have recently joined 0'66. among
whom--according to the members of the Rappel group-careerism and irresponsible
opportunism run rampant. Certainly, D'66 is an open party (anyone who wants to

go to the party congress can go, and then he just votes along with everyone else).
But that openness is seen to have its disadvantages, too. Spigt: "In a local
chapter with 20 members, it can happen that someone comes forward who says: I

want to be the standard bearer. For that he needs the support of 11 party members.
If that person quickly recruits 20 new members, for example by paying their dues,

he can just buy his way in as standard bearer. That is a worry which we recognize."

Van Altena: "Only three requirements are made of someone who puts himself forward
as a candidate for municipal council member: Has he paid his dues? Has he not at
fault from 1940-1945? And has he been a member of the party for at least 6 months?
You can have yourself put on the list very handily. If you are in a small chapter
--and 0'66 has only a very few big chapters--it is quite easy to work your way up."

Therefore the Rappel group--once again quite unlike the average rebels in political
parties--wants more "discipline" and more "control." Van Altena: "If structures
which were called into being in the enthusiasm of the l960s prove to work badly,

you must dare to revise them. You must not maintain any dogmas until they kill you."

Van Altena stresses once more that it is not Jan Terlouw or Laurens-Jan Brinkhorst
he is concerned with; it is the base of D'66 which is not any good. Spigt and Van
Altena are also careful not to let drop any juicy words about the new party leader-
ship of party chairman Jan Van Berkom (who just won at the party congress of
November 1981 against his opponent, Cees Spigt).

In the meantime, the party leadership and the Chamber delegation have been informed
of the existence of the Rappei group, but there are no returns as yet. It may
safely be assumed that they will not be overenthusiastic. Van Berkon, himself a
former activist from the Brabant KVP [former Catholic People's Party, now a part of
the Christian Democratic Appeal], and further a member of the board of Samivoz and
the directorate of 800 Years s'nertogenbosch [Bois la Due], has thus far stressed
above all that 0'66 is certainly progressive, but above all quite differently
leftist than the PvdA [Labor Party].

And the delegation?

Ha, Laurens-Jan himself on the telephone. What does he think about the Rappel?
Brinkhorst: "I do not feel it is any frightfully serious matter. Sorry, I mean

no serious problem. They are not setting themselves up as an organized party-with-
in-the-party. They do not want to play the conscience of the party. Everything is
being done quite openly. Pine. we have enough democratic organs in D'66. I have
no need of a group like that."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 VN/BV Heekbladpers

6940
050: 3105/82 30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ARTICLE SCORES POLICIES OF MILITARY REGIME
Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 252, 9-22 Nov 81 pp 35-37
[Article by San Corbin: "A Year of 'Nornslizatiou'"]

[Text] The junta is not hiding its desire to place itself

totally at the service of the western alliance, at the price

of a "guided democracy" which has elininated any union,

_ political or cultural expression.

The Turkish military junta has just celebrated the first anniversary of the 12 Sep-
tenber 1980 coup d'etet. General Bvren--head of state and chairman of the
National Security Council, composed of five generals who exercise almost absolute
powero-prided himself on this occasion, in a televised speech, on the "public
order" which reigns in the country as well as the "inprovaaant of the economic
situation."

But, the relative "social calm" that Turkey is experiencing has been obtained only
at the price of wiping out any trace of democratic life, and the partial economic
recovery is only benefit ing me local middle class and the multinational conpanies,
whose investments are more and more profitable. As for the celebrated "return to
civil government“ pronised by the generals, it remains a distant goal, with the
junta not hiding its intention to keep the reins of power for a long while still-
for the good of the country, naturally!

International financial circles are loudly expressing their satisfaction with the
"rehabilitation" of the Turkish economy under the direction of Deputy Prime
Minister angut Ozsl. The latter could not be cooperating more closely, in fact,
with specialists from the International Monetary Fund, whose prescriptions and
philosophy he fully approves. In the manner of the economist Milton Fried-an,
adviser to President Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, Oral wagers on the "free play of
narket forces"--manipulated in their way, obviously, by the most powerful capitalist
groups~-to pull the country out of its present slump.

The representatives of 260 international private banks, meeting in london, have
just given concrete evidence of their confidence in Ozal's "good intentions" by
agreeing to reschedule $3.2 billion of Turkish debt, with naturity postponed

from 7 to 10 years. At the same tine, international authorities such as the OBCD
and the IMF are on the verge of substantially increasing their econonic assistance.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Turkish papers recently made much of the choice of Ozal as "economist of the
year" by EUROHONBY, the great financial monthly in London. This prestigious
review spoke highly of the "stabilization program" established by Oral in Janaury
1980, under the previous Demirel regime, and continued under the military regime.
This program-which has basically meant austerity for most and a fuller freedom of
action for trusts--makes things easy for foreign bankers and IMF specialists.

Ozal's first measure as Demirel's economic adviser had been the elimination of

the system of price controls previously in force, which caused immediate and
spectacular increases in the prices of products of the state's major enterprises--
sugar, textiles, cement, fertilizer, tobacco, etc. Under the military regime the
rate of inflation has fallen from 100 percent to 40 percent, but this decrease

on which the junta prides itself, is not satisfying most consumers who are incapable
of purchasing basic necessities whose prices were already excessively high in
relation to their salaries.

The keystone of Ozal's economic policy was an extreme devaluation of the Turkish
pound which enabled a 54 percent increase in exports. But this pronounced orien-
tation of the Turkish economy towards the outside--including the countries of the
Middle East-~has been accompanied by a continued deterioration of the domestic
market due to the extremely weak purchasing power of the working class and peasant
population.

The difficulties of daily life are enormous for the average family. In this
regard, an economist furnished us some estimates in figures: Even after the recent
increase in the minimum wage from 4,500 to 10,000 Turkish pounds per month--which
could at first sight appear to be a real improvement--a wage earner drawing the
Interoccupational Minimum Growth Wage [SHIC] only earns the equivalent of three
pairs of shoes and a kilo of tea per month. A family of 4 would actually need
50,000 Turkish pounds to live modestly but decently. However, when the conserva-
tive Turk-Is union--the only one tolerated in Turkey at present--proposed that the
SHIC be increased to 19,500 pounds, it ran up against the categorical refusal of
the authorities who termed this figure exorbitant.

Since the military takeover, the working class finds itself completely deprived
of its means of defense. Strikes are strictly prohibited and the large leftist
group of affiliated trade unions, DISK [Confederation of Revolutionary worker
Unions], was dissolved by decree as were all the professional, cultural or
political organizations in the country. Hundreds of DISK union members have been
imprisoned and the military regime's prosecutor in Istanbul has called for the
death penalty for 52 leaders of this organization, so active before the coup
d'etat.

Hhat are the "crimes" of these union members, who never indulged in "terrorist
acts"? Here are some of the "subversive" acts of which they are accused:

6 September 1976 — Attempt to start a general strike against the institution of
emergency courts.

20 March 1978 - Attempt at a general strike against the rise of fascism after
the assassination of seven young leftists from the University of Istanbul by
members of the Nationalist Action Party.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30 April 1980 - Work slow down and strike, on the national level. as a sign of
protest against the regime's prohibition of 1 May celebrations.

"Attitude" adopted during the signing of collective bargaining agreements "which
aggravates the country's economic situation."

It is useless to recall that strikes and collective bargaining were perfectly
legal before the junta's rise to power.

Political Clean-Up

In the name of the "fight against terrorism"--the military regime's true theme and
raison d'etre--tens of thousands of citizens find themselves under lock and key
and numerous cases of torture have been pointed out by Amnesty International.
According to the official figures announced by General Bvren himself on 12 Sep-
tember--anniversary of the coup d'etat-—some 24,300 political activists are in
prison awaiting trial, while 3,735 "suspects" are under surveillance or closely
watched. So far, 1,898 people have been condemned to long prison terms or to
death, and 20 executions have already taken place. These figures cannot be veri-
fied and experienced observers think that the political prisoners-the overwhelming
majority of whom are found to be leftist activists-are much more numerous than
the junta's spokesmen are saying. '

This “political clean-up" operation is being accompanied by a carefully orches-
trated whitewashing. Every day pictures of groups of "terrorists" just arrested
or being tried and of impressive stocks of weapons of all kinds found in their
possession are spread across television screens and newspaper front pages. These
prisoners are most often youths belonging to groups termed "co-annist" or
"leftist" and, much less often, fascists from the Nationalist Action Party whose
leader, Colonel Turkes and several other activists also risk the death penalty.
In the present context, in fact, trials of neofascists-responsib1e in a large
part for crimes perpetrated before the coup d'etat--correspond to a specific
political need in the sense that they permit the regime to present itself in the
eyes of the world as "impartial" and involved in a purely "antiterrorist" action.

Let us render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. In the area of repression, the
military regime has proved effective. Although the acts of terrorism have not
comphlely ceased since the coup d’etat, it is true--aa General Evren has
stressed--that they are much less frequent than before 12 September 1980. Accor-
ding to official figures, crimes have decreased by 90 percent during the past 12
months.

But the restoration of public order and the fight against terrorism have served

as perfect justification for the suppression of any political activity or expres-
sion. No public demonstration is tolerated, many publications felt to be "extrem-
ist" have been prohibited, and the papers which continue to appear are subject

to strict censorship.

In all his speeches, General Evren stresses his intention to "reestablish demo-
cratic life" in the not too distant future, but most experienced observers feel
that the military regime-«a true dictatorship benefiting from a total monopoly
of power--will remain in place for 2 to 6 more years. This is the minimum period
which will no doubt prove necessary for establishing new institutions.

33

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The first step on the long road toward reestablishment of a restricted form of
parliamentary democracy should be, according to decrees issued at the end of June
by the National Security Council, the establishment of a constituent assembly
responsible for defining the general framework of future political life as well
as laws on political parties and unions.

The junta will have the upper hand in this process from beginning to end. The
constituent assembly will be composed of an advisory assembly of 160 members and
the 5 generals from the National Security Council. Forty of the members of the
advisory assembly will be appointed by the junta which will choose the 120 others
from among the candidates presented by the authorities from the various provinces.
No member of the political parties which existed before the coup d'etat can be

a candidate. The work of the assembly will also be dominated and controlled by
the junta which will have the power and the responsibility for amending the draft
constitution and issuing it.

"Atlantic Solidarity"

General Bvren's statements--and particularly his repeated denunciations of the
"excesses" of the democracy instituted by the 1960 constitution, felt to be too
"libers1"--hardly leave any doubt as to the orientation and the probable content

of the future constitution as he envisages it. Thus, all observers agree that they
foresee a basically presidential system with an all-powerful head of state and a
parliament with reduced powers. In such a context, only purged and conservative
political parties will be tolerated and the freedom of the unions will be strictly
limited, with any "ideologically inspired” action prohibited. Such are the major
lines of the "guided democracy" which the generals intend to establish before giving
the troops the order to return to their barracks.

A Turkey dominated and run by a junta more concerned with maintaining order at any
price than with social justice or freedom of expression will not displease the
NATO strategists, who are concerned with the situation in the Middle East, more
explosive than ever, and preoccupied with the Iraqi/Iranian war, the fighting in
Lebanon, the death of Sadat, the Polish crisis, etc. General Evren's government—-
sheltered fron any public pressure in its own country--does not hide its desire to
place itself totally at the service of the Western alliance. This is why it
presents itself as more disposed than its predecessors to come to terms with
Greece, which has recently, with Turkish approval, rejoined the NATO military
system. For the first time since the Cypriot crisis in 1976, Turkish and Greek
units therefore participated together in NATO military maneuvers which just took
place in the area. Under the auspices of "Atlantic solidarity," moreover, Greek-
Turkish cooperation seems to be improving all down the line, as the reciprocal
measures recently taken to eliminate restrictions on air traffic over the Aegean
Sea indicate.

But on the thorny question of Cyprus--where Turkish forces still Occupy almost 60
percent of the territory--the positions of the 2 parties remain distant, despite
the recent resumption of a long-interrupted dialogue between the Greek and Turkish
communities on the island. The Turks recommend a federal, two-zone solution, with
each of the two communities having a separate territory with its own institutions
under a central Greek-Turkish authority. The Greek Cypriots see this as a de

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
facto partition which they refuse and recommend, on their part, a combined
central government with more extensive powers. At the beginning of September,
the Turkish Cypriot authorities proposed to their Greek counterparts a compro-
mise including, among other things, the restoration to the Greeks of 9 percent
of the territory currently occupied by Turkish forces, which would enable some
40,000 Greek refugees to return and reestablish themselves there. This proposal
was judged clearly insufficient by the spokesmen for the Greek community who in
turn presented an arrangement leaving the Turks only 20 percent of the island's
territory. The Cyprus question therefore remains a formidable area of discord
between these allies, but the negotiations are continuing.

An Unhoped-For Theme

In all areas of daily life as well as political life-—from foreign relations to
relationships between governors and governed in the country's cities and towns--
Turkey, under the military boot, is undergoing an extreme process of “normaliza-
tion," indeed of "standardization." Everything has returned to order, and an
inhabitual calm seems to have installed itself.

In the streets, troops walk, submachine guns in hand, under the distracted and in-
different gaze of citizens who often express their satisfaction with the absence-—
or at least the rarity--of crimes whose frequency was becoming terrifying before
the coup d'etst. The media have been mobilized in order to reassure and lull the
public when the military regime has succeeded, to a large extent, in persuading
that the country, formerly seriously disturbed, is currently in good hands.

Nor do the authorities refrain from using a good dose of damagoguery to give
themselves a somewhat "populist" image. Television, for example, shows soldiers
going through me markets to make sure the vendors are not allowing prices to

rise too much, and the junta is shown to be particularly anxious to assure inex-
pensive leisure activities for its good people. Thus, many cafes and restaurants
located on the banks of the Bosphorus or the Harmora have been demolished by order
of the authorites to give everyone free access to the sea. It is now possible,
therefore, to swim or picnic at the ed; of the water inexpensively in Istanbul,
as in other seacoast towns.

At the same tune, the regime incessantly sings the praises of the "particularly
Turkish" ideology of Kemalism, the doctrine of Hustafa Keaal Ataturk, hero of
the war of independence and founder in 1923 of the Turkish Republic. This year
just happens to be the 105th anniversary of the birth of Kemal Ataturk and the
regime is bending over backwards to exploit this unhoped-for theme.

but, if the propaganda in all its forms, the continuous ceremonies and the
booming speeches have contributed for a time to deceiving the public, they are
ending up by exasperating it. In any case, they are hardly succeeding in dis-
tracting the people's attention from the serious economic and social problems
which, in the long term, risk creating an explosive situation, all the more so
since the absence of freedom and democratic institutions prevents the discontent

from being expressed through legal channels.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NI.\

Additional Turn of the Screw

The Junta has just taken one more step in forced "standardization." Political
parties. which were officially only "suspended" as of 12 September, have just
been permanently dissolved by decree on the eve of the meeting of the advisory
assembly responsible for preparing the new constitution. This measure includes
the confiscation by the state of all their property which was already sequestered

anyway .

Bulent Ecevit, former prime minister and leader of the Republican People's Party
(social democratic), has communicated to the press a protest against this
measure, thus daring to infringe the prohibition of all leaders of former parties
from expressing themselves publicly. "If everyone remains silent in the face of
such a measure, we will no longer have the right to consider ourselves as worthy
of democracy," he declared.

Legal action was innediately taken against him and the military prosecutor has
demanded a penalty of 3 months to 1 year in prison.

Addressing the advisory assembly during its inaugural session, 23 October, the
head of state, General Evren, justified the dissolving of political parties by
invoking the "necessity" of preventing them from "exercising pressure" on the
assembly's work.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9693
680: 4619/26

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUBMARINES TO BE ARMED WITH NEW EXOCEI‘ SH 39 MISSILE
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French ll: Nov 81 pp 50-51

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "New Exocet SM 39 Missile for Submarines: The
SNA. SNLE, and 'Agosta' [class] "111 Soon Be Armed With SM 39 Antiship Missiles")

[Text] The new SM 39 subsurface version of the antiship Exocet missile of
AEROSPATIALE [National Aerospace Manufacturing Company] will in a few years
equip the French Navy's conventional attack submarines of the "Agosta" class

as well as the nuclear propelled attack submarines (SNA) and nuclear propelled
missile launching submarines (SNLE) of the Oceanic Strategic Force HOST). The
first Submarines armed with the SM 39 will supposedly be the SIM, beginning with
the second unit, the "Saphir," which was launched on 1 September 1981 and will be
placed into service in the middle of 1984 (see AIR & COSPDS No 870). The first
nuclear attack submarine, the "Rubia." will also receive the new missile, as well
as the other three French SNA which will be placed into service between now and
1988. Each SNA will thus be equipped with 1!: torpedos of S33 millimeters or a
like number of SN 39 missiles capable of being launched by any one of the sub-
marine's four torpedo launching tubes. Testing of the installation of the SM 39
aboard an "Agosta" class attack submarine have already taken place this year.

Constructed under the auspices of the Technical Directorate for Missiles (DTBn),
the SH 39, for the time being, is reserved exclusively for the French Navy. There
is no plan to export it even though the missile can be launched "by all submarines"
(equipped with Standard S33-millimeter torpedo launching tubes), as stated in a
MEn document. Therefore, it is not out of the question that in the future the

SM 39 may he sold to "some friendly countries," which have attack submarines.

especially of the "Agosta" class.

Development of the SM 39, started in 1979. has just completed a phase with the
commencement of full-scale submarine firings. The first submarine firing of the
SM 39 took place in the Mediterranean last July. The trial made it possible to
test the underwater trajectory and emergence of the Missile up to ejection of the
aerial missile, which constitutes the principal innovation of this particular
vcrsion of the Exocct intended for submarines.

Milieu Changing Missile
Differing from all other Exocet missiles, the SM 39 is a composite missile

since. in fact. it consists of an "aerialmissile" encapsulated within an "under-
water vehicle" (VSM) which. incidentally. gives it the appearance of a torpedo.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'Sl" ONIJ

The complete SH 39 missile, encapsulated within the underwater vehicle is
5.8 meters long and weighs 1,345 kilograms. The aerial missile is only 4.6
meters long and weighs 666 kilograms (see AIR & COSMOS, No 645).

The SM 39 missile has an acceleration motor (76.5 kilograms) equipped with a
single-component "Condor" block of Isolane composite solid fuel: the cruising ”Helios"
block (156 Kg) is also a single component of smokeless Nitramite solid fuel. The
underwater vehicle is equipped with an ejection motor (100 kilograms) with a
single-component "Narval" block of semi—smokeless Butalite solid fuel as well as

a gas generator with a single-component block (1 kilogram) of Isolite composite

solid fuel. These solid fuels are supplied by the SNPE [National Powder and
Explosives Company].

The SM 39 serial missile is practically the same as the AM 39 missile, the air-
sea version of the Exocet which equips airplanes and helicopters, with this
exception: the SH 39 is equipped with a new digital computer (that of the MM 40)
and slightly modified retractable wings in order to be enclosed within the launch-
ing capsule fabricated in part by the EGAN [expansion unknown] of Ruelle.

The underwater vehicle is a strong, watertight capsule which completely isolates
the aerial missile from the water for the entire underwater trajectory after it
leaves the submarine's torpedo-launching tube. In addition, this underwater cap-
sule has a hydrodynamic shape whereas the missile is adapted to aerodynamic
flight in the upper subsonic regime. The VSM is propelled and guided in its
entire underwater trajectory, which is one of the main advantages of the SH 39
over all its competitors, including the American Sub-Harpoon which is launched

in an unpropelled and unguided capsule. This original characteristic of the
French missile permits considerable reduction in the peak altitude of the SH 39,
to about 50 meters, whereas the Sub-Harpoon ascends to 600 meters, which exposes
it to the risk of detection by enemy radar. In addition, it assures emergence
from the water under favorable conditions, even in very heavy seas, something the
other missiles cannot do.

The VSM is in fact propelled and guided up to emergence, that is, up to the very
beginning of the aerial phase. At that moment, after jettisoning of the under-
water capsule's forward nose the SH 39 aerial missile is ejected from the under-
water vehicle by a solid-fuel gas generator. The VSH, now no longer of any use,
falls back into the sea and sinks, as do the otherelements (the missile's nose
and check pads) in order to avoid localizing of the point of the missile's
launching and hence of the submarine.

During this time the SM 39 missile rapidly enters upon the cruising trajectory
and from then on behaves like the AM 39 missile. It follows, in particularly, a
trajectory near the water's level (sea skimmer) whose altitude-controlled in
accordance with sea conditions by a radio—altimeter-«is lowered in successive
steps as the missile approaches its objective.

From its launching by the submarine the SM 39 missile is completely autonomous,
like all tthxocet versions, by virtue of an inertial preguidance which directs

the missile both during the underwater phase and the cruising phase of the atmo-
spheric flight. At the end of its flight, about 15 km from the objective, the

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SH 39 missile, like the AM 39, is guided in proportional navigation by its
ADAC active electromagnetic self-guidance, perfected by END [Marcel Dassault

Electronics].

The large explosive charge, initiated by an impact or proximity fuse is "capable
of neutralizing any surface objective." states a DTEn document.

The range of the SM 39--officially classified-is on the order of 50 km. since
it is the same missile as the AH 39, whose range is variable, depending upon the
altitude and speed of the launching airship, from 50 km (fired at low initial
speed) to 70 km (fired from high speed, high altitude airplanes), the range of
the SH 39 is therefore shorter than that of other tactical subsurface missiles
like the Harpoon (about 90 km). But it is considered sufficient by the French
Navy, considering the detection and objective designation capabilities of the
SNA and SNLE, whose mission requires. above all else. the greatest discretion.

[Photo caption--p 51] Detail of the separation of the SH 39 missile from the
USN after emergence: the nose of the capsule is jettisoned; the missile is
ejected by a gas generator; the capsule falls back into the water and sinks.
The missile's solid fuel motor is ignited shortly after ejection. This tech-
nique of a propelled and guided capsule permits firing even in heavy seas. 0n
the right; ignition of the SH 39 motor after ejection from the capsule (the
chock pads for the missile are also ejected).

Yul 34—7/4 ’ l, :.' 1
-' V "——_ .-l

 

Caption: Details of the SM 39. A. ADAC self-guidance, water tight and resis-
tant to low temperatures. B. Guidance order elaborator. C. TRT radioaltimeter.
D. Inertial platform with vertical stabilization gyroscope equipped with three
accelerometers and a yaw gyroscope (like the MN 38). E. Thermal pile.

F. warhead (MM 38). G. Ftuise motor with steel shell and higher energy solid
fuel. H. Acceleration meter, lighter and more powerful. I. Rear window, like
the H! 38. J. Trapezoidai wings. K. Control surfaces modified for adaptation
to the wings or the carrying aircraft. L. Nozzle of underwater motor.

M. Underwater booster. N. Strong water-tight capsule (VSH).

COPYRIGHT: A6C 1981

11706
CSO: 8119/0667

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UK'S NOTT REAFPIRHS DEFENSE SPENDING PLANS
PH271503 London THE TIMES in English 27 Jan 82 p 4

[Unattributed report of 26 January House of Commons session: "Some Adjustments to
Defence Procurement Are Inevitable"]

[Text] Timetable changes in a large and diverse defence procurement programme,
would be necessary. but the main features of the prograamm envisaged in the defence
white paper stood, Mr John Hart, secretary of state for defence, said during commons
questioning.

Hr Hilary Miller, (Bromsgrove and Redditch. C) had called upon the minister to re-
state the position about Britain's defence procurement in order to reassure defence
industries and those who served in the forces. He asked whether Mr Nott had pro-
longed any previous announced timetable for the purchase of equipment.

Service in the armed forces (he added) provides valuable jobs for those who wish
to serve their country and the equipment they use provides valuable jobs in our
industry. There is some uncertainty in our defence industries arising out of the
stream of releases about cancellations and prolongations.

Hr Nott: The professionalism and dedication of our armed services are admired
throughout the country. He should be proud of them.

On procurement generally we shall be spending more in real terms with British in-
dustry in the next financial year than this year, and this year we are spending
more than we did last year.

There will have to be some adjustments, maybe changes of a few months, to some
programmes, but there are bound to be these changes in such a large programme
amounting to 6,000m pounds next year. The strategy set out in the white paper
published in June remains. All the major programmes there are going to be main-
mined.

Mr Bruce George (Walsall, south, lab): How many aircraft are available for the air
defence of the United Kingdom? How does his recent announcement on Tornado affect
the air defence variant of Tornado?

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If this is likely to be delayed, how does he square this with the off-repeated
charges made by Tories in opposition that British air defences were grossly inade-
quate?

Hr Nott: The air defence version of Tornado is hardly affected by the reduction
in the peak deliveries we have made from just over 60 aircraft to 64. That will
not affect the strike version and the air defence version may be affected by a
month of two but little more as far as we can see.

On the air defence of the UK which with him I regard as of greatest importance, we
have made considerable advancements. Re have agreed to run on two phantom squadrons
into the 1990s, a new decision. He intend to arm with the side-winder missile 72
of our Hawker aircraft.

The huge programme for the improvement of the country's environment-~radar and
other things-for defence of the UK cantinues. This is an area where we are
applying greater concentration and more resources.

Mr Keith Speed (Ashford, C): In the 1980 white paper there was the intention to
purchase more minesweepers for the Royal Navy reserve. In this year's there is no
sign of that desperately needed replacement.

Hr Nott: He is right. These are urgently needed for the RN reserve. I hope to
start placing these orders in the next financial year.

Mr Peter Snap, and oppositiOn spokesman (Heat Bromwich, East, lab): How does he
envisage paying not only the immense bill for the 385 Tornado aircraft on order but
the ridiculous and nonsensically expensive Trident project, the bulk of which will
also fall due at about the same time?

Mr Not: The bulk of the Tornado expenditure is happening at present. In the next
financial year, the Tornado programme will cost the ministry of defence budget about
1,000m pounds. The same expenditure profile is in the next few years. The major
expenditure will have been tapering off by the mid-19803.

Generally speaking, the Tornado programme as a whole, when compared with the Trident
programme as a whole, is infinitely more expensive. We are talking about a total

programme cost for Tornado aircraft of somewhere in the region of 11,250m pounds.
A huge programme which is going forward successfully.

cwmmn:nmstmanmnw.wu

CSO: 3120/37 END

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY