APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPBZ-00850R000100010035-1

‘
-O o a, "IL
, 'QMIIDDU 4 0,. l‘ﬂlln 1 I’.‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/szza
17 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
POLITICAL, SocmLoeICAL, AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service. and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, ﬂashington, 0.0.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 5 Howell. 01d
Mansfield Road, Rooster. Ohio, 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North clebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
ai'ﬁugonumc pan |~ "nu-N Nu- JPRS b/ 8228 J. Recipienl't Attention Nu.
1.7::F122'l'71m ' ..._...... - rpnu ale
rmusmrums 0N EASTERN mum-r: - l'Ol.l'l‘lCl\l.. :;ocxomcIcM.. 1" Janna 1979
AND MILITARY Al-‘l‘AlRS. (FOUO 1/79) -

0-

'. l'ulvun-u' (manual-on Name and Adele“ l0. l‘tobcci/Tash/toak Unit No.

Joint Publicationa Reaearch Service
1000 North Globe Road H. Contract/Grant No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

n. \fI-naﬂlﬂl Organ-Inna Name and Adda" I). 7.7pe oi Repon a Period
Covered

As above
I5. Supplement-1y Note.

0. Abmaru

The serial report contains articles on official party and government pronounce-
ments and writings on significant domestic political developments; information
on general sociological problems and developments in such area: as demography,
manpouer, public health and welfare, education, and mass organizationa; and
articles on military and civil defence, organization, theory, budgets, and
hardware.

. ey ' «do and Document Analytic. I o. Deutipton

X International Affairs Propaganda .

: Albania Political Science
Bulgaria Sociology
Czechoalovakia Military Organiutiona
East Germany
llungery
Poland
Romania
Yugoalav ia

375. Ut'MIIIc-u 'olu-n-l-aned Tune

in. ((rsAI'IIwIJIccowp SD, 5K, 15

u. Avatluhltiv .‘IIICMM - ' ' -'
For Official Use Only. . “ . 22
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. W“

' °'"‘ """" ”'"' ""' rms roan MAY be ntnooucso V"°"‘*°‘ """"’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8228
17 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE

POLITICAL, SochosICAL, AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(moo 1/79)

Coureurs PAGE

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Dissatisfaction by Hungarian Minority Reported
(uuuuuu;mmumnauwmmm.nan?».HH l

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Son of Jailed Sabata Appeals to Harchaia for Help
(Philippe Ganier-Raynond; L'EXPRBSS, 2 Dec 78) ........ 5

EAST GERMANY

Naumann Decision Prohibiting Drama on Interahopa Supported
(Various sources, 6. 3 Nov 78) ........................ 8

Heat German Commentary
580 Official Justifies Ban. by Reinhard Hichalke

what German Account of GDR Military Training for Teenagers
(Nick Barkow; STERN. 16 Dec 78) ....................... lb

Briefs

School Military Instruction Preasure 18
SEE overtures to PSOe l8

YUGOSLAVIA

Comments on the Croatian Question
(Viktor Heier; FRANKFURTER ALLGEHBINE, 25 Nov 78) ..... l9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

DISSATISPACTION BY HUNGARIAN MINORITY REPORTED
Frankfurt/Main PRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE in German 31 Oct 78 p 10

[Article by Viktor Meier: "The Hagyars in Romania are Dissatisfied; the
Hungarian Minority and Ceausescu's National Course")

[Text] The main catholic church on the elongated town square of Tirgu

Hures (Harosvasarhely). the center of the Hungarian area of settlement in
Transylvania. is a small but nearly perfect copy of the cathedral in Buda-
pest. As members of this ethnic group tell us, the Hungarians may well

live in different countries but they remain one nation and their spiritual
center is Budapest. The main conflict with the Romanian state. today,
appears to be based on this point. The Romanian authorities follow the
obvious intention to cut off their Hungarian minority, culturally as well.
from the nucleus of their nation as much as possible. The word "fatherland"
is taboo and must not be used.

There is a publisher in Romania, "Criterion“, which prints a considerable
number of Hungarian books every year. selected, of course. There are
Hungarian theaters or Hungarian Sections in Romanian theaters in-Klausen-
burg [Cluj formerly Kolosvar], Tirgu ﬂutes and some other places. Although
no longer a Hungarian University. yet there are Hungarian lecture series in
Klausenburg. In general, however, a Hungarian from Transylvania can hope

to visit Hungary every two years at best. Host of the people we talked with
had visited Hungary at the moat only two or three times since the end of the
war. The Hungarian consulate. which is to be established in Klausenburg
according to an agreement between Radar and Ceauseacu, is still not function-
ing. From an agreement covering the expansion of zones for small border
traffic, according to which twelve visits per year would be possible, the
large towns of Oradea (Nagyvarad). Arad and Satu Hare (Szatmar-Nometi) are
still excluded although they belong to the border zone geographically. The
Budapest paper NBPSZABADSAG cannot be found sold by street vendors anywhere
in Transylvania and new private subscriptions will be automatically refused
because of an 'exhaustion of the quota". The local Hungarian papers which
appear in the large towns of Transylvania are woeful in their information
content. They are not even allowed to use the Hungarian names of the cities.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The small rural town Sf. Hheurghe (Sepsiszentgyorgy) in the Szeklerland
North of Kronstadt [Brasov formerly Brasso] nas a Hungarian theater which.
as a travelling company, serves the whole districts of Covasna, Harghita

and Kronstadt. With its ensemble of over 60 actors, it produces seven to
eight plays each year. As a rule. two of these are translations of Romanian
plays, four are from the general world literature and only the rest are from
the specifically Hungarian theater world. Nevertheless. the new play by
Andras Suto, who lives in Tirgu Mures, on Michael Khoihaas. "Palm Sunday of
a Horse Dealer“ is being played here. Because of its beautiful language.
tied to the Hungarian bible translation. it made an impression especially on
young people.

it is nice to have a Hungarian theater in the Szeklerland because the feeling
for oral expression remains strong and unspoiled here. There is also an ex-
change with Hungarian theaters across the border such as with Veszprem in
Hungary and with Snmbor in the Hungarian speaking area of Yugoslavia. It is
almost easier done with Sombor.

The New industries

all over the Szeklerland, we hear complaints about the higher school educa-
tion in the Hungarian language. The bad conditions are a result of the
high school reform, enacted a few years ago in Romania. through which the
traditional gymnasium (high school) was largely ended and was replayed by

a widely compartmentalized system of specialty high schools (Pachlyceen).
in these specialized high schools. there are often not enough students for
Hungarian classes and equally often there are not enough Hungarian teachers.
The support offered by neighbouring Hungary is rejected. But the Romanian
state appears to be relatively most ready for a compromise in the school
question since this would be reconcilable with the concept of their own
Hungarian people in Transylvania.

The question of industrialization is ambivalent. From his own standpoint.
Ceausescu is hardly unfair when he sharply rejects the thesis. as he did
last spring, that the conservation of the ethnic character of an area would
be more important than economic progress. In the Szeklerland. with its
compact Hungarian population in the country as well, there is always
sufficient supply of workers from the immediate surroundings of the new
industrial centers to maintain their Hungarian majority while this is not
the case at other areas. for instance in Klansenburg. It is steadily main-
tained by the Romanian side that the new industries created working places
for the Hungarian speaking elites as well, in their iamediate home area.
"At times". is the comment on the Hungarian side. it remains to be true
that Hungarian physicians or engineers can find work only in Huntenien or
in Holden. In places where the Hungarian population is especially compact.
even streets may get Hungarian names occasionally. "After flowers or
hires" is the ironic comment to us.

2
FOR OPFiCiAL HSE DSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dramatist Andras Suto admits to us that certain problems concerning the
minority became acute within the recent past. in March, at the last meeting
of the peoples' council (Volksrat) of the Hungarian ethnic minority. some of
the comments heard were very critical. Suto himself let himself be heard

in a sort of memorandum which he submitted in writing because of his absence
but wanted to be understood as a normal contribution to the discussion. As

a vice president of the Romanian writers' association. Suto represents the
writers of Hungarian nationality. In his opinion. Romania shows a certain
elasticity time and again. In general. the various groups. regardless of
their kind or ethnicity. put forth their demands and interests more openly
today than two years ago. in Romania. This is also true for the Hungarians.
Insofar as the problems are becoming "more consciously" recognized, one could
speak of an improvement in the situation. Certain principles have been
acknowledged by the Romanian authorities. However. their realization presents
difficulties sometimes as. for instance, in the case of school curricula.
There are certain new developments even in contacts with Hungary. for in-
stance, improved contacts between the theaters and the authors. Yet much
more remains to be done. it is important that a dialogue be maintained.

Until this summer. the dialogue had been conducted in a very intolerant
manner by the Romanian side; matters appear to be quieting down somewhat
only during the last few weeks. The reaction to the letter sent by Kiraly.
a former [party] functionary, to Ceauaescu, and also to the voicing of
criticism during the March meeting of the Hungarian people‘s council were
hostile. An article by the widely respected Hungarian author. Gyula lllyes.
was countered in such an aggressive manner by the Romanian cultural func-
tionnry. Gheoryiiu. in the periodical "Luceafarul" that Romanian authors and
politicians took a stand against it and warned against overreactions. Yet
Romanians were burdened by memories of the last war. Foreign television
crews which wanted to report on the Hungarian minority in Romania were
prevailed upon to film a mass grave with victims of the "Horthy terror".
Some did this although one can not grasp what this has to do with the present
situation of the Hungarians in Romania. The Romanian army. to be sure. has
also left behind admonishing stains during their occupation in Besseraeia
and Transnistria. in 1961.

Because of the nationalistic tendencies of the regime of Ceausescu. Romanian
ethnic minority policy has. without doubt, gotten itself into a dead end
street. in part. It is a fact that the majority of the Germans want to
emigrate. The Hungarians do not want to emigrate but. because they feel
nationally suppressed and, in addition. they feel the economic-political
gap ever more strongly in comparison with the neighbouring country. they
have become a source of active dissatisfaction. in the Heat. one can still
hear the opinion that the Soviet Union could put a thorn in the flesh of
Cenusescu‘s regime by encouraging Hungarian nationalism in Transylvania.
Such fears could be fostered ten years ago but they are no longer applicable
today. If the Soviet Union wanted to encourage Hungarian nationalism. it
would hardly be limited to Transylvania alone.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Budapest is Cautious

Ceausescu himself has emplanted the thorn with the minorities. Official
nungary obviously behaves cautiously although it must also pay attention

to the mood of the population. Party Secretary Radar is supposed to have
warned informally against openly discussing the problem of Hungarians in
Transylvania since no one would support Hungary in this question. It would
find itself politically isolated. “ll! standpoint appears to be realistic.
Yet, Hungary attempts to achieve improveuents through discrete diplomacy.

COPYRIGHT: F.A.Z. Gab". Frankfurt am Main (1978)

2473
CSO: 2300

I.
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

son or JARED SABATA APPEALS 'ro HARCRAIS son mp
Paris L'EDKPRESS in French 2 Dec 78 pp 133. 13*
[Article by Philippe Ganier-Raynondl "To the Aid of Sabata"]

[Text] Jaroslav Sabata, editor of Charter 77, m been in Jail since
1 October and in danger of dying. His son Vaclav sends an
appeal .. .

Jaroslsv Sabsta was one of the editors of Charter 7?. ‘Dogether with many
Czech intellectuals he had demanded strict application of the Helsinki agree-
ments. co-signed by Gustav Husak, the right to information. the right to
enter and leave Czechoslovakia...

Sabata was a professor of psychology at the UniVersity of Brno. Fifty-one
years old. very soft spoken. punctilious. he has for a long tine carried

with him the sadness of the incorrvhls optinist. Sabata was a little to

Brno what Dubcek was to Bratislava: anapparatchik who. well before 1968.
expressed ideas in Southern Moravia (1.5 nillion inhabitants) which were to
lead to the Spring. This for-er official of the PCT [Communist Party of
Czechoslovakia], former official in charge of youth in the Brno region, spoke
openly about self-managenent, of "dynanic unions." of "accelerated denocracy"...

During the 1hth Party Congress. in September 1968. he denounced the Moscow
treaty which lsgitinized "normalization." Gradually Sabata was to enter a
narginality bordering on life underground. This meant an end to party
responsibilities. no lore professorship in Brno. no more work, tasks ... In
1971. he was arrested by the "civic police" for distributing tracts and
sanizdats. Husak‘s police also jailed his three children. Those three
arrests were not unconnected with the two heart attacks Sabata suffered
during his 5 years in prison.

He got out in 1976. Just in time to participate in the writing of Clutter 7?.
His children were also free. Jaroslav Sabata, Vaclav Havel. the dranatist.
and tho nany Christians who signed the Charter. as well as the engineer Peter
Uhl. representing the extreme left of the novensnt, and the singer lhrta

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kubisova. hundreds of students and workers of all sorts did not wait to feel
their solitude. During meetings in Prague appnrtmente stuffed with micro-
phones (Husak's plumbers do not even take the trouble of hidi the wires.

In Prague you can /see/ [in italics] that they are listening! . they decided
to make contact with other dissident groups and. first of all. with the Polish
Committee “of Social Self-Defense." A unified movement "for the respect of
human rights in Estern Europe."

In the hountains of the Giants, in the very northern part of the country.

not far from the small town of Pec Pod Sneskov, there is a footpath called
the Path of Friendship, a kind of free zone between Poland and CzecholeVekia.
For 30 years. Czechs and Poles have met there. in sight of both police forces,
without having to show their papers.

The Charter 7? Cmchs -- Sabata, Havel. film producer Jiri ﬂemec. plus a few
students 7- and the Poles of the "Self-Defense" group (KOR [Workers' Defense
Committeej) -- Michnik Kouron -- met twice on the Path of Friendship. in
August and in September. First conclusion drawn by the Czechs: "The Poles
are farther ahead than we are. They have succeeded in getting all their
political prisoners out. for example."

Following these two meetings. both the Czechs and the Poles wrote and circu-
lated a "Letter to the dissidents of Eastern Europe." 'me next rendezvous
was set for 1 October. It would never take place. In the early hours. when
Sabata. Renee and a small group of students arrived at the bottom of the
Path of Friendship. two companies of Czech and Polish policemen swept upon
them: "Papers!" Following the control. they let everybody go on again.
Except for Sabata. one student and a film producer. They were pushed into
an orange and white Skoda of the "civic security" which took them full speed
to the police station in Pec. 2 km away. They were at once interrogated.
separately. in three different rooms. Aiu‘r half an hour. Sabata asked
permission to go to the toilet. A policeman went with him. Sabata pulled
the chain. The policeman howled: "Swine! he flushed a piece of paper!"
We of them grabbed Jaroalav Sahata and hit him. In the room next door the
student hear them hit his head against the wall. He went out and tried to
intervene. The two policemen pushed him back violently. Sabata was on the
ﬂoor. They pulled him up. They pushed him back into the office.

"Take off your clothes."

Sabata started to comply.

"Attention!"

- "How do you want me to take off my shoes while at attention?"

The beatings redoubled. Sabeta's lower lip was split open. Sabata ended

up defending himself ... The officer who was interrogating him was only
waiting for this. he gloatedz

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"You are going to see what that will cost you!"
He wrote down: "Struck and wounded officer."

For Sabata this meant the certainty of 3 years on a prison farm. Hhile
writing. the officer kept repeating: "You have no right . .. we have all the
rights." The other two never stopped beating him. At this point Sabata was
down on the floor. They hit him on the head with their heels. The same
evening he was in prison. but not in the infirmary: in a cell. As he was
also suffering from a duodenal ulcer he was put on a "tea diet." His daughter
Anna translated his first letter from prison to me. Sabata can no longer

hear with his left ear. he is practically certain that they broke his ear
drum.

It is obvious that the regime will do anything to make sure that the Sabata
trial (in 2 weeks? In 3 months? Nobody knows) will take place quietly.

Vaclav. Sabata's son took refuge in Vienna. On 11 October he sent. in the
form of a circular letter. a veritable appeal for help to the three leaders
of Dam-communism: Enrico Berlinguer. Santiago Carrillo. Georges Harchais.

"I as turning to you,“ wrote Vaclav Sahata. "so that you can come to the aid
ofly father. Jaroslav Sabeta, spokesman for Charter 7? ... I an turning to

you not only in the interest of my father. but also in the interest of

numerous Czechs who might at any moment find themselves in the same situation...
I am asking you to intervene with the Czech authorities. to protest against

the methods of repression. .."

As of 18 November 1978. Georges Herchale had not answered yet.
COPYRIGHT: 1978 S.A. Groups Bpress

3‘63
080: 3100

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EAST GERMANY

NADMANN DECISION PROHIBITING DRAMA 0N INTERSROPS SUPPORTED
Heat German Commentary
Frankfurt/“sin PRANKPURTBR ALLGBHBINB in German 6 Nov 78 p 3

[Article by "He": "GDR Taboo"; a translation of the East Berlin BERLINBR
ZEITUNG article cited below follows this article. For a related Paris

LE muss article see JPRS 72210, 13 November 1978. No 1607 of this series
pp 62-101.]

[Text] Through the pen of the actor Reinhard Michelke, the party secre-
tary of the East Berlin Haxim-Gorki-Theater and member oi- the 830 Berlin-
Hitte City District Management reader of the (East) BBBLINBR ZEITUNC have
now finally learned why the play "The Hhisper Party" was eliminated from
the program of the Maxim Gorki Theater. In an article entitled "Serving
Our Cause With Party Conitment. Talent. Wit. and Imagination." Michalke
wrote this weekend as follows: "To be sure, there is a taboo-the ques-
tion of the power and the leading role of the party. And this is always
concrete. A play may be meant ever so honestly. it may be inserted in
the program in a responsible manner. and be prepared by the players in an
equally responsible fashion. But should the play—even if it was not
nleant to—lead to final conclusions that publicly raise questions about
the decisions of our party, then one must divorce oneself from it upon
such perception, before the play is presented to the public. Recently

we made such a decision at our theater."

The play "The Whisper Party" by Rudi Strahl, one of the most successful
writers of comedies among the GDR playwrights, was to have had its
premiere in Leipzig at the end of September, and was scheduled to be
staged in the middle of October as a contribution of the Maxim Gorhi
Theater to the (East) Berlin Festival. At that time the BERLINER ZEITUNG
had this to say as preliminary information: "In this play, young people
do not withstand the temptation to gain apparent prosperity with evil
means." The text of the play, which was supposed to be published shortly
after the premiere, has up to now not been published. In the meantime

it has been learned that the play depicts how young people go about to
gather West marks in order to make purchases in the "Intershop." Thus the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

880 considers the depiction of the "intershop" problem on the stage to be
a public questioning of its decisions. In Leipzig and in the Haxim Gorki
Theater the rehearsals for the play have been suspended, "for internal
reasons," as the BERLINBR ZEiTUNG laconicaily reported. A little later
Konrad Naumann. member of the SED Politbureau and the powerful chief of
the East Berlin District party leadership stated that the realities of
daily life should not be brought to the stage in a nonreflective manner
but rather "something has to be crested by the individual talent with its
artistic-political education. its clear class consciousness that is
expressed in the esthetic transfigurstion."

This became the point of departure for the party secretary of the Maxim
Corki Theater. Michalke wrote: "I am in complete agreement with the
recent statement of Comrade Konrad Nauaann...aade recently to the Berlin
party activists regarding the question of the simple transposition of
facts of so-called daily reality to the stage..."

This cultural political line of Konrad Naumann is, to be sure, different
from the maxim proclaimed by the secretary general of the SED, Erich
Honeckar upon his assumption of the office of the SED chief: "Consider-
ing the firm position of socialism, there can, in my opinion, not exist
any taboos in the field of art and literature." it is hardly coincidental
that Michaikc in his essay-owhich is apparently in harmony with the views
of Konrad Naumann-speaks of a "taboo" in being. However, it is not
Konrad Naumann--at least not yat--who is the responsible party secretary
for culture and science, but the member of the Politbureau. Kurt hager.
Roger has to date not made any public comments regarding the "Hhisper
Party" affair.

The question arises whether honecker's cultural political maxim will
remain in force. hagcr has based his cultural policy on it. Or will the
new party line in cultural and scientific fields be determined by Naumana
and Hichaihe.

COPYRIGHT: F.A.Z. Gab", Frankfurt am Main 1978

SED Official Justifies Ban
East Berlin BEKLINER ZEITUNG in German 3 Nov 78 p 6
[Article by Reinhard Hichalhe. actor; member. $50 Berlin-Mitts City
District Management; party secretary. Maxim Gorki Theater: “Serving Our
Cause Hith Party Commitment, Talent. Hit. and Imagination"!
[Text] Party elections are for communists again and again causes for
critical self-examination. Thus, again and again it will be measured and

weighed whether and how the self-imposed goals derived from party strategy
have been reached, and new goals are set.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Surely. this year also one can draw the conclusion from the work of the
party collectives of the Berlin theaters that they have been weighed and
not found wanting. Aft-r all. 55 new productions have been staged since
1977. This means 55 tires months of work. l.a.. a search in the rich
store of world literature. in the classical and proletarian-revolutienary
heritage of the progressive drama of all countries. in the rich treasure
of Soviet drama; this means constant work with the veterans and the new-
comers of the modern drone of our republic; this means to try and try
again. to search for the best theatrical solution right up to opening
night. And in all of these areas, the comrades artists are involved.
naking demands upon themselves and at the same time urging the colleague
next to them onward, so that he too will all the more consciously con-

' tribute his talent. his imagination, his wit. knowledge and ability toward
the fulfillment of the main task. that is, the accomplishment of the deci-
sions of the Ninth Congress of the 530.

The cultural policy of our party has proven to be a fertile ground for
this task. The trust of the theater personnel in their state and their
party has grown quite apparently. It can also be proven that our public
needs us more and more. in the same fashion our work has become demanded
and recognized on the international scene. Since 1972 the theater collec-
tives of the capital of the GDR gave 136 guest appearances; 10,113 artists
showed in 39 socialist and nonsocialist countries the achievements of the
creative work done under the conditions of our country's socialist cul~
tural policies.

Responsibility to Socialism

Many productions were proof of a high artistic and mental-political level
of expression. Some were not, or to a lesser degree. That is normal and-
trading trust for trust-nobody blames us for it. Some things that
glittered proved on closer inspection not to be gold after all. The party
collectives of the various theaters will have to discuss this in detail.

In my opinion there was some work that did not achieve the established
level of socialist theater. was this willful or did it happen to us by
accident? re that as it may, the comrades in the theaters must first of
all blame themselves. True, it is very difficult to detect something of
this nature when it is staged in the guise of the parable, the fairy tale,
or the allegory, when possibly even the classics are brought into use.

In this regard it is evident that our life cannot be drawn upon as a

control measure or a yardstick.

I am in complete agreement with statement regarding the simple transfer
of the facts of so-called daily reality to the stage that was recently
made to the Berlin party activists by Comrade Konrad Naumsnn, member of
the Politburesu of the Central Comuittee of the 830 and first secretary
of the Berlin District Directorate. The problem does not concern
esthetics, it does not concern style, it does not concern simply the

’

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

question of verisinilitude on the stage. as seen by one person or another.
The problem is also a profoundly political one. It concerns the question
of artistic responsibility within socialise as a responsibility to socialism.

The Question of Authority Is Always Concrete

"Art is nature seen by a tempera-ant." I believe it was Balzac who said
that. I would like to add to this statement: Art is nature seen by a
temperament with class consciousness and party spirit. For. to be sure,
there is a taboo--the question of the power and the leading role of the
party. And this is always concrete. A play may be meant ever so honestly,
it may be inserted in the program in a responsible manner. and be prepared
by the players in an equally responsible fashion. But should the play-
even if it was not meant to-lead to final conclusions that publicly raise
questions about the decisions of our party. then one must divorce oneself
from it upon such perception. before the play is presented to the public.
Recently we made such a decision at our theater. This points to the polit-
ical responsibility of the comrades in the theaters for the artistic
production. This is a responsibility that should always be understood to
be a responsibility toward our partner in the evening's audience-the
citizen of the GDR.

Now as before. our theaters are expected to present exciting and provoca-
tive problses and questions from our revolutionary daily life. He cannot
do this without concrete stories from concrete areas, without concrete
persons with their concrete relationships, with their hopes. their dreams,
their successes and also their failures. We shall meet this responsibility
when we perceive our entire activity always as a part of the political
reality in a concrete social environment. when we derive our decisions
from the facts and not from wishful thoughts.

Even the party cannot give us talent and knowledge. nut fundamental
theoretical knowledge, fundamental factual realizations, firm class con-
sciousness, knowledge about the complexities of international political
developments. knowledge about the conditions and requirements of the
socialist revolution in the GDR-these we must acquire ourselves. but
they also have to be coImunicated by the party even more fundamentally
and comprehensively. For it is clear that the mass media are not suffi-
cient. we need this knowledge not only to avoid mistakes. but first of
all to enable us to solve our tasks in the spirit of the ideology of the
worker-peasant state in s more appropriate manner.

Added Combativeness Is Needed

Again. the party organizations of the theaters need added coabativsness,
that is, added ideological and organisational unity and determination.
added loyalty to the masses. added activity. knowledge of the personal
responsibility of every single comrade for the effecting of party deci-
sions. added unanieity of artistic subjectivity. and unconditional party

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

loyalty. He should take the statutes in hand not only when we have to
determine the extent of a party disciplinary action, but to place us again
and again on the scales to see how much weight we can add to our side in
the class conflict. And one can never gain enough weight in this ques-
tion.

This is how i understand the content and aim of our party elections
according to the Central Committee's election directives regarding the
concrete conditions of the Berlin theaters. This is also the way the
comrades within the artistic establishments of the capital prepare for
the party elections. At this time work is going on on the reports of the
party leaderships. In this connection the achievements are analysed and
a party comment on them is worked out. Measures are taken that--with a
view to the 30th anniversary of our republic-are suitable to increase
the richness of artistic enjoyment and experiences with a deep world view
for our socialist contemporaries in the audience.

Those party leaderships that include a multitude of comrades in the sub-
stantive preparations for the party elections are acting wisely. We of
the Maxim Gorki Theater have invited groups of comrades to discussions
in the party leadership. comrades who work as governmental managers.
officials in the mess organizations. including labor unions, i.e., party
activists. Before the discussion. they received a list with painted
questions regarding the work of the theater and its party organization.
Thus they could prepare thoroughly. Thus they did not have to digress
during the discussions. Host of them did prepare and the party leader-
ship new has additional materials regarding the political situation in
the various fields of the theater.

To be sure, many a comrade during the discussions forgot to evaluate
himself. his personal contribution, the realization of his personal
responsibility to date and in the future. In this regard there is still
something to be learned.

Many Possibilities of Political Discussion

In the party elections. we emphasize the political influence of the labor
union organiratlon, the primary ally of the party in political work with
the masses. in the development of mass loyalty generally. He stress the
responsibility of the labor union in Harxist-Leninist instruction and
citizenship training of its members. for example, the competition pro-
grams of the various labor union groups of our theater envision the
utilization of the many opportunities for political discussion and polit-
ical influence offered by contemporary socialist drama and the drama of
the Soviet Union which occupy a central position in the artistic work.

Conscious Involvement in Theater work

in the preparation for such productions the political contact to our young
artists is thus the most intense. Now as before our concern and attention

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

must be directed to their ptiitical education. to their conscious involve-
ment in the theater work of our society.

All party collectives. thus also those of the theaters of the capital.
have the same taske-the ideological level of party work must be raised.
the political-ideological work must be accomplished with scientific
objectivity. communist party loyalty, the revolutionary atmosphere of

the timee with its optimism. and with combative wit, it we should be able
to do the letter. Only in this leaner can we fulfill the demands and the
expectetione of the party and society that are not determined by somebody
eoeewhsre but by the objective course and the complicated dialectic of the

class struggle in the world. we, the comrades of the Berlin theaters ere
reedy to meet these demands.

9260
080: 2300

13
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
’03 OIIIOIAL 083 ONLY

EAST GERMANY

NEST GERMAN ACCOUNT OF GDR MILITARY TRAINING FOR TEENAGERS
Hamburg STERN in German No 51, lb Dec 78 pp 24-26

[Report by Nick Barkow: "'Obedisnce Must Become Second Nature'-From the
GDR Textbook 'Civil Defense'"]

[Text] The commands sound the same as in military barracks yards. East or
Nest: "Attentionl"--"Eyes rightl"--"Right facel"--“Porward marchl"--"Songl"

Slender, long-haired girls in green fstigues obey commands on the parade
ground like recruits--not yet in the army, to be sure. but in the German
Democratic Republic's "Society for Sport and Technology." in the CDR abbre-
viation craze simply referred to as CST.

But what until now many teenagers 14 years and over did voluntarily in CST
premilitary training, because they were enticed by other GST offerings
(sports, driving cars, riding motorcycles, broadcasting, flying, firing
small weapons. and cross-country exercises), has recently become compulsory
training on sport fields and school yards: All 15-year old boys and girls
of the other German state Inst now report for defense study instruction.
The GDR is the only East bloc country where such instruction is compulsory.

Since this fall, teenagers have been drilled in civil and national defense
in four 2-hour lessons and a lb-day course of instruction with 72 contact
hours. The compulsory defense-study program. vehemently rejected by the
GDR's Protestant Church, is grudgingly accepted by parents who have mostly
resigned themselves to it, and by teenagers who grind their teeth about it.

But the comparison with the "pro-military training" of the Hitler Youth.

all too easily made by the Nest. does not really fit the case. Differently
from then, the school that has simply been given a new subject entitled
"Civil Defense" to teach, is here responsible for it. The recently finished
text books for this 9th grade course are not for sale. They are distributed
at the beginning of each lesson. and they are collected again at the end.
Teachers also are not allowed to lend out their volume on "Teaching Aids";
it must "always be ready to be shown for inspection."

16
FOR OP?ICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Following the party mandate to divert the GDR youth at long last from discos.
Jeans and pop music and to interest it more in the defense of the socialist
state. topics in the text book "Civil Defense." are treated all but moder-
ately under such headings as "group and troop training." "cross-country
training.“ or "necessity of military discipline and order in the military
fortification and defense of socialism." There are pictures for correct
exercising and marching and. to boot, massive attempts to create fear.

By policies of peaceful coexistence and relaxation. the youth has been dis-
posed to peace; to convert it now to courageous military behavior. the
authors of the school book dip deep into the slogan-box of the cold war:
"Since imperialism by nature is aggressive. we also have to expect a real
danger of war."

By imperialism. the school book leaves no doubt. is meant first and fore-
most the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany: "It is known
that there is nothing the imperialist will shrink from. To save imperialism
as a system. the imperialists are even ready to employ means of mass anni-
hilation." One has to consider the fact "that in a modern war the imper-
ialists would attempt to engage in inhuman methods of conducting the war
and to put into practice the moat cruel plans of annihilation. These plans
would first of all be directed against the civilinr population too."

But, to be sure. the text book offers consolation against the "insanity of
reactionary forces": "with real effort and correct behavior. protection
against the prompt effects of a nuclear detonation is possible over at
least 80 percent of the total area within the effective range of a nuclear
weapon."

Thus. students are taught that atom bomb drops are net all that bad if one
follows the instructions of the text book: how to put on home-made pro-
tective head and body gear and how to lie down correctly in the light-
shadow of an atomic explosion-the feet towards the center of the explosion.

In Chapter 2A. the text book describes in detail the 'iethods of the imper-
ialists to trigger and start wars." It explains. for example, how on 13
August 1961 the Berlin Hall came about. and the mine fields, the spring-gun
installations. the barbed wire fences. the traps and the blocked zones on
the border. That sounds then as follows: "End of July. beginning of
August. 1961. a tense situation prevailed in the heart of Europe. "or
threatened. all NATO troops in the west European countries were on alert.
the USA air force conducted land and air-bridge maneuvers, and war exer-
cises of the Heat German marine corps took place in front of the GDR's
Baltic Sea Coast."

Not a hint was dropped that what happened was but a Hestern reaction to_
the troop concentrations in the East for the military protection of the
erection of the wall. And the original tone continues: "For what pur-
pose were the imperialist troops mobiliasd in those August days of 1961?

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Obviously for war against the GDR... To thwart these war plans. combat
troops of the working class and the soldiers of the GDR secured the state
border during the night from the 12 to the 13 of August. l9bl. Thereby
they were shielded by deep-echeloned troops of the “VA [National People's
Army], by the Soviet army. and finally by the entire military might of the
Warsaw pact nations. Thus. on the state border between the GDR and the PRC.
including Rest Berlin. a type of setup was created such as is implemented
by sovereign states on their borders the world over."

"what matters is military preparedness. defense-mindedness. and defense
morale."

In the course. the imperialists are charged not only with dropping atom
bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 19as. but also with the rebellion of
GDR workers against the increase of norms in 1953. and with the 1956 in-
surrections in Poland and Hungary. Because: "The imperialists and their
military can employ various measures to trigger wars ... The imperialists
also have no scruples to break international treaties and ride roughshod
over international law."

Against this. only "heroism" can help. as the next chapter discloses:

"heroes and heroic deeds are the result of education and training. To
commit a heroic deed, will alone is not enough." And: "In case of a

possible armed confrontation. it becomes necessary .... for the entire
people en massa to commit heroic deeds."

GDR teenagers--who have been. according to the $30 View, rendered effemi-
note by western influences--learn in subsequent lessons that the pre-
requisites for such heroic deeds are: discipline and order. because
"without discipline and order. things can't go right." Below are some
slogans for 9th grade children and for apprentices of the same age:

--"Today more than ever. discipline is the 'mother of victory'."

--"Hilitary discipline includes also unquestioned execution of orders and
absolute obedience."

--And when the superior says “Comrade soldier. you must ...". there is
only one answer: "Yes, Sir."

--0rders must be carried out unquestioned. "without discussion."

--"Discipline and obedience must become second nature. a daily habit."
Because orders of commanding officers must "be obeyed unconditionally."

Since the ”predatory and "criminal" imperialists might also make use of
chemical and biological warfare. there are practice experiences in the
use of "protective masks for the population" which, imported from the
USSR. are currently distributed in schools and kindergartens.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POM (WI’HZIAI. USE ONLY

Since "the possibility of a modern var cannot be excluded," the 15-year
olds must, of course, also know "how to reach their base of operation
speedily and safely under the most different circumstances, by day or by
night, even after enemy weapons have had their effect," how to formulate
reports, how to behave as outpost observer, how to compute compass march
numbers. Because: "By means of cross-country training, such characteris-
tics as courage, boldness, perseverance. ingenuity, discipline. and collec-
tiviam are furthered and reinforced."

Thus, they learn to crawl, slide, jump, creep, and at the same time to stay
out of the opponents' sight and protect themselves from enemy fire. "Haik-

ing bent over can be accomplished at any speed when conditions do not allow
walking erect." They learn to construct shelters in the terrain, and they

are to engage in sports for the "achievement of their energy potential."

So that the youths, in spite of drill. roll-call, marching in step, and
“at easel" be gripped by love of adventure, the instruction, according to
the instructor's guide, should also be made “emotional." But_a11 this is
intended only to accomplish the pedagogic main goal: "what matters in
particular is to utilize the educational potentials of the teaching mate-
rial for the further improvement of the military preparedness of the
students, the development of their defense-mindedness and their defense
morale."

COPYRIGRT: 1978 STERN

9011
680: 2300

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EAST GERMANY

BRIEFS

SCROOL MILITARY INSTRUCTION PRESSURE--Insistencc upon military Instruction
in COR schools is becoming noticeably more adamant. The recent punishment
by more than 2 years' imprisonment of a youth from the Goerlitz church
district for making protest leaflets was only the beginning. Outweighing
the sentencing of a single active believer is the fact that every young
person who. entirely of his own accord and without participating in demon-
strations, wants to stay away from the unpeaceful training is now threatened
by an unfavorable entry in his report card. This "absent without valid
excuse" is to be with him through life: it is to be a black mark in his
"cadre file.“ As fo; the GDR churches which object to military instruction
just as they do to LFQg/ youth consecration. they are once more confronted
with the problem of what they should advise the youth. The churches cannot
take the responsibility for urging the youth to resist, the consequences of
which cannot be foreseen for the future life of the young people, as well as
for their parents. Thus in the 603 every one is on his own again. And the
Germans in the PRC have a new reason tq_retain their 3-decade-old feeling
of disapproval toward the GDR regime. (Test! [frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTBR
ALLGEHBINB in German 23 Dec 78 p 12/

- _-- . _..._.—-———

SED OVERIURES T0 PSOE--In a striking manner the SED has played the Spanish
card twice within 8 weeks: in early October it had its top official for
foreign relations. Amen. receive medium-ranking visitors of the Spanish
Socialist Workers Party (PSOE) with great honors; in late November the SED
dispatched visitors of low rank to Spain to the fraternal Communist Party
headed by Carrillo. These two developments must not be misunderstood. The
P506. which keeps sliding into the Latin American-socialist direction, is
becoming an ever more desirable partner for the Communists in East Berlin
and Moscow. while the $50 and the CPSU would not even touch Burocommunist
Carrillo with a 10-foot pole. This is not surprising. "hat is amazing
only is that the P506 and its leader Gonzales not only do not cause any
offense within the Socialist International with their course but are even
being encouraged. Hilly Brandt, the president. and Felipe Gonzales, the
outstanding one among 19 vice presidents. rather seem to be as thick as
thieves. Apparently it is easy in Spain to have the wrong friends. [Text]
[Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEHEINB in German 25 Nov 78 p 12 DH]

CSO: 2300
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

YUGOSLAVIA

COMMENTS ON THE CROATIAN QUESTION
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTBR ALLGEHEINB in German 25 Nov 78 p 12

[Article by Viktor Meier]

[Text] Zagreb, 26 Nov. “Look. people are always trying to make us Creations
out to be enemies of the state," says the friendly old gentleman in Zagreb
who has nothing to do with terrorian. Bombing attacks and acts of terrorism
would be the last thing he would want. But he took exception to the fact
that on the extradition list transmitted to Bonn by the ministry of the
interior in Belgrade, “with the exception of a well-known Chetnik or a
well-known Albanian.” only Croatisns were to be found. This hurts his
national pride. "There are other emigrants. too, who are up to no good.”

Another Croatian. also no extremist. said: "Previously, no one amongst us
knew this Bilandric. Now our press is building him up into a greet personality.
I would never have dreamt that after 1.000 years we Croatiana would again
have a heroic age." Scarcely anyone here in Zagreb would want a reign of
terror. "But amongst us there is also a political reign of terror. “any
criminal proceedings are unjust. People are arrested without reason end
frequently detained for longer periods. Hair-raising things that are
against the law take place in pre-trial confinement and in the prisons.

As long as this goes on, reactions must be expected.‘ The rejection by the
extradiction requests free the PRC has left the Croatian people quite
indifferent. "That is no affair of ours."

This mood nakes conprehensible the nervousness in the Yugoslav police.
Obviously. "success" has to be produced in Zagreb because the "Croatian
Question," the Achilles heel of Yugoslavia and also of the communists. is back
in existence. Largely due to the fault of the regime itself, which,
apparently, instead of letting matters rest. forcibly dragged them out again.
Nobody ordered the newly-appointed secretary of the Croatian central
committee. Hilutin Baltic-a Serb, by the way--to speak in an inflamatory
manner of the reawakening of "nationalism" and of an "opposition front."

He did it, nevertheless. People in Zagreb quickly sat up and took notice
with a mixture of spectator interest and malicious pleasure which. since
1971. has always arisen in Zagreb whenever problems becoee apparent in the
"ruling class."

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other incidents occurred: in the literary Journal, 0K0. the second-class
writers once again lashed at each other under the viewpoint of who had been
"nationalist" and when; the student Journal STUDENTSKI LIST was prohibited;

a secret trial affected five students; and Biharic, who had otherwise acted
cleverly before, provoked the Church just at the moment when the election of
a Pope from Poland, moreover, strengthened the morale of the faithful.
Archbishop Kuharic recently emphasized that the Church would adhere to the
fundamental demand for the rehabilitation of Cardinal Stepinsc. Above all
things the bitterness is because of the school reform conceived by Minister
of Education Stipe Suvar, one of the most intelligent heads in the present
Croatian leadership. In the endeavor to bring education into practice at all
levels, the process has gone so far that today the nationalists are asserting
that people want to "truncate" Croatian intellect. Not without good reason,
thus is it asserted in these circles, is the classical secondary school
nnmwinuﬂh.

In such circumstances, the terrorist affair can acquire still greater
significance for internal Yugoslavian developments than for German-
Yugoslevian relations. without doubt, certain legal cases in the Federal
Republic have been dealt with slowly, but. for all that, proceedings were
instituted and the people are vulnerable. At the same time, however, it
was explained to the Yugoslav police that they are not omnipotent on German
soil. Its limits have now become evident. That means a less of face
precisely in Croatia but equally so in the eyes of the Yugoslavian guest
workers in the Federal Republic. Somewhat less than 600,000 Yugoslavs

are at present still working in Germany; with dependents it could be
700,000 persons of whom, according to estimates. a good half are from
Croatia. This, too, has political significance. For its part, communist
Yugoslavia, in its reactions, has gone to the limit of that which is still
consistent with normal relationships between two states. Politically,
Belgrade's step means a radicalization and, according to experience, such
a step in Yugoslavia always shifts all weight to the side of dogmatism, no
doubt because the dogmatic-bureaucratic elements feel encouraged by the
worsening of relations with the "eat. It is scarcely accidental that,
almost simultaneously with the "terrorist affair," and rather suddenly, the
Yugoslav press also broached the problem of shopping trips to Trieste by
Yugoslavians.

From the standpoint of the Yugoslav offices responsible for the release of

the terrorists, it appears normal that they immediately invited high officials
of the German interior ministry to Belgrade. They probably hope, purely
"technically." to come to an agreement with them which is supposed to grant
to the Yugoslav police in the Federal Republic certain authority for the
purpose of having a better "grip" on the emigrants, still before Tito's
retirement, if possible. That would mean making up for the loss of face. In
doing so, the Yugoslavs appear, as has been frequent quite recently, to

count on the not exactly first-rate ability of certain offices in Bonn to
judge Yugoslav realities.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l.'Sl-'. ONLY

In view of the fixation of the Yugoslav regime's police on Creations. and

in View of the increased nervousness and tension to be expected there,

giving in on this matter could bring the Federal Republic a problem that

would be difficult to overcome. with almost half a million Creations in

the country. it can scarcely afford partisanship in internal Yugoslav affairs.
The only thing remaining is normal maintenance of the obligations of state.
The responsible offices in Belgrade have carried out their unilateral action.
They have nothing more to offer and it is not known how strong the dogmatic

forces backing the decision really are. In any case, there is no reason to
help them further.

COPYRIGHT: I". A. Z. Gmbll. Frankfurt am Main, 1978

8826
cs0: 2300 3ND

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY