FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10046
13 October 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 52/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

JPRS L/10046
13 October 1981

WEST EUROPE REPORT
(FOUO 52/91)

CONTENTS

ENERGY ECONCMICS

BSIBIUF.

Government Criticized on Coal Subsidies, Mine Closings
(Jean Guily; NURQUOI PAS?, 3 Sep 81) oo-ooooooooooooouoooooo 1

mane
FRAE CE

Unions' Role, Demands Under Socialist Government
(Jean unbois; PROJET, Sep-Oct 81) ........................... 3

POLITICAL
FRANCE

Citizens Desire Right-Ring Activity; Chirac, Giscard Pun
(Irene Allier; LE NOUVBI. OBSERVATEUR, 12 Sep 81) ............ 12

CGT Leadership Change: Seguy's Health or PCF Stalinists
(Claude-Hancois Jullicn; LE NOWEL OBSERVATEUR, 12 Sep 81).. 17

ﬁcu Government: Transi ti on, Errors, Successes, Future Problems
(Hugues Portelli; PROJET, Sep-Oct 81) ....................... 2O

PS-PC Conflicts: Nuclear, Military, Immigrants
(Arthur Conte; PARIS MATCH, 28 Aug 81) ...................... 23

ITALY

PCI'S Colajanni Interviewed on Intraparty wrangles
(Napoleone Cclajanni Interview; EUROPEO, 21 Sep 81) ......... 28

- a - [III - WE - 150 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY EBONOH'ICS MGIUH

GOVERNMENT CRITICIZED 0" GOAL SU'BSIDIES. MINE CLOSU'GS
Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 3 Sep 81 pp 13-15
[Article by Jean Gully: "Coal. Coal. Coal!"]

LText] Hilly Claes is ready to grant a 1 year reprieve to the
last walloon coal line. the Roton in Farciennes. near Charlestoi.
which would thus close its gates on 31 October 1982. 'Ihe minis-
ter is really too generous. But could we ask the minister about
the fate he has planned for the coal mines of Eisden and
Hinterslag. which cost the Belgian taxpayers just as much?

As a matter of fact, our Willy has already answered the question. I: a recent me-
morandum submitted to his colleagues, the minister of economic affairs justiﬁed
both coal and the coal nines of the Campine. which he sees as one and to which he
generously attributes the same future. This. very obviously. a little short. He
are quite willing to admit. if necessary. the importance. even a relative one, of
a mini-independence in terms of energy. He should no longer ignore possibilities
offered by new technologies. in which -- consider the underground gasification --
our country is getting behind. Finally. it is also important to avoid social tra-
gedies -- 20.000 miners to find a new job for. which is utopian -- which would re-
sult from the widespread closings which nobody. furthermore. seems to want. Should
we for all that continue to pay the full price. and blindly so. for an artificial
survival of the Belgian coal mines? This is what Hilly Claes. bothered by his
voters. would like.

This would not seen wise. In addition. such a policy is not within our neans. And
the "little red man," who regularly promises us the apocalypse for tomorrow. is not
t‘e last one to know it...

156 Billion - 10 Years

In this case. the opinion issued by the Walloon executive in July 1979 appears to
us to carry certain nuances: "In the prevailing uncertainty concerning supply."
they wrote. "the contribution made by the coal production in Linburg constitutes

a measure of security. even if the cost of producing coal in Linburg is much higher
than that of coal imported at the world price or even than the average production
cost within the Common Phrket. However. the executive requests that the exact cost
of this measure of security be calculated both in relation to the annual tonnage

to be mined and the duration of the exploitation.“ Two years later. we are still
navigating by guesswork and the services of the Ministry of Economic Affairs do not

1

V09 0997574! "C? may
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

seem to be prepared to lift the fog. Hell. a moment of embarrassment is quickly
over...

According to Jean-Maurice Dehousse andhisfellow workers. an estimate of the expen-
ses the state will have to support for loan guarantees fer the National Company for
the Financing of Caal Hines between 1982 and 1991 may be estimated at 156.3 billion
francs. It is not certain. This will undoubtedly require a few explanations. if
not an adjustment of the aim.

The first thing would be to define the coal policy in Belgium within the framework
of a real energy policy. why not then. in this context. call with the utmost ur-
gency for a parliamentary debate on energy which is continuously being postponed
indefinitely? For administrators worthy of that name. however. it would be an op-
portunity to set in motion a new industrial policy with concrete and immediate fall:
out on employment: Hark Eyskens prefers to criticize the Belgians for living it up
too much. Of course. it is much easier to bowl us out!

On the other hand. one can only agree with the Halloon executive when it states
that. in order to prevent the "exponential" growth of the amounts to be paid by

the state for the coal mines from reaching unbearable levels. it would be advisable
as of now to consider a ceiling on financial intervention. The possibde heirs of
the gravediggers who are currently in power. are preparing themselves for a dread-
ful succession: in 1991. the cost of the Limburg coal will be. at best. on the
order of 30 billion francs. For budgetary reasons. it will no longer be a question
under those conditions. of raising the school standards but of eliminating schools!
One cannot step progress...

The Roton and Others

The losses soaked up by the providential state will continue to climbu from 1.864
francs per ten for all the coal mines in the Campine for the year 1980. they will
reach 2.500 francs h years fr0m now. and “.300 francs in 1990. As these figures
came from Mr Claes. we would not want to suspect him of having placed the line too
high...

To give an example. for the first 4 months of 1981. the losses per ton at Eisden
were already at 2.120 francs. and at Hinterslag at 3.211 francs. The Roton. with
its 2,398 francs. did not. by the way. have anything to blush about.

Hence. there is cause -- as it occurred and will occur in the steel industry -- to
rationalize. The fact that this rationalization applies solely to the Roton. the
reserves of which were estimated at 1.230.000 tons as of 31 October 1981 by the
Service of Mine Management in Charleroi. and the closing of which could logically
take place in 1985. is disturbing to say the least. One-way savings are accepted
with increasing ill will in wallonia where. if necessary. they might understand
and accept that the state turn off the faucet for the Roton as long as a similar
effort. equally justified. is requested of Limburg. which is not the case.

The coal file has been "put into commission." For the miners of Farciennes. the
wait continues. To settle their fate without taking into account the Belgian con-
text would be an ingustice. One more. It would also be an economic mistake. One
more also...

COPYRIGHT: 1981 POURQUOI PAS?

31-63
cso: 3100/96}
FOR 0FT1C1AL.USE(MNLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

UNIONS' ROLE, DEHANDS UNDER SOCIALIST GOVERNMENT
Paris PROJET in French Sap-Oct 81 pp 960-948
[Article by Jean Dubois: "The New Social Deal"]

[Text] In the latest statements from the employers and the
labor unions, J. Dubois detects relatively parallel analyses
which can lead to compatible strategies. The labor unions
and the employers are facing common problems and it is in
their interest to solve them together. Negotiations on

both sides look like the only way out of the current dead-
lock.

"A new social deal." it was announced just about everywhere. The thing seemed
certain if one listened to the apocalyptic remarks from some employer circles:
"Just read the socialist draft, look at all the powers given to the labor unions;
business and industry will be paralyzed." The same impression came from wage
earners, that is, "to cut down" some militants who allowed themselves to dream:
"no more arbitrary actions by the employers; the time has come to move on to self-
management." A new deal-are you sure? Leaving each to his own imagination. let
us address ourselves to the central question: "Is there a chance that the change
in the political majority might introduce a radical transformation in relations
between the employers and the labor unions?" The answer is not obvious. This
might be a simple episode in the endless struggle which, for a century, has been
going on between the employers and the labor unions. But it is also possible that
an irreversible turning point might be reached, that the labor unions might assume
a new face for themselves and that the style of industrial relations in France
might be turned upside down.

The Hundred Years' War Continues

One word comes to mind in describing French-style industrial relations, in compari-
son to other countries. and that word is archaism; these relations essentially
continue to be a part of the patterns inherited from the 19th century. A revo-
lutionary labor unionism, an agent in the class struggle. establishes for itself
the objective of abolishing the employers. Quite logically in keeping with the
adage of "to kill or be killed," the employers dream of the death of their
adversary. Even though the most radical solutions a long time ago lost their
likelihood of materializing, the attitudes did survive: Open warfare is followed
by guerilla war. Throughout these past several years, the deliberate policy of

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY
FOR OFFW‘MI. USE ONLY

a number of employers was aimed at pushing the labor unions to the sidelines as
much as possible, in the absence of success in eliminating the labor unions al-
together. The labor unions, on the other hand, adopted ways of behavior that
amounted to counteraggression and rejected anything that smacked of "class
collaboration."

A third partner-the government—~always held a capital position in this social

war. To win, each of the protagonists needed to have an ally. The more the powers
of the state grew, the more did the conquest of political power become an essential
stake. The two-way game had become a three-way game and developed according to an
unalterable scenario whose end does not seem to be coming. As if they were obeying
the movement of an invisible scale, the adversaries alternately experienced success
and defeat. Let us recall the latest episodes which are not too far back. In
1936. the labor unions advanced along the broad Popular Front; this advance was
wiped out by the events of 1940 and the Vichy regime. In 1945, the labor unions
resumed the offensive but the gains of the Liberation would be eroded as the Left-
wing parties lost all access to power. The year 1968 brought back a certain dash
to the labor union movement but the economic crisis quickly put it on the defensive
while the employers congratulated each other on having a government to their
liking.

Within this perspective, what does May 1981 mean? A simple return swing of the
scale; it now remains for us to wait for the next phase and the medium—term
scenario for the future will be written without any big chance of mistake.

The labor unions will benefit from their position of strength to get as many ad-
vantages as possible, both regarding their conventional demands (wages, job
security) and in terms of institutional power (labor union rights, powers of the
enterprise committee). 0n the strength of their closeness to the political
establishment, they will be persuaded to prefer the way of the broadest possible
legislative measures.

The enterprise managers, in falling back on arguments of an economic nature, would
try to cut their losses and will bow to the inevitable; but they will wait for a
real economic crisis to give them back their position of strength which they held
during the preceding phase.

In short, only the balance of forces will have been reversed for a moment. Nothing
else will really have changed in the nature of industrial relations. The Hundred
Years' War will continue and 1981 will just have been one of its episodes.

This scenario is the scenario of failure. Not only political failure in more or
less long-range terms but above all a fundamental failure for the labor unions.
It is not by accident that there has been talk of deunionizing for several years
now; this is not a temporary or passing phenomenon. Some recent public opinion
surveys confirm the diagnosis: Wage earners are profoundly tied to the fact of
the existence of labor unions but they want a different kind of unionism. The
passage of some social laws or an increase in labor union rights will not in any
way constitute a response to this demand. In the absence of finding it, the pre-
diction of deunionization will undoubtedly in the end become a reality. And that
will mean failure.

h
FOR 0FTWCJAI.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sociological Lesson from May 1981

This scenario appeared to be the most likely so long as one looks at it through
the spectacles of the past. 0n the other hand, a different reading of events is
possible if one adopts a broader sociological perspective. Our society is
changing and what happened in May 1981 evidences the emergence of strong ten-
dencies which have been at work for a long time already. henceforth, the victory
of the Left is no longer a part of the cycle of eternal return but signals a

possible advance toward the establishment of new industrial relations in a
different society.

A Differentiated Society

There is a first strong tendency which creates almost unanimity among sociologists:
We are moving toward a more differentiated society; one can no longer describe it
in terms of the simplistic categories of yesterday. There is no longer any bloc
of rich people facing the masses of poor people, with the working class facing

the bourgeoisie. Thedemandsremained homogeneous so long as the wage earners lived
in poverty and insecurity; with the rise in the living standard, differentiated
needs emerged. The qualitative themes became intermingled with the quantitative
themes. Subgroups took shape and they no longer resembled the excessively vague
definitions of the working class. Each of them has its own aspirations which
sometimes clash with those of the other subgroups. Some of them want to be able
to work more and others demand more free time; the unaigrants demand that we make
room for the: while our native-born citizens defend their job monopoly; young and
old. men and women are becoming involved in competition. And let us not speak of
the objective diversity of status or economic situations; what is there in common
among those wage earners whose job is almost guaranteed and the seasonal workers
whose number keeps multiplying? "hat is there in cannon between those workers in
the small enterprises of the declining branches and those technicians in the big
industrial groups that are at the very spearhead of technological progress, etc.?

For the past 2 years, conflicts have each time been regrouping different sub-
categories; sometimes wage earners in one and the same enterprise (including
supervisory personnel), sometimes a single job category, and other times even a
single workshop or a single establishment in one and the same company, sometimes
an entire city or region. etc. There is no longer any constant in all this.

As a more profound and new development, we can now see the workers today looking
forward to the possibility of pursuing individualized strategies of preference
over collective strategies. They reject the vocation of institutions to deter-
mine the best strategy in their place, in other words, control them. The document
on "The Future of Labor"-drawn up in preparation for the eighth plan-summarizes'
this tendency: "The new thing is that each thinks that it is up to him to judge
what has to be done in relation to his desires. Perhaps this is the emergence

of a new morality among the workers: Individual protest is considered possible
without excessive costs"1.

The multiplication of information and the complexity of modern systems offer real
possibilities for looking forward to a broad diversity of strategies; there is no
longer a single road toward obtaining one’s salvation. According to Mr Crozier,
"Actors who have a multiplicity of alternatives available to them can no longer
be Controlled. guided, and forced to act in the same fashion as they did in a
system in when they he... a considerably lesser degree of liberty”.

FOR OFTNCLAL.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From that moment on we can just guess what the menace is which hovers over these
institutions. both the enterprise and the union; thuy can no longer be content
with their traditional ways of regulation which have become too simplistic. It
is their authority which is now being challenged: "In all human gatherings at
this time, in which the multiplicity ci interactions offers choices unknown until
now, the forms of authority which constituted the foundation of the institution
are breaking up. One can no longer in the same fashion control people who hence-
forth enjoy degrees of liberty which transform the very nature of the social
fabric. The believer can seek refuge with his pastor, just as the draftee can
run to his officers and the high school student to his teachers“3 and by the same

token the worker can run to his outfit, the labor unionist can run to his dele-
gates.

This context enables us to interpret May 1981. The victory of the Left is not due

to the sudden support of the French for the old revolutionary programs. suddenly
perceived as a miracle remedy for all ills. certainly not as a "big thing," promising
an idyllic society. 0n the contrary. the election success did not stop the skepti-
cism of many people. Each doubts that the economic difficulties will disappear all
at once, that unemployment and the operating restrictions of the enterprises will
vanish. As a matter of fact. the Socialist Party's success is the success of a
"catch~all" party; instead of giving this expression a pejorative meaning. we
should perceive its profound truth: The PS [Socialist Party] won because it appeared
to be the only one to achieve the rally of widely differentiated groups which neither
in the Giscardian nor in the prospects of the collectiviat type, found the way of
being heard and rspresented. In this sense, the success of the Left is due less

to the content of its program and it is due more to the prospects of differentiated
actions which it presents.

Will this orientation become a fact? The role of the labor unions will be a central
one here. Or, succumbing to its old demons, continuing to fight yesterday's war,
it will line up its demand action toward the procurement of overall measures, thus
hoping to meet the aspirations of a majority of its followers; that would mean pre-
paring the disillusionment oi tomorrow; in shutting itself off within the area of
overall measures. it will fail to respond to the aspirations for autonomy and
difference which are behind the current social movements. Or it will understand
that it is the only one capable of conducting differentiated actions, adapted to
the diversity of work situations, modulated according to the particular features

of each enterprise. each worker category. By losing speed while sticking to over-
all programs which are excessively politicized, it can start a rejuvenation cure

by demonstrating its local effectiveness in changing the daily lives of the wage
earners. Its future position therefore from this moment on, will not be to work
toward a problematlcal ideological adhesion to a program but toward the verifiable
utility of the labor union institution in modifying the living and working condi-
tions of each and every one. That is the chance which is offered to it today.

Labor Unionism Recognized at Last

If labor unionism remained on the general and political level for so long, allowing
the gap between the wage-earner rank and file and the apparatuses to grow, it at

least had a good excuse: The feeling of not being really recognized. Above all it
had to fight to exist.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Everything so far happened as if France had escaped the second major strong ten-
dency which emerged in the other industrial nations: The tendency toward integra-
tion and institutionalization of labor unionism. Just about everywhere, the
political system has permitted the opposition to be integrated in society, to
have access to the Establishment when its turn came, without talking of revolution,
without being subjected of threatening the country's general interest. Likewise.
labor unionism very early was recognized as an integral part of the social system.
It was allowed to increase that which the sociologists call "access to control,"
that is to say, the ability to have its say in the decisions of other institutions
such as the governmenz, the enterprise. Very equitable "rules of the game" were
established so that the labor unions might agree to play the game instead of
spending their time trying to change the rules.

That is not the case in France. The laws are not being challenged but the attitude.
deep down, of the ruling class is being challenged. Jacques Moreau summarized the
strategy of the employers as follows: "As a matter of fact, the present approach
of enterprise managers tends to modernize the old dream of the French employers.
For most of them, labor unionism is still an evil which one puts up with but which
should be rooted out as soon as possible. Is this an excessive judgment? The
expression is never as direct as all that but this is where the tendency of recom-
mended policies is oriented in the end. In the absence of being able to challenge
its recognition once again, they will try to limit their control and to reject
their action outside the enterprise or in the institutions which are formalized
and devoid of content"4.

This gap with respect to the general tendency toward integration is so spectacular
that one of the first actions taken by President Giscard was to try to fill the

gap by creating a condition for the "reform of powers in the enterprise." We know
what happened to the Sudreau report which recommended the "strengthening of the
means of labor union action" and "the extension of the field of negotiations"; only
a few scraps are left. The power of the enterprise boss remained a taboo area and
labor unionism once again was pushed to the sidelines.

From this viewpoint. Hay 1981 has a very obvious meaning: It is a big step on the
road toward social integration. The political system shows, for the first time,

its capacity to implement alternation in office according to normal channels. The
most revolutionary elements were disqualified. The electorate voted ft those who
wanted to make changes in society and not those who wanted to change society. Labor
unionism found itself getting a place of honor on the national level; some of its
members took over important functions in the presidential and ministerial offices.
The appointment of communist ministers runs along those lines; until now considered
pestllential, the minority finds itself a part of the collective setup.

this process of integration will be continued if certain measures are taken con-
cerning labor union rights. The latter constitute a big bugaboo for quite a few
employers. Still. this involves practices, several of which were already contained
in the Sudreau report, while others are already in use in Germany or Sweden. Much
less than a rupture. this involves the line up of France along a tendency that is
more advanced elsewhere. we have fallen behind; but we are now in the process of
catchlug up.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFI’VH “SE ONLY

Is this scenario too optimistic? Undoubtedly, to the extent that its realization
depends on two prior prerequisites.

First of all, the employers must nev-‘i 2 - fact of institutionalization; they
must get used to the idea of facing a siroeg partner; they must learn to exercise
their own power by taking into account another power that is capable of limiting
their power. Employer responsibility is overwhelming here. If the employers prove
incapable of playing this new game, they will be forcing the labor unions to fall
back on the state. to demand of it that it impose restrictive laws which the
employer partner always rejected. This will then give us a system of formal rules
and procedures involving paralyzing controls.

0n the other hand. the labor unions must know how to use their new power. They

may be tempted to abuse their victory; they might think that they have won the
battle once and for all; they may in turn ignore the employer as a partner; they
may wish to impose the strongest possible law upon the employer. Intoxicated with
their access to political power, the labor unions might take the apparently easy

way by settling everything through the law, multiplying statutory guarantees. In
this way the labor unions would be expressing their disdain for the enterprise and
by the same token they would, among the employers, trigger forms of behavior amount-
ing to the "resistance"to labor unionism which would lead back to the scenario of

The Hundred Year's War.

There is nothing ubviously to assure us that these two conditions will be met. 0n
the other hand, we have never had a similar opportunity to break out of the vicious
cycle where the employers and labor unions were trapped. It would be astonishing
if nobody were to try to benefit from that.

A Chance to be Grasped

The blinders of the past very often prevent us from detecting signs of renewal no
matter how obvious they may be. That is the impression which we get today from

the comparative reading of statements from the employers and from the labor unions.
Behind the reciprocal denunciations, we think we can detect the appearance of rela-
tively parallel analyses which are liable to lead to compatible strategies; the
concepts of labor unionism are getting closer rather than moving further apart;
labor unions and employers face common problems which it is in their interest to
solve together; a relationship based on the development of negotiations appears on
either side as the only way out of the current deadlock.

Parallel Analyses

French employers often expressed their dream of finding a labor union partner less
under the control of political slogans and more concerned with enterprise problems
rather than with overall ideological viewpoints. Very recently, F. Ceyrac declared:
"The labor unions today are moving along the line of 1936. They seem to be
prisoners of a linear tradition which is now $4 years old, which absolutely ignores
both the aspirations of men and women for work and the needs of the enterprise.

The aspirations of men are not the same at Dunkerque and Perpignan in a plant where
there are many women, in a plant out in the countryside, in a plant at Gennevilliers
or Lyons; I therefore think that progress is moving toward diversification, that is
to say, the search--on the enterprise level-—for solutions adapted to the real
operating conditions of the enterprise and of labor"5.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

E. Maire finds words just as harsh in denouncing those who only believe in overall
solutions: "They confine labor union action to a few unifying demands, incapable
of responding to the extraordinary complexity of real life. They put all their
hopes in a political victory which is considered to be able to resolve, from top-
side, the problems which they leave untouched today. The only supportable labor
unionist attitude consists in definitely rejecting this new promise of bureaucracy
and setting up the facts, the requirements, and the real aspirations of each
social group as the first basis for action and reflection"5.

Without pursuing these parallel quotations, let us be content here with one last
approach: Mr Ceyrac defined the social policy of the employers as having to
develop toward "personalization." Here is what he says: "The rise in the living
standard creates a wide diversity of aspirations and thus. to respond to that, an
individualization of solutions. The principle of individualized social policies
is the fruit of a convergence between the aspirations of the personnel and the
necessities of the enterprise.“ And E. Maire somehow came up with an echo to that:
"Building labor union action as close as possible to each worker, rehabilitating
an attitude of inquiry, a thirst for knowledge, unstanding the why's of individual
and collective reactions...there is no other way to make up our long-standing
delay and to build the labor unionism of our time."

But, some people might say, what about the COT [General Confederation of Labor]?
One must undoubtedly bet that it will be forced to follow the movement started by
the other labor unions. Such a bet is not impossible when one reads the declara-
tions of J. L. Moynot: he also thinks that the essential part of the game will

be played in the enterprise: "The change cannot be limited to the traditional
field of social measures. we think that the key to many problems is found in

the rights and possibilities of the workers to intervene within the enterprises
themselves. Permitting real access of workers to information on the economic
ituation of their enterprise, gr0up, and industry to which it belongs" constitutes
a central objective. "As a matter of fact, our contribution as a labor union to
the materialization of a real change above all takes place in an autonomous
fashion amid our roots in the enterprises, at the ground level, and in the rela—
tionships which the workers are capable of establishing between the immediate
demands and the prospects of the future"7.

what more could business and industry want after thgrcalled for a labor unionism
centering around the enterprise? The only reservation-and it is a hefty one-

has to do with the fact that this labor unionism most of all wants rights and powers
in the enterprise. One does not go without the other: The employers will have to
pay the price of n more realistic labor unionism.

And Common Problems

if, nut of a lack of awareness, they were to continue their heavy-handed approach.
then the labor unions and the employers would run an identical risk: They would
progressively lose control over the real problems in the world of labor; they would
be incapable of regulating the behavior of the social actors; they would allow the
creation of a quasi-anarchic situation in which the two institutions-—the employers
and the labor unions-—would no longer have any credibility.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FW"’-\L 355E ONI Y

The risk is all the .zreater if neither 011:. nor the other in his satchel has a
valid response to the problems arising today. We are as a matter of fact wit-
nessing the rise of contradictory aspirations. More numerous constraints rise
simultaneously. In other words, there 2: no longer .1 chance of finding an overall
solution but only of moving toward a g-.:-..-..:. ---.:.' sc:.tlemcnt of renascent conflicts.
Without going into any details, let us: report here some of these contradictory
pairs whose disappearance we find difficult to visualize. There are contradictions
between the demand for free time and the desire for higher wages, between the
aspiration for work that is fulfilling and the requirements of productivity and
international competition, between a desire for equality and justice and the con-
cern with maintaining differences and asserting one's specificity, between the need
for solidarity and the push toward individualized action, between the desire for

security and the requirements of flexibility and mobility, between short-time
demands and long-term concerns, etc.

One cannot pick either of these alternatives in all cases. There is only one way
out: A permanent, ceaselessly revised compromise. But how to bring about a con-
promisc all by oneself, by claiming to be judge and party to the case at the same
time? Here of course we must have two partners and both of them will still have

to go through the trouble of covering the entire field of diversified aspirations.
In isolation, this would be suicide.

The Requirement for Negotiations

The thrust of new industrial relations will boil down to the extension and perma-
nent instition of negotiations. Until now, there was talk of negotiations only

on the highest levels, that is, national or job category. The diversity of problems
to be tackled, the need for different solutions will hereafter force us to go down
the line on negotiations, all the way to the lowest levels not only the enterprise
but perhaps the factory or the mrkshop. We will have to have national accords

and local accords, overall agreements, as well as pa'tial agreements.

We should reserve the word "negotiations" for those episodic meetings which take
place to put an end to a conflict. We must now talk of permanent negotiations.
we must turn into the normal and habitual practice which alone can bring about
acceptable decisions. In that way we are going to have lasting agreements and
also provisional agreements.

There is nothing Utopian in these prospects. In a complex society. where one can no
longer dream of an idyllic consensus—be it of the Right or of the Left—the only
realistic goal is, through negotiation, to work out compromises which are acceptable
to the largest number of partners. This realism has been entirely too absent in

the labor unions and among the employers to have them fail to measure today the
risks of their blindness. Forced to renounce the hope for a total victory but at
the same time sure of their survival, they are ready to recognize the existence

and power of the other side. May 1981 permits the labor unions to rid themselves

of the mortgages of the past, it offers the employers a labor unionism which is

mcre inclined to negotiate and which is closer to the enterprise; it is up to both
of them to grasp this chance.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

1. "Reflexions sur l'avenir du travail" [Reflections on the Future of Labor].
1a Documentation francaise, 1980.

2. M. Crozier, “La sagesse et le desordre, France 1980“ [wisdom and Disorder in
France in 1980]. a team effort. NRF, 1980.

3. Idem.

4. J. Horeau, "Employer Policy-New Practices and Old Demons," PROJECT, no 145,
May 1980.

S. F. Ceyrac, LE HONDE. 3 July 1981.
6. E. Maire, LB MONDE, 18 August 1979.

7. J. L. Moynot. "What Response to the Crisis Can Change Life?" LE NONDE, 3
July 1981.

COPYRIGHT: CBRAS,15,rue R.-Marcheron,92170 Vanves. 1981

5058
C80: 3100/983

11 '
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OLITi-CAL FRANCE

CITIZENS DESIRE RIGHT-WING ACTIVITY; CHIRAC, GISCARD PLAN
Paris L13 NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 12 Sep BI pp 24-25
[Article by Irene Allier: "Where Does the Right Stand?"]

[Text] The UDF [French Democratic Union] is floundering, the RPR
grows restless, Chirac is getting ready, Giscard and Barre are
observing. The minority is emerging from its lethargy. With
what leader? With what strategy?

"It isn't a jump. It isn't an attack. But at last the scales of the wounded beast
are beginning to quiver," remarks one who is close to Jacques Chirac. in fact, by
announcing on the very day that Parliament reconvened that a motion of censure had
been filed against the government, the RPR reainded everyone suddenly, after its
long summer sleep, that sooner or later the opposition was going to re-form. in a
state of shock ever since France went into a state of grace, the RPR and the UDF, as
if by magic, had disappeared from the French political scene. that happened was that
the survivors had been glimpsed in July, on the floor [of the National Assembly],
where they appeared to be submerged by the Socialist tide.

During the August recess not one of the big names raised his voice. Jacques Chirac
remained silent; Giscard, absent; Raymond Barre. inscrutable. Here and there the
members of the second rank had proffered a few sententious words with no great in-
port: "With Giscard, France was governed; with Mitterrand, it is drifting"

[Michel d'Ornano, UDF). Jacques Toubon (RPR) compared Marseilles with Prague or, to
be more explicit, France with the Gulag. As for Jean Lecanuet, he was struggling,
with no further results, to find his Social Denocrats' rightful place on the new
scene. The polls gave the Hitterrand-Mauroy tandem a rating that has never been
equaled. Plans for reform fell like bombs at Gravelotte. Change and peaceful force
alone occupied the land. The only thing that succeeded in tempering the euphoria of
the first days was the counting curves of uncaployment and inflation. in short, no-

thing was heard and little was expected from the opposrtion side.
The liyes of Chimcne

However, on Tuesday 8 September, the day Parlialent reconvened in extraordinary ses-
sion, a shiver awoke the Assembly. in the morning Philippe Seguin, the RPR deputy

from Vosges, and Jacques Toubon, the RPR deputy from Paris, secretly sold their group
chairman, Claude Labbe, on the idea of immediately filing a motion to censure against
the. government. Claude Labbe had this initiative approved by the group‘s bureau and1

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the early afternoon. all the RPR deputies applauded it. Only Jacques Chaban-
Delmas was to regret the precipitation that prevented the UDF from being associated
with the operation. The matter was carried on regardless. At 1600 Claude Labbc,
very proud, took the microphone to announce to the Assembly the first request for
censure of his career; the first to emanate from a former-majority group in 23 years.
A surprise in truth, it is so difficult to remember constantly that in three months
the RPR and the PS have reversed their roles.

What is the goal of this operation, which is destined to misfire, given the new re-
lationship of political forces? First and very obvious. to show that the opposition
exists and is going to encountered. Of course, for the first shot the RPR preferred
to turn the spotlights on itself alone and on its leader. But the UDF, which had
been informed at the last minute, will support it nonetheless, as the RPR has prom-
ised to support the UDF if in the future it should take a similar initiative. In
the meantime the RPR scored for 24 hours. Television and newspapers fleetingly
found the eyes of Chimenc for it.

The second objective was more difficult to attain. It was to sabotage the effect of
Mauroy‘s speech, scheduled for 15 September. On that day the prime minister is to an-
nounce a number of measures against unemployment. The RPR, afraid it would have to
approve some of them, intended to condemn, before the speech, the government's in-
competence in the last three months in the fight against unemployment and inflation,
and with the same stroke to rob the anti-unemployment plan of its star billing.

The morning of 9 September, the chairmen's conference disillusioned it: it set the
time for the debate on censure for immediately after Mauroy's speech. You might say
the debate lost its reason for being at the same time. It now appeared to be nothing
more than a simple case based on assumptions rather than facts.

However, it was not without reason that Jacques Chirac and his party decided to emerge
from their torpor, even if there were to be no immediate benefit. In reality, the
a'mosphcre in the country has changed perceptibly. And the opposition deputies re-
turning from their provincial districts are becoming pleasantly aware of it. They
have sensed what was expressed in numbers in the latest polls: it is not the end of
the state of grace (although Mitterrand lost 9 points in 2 months and Mauroy S, the
popularity of the president and the prime minister remains very high), but the end

of what Jerome Jaffre called in LB MATIN "unanimism," which surrounded the Socialists
after the presidential election of 10 May and made possible the legislative tidal

wave in June.

All social classes had been affected by the grace: small farmers, small merchants,
highly-placed managerial staffs, retirees and professional people more or less gave
their support to the new president. Three months later, at a time when the Social-
ist government is beginning the promised reforms (nationalizations, tax on wealth,
abolishing the death penalty), a group of moderates who have strayed for a moment
draw back, terrified, and start looking for a protective wing so they can re-enter
the nest. Did they vote for the PS or did they abstain, those who now badgering the
elected representatives of the new opposition? "Now what are you doing?" "No one
is listening to you!", "Say something! You are not going to let them do it?" Their
political constitution is fragile, in any case. No doubt the traditional left,
further increased today by the support of the majority of the retirees, clerical
workers and middle management, is still largely in the majority. But the right,
even though it is a long way from recovering its usual active members, is nonethe-
less beginning to find its voice again.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The RPR, which is more thoroughly implanted in the country than the UDF and which
still has structures--if not elected representatives--at its disposal in all of the
departments, was receptive to these early tremors. It is going to be busy adding to
them. Just as 44 percent of the French, according to an IFRES [expansion unknown]
poll for LA VIE FRANCAISE, consider the new opposition to be "not active enough;"

33 percent think the head of the opposition should stand on the right; and 30 per-
cent put Jacques Chirac at the head of the list as the most plausible leader for
that powerful opposition. Ahead of those who are hoping for a new personality (24
percent) and those who cling to the hope that Valery Giscard d'Estaing will fill the
role (lS percent).

A Durable Patience

To tell the truth, the head of the RPR does not need such encouragement to engage in
reconquering-the government. But, "like pigeons that make big circles around the
pigeon house before they find the axis of their flight," he was awaiting the oppor-
tune to come back in. This will probably be on the occasion of a press conference
that is envisaged for the end of September, after Francois Mitterrand's press con-
ference.

Khat strategy did Jacques Chirac grind out during the recess? It is relatively sim-
ple, but requires enduring patience. It is based in the first place on the convic-
tion that the Socialist experiment will fail. If you listen to him, he has already
announced the failure to the president of the Republic in two hour-long audiences
the latter granted to each of the party heads on 25 May, four days after he was in-
stalled in the Elysee, and on 14 July, on the eve of his departure for Qttawa. "You
will not hold prices, and the purchasing power of the French will diminish. And be-
lieve me that counts above everything else with them, above unemployment. I really
see it at home in Correze. The Communists will drop you in two years." And Chira:
added, reporting these conversations recently to a third party, "The president gave
me a da::ling lecture on the PCP; but I replied, purchasing power." Mentioning for-
eign policy problems in passing, Chirac may also have slipped this "advice" to
Mitterrand: “Despite the primary anticommunism I was led into because of
Marie-france Garaud, I toil you there is no good alliance with Washington that does
not go through Moscow."

Despite what he believes to he an inevitable failure, Jacques Chirac thinks that
"Viiterrand will last 7 years." "He has taken the measurements of the General's
chair,“ he said recently. The mayor of Paris is putting his plan of action in
place. he will pass over the umpteenth reform of the RPR. which he wants to be both
rmrv flexible and more operational at one and the same time. More novel, if not
easier to put into operation, is the decision to organize cooperative relations with
’h°“t of his former UHF partners who might be disposed to do so. A double necessity

ﬂ)r "no who aims at expanding his political base and recentering his movement. More
originil is the creation--outside the RPR--of a kind of Jean Moulin Club, bringing
iugvlhrr "the nest in their special:ies"--physicians, teachers, highly-placed civil
~vrranl‘, bankers, Rational Administration School graduates, cconomists--, who,
though they are "without political membership," had nevertheless offered their co-
operation to the mayor of Paris. He expects them to enrich the Chiracian doctrine

and i-vmtiiiilly furnish managers for his future action.

Hi
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A Fundamental Stake

But Chirac is devoting his early efforts entirely to the next political battle he
must wage: the battle of the [983 municipal elections; for there he can keep--or
losc--thc Paris mayornlty. For him the stake is a fundamental one. It is from
his personal success in Paris and the exc;l§ent way in which his movement was run
in a test that in 1977 was the forerunner of future victories by the left that
Chirac will be able to envisage the 1986 legislative battle, and naturally, the 1988
presidential fight. Chirac is in fact convinced that the Socialists won, less by
the conquest of a new electorate than by the collapse of the majority electorate,
which largely sought refuge in abstention. He is sure he can reconqner it by means
of a new language and new personnel, by listening better to its desiderata, and es-
pecially by means of the disappointment certain to be inflicted upon it by the So-

cialists. in short, the mayor of Paris is back in the saddle and ready to get going
again on a long-distance course.

But will he run alone? Nothing is less certain. Giscard is preparing for his po-
litical comeback in the silence of his headquarters in the rue Francois 1.

Raymond Barre has established his observation post in a five-room apartment located
in the boulevard Saint-Germain. On his return from Saint-Jean-Cap-Ferrat, where he
spent his vacation in his villa, which by coincidence is called "les Dauphins," he
is receiving a great deal of mail, to which he replies, “The time will come when all
who remain devoted to the fundamental directions of the Fifth Republic will have to
get together." Even the senator-mayor of Loudun, Rene Monory, might dream of being
a new Pinay, the wise man who must be called upon one day, when all is lost. In
Chirac's eyes, hOWe‘:r, the latter two are running the risk of playing the role of
the eternal recourse in vain. 0n the other hand, if the former president of the Re-
public were to rc-enter the race, Chirac would be presented with a real inconveni-
ence. Not that he credits him with any chance of success, but to re-form their in-

fernal pair before public opinion might well have a negative effect, to his detri-
mcnt.

Of course this cannot stop Giscard d'Estaing, who has been ready to begin to win
back the government ever since the moment of his defeat. But start again with whom,
with what? For three years there was a Giscardian coalition that called itself the
UDF and included the little Republican VGE [expansion unknown] Party, the meager
troops of Jean Lecanuet's Social nemocrats, the remains of the Radical Party and the
Prospects and Realities Clubs of Jean-Pierre Fourcade. A heterogeneous coalition,
cemented by the support for the conqueror, it took very badly the trauma of defeat.
The members of the coalition are scattered in every direction, are victims of a
cholera~like feverishness. Without finding them, obviously, they are looking for
their atomized troOps, their overturned structures, a common doctrine and an oppo-
sition's modus operandi.

The structures? "l am in favor of a multiple opposition, and I believe the debate

on merging the parties making up the UDF is futile," Jean Lecanuet, the chairman of
the UDF but also the leader of the CDS [Social Democratic Center], said in LB POINT.
"There has to he one party. From now on we have to envisage a merger under the same

or some other insignia," Jean-Francois Deniau, the manager of Giscard's presidential
campaign, retorts in LE MONDE.

lﬁ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R40FFNJAL.USEIDNLY

Rough Battles

Their place in the opposition? “We are not employing the policy of painting things
as black as possible. We are neither the restoration party nor the party of the
emigres from inside," proclaims Lecanuet. "We are situating ourselves on the border
of the majority in order to fight it." Bernard Stasi, chairman-delegate of the CDS,
qualifies the words by bringing up Gaston Defferre's regionalization plan, which he
suggests approving. "When it was a partner in carrying on the government, the CDS
continually fought for decentralization...We will remain faithful to that fight,
despite the change of sides," he writes. But in La Canourgue (Lozere), where the
Republican Party has just opened its summer university, Secretary General

Jacques Blane roars, "We are an opposition party, in implacable opposition...because
the solutions that have been proposed can only bring disaster with them."

The same is true of doctrine. Jean-Pierre Fourcade is the only one who dares declare
aloud, "We are loyal to the theses and values defended by Giscard d'Estaing in
"French Democracy." Quite obviously, reference to the "Book" is no longer a winner
among his friends and partners. To complete the misfortune, the UDF is rent by the
quarrels of men. Rough battles are going on in the wings between Michel Pinton, the
UJF delegate at large, and Roger Chinaud, whose defeat in the legislative elections
in the Paris 18th district, deprived him of his post of group chairman, and who is
conducting the offensive so he can take his place.

An underhanued struggle within the C05 is pitting two of Giscard's former ministers
against each other: Jacques Barrot (Health) and Pierre Mehaignerie (Agriculture).
It involves the succession to Lecanuet, of course, but it also involves longer-tern
strategy. "The former would not be hostile to rapprochement with the Socialists at
a later date, while the other has his eye on Giscard," one of their mutual friends
asserts. While in La Canourgue Jacques Blane, undaunted, proclaims urbi et orbi,
"There is no room for personal ambitions, only for a common ambition!"

The right, having thus come back onto the stage in this autumn reconvening, is de-
cidedly presenting a most curious spectacle: two champion cyclists confront each

other on the track. Having been observed marking time for a long while, the first
one starts up like a whirlwind--while the second one seems to be occupied still in
assembling his wheels, his handlebars, his saddle and his pedals.

cavialuur; 1981 "le Nouvel Observateur"

89-“)
(:50: Klein/993

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLI TI CAL FRANCE

CGT LEADERSHIP CHANGE: SEGUY'S HEALTH 0R PCF STALINISTS
Paris LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 12 Sep 81 p 26
[Article by Claude-Francois Jullien: "The CGT: Taking Over From the 'ﬁardliners'"]

[Text] Krasucki is going to replace Seguy. But it is
more than just a change of men.

Post-Seguy has already begun in the COT. For a long time Henri Krasucki, the Number
Two man in the Confederation, appeared to be the strong man of the big French labor
union group. The fact that for the first time, on Tuesday 8 September, the keynote
speech at the COT opening session confirms the change. Georges Seguy should an-
nounce his approach:ng departure to the national confederal committee in October.
The transfer of power should take place at the June 1982 congress, if the statutes
are to be observed. But the fact is, the power has already changed hands.

Officially, Georges chuy, who is ill, no longer has the strength to direct the
group. No one can deny the fatigue that marks this 54-year-old fighter. A member

or the Resistance and of the PCP, at 17 he was deported to Mauthausen. For 15 months
he endured camp life. Back in France, he waged a dual head-on engagement, political
and union. Elected in 1956 a member of the politburo of the PCP, he went to the
confederal bureau of the CST in 1965, and two years later replaced Benoit Frachon as
general secretary. Since then he has never stopped working.

However, these reasons of health are not totally convincing. Recently, some of his
friends went farther: "You'll see, he agrees to pretend to leave, but he will be
re-elccted at the congress.“ Today they are not saying the same thing: "For several
years people have organized completely false leaks on the state of Seguy's health.

We were wrong in treating the operation with scorn."

Devoted People

"Georges Seguy," they are saying, "has always refused to sacrifice the CGT for the
PCF; but he was also incapable of conducting a rebellion." This ambiguous position
led the general secretary to wage battles discreetly. sometimes to win them, but to
lose the war. In favor of unity of action and a leftist victory in 1978, he no
doubt appreciated the unilateral "assessment" of the "Common Program" by the PCF in
May 1977, that first stabbing of the Union of the Left. Moreover, he supported
Jean-Louis Moynot, who dared to initiate criticism, adding however, "It is prema-
ture."

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

In November 1978 he was the architect of the 40th Congr ts, the "openness" congress,
which recognized-~with respect to the PCF in particular--the CGT's diversity. In
December 1979 he was in the minority in the politburo because he desired a condemna-
tion of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Finally, even though today he is
preparing for the coming congress of the World Trade Union Federation in Havana. his
quarrels with that crypto-Seviet organization are famous. Even though he always

ended up by aligning himself with the PCF, he was no longer a man they could count
on .

But now the PCP needs, at the head of the CGT and in the apparatus, men who are ab-
solutely devoted. Communists are sitting in the government and the party can no
longer so easily make itself the spokesman for all the discontented. The CGT, which
it controls, must take over in its behalf and assert itself as the spearhead of the
working class. This being the case, it can no longer be motivated by the partisans

of unity of action. but must be run and controlled by trustworthy men who are devoted
to the party.

This taking in hand again, even though it worries the minister of Labor, does not
nmun that the cal is going to throw itself into systematic criticism of the govern-
ment. 0n the contrary, at first it may favor continuing the state of grace; and
that was the direction of Krasucki‘s speech on 8 September. It will be necessary to

wait until the PCP decides to stand aloof, before the well-oiled union machine, kept
under pressure, can be turned on.

Henri krasucki is the ideal man for this takeover. Behind the falsely candid smile
he always wears is a redoubtnble leader. A “Stal,u his detractors say. Little by
little he has seized control of the key sectors of the Confederation, especially the
press and the federations. In addition, his promotion is going to reassure the Com-
munist militants who were shocked by the PCP-PS collaboration. Was he not, they say,
with oeorges Gosnat, the only one of the party leadership to vote against having Com-
munists in the government? A reference. And his friend Michel Wareholak, a member
of the Central Committee of the PCF and the confederal bureau of the CGT, is he not
asserting that the famous 40 Congress--the "openness" congress--is an "impromptu"
evunt--in other words, an episode--in the history of the Confederation?

The departure of Georges Seguy and the arrival of "Krasu" announce other changes.

“he confederal bureau has lo members: eight communists and eight noncommunists.

Rene hunt and Jacqueline Lambert--two of the noncommunists--1eft the bureau in Janu-
ary iuxl. and only Alphonse Veronese was elected in their place. The departure of

r: rv; uvnsnus (PCP), Andre Alamy (PCF) and perhaps Livio Mascarello has been an-
nounced. But there is also a rumor going around that the new general secretary wants
a lil'hilrt‘l .

'l‘h ret- Names

The furs: victims would be two communists, Jean-Louis Moynot and Christiane Gilles.
In spit" of pressure, they had the audacity to refuse to vote for Georges Harchais
In tne first round of the presidential election. Intolerable! Also dismissed is
iruvst heiss, a "New Life“ Catholic who, in an interview in TEMOIGNAGE CHRETIEN" de-
fended the necessary union independence. finally liquidated is the whirlwind.
Jc:n-.-(2l.=-lde Laroze, who has beer- less useful to the COT comunists since he quit the

PS. Sn the congress should elect at least seven new members out of 16 in the confed-
eunlmwmu

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among the new appointments, three of the names being mentioned are significant:
Gerard Alezrrd, the secretary of the Paris Departmental Union and member of the Cen-
tral Committee; Therese Hirszberg, general secretary of the Civil Servants' Federa-
tion and member of the Central Committee; Raymond Barberis, a faithful follower of
"Krasu." "It is the return of the Stalinists!" says a protester, who adds, "It's
also worrisome for the claimed growth of the PCP!" in any case, the CGT leadership
has permanently buried the 40th Congress.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 "le Nouvel Observateur"

8946
C50: 3100/992

19
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

NE" GOVERNMENT: TRANSITION, ERRORS, SUCCESSBS, FUTURE PROBLEMS
Paris PROJET in French Sep-Oct 81 pp 911-914
(Article by Hugues Portelli: "Uninterrupted Transition")

[Text] It is always difficult to evaluate the first steps of a new government.
Nor do the French socialists escape this rule. While action undertaken in the past
few months responds to a single line of logic: implementation of the presidential
program. serious contradictions are emerging despite the government's denials.

The gradual takeover by the new majority furnishes a prime example: There are two
opposing logics: the one inherited from the traditional internal life of the So-
cialist Party and the equally traditional one of the Fifth Republic. At the time

of the formation of the government and its subsequent shakeup, have we not seen

the prime minister, following the example of the Italian Christian Democrats, dole
out the various posts based on the weight of the different party factions, with
leaders receiving ministerial rank? When ministry staffs were set up, the holder

of the portfolio was careful, in most casesl to surround himself with advisers and
supporters who had already followed him in the party, without always being concerned
about their actual competence. Likewise, in the National Assembly, the distribution
of responsibilities in the various committees did not escape the logic of the fac-
tions and the president of the socialist group had to demonstrate consummate skill
in order not to be overwhelmed by factional quarrels.

If, despite these trying precedents, the new government has not succumbed more to
factions! divisiveness, it is because the president of the republic rapidly imposed
his authority. Inopportune moves on the part of a given minister have been imme-
diately rectified and condemned and ministerial rivalries have remained secondary.
The prime minister and the first secretary of the Socialist Party as well —— which
says a great deal about Francois Hitterrand's determination to retain control over
the majority party -- have rapidly become accustomed to the Blysee's power and
haVe noted that nothing was changed in the institutional balance. To be convinced
of this, one has but to consider the operation of the Council of Ministers or to
read the president's message to the Parliament preceding Pierre Hauroy's address
when he presented his program.

Hajorities change, but the spirit of institutions remains, for better or worse.
Thus, the new government has effected a systematic sweep of the audiovisual field
and decided upon a prefectoral_movement of exceptional scope. 0n the other hand,

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

certain key sectors such as the courts and the army have remained untouched by any
purges. At the same time, and despite the speeches about restoring a balance be-
tween the Executive and Legislative branches, the first act of the president was
to put his stalwarts in the key posts of president of the Assembly and president
of the parliamentary group. At the special session, the latter maneuvered with
perfect monolithism, reminiscent of the UDR [Union of Democrats for the Republic],
although one can justifiably think that it will not always be the case.

As for the proclaimed rights of the new opposition, the first skirmishes on the

regulation of the National Assembly show that the liberalism of its president will
be completely relative. It is true that the opposition, as yet poorly accustomed
to its new status, is inclined to a systematically prejudiced attitude toward the

new government. Even the Senate does not seem to escape the rule and the tempta-
tion to act as an opposition chamber was apparent from the very first votes.

Despite the fact that the majority in the Assembly and the president are of the
same persuasion. the position of the prime minister is perhaps the most delicate.
Pierre Mauroy risks difficulty in overcoming a major political contradiction: As
a leader belonging to the moderate wing of the party, his plan is to give the gov-
ernment's policy the stamp of real reformism but based on healthy management. His
agreement with the minister of finance on this point is obvious.

But this relative moderation may be contradicted by his determination to bring
about the most decisive structural reforms from the very beginning of the 7-year
term: nationalizations. decentralization, a reduction in inequalities. Hauroy
must in fact resolve the problem of all the first prime ministers of all 7-year
terms: not displeasing or giving umbrage to the president, while creating an image
of himself that will keep him in favor with the republic. Jacques Chaban-Delmas
failed. If Mauroy wants to succeed, he must leave the memory of a man of great
reforms, but also of good.administration. This double objective is perhaps contra-
dictory insofar as the prime minister is far from having all the trump cards.
Does he not continually risk being overcome by the one-upmanship of his allies or
even his friends? How can one be the head of the parliamentary majority when one
belongs to a minority faction of one's own party and of the socialist group in the
-Assembly? How can one counterbalance these real risks other than by relying on
the person of which the prime minister tends to be only the instrument: the presi-
dent of the republic?

Concerned about his image, Hauroy therefore went about launching the grand reforms
promised as early as June. In each case, whatever has been said, the caution has
been real. with respect to the reduction in the work week, the determination has
led to limited progress because of resistance on the part of management. Concern-

ing nationalizations, the targeted enterprises are companies resigned to a public
takeover, which was already the case for some of them. Regarding decentralization,

the opposition between the supporters of a communal government, departmentalists,
regionalists and revolutionaries within the Socialist Party.itself has led to an

initial spreading out of reform. The real problem mainly involves the lack of
drafting of bills. The determination to work as rapidly as possible has often led
to the presentation of bills that had visibly not been sufficiently thought out:
shaky drafting, contradictions. as in the bill on decentralization. The presence
in the Assembly of a majority of inexperienced deputies would not indicate that
these imperfections will immediately be corrected.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It may be objected that these are inevitable flaws in a political force that for
25 years has been kept out of the administration of affairs and the knowledge of
dossiers. Consequently, between the immobility of a general moratorium and the
risks of groping its ay around, the government has chosen the second solution,
for the "state of grace" is not eternal and, as the English and German examples
demonstrate, reforms that are not made at the beginning of the legislative period
will not be made subsequently, The French socilaists can count on the element of
time, but this element will essentially serve long-term reforms (work week, taxes),
if not to "digest“ structural reforms. Is this not the first time that the right
will not have to apply, as after the Popular Front or the Liberation, the reforms
promised by the left?

For the time being, the new government seems to have succeeded in reassuring its
supporters, whether old or new, by imposing a new style in relations with the
country: democratization of the status of immigrants, breaking with the previous
latent racism; abolition of the "security and freedom" law and especially, of the
underlying police ideology; and affirmation of the equality of all before the law,
including unscrupulous businessmen ("1110: case) or the parallel police (SAC [Civic
Action Servicel). It also reassures those -- mainly abroad - who had some ques-
tion about the solidity of France's international commitments: the very "Western"
attitude of President Hitterrand on the matter of the Euromissiles (clearer than
that of the Socialist Party previous to June 1981) is a good example.

But one can never reassure anyone but those who truly want to be reassured. As the
"state of grace" is gradually diminished in the face of the realities of the eco-
nomic crisis, unemployment and international tension, it will no longer be enough
to reassure. The right, disabled, will for a long time be disorganized and without

any alternative. The first shots may therefore come from a Communist Party shaken
by its decline and whose support for Francois Mitterrand is far from enthusiastic,

as the veiled criticisms of L'HUMANITE and the open rctieence of the CGT [General
Confederation of Labor] amply show.

It is a curious period of transition when one makes a spectacular break with cer-
tain aspects of the previous policies, but when one tacitly packs up more than one
orientation, when the determination to bring reform carefully skirts the traditional
"leftist" lobbies. and when yesterday's ideologists full silent in order to learn

to govern.

ChrlthHT: CERAS, 15 rue R.-Horchvron, 92170 Vanves. 1981

11,464
«:30: 3100/981.

?\

son on-‘Icmt use ONLY
FOR OFF-"l H. I'SE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

PS-PC CONFLICTS: NUCLEAR, MILITARY, IMMIGRANTS
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 28 Aug 81 pp 32, 33
[Article by Arthur Conte]

[Text] Clearly, rifts run deeply across the whole Socialist/Communist front.

Officially, of course, the Socialist and Communist ministers continue to get along
well with the administration. With the help of the vacation mood, which does not
encourage dramatization, the two majority parties are avoiding any outburst among
them which could cause a scandal. Fiterman, whose virulence the Socialists had to
suffer for so long. has become all honey. Harchais is not there. Hauroy is manag-
ing to evade any declaration which would stir up the slightest dispute among com-
rades. The four Communist minis era are competing to see who will be the most
discreet, like shadows in the corridors of power.

But, in actuality, things are far from well set.

The first involves nuclear power in France. The Communist party has never hidden
the fact that it is an avid supporter of nuclear power, "the only thing capable,"
Marchais has even announced, 'bf assuring the complete independence of our people
both in the short and long run." Clearly, this position has not and will not be
changed. It is a basic principle. If Francois Hitterrand is still able to nurture
any illusions on the subject, the COT [General Confederation of Labor] certainly
would not be the ones to leave him any: its militants reacted to the closing of
the nuclear work sites now in progress with a violence and a speed which says
much for the will of the labor confederation and of the party, its brother. never
to compromise in this area. Now, the Socialist Party is far from demonstrating
as firm a conviction. Whether anxious not to overly alienate its ecology-minded
supporters, or powerfully undermined by seriOus internal disputes or by natural
incapacity to take responsibility without wavering. for weeks now it has been
showing an impressive indecision. The President of the Republic himself has let
his discontent be known. In the end, the Socialist ministers were able to make
contradicting statements among or with each other, over a period of a few days,

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And, today, no one at all, not even Hitterrand himself, could tell us what posi-
tion the Socialists will end up supporting. Depending on the choice finally
made. or if indecision such as this persists for several months, obviously there
will be many opportunities for the Socialists and the Comunists to cross swords,
even at the highest levels of power.

Edmond Maire, One of the Leaders of the Socialist Venture

The se.-ond disagreement involves everything which is happening in our southern
departments. During the last electoral campaigns, and even for some 20 years,

the Socialists promised miracle upon miracle there to our vine and fruit growers.
According to them, the whole problem was due to the stupidity of or to the posi-
tion taken by the Gaullist or the Giscard administrations. 0n the other hand,

in a few days, "you will see what you will see," they would return full prosperity
to the vine growers and the truck farmers. They delivered their wonderful promises
with enormous imprudence, because they themselves know only too well that no one
has the magic wand which can instantly settle such a difficult problem. Whatever
my be the case, such is the chief political result.- the Socialists are on trial
for not having known how to keep the least of too many wild promises. Apparently,
the embarrassment of all the Socialist deputies in an area where they had massive
wins in June on the faith of a simple sermon is being surmised. But, it happens
that the Comunists, far from showing them the slightest sympathy or comiseration,
are not the last when it comes to organizing demonstrations “against the incompe-
tence of the government." Host of the time even, whether through their important
elected officials in the region, or through the crypto-comunist organization
Hodef. it is the Comunists who take the initiative in the struggle and claim the
most spectacular responsibilities. Obviously, in an area which is such a valuable
Socialivt stronghold, this cannot go on without serious consequences-mot without
heated reckoning among the two parties.

chnd Maire is integral to the third dispute. It is known that, in point of fact,
as of l971 the Socialist Party began to prosper only because it opened its doors
wide to the Christian unionists. This was its true renewal so such so that it can
be said in general that the new Socialist Party. even more so than Francois
.‘iitterrand's party, is Edmond Haire's. "Sacristy Socialists," grumbled Guy Hollet,
"they have plunged me into holy water." As exaggerated as it was, the remark had
some basic truth to it. The hay/June electoral campaigns only showed even more
ritariy the ixmncnse share of the socialist vote that the leftist Christians have
taken: to get a better picture we only have to study closely the formidable re-
:-;‘:~- :‘z-h the new Socialists obtained in the most traditionally Catholic pro—
-.-i::\rc:-. in Brittany and even in Alsace, for example. Furthermore: it has escaped
an cm: :Im the major measures taken by Francois .‘iitterrand since his election in
"w rial. economic and fiscal area have been basically of Christian progressive
i:::.pfra:ion. And better still: several days ago, after a luncheon meeting with
S'it'frl: Mauroy, Edmond Maire could be seen and heard expressing himself as an ex-
“rrl, :u' at least as a very high level official, on all the hottest political
...-.r:» n!' the day: state Caur dc Surctc, decentralization. This was not just an
Inpni‘LJnt union leader speaking. but one who spoke as a real adviser, as if with
direct responsibilities of state. Whatever the case may be, it is quite true that
'-'.:irn\:u. ‘-L1ire has become one of the great leaders of the venture, if not its chief

2;:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rm: OFF?” \l. l'SE OVIN

inspiration. But, as a matter of fact. Edmond Haire's enormous importance, which
1e does not think of trying to hide. is no small problem for Georges Seguy or

Georges Harchais. if there were any untimely intervention which could make them
grit their teeth, this is it. The challenge is simple to accept. War among the
union groups will precede indeed will precipitate war among the allied Socialists

The Socialists are Surprised by Their Own Audacity

Although perhaps the least apparent, the fourth disagreement brewing is not the
least serious. It has to do with nat ionalizatiomz. You do not have to be a
genius to recognize that in this matter the Socialists have improvised the affair
incredibly. Everything occurred and was prepared for as if the Socialists, when
they planned their nationalizations, did not realize at all exactly what was in-
volved. in any case. now they are surprised by their own boldness, that is if they

have already recovered from their ignorance.

This is the origin, on their part, of a certain caution, a certain circumspection
and, above all, a certain fear of destroying or paralyzing "nationalizable" enter-

prises which are operating well.

On the other hand. the (‘nmmunist's extremism on the subject is categorical. They
never cease presenting demand upon demand. As far as they are concerned, the
Socialist administration never goes far enough or fast enough. Obviously, sooner
or later, this will lead to open conflict. As long as the Socialists play the
extremist game and agree as much as possible with the Comunists, the Conunists
will grudgingly effect partial satisfaction. But when, through realism and wisdom,
the Socialists. who are directly and fully responsible for our financial condition,
want to slow down or suspend the nationalization movement, the most fervent pro—
tests may be expected from Georges Marchais and his party.

The fifth disagreement: imigrants. Many of us would be astonished were we to
learn that the Comunist Party is passionately in favor of allowing immigrants to
vote in the next municipal elections. They would truly have had to make a
terrific effort. The militants and the Communist electorate would be even more
resistant to such a proposal than the bourgeois and nationalist population who are
not in direct contact with colonies of immigrants. 0n the other hand, the
Communist Party guards the "national" character of its program at any price. It
does not want to be suspected in any way of diminishing the national character or
the national responsibility. Comunist party leadership would even tremble with
horror at hearing such a project, moreover announced by Claude Cheysson one of
the ministers who is least accepted by the Seraglio faith. In return, here is an
"internat ionalist“ or “world" project which cannot help but please the supporters
of universal socialism and particularly the theoreticians of Christian socialism.
Even if many Socialist mayors and county courcilmen must present thaaselves as
more than hesitant in such an area, it is obvious that the Edmond Maire's, the
Bouchardeau's, the Krivine's and the Ceresien‘s must warmly applaud such a dream.
A new opportunity for misunderstanding and conflict. whatever the case, the oppo-
sition of the Conunist party has had to be a determining factor in the Socialist
party's renunciation of their attempt to have the new regulation apply as of 1983.

25
FOR OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Communists Practice a Cautious Reserve

And the sixth deep-seated disagreement: military policy. It was a tactical
masterpiece when, on 22 June, in order to erase their basic differences of opinion
on military strategy, the two parties requested "rapid occurrence of international
negotiations on reduction and limitation of arms in Europe." In the art of
eliminating the irreconciliable, there was nothing better. Harchais and Hitterrand
executed a lofty virtuoso performance. Everything took place as if the "warring
brothers“ now had every reason to come to terms; even to find "impossible agree-
ment." The fact remains that, underneath, the opposition between them is as
strong as ever. We will never hear the Communists condemn the placement of Soviet
SS 20 nuclear missiles on European soil, an implantation which Hitterrand and his
friends have deplored time and again. Neither will we hear them approve the
American plan for placement of Pershing missiles, a program with which Hitterrand
expressed satisfaction during the first days of his term. Since 1978 the Soviet
Union and, immediately after, the French Communist Party, have condemned the pro-
duction of the neutron bomb; Georges Harchais even denounced this "N" bomb as
aggressive and non-defensive. Along with all the other Communists throughout the
world, he goes so far as to declare it "a determining factor for the next world

war.

Francois Hitterrand is far from expressing such a decisive opinion: in any case,
as far as is known, he has not decided to halt studies and experiments in progress
on this weapon which clearly is the ideal tactical weapon, perfectly suited to halt
a possible massive attack on Western Europe by Soviet armored divisions. There
are extraordinarily serious differences of opinion which cannot be concealed for
long.

To these six sources of disagreement we can even add two more, both also visible.

On the one hand, although Harchais and Mitterrand use the same words in deploring
the Soviet army's intervention in Afghanistan, the tone is far fron identical.
Clearly, the two men in speaking the same sentence do not give it the same meaning.

0n the other hand, we cannot help but notice that the Comunists have become quite
detached regarding the administration's financial policy. Not only have they been
rareful not to claim or accept direct responsibility, but, they are attentively
preparing for the time when they will have to divorce themselves of any responsi-
bility for failure, if failure should occur. Of course, they are heard now and
«gain in support of such and such a particular initiative, but, overall, they are
maintaining a careful distance. And, be sure of this: the Communists will not be
the least severe of critics should failure become evident.

0n the whole, then, the present and the outlook for Socialist/Communist relations
are much less "rosy" than the administration propaganda allows.

For all that, is it possible that they will erupt in the form of a serious crisis
this fall?

That would be saying a lot, even if anything has become possible in this crazy
whirlwind world, which no longer spare! Fraace either.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'l-U. IZSE (NIX

The state of grace may still last a few seasons: the Communists have too much to
gain from it to lightly allow a definitive split.

Let us say that they must view it in three ways.

One, they foresee financial disaster due tc exorbitant interest rates, after many
months. In this case it is completely in their interest to remain on the Ship of
State. They will remain there whatever the cost. Then, they will be the most
diligent in "erasing" the most serious disagreements.

Msrchais Will Eclipse A11 Opponents in Severity

Second, they envisage the possibility of rapid disaster. In this case, they will

be the first to make known their "longtime disagreements.” Harchais will eclipse
all other opponents in severity.

0r third, serious aggravation of the international situation will occur: for
example, due to the Polish crisis. It would be very surprising then if the two
parties could, for more than a few days. express an absolutely identical policy.
In order to split. the Communist Party would have to list the full catalogue of
grievances. Another reason to keep them fueled and not to do anything to com-
pletely neutralize them. In any case, as far as common sense goes. the evidence
is there: serious rifts are visible between the Communists and the Socialists and
it would not be surprising to see then eventually cause a large problem.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 {It Cogedipresse S.A.

9693
C50: 3100/956

2?
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

PCI'S COLAJANNI INTERVIEHED 0N INTRAPARTY URANGLES
PM280845 Milan EUROPEO in Italian 21 Sep 81 pp 12—14

[Interview with PCI Senate deputy floor leader Napoleone Colajsnni by Claudio
Rinaldi: "Come on Comrades. Let Us Argue"]

[Excerpts] [Question] Senator, why is the PCI so divided at present?
[Answer] Divided is not the right word.
[Question] What do you consider the right word?

[Answer] It is experiencing an extremely major debate: this is true. But that
should cause no surprise.

[Question] Why?
[Answer] For at least three good reasons.
[Question] Would you care to list them?

[Answer] First, if there is one thing on which all the analyses that have recently
emerged within the party agree, it is the crisis of the Italian political system.
it is absurd to believe that the PCI can fail to be affected by this crisis. At
the very least. it poses new problems.

[Question] what else?

[Answer] Second. the notion of socialism is now less clearly defined than it
once was. This applies to the PCI, but it also applies to all components of the
international workers and socialist movement.

[Question] what is the third reason?

[Answer] It is what [PCI directorate member] Pietro Ingrao calls the emergence
of new subject--perhaps an insufficiently vicar expression. The party's relations
with the masses cannot fail to channe. For instance, at one time it was based on
the transmission belt; now the need for autonomous mass bodies is a real one....

28
FOR OWCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVLY

[Question] In other words. the communist unease stems from fundamental causes.
not only immediate political ones. Is that the case?

[Answer] Yes.

[Question] th do you hesitate to talk in terms of a division and prefer to say
that there is a debate?

[Answer] Because the word "division" implies a continuous counterposition among
organized currents.

'Not Enough Discussion'

[Question] Is it not perhaps true that there are the Berlinguer supporters, the
lngrao supporters, the Amendola supporters and so forth?

[Answer] No, there are no currents in the PCI. From time to time there is a
comparison of stances-even different ones--in which agreements and disagreements
are freely expressed (or should be expressed) independently of preestabliahed
patterns. And a dialogue is a sign of vitality. I light disagree with Ingrao
on several points but if lngrao says something that I consider correct why should
I not say so?

[Question] In my opinion this is only the start. It seems to me that not all the
problems have yet been properly identified.

[Question] why?

[Answer] Hitherto there has been much debate within the PCI on a policy line.
namely whether or not we should aim at unity with the socialists. Or on a broader
:ormula, such as the democratic alternative. Well, I believe that we should

D -5 -. a
:2. 4-3; .neze.

[Question] It is not a matter of establishing whether [PSI secretary] Bettina Craxi
is good or bad.

[Answer] Precisely.
[Question] What else must be discussed?

[Answer] Many things. Let us take the issue of the state and the institutions.
Here the time is ripe for reforms and we are faced with difficult questions.
Take the following one, for instance: How can one reconcile the just demand

for local authorities with the demand for a democratic central government that
will work?

[Question] What else?

[Answer] Then there is the economy. Here, too. there are many problems to be
resolved. Do people realize or not that the social subjects' autonomy always

29
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has a negative, corporative, aspect and that it is not easy to surmount corpora-
tivism in a society in which the individual subjects' demands are mostly
legitimate but improving one subject's situation means worsening another's?

[Question] If I understand you correctly, you are saying that in the PCI today
there is too little, not too much, discussion?

[Answer] I am saying that there is an insuppressible need for discussion and
in-depth study and that if the problems which I mentioned are discussed different
stances are inevitable. I am also saying that these problems must now be broached.

[Question] The debate within the PCI still seems to be limited, as you say.

Moreover, it seems difficult to interpret, camouflaged behind innumerable verbal
reserves. why. if [PCI secretariat member] Napolitano disagrees with Berlinguer.
is he forced to say so indirectly, after endless preambles explaining that there
are no personal counterpositions? th can only major leaders of long standing-

at one time Giorgio Amendola. now [PCI directorate member] Pajetta--call a spade
a spade?

[Answer] The sense of the value of party unity is an inalienable characteristic
of PCI members. It is a legacy of the third International which gives the party
great strength and must be safeguarded. A particular approach, which might even
seem hypocritical from outside, is dictated by the acknowledgement of the need

for unity which spontaneously permeates the party. This need, I repeat, must be
safeguarded. but it must be adapted to the present situation; it must not prevent
the freest eXpression of different opinions. Unity can no longer be assessed in

the same way as it once was. Now it can only result from a convincing debate--thst
is. one based on analysis and arguments, not on formulas.

[Question] Is the debate within the PCI still based too much on slogans?

[Answer] I am thinking about the historical compromise: in the correct definition
or it gLch several times by Berlinguer it is not a government alliance but a
relationship among various classes and parties to achieve shared objectives.
Nevertheless, it has become a slogan. I am thinking about the difference between
the democratic alternative and the leftwing alternative, full of subtleties and
difficult to understand. A clear and explicit discussion of the substance of
things is indiSpensable for the proper training of communist cadres.

[Question] Is this a problem too?

[Answer] In the DC the training of cadres takes place through the struggle among
the currents. In our party it has taken place in the past through a very tough
selection process imposed from outside circumstances--clandestinity, the armed
struggle against fascism and the major social struggles of the fifties. Now the
situation has changed. how cadres can be selected only on the basis of their
ability to lead by winning over people's opinions and through the explicit-—not
formal-~expression of support. Unless selection takes place by very rigorous
democratic methods, bureaucracy and conformlsm become a real danger.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'Sli ONI.\'

[Question] In recent weeks the PCI seems to have adopted the method of secret
ballots.

[Answer] I find nothing strange in that. It can be done. But it is a matter
of form rather than substance.

[Question] I wOuld not be so sure about that. The secret ballot is a guarantee
against the imposition of options from above.

[Answer] Yes. but the recourse to the secret ballot does not in itself guarantee
that there will be a tree. responsible and thorough debate, as there should be.

[Question] But a party cannot live on debate alone. There must be decisions too.
And the PCI seems to be in a state of crisis in this connection too.

[Answer] If there is little discussion it is inevitable that little will be
decided or that only individual comrades' stances will emerge. What I mean by
discussion is something conclusive, not a continuous performance [happening].
Our party is not a debating society: it needs to take decisions all the time.
But this does not mean that decisions must always be reached by a majority.

There is also the synthesis which transcends individual positions, thus achieving
the reconciliation essential to party unity.

[Question] Who carries out this reconciliation?

[Answer] Togliatti's great strength was that he carried out the synthesis. But

a Togiiatti is born only once a century. Even if another one emerged he could

not behave as before. Now synthesis must be entrusted to the democratic method of
open debate.

[Question] The most acute conflict at present is between Berlinguer and Napolitano,
who criticizes the secretary for two main reasons: the tendency to class the PSI
and the I): together, thus abandoning the necessary distinctions, and the danger

of adopting purely condemnatory stances.

[Answer] I would point out first that it is a mistake to portray the PCI's internal
situation as dominated by a personal dispute between Berlinguer and Napolitano.

[Question] You say that Napolitano is entitled to express criticisms without
these being mistaken for bids to oust Berlinguer. Agreed. But is it or is it
not possible to discuss the hypothesis of changing secretary in the PCI? Many
peOple, starting with the socialists. consider it absurd that the PCI's new
policy, namely the alternative, is being pursued by the same Berlinguer who
refused it for so many years for the sale of the compromise.

[Answer] Part of the legacy of the Third International is the notion that a change
of secretary is a traumatic event. In my opinion there is nothing traumatic about
it, and this is one of the points that must be resolved--but resolved on the time

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l SE ONI.\

scale and in the ways required when there are hundreds of thousands of party
members who reflect a very rich and complex historical and human phenomenon
in their outlook and their genuine morality and enthusiasm. You cannot do
things simply to satisfy the demands of the first [PSI deputy secretary]
Martelli Win passes by. with regard to the facts of the matter, moreover, I
cannot understand why every policy change must inevitably involve a change of
secretary. If the formulation of the policy line must not fall solely on the
secretary's shoulders. still less should there be any crude and automatic
connection between policy changes and the replacement of secretaries.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Rizzoli Editnre

C80: 3104/2 END

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE OVIJ'