FOR OFF1CIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10529

18 May 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 32/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(P000 32/82)

Cements
ECONOMIC

BELGIUM

FRANCE

SPAIN

UNITED

FRANCE

De Clercq on Budgetary. Economic Problens
(Hilly de Clercq; POURQUOI PAS. 18 Mar 82)

ososooasoooooltot'ls

Causes for Pranc's Weakness in EMS. Options Considered

(L'EXPRESS. 26-1 Apr 82; VALBURS ACTUELLBS
6 Apr 82) ...............................

,29Har-

.s-oasssso-sossssssso

Hays to Avoid Devaluation. by Jean Gloaguen
Withdrawal of Petrodollars. by Philippe Durupt

POLITICAL

Spanish Magazine Interviews PSOB's Gonzalez
(Felipe Gonzalez; CAHBIO 16, 26 Apr 82) ..

Left Attacks m for Bias. lncowetencs. Cronyisn
(M1016, 5 Apr 82)

oss-ossoooososososso

asses-ooessosos-ssss

Liberal Press. by Encarnscion Valenzuela and Sebastian Moreno

PSOB's Guerra, by Alfonso Guerra
KINGDOM

'TIMES' Assesses Soviet Policy in Latin Anerics
(Editorial; m TIMES. lo May 82)

GENERAL

ss-ssoooosvossssssos

Franco-Japanese Cooperation on Ariane. Spot. Airbus Discussed

(AIRGI COSMOS, 24 Apr 82) ................

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oosssosssssossoooso

[III - WE - 150 P000]

10

16

210
DE CLERCQ 011 mm, KYONOHIC PROEDB
Brussels POURQIDI PAS? in French 18 hr 82 pp 10-11

[Interview with Hilly de Clercq. vice prime minister and minister of finance
and forei commerce: "Hilly de Clercq Explains Himself”: date and place not
specified .

[Text] on, poor, dear Hilly de Clercq. Uhat a tragedy for
this man who adores so much being popular and then finds him-
self at the head of the lost cruel department in an adminis-
tration which intends to govern: the Ministry of Finance.

Consequently. he longs to explain himself. How could we
deny him that?. . .

[Question] Without wanting to be too disagreeable. some people are starting
to wonder about your loyalty -- we mean that of your party to your campaign
promises. No new costs. no new taxes. He understand the general discontent
which is translated into street movenents. Now what?

[Answer] A liberal government agreenent is also a Christian denomt govern-
aent agreenent. Both political parties stars in this agreement. and I don't
want to answer the question about where the most important input cones from.
The four coalition parties approvad this agreement and were thus satisfied
about is as a whole. But the participation of each of then implies conces-
sions and conseQuently numerous measures which have been taken are the result
of a conpcmmise.

The agreement clearly states that the government has based itself on the ob-
servation that "the Belgian sickness" is due to three phenomena: first of all.
an unemployment rate which is too high: secondly. the imhlance of public
finances: and finally. the deterioration of our current balance of payments.
These three elements have reached such proportions that a complete reversal of
the socio-economic policy conducted over the last it years has become indis-
pensable. The government is and will continue to apply itself to this.

[Question] You are talking about a reversal. Up to now, what has been turned
over most is cars in the street. mm, do you mean concretely?

[Answer] We can all easily see that the source of all our problems is the
continuous and unjustified application of Keynesian concepts. which are

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.... ~.--u.~_ -v- use...

translated into a policy based on the over-stimulation of demand. and this
through the expedient of demand. Such an option has resulted in ever higher
tax costs for the productive forces in our econow. both private individuals
and enterprises.

The shortage of resources has led to an increasingly frequent call on borrow-
ing. in Belgius or almond. at astronomical interest rates.

The level of the fiscal costs has caused a loss of motivation to work and. for
the enterprises. an inability to invest. to modernize. to renew. all the more
so as the high interest rates no longer allow recourse to borrowing for those

who might possibly still have been inclined to finance their inveataents that
way.

High taxes. increasing production costs. the absence of investments. these
are all reasons which have allowed the cospetition to exclude us not only on
the foreign markets but also. let us not forget it. on the domestic market.

From year to year. enterprises working for the Belgian market have seen their
market taken over by foreign oowpetitors. Aren't these the reasons for the
b.1157 bankruptcies we have experienced in 1981? And for the ever growing rate
of unemployment? When you no longer sell. it is no longer possible to provide
work.

[Question] Hence the presents to enterprises?

[Answer] If you want to call it that. everyone is of course free to practice
denagoguery. to tell economic countec~truths or. even more simply. to be un-

aware of the government neasures. What are the min measures taken in ever

of the enterprises? There is the reduction of the TVA [Value-added Tax rate
for the construction sector (from 1? percent to 6 percent).

Next. we have all the decisions concerning the reduction of production costs:
wages. energy. financial costs. taxes. The rates of corporate taxation have
been reduced (the general rate has been reduced free ll8 percent to 1&5 percent).

The exceptional solidarity contributions (Solidarity I and II) will not be
renewed. Is this a. question of presents? Isn't it necessary to leave the en—
terprises with a net profit sufficient to allow them to invest and consequent-
ly to create Jobs?

He should also note the decisions concerning the tesporary change in the link-
age of wages to the index. I would first like to stress that all categories
of the population are affected: independents. doctors. managers. etcetera.
also have to participate. Just like the wage earners. Second renark: the
small tax payer is not affected. as the minim wage resains indexed.

mird renark: it is not a question of "contributions." as people are too
often inclined to write. but rather of ”soderation." which means that incomes
will not be reduced but their growth decelersted. The difference is a signi-
ficant one.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All of this nay seen a little complicated. but a careful reading of these
decisions will prove that there is no question of presents to enterprises.
Besides. there are no longer any presents to be .given. to anybody! Because

we no longer have anything. The legacy left us by those who are so vehenently
criticizing us today is ainply indescribable.

[Question] Aha! The legacy: the traditional case of enbarrassnent. Hhat
do you seen by that? -

[Answer] Pany things, as a matter of fact. but 1 as not in the habit of cri-
ticining others and adding up their errors. "" ‘ " ‘

As for us, we have rejected a total cost increase in the anount of 35 to 40
million francs.

True. there are cost increases in the amount of 16 billion francs. But, op-
posite these increases there is a set of cost reductions not only in favor of
enterprises, but also in favor of private individuals. specifically the in-
crease in the level for elimination of ounulative taxation for household in-
come up to 750.000 francs, the elinination of taxation on the appreciation of
cadastral incoae for the house of residence, etcetera. without forgetting the
measures I mentioned above.

[Question] You had announced. perused a 200 billion franc deficit. And you
have accepted a 252 billion franc hidgetary deficit. Is this very responsible?

[Answer] There are two reasons for this: first. the fact that the budget cut
measures can be applicable only for 9 nonths. Cuts were decided on in all the
public sectors for an aaount of 70 billion francs. which gives an annual
amount of approxinately 95 billion francs. The second reason. which I have
already mentioned, lies in the surprises we encountered when we saw the real
figures in terms of unemployment. the interest costs for the debt, etcetera.

I repeat: I knew that the legacy was a heavy one: but what I have learned
over the past weeks and months is simply alarming. As leader of the opposi-
tion. I knew that Belgiun was economically and financially sick. But it is
only when you are in the govern-ant and when you are acquainted with all the
data that you realize to what extent the country is sick.

During the last few he... the situation has been allowed to deteriorate; the
sick person has been abandoned to his fate.

Ask a doctor what that means.

[Question] To finish with a nourish: at the tins of the elections. the alc-
gan of the PW [Party for Freedom and Progress (Flemish)] was: "More Jobs.
less costs“: do you think you will be able to realise that slogan?

[Answer] Less costs, certainly. The rejection of the new tax hikes planned
for 1982, the neastn-es ained at canceling earlier neasures (taxation on the
appreciation of undeveloped real estate, and the like). and the new cost re-

ductions both for enterprises and for private individmls which I just men--
tioned. prove it.

son onicm. use om:
More jobs. I have already told you: that requires the cooperation of every-
one. The goverrunent has taken the measures necessary to reach this goal. Let
me say it clearly: if all of Belgium uere to go on strike because the govern-
ment imposes a temporary income soderstion, do you think that any neasms.
whatever they my he. could have a positive effect on employment?

He have to save our economy and thus our social security and our social wel-
fare. It is a question of saving that which can still be saved. During the
coming months and yam. it will be necessary to pursue this effort in order

 

to schI' eve sore positive fee-ﬂﬁim‘gomt'remn'in place until
the end of the legislative session and you will see the positive results.

COPYRIGHT; 1982 POURQUOI PAS?

8063
cso: 3100/ 511

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CAUSES FOR FRANC'S HEAKNESS IN 8H5. OPTIONS CONSIDERED

ways to Avoid Devaluation
Paris L‘EXPRESS in French 26-1 Apr 82 p 82
[Article by Jean Gloaguen: “The Franc in Trouble"]

[Text] Three weapons and 45 days to defend the franc.
It is enough?

A currency's loss of parity is always a political and economic failure. The
administration was hoping for a return to a peaceful currency exchange market
after the fitful week before the cantonal elections. However, speculation
continued; the dollar set a new historic record at 6.27 francs on Tuesday

23 March. Has this a return shock from the Left's electoral failure? In any
case, devaluation runors started up again even stronger.

The attacks against the franc, which had started in the beginning of March.
became alarming on the 16th. The dollar. quoted at 6.05 on Friday the 12th.
hit 6.23 a week later. What was even sore disturbing was that the francs was
weakening dangerously in relation to other currencies of the European monetary
systea_(EHS). in relation to which it should fluctuate within a narrow range.
The Bank of France. eager to limit the danage. dug deeply into its reserves

of foreign currency. On Thursday 18 narch it increased the noney market

rate from 15 to 17 percent. Jacques Delors. ndnieter of economy and finance.
thOught this was a passing fever. He was disappointed.

Technical and psychological factors were at the origin of the unrest.
Payments related to the recent gas contract signed with Algeria have entailed
large purchases of dollars. In addition. non-residents sold their francs
after turning in their securities in nationalized companies. 0n the other
hand, contrary to certain rumors, Arab capital has not deserted Paris.

In any case. the distrust of the foreign exchange brokers was more of a factor
than the exceptional need for foreign currency. This distrust began with the
deterioration of the French trade balance at the end of 1981 and worsened
when runors of a 200 billion franc budget deficit for 1983 were heard. The
conclusion drawn by national and international financial authorities was

that a devaluation of the franc was inevitable.

FOIIﬂHHCIAl.USB(HVLY
I'UK UIPILIAL 0.3.. UI‘LI

0n the Rue de Rivoli. not surprisingly. this reasoning is not accepted. "Any
speculation based on the devaluation of the franc is doomed to fail." repeated
Jacques Delete on 23 March. We are reminded that in Hay 1981. against the
advice of the governor of the Bank of France and of several ministers.
Francois Hitter-rand decided to stay in the EMS. In October the franc's
parity was decreased by 8.5 percent in relation to the mark. but the excuse
of the former administration's legacy was given.

In any case. a slide of the franc presents problems. An expert explained.

"If we want to change the parity while remaining in the D18. our trade
partners, especially Rest Germany, will refuse. Will this mean a momentary
exit from the EMS. as in 1976 and 1976‘! This would mean the death of monetary
Europe and its transformation into a mark sons." Some, however. see this as

an elegant way to implement the price increases demanded by farmers. which
Brussels refuses. (See the article by Patrick Bonaua.)

Another substantial argument is that the economic advantages of a pullout

are not predictable. As an imediate asset. France's competitiveness with

the PRC. its major trade partner. would increase. As a liability there

would be the obligation of paying more francs for two-thirds of our imports
and the one-third of exports which are billed in foreign currencies—8 billion
francs yearly for each devaluation point.

The Speculators ' Loss

But can France avoid a devaluation? It all depends. of course. on the ability
of its leaders to reinstill confidence in foreign capital. The authorities
have three means at their disposal for defending the currency at all costs:

-- Interest rates. Already at 17 percent. they could still be raised
sign if icantly .

-- Control of foreign exchange. In effect since May 1981. it would be
difficult to increase it for businesses. but increasing it for individuals
has been discussed.

-- Direct intervention. At least for the moment it is not a question of
digging into the gold stockpiles. which make up the bulk of the reserves of
the Bank of France. This leaves the modest 6 billion dollars in foreign
currency held by the Issuing Institute. More important. this leaves the
unlimited drawing rights on Fecom. a European institution which would give
France access to advances in another EMS currency. when this currency
approaches its ceiling price in relation to the franc. However. these
advances must be reidaursed within 45 days.

Forty-five days is enough for speculators to lose in an unjustified attack
against the franc. It is also enough to avoid devaluing under pressure. But
in monetary matters time is worth only the interest rates of the loans that
have been made. The franc will not regain its status and will not escape
upsets until the country's econonic management is deemed orthodox by the
entire world's bankers.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groups Express

FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
Hithdrewal of Petrodollars

Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 29 Mar-lo Apr 82
[Article by Philippe Durupt: "The Hostage Franc")

[Excerpts] The only realistic way out is to give the
franc a vacation from the EMS for as long as the

inflation differential with our German conpetitor is
not corrected.

Six months was the length of the respite that the 6 October 1981 devaluation
gave to the franc. which has been under new attacks for 3 weeks. Within the
ans it is declining in relation to all the other currencies, and has been at
a seriously low level against the gulden since 18 March and against the
German mrk since the 22nd.

What is this speculation that has been loosed against our currency? The myth
of the wall of money has a hard life. In this case it can be reduced to a

simple fact: the holders of petrodollars are taking their capital out of
France.

Their deposits in French banks, a real sword of Damocles. create a permanent~
threat of instability. while at the same time they reduce the administration‘s
economic and political freedom to maneuver.

This includes petrodollars invested in France as capital entrusted to a
trustee by third parties. The trustee can have this credited to his bank
account to give the illusion of wealth. But the depositors can demand its
withdrawal at any time. This is unfortunate for the imprudent trustee who
might have spent the money on himself or frozen it to finance personal
borrowing. The fate of petrodollars is to come and go. They are at the
mercy of unpredictable decisions.

The latest attacks against the franc coincided with the cantonal election
campaigns. Deducting from this that monetary maneuvers are only one weapon
among others for political combat is a step quickly taken by men and a public
opinion lacking in financial experience.

Even if the regime‘s political opponents were tempted to use this argument.
the foreign exchange controls which were implaented 10 months ago are such
that this would be discouraged. Only foreign depositors benefit from free
circulation. They are indifferent to the political coloring of the host
country as soon as this freedom is assured. However. they are extremely aware
of financial security. And for the Arab states there is also a particular
political sensitivity.

The speech by the president of the Republic to the Knesset on A April was
much more important in their eyes than the restructuring of county councils
in France. They apparently took the courageous declarations of the French
president badly and are showing this by withdrawing capital. They have also

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'm UI'I'ILIAI. USE. UNLI

taken the nationalization of large French firms badly and have made huge sales
of their compensatory security rights during the month of March.

On last 8 and 9 February, during meetings with foreign investors, nedaers

of the Hauroy administration knew enough to use a realistic language—they
reassured.

The foreign investors were ready to give them the benefit of the doubt, but

the cantonal elections put the party hardliners back on stage. The tone
hardened and caused an always latent worry to be stirred up.

This series of events acted as a detonator in the speculation against the
franc. It would have had no more effect than a wet firecracker if our
currency had been the faithful reflection of a competitive economy.

This is far from being the case in our relations with West Germny. our
principal client and foreign supplier.

Since the creation of the European monetary system in April 1979, the German
mark's value in francs had gradually gone from 2.3 to 2.6 (the old ceiling)
then. lately. to 2.62, a new ceiling since the devaluation of October. In
3 years our currency has depreciated lb percent. At the same time, our
inflation was 29 percent higher than German inflation.

The 15 percent difference between the difference in inflation (29 percent)
and the foreign exchange adjustment (16 percent) is a measure of our loss

of competitiveness in relation to German industry. This difference should
be reduced not to the sales volumes of our firms but to their profit margins.

In 1979. these did not exceed 10 percent before taxes in the best of cases.

Clearly. our firms today are in a losing situation with their competitors

on the other side of the Rhine. as well as on the French mrket. where Gama
products are making irreversible inroads. and on the German market, where
French products are beating a retreat. Our trade deficit with Germany has
doubled in 2 years. going from 11.1 billion francs in 1979 to 22.7 billion
in 1981.

The French franc is in a state of structural weakness in comparison to the
German mark. Its true value is closer to 3 francs per German mark than 2.62.

In this situation it would be surprising to see it get stronger rather than
to see it weaken as it is doing today.

The administration's obstinacy is probably due to a fetishist conception of
currency. which is very widespread in France. It also reflects the old
dream of European unification. which is more unlikely than ever to happen
when national egos arise during times of crises.

In this second battle. Delors is a lonely man. As flattering as the hopes
of the financial cos-unity were to Barre. they are today playing against
the minister of finance in equal proportion. The personal worth of the an
is not at all in question; rather. the opposite. But the restraints that he

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
must undergo appear to be incompatible with any hope of rapid economic
recovery.

The foreign deficit is increasing and Jobert has not ruled out the possibility
of a negative balance of 100 billion francs for 1982.

The budget deficit has now reached 3 percent--a rate similar to, if not lower
than, that of our mjor competitors. But the level of the deficit makes less
of an impression than its trend--it has tripled in 1 year. And the leaks on
the preliminary estimations of expenditures for 1983 (a deficit of over 200
billion was mentioned) have cast a glacial chill over it.

The hardening of the political rhetoric since the elections leads to the

fear that social reforms will be maintained, if not increased. For French
firms this means the prospect of s new increase in social and salary costs and
a greater rigidity in employment: the increases in productivity which are
still likely to happen are liable to be absorbed by the cost of maintaining
the staff.

This is the opposite of the tendencies seen in our major competitors. In
Germany. for the first time since the war. the large iron and steel union has
just accepted a loss in purchasing power for 1982. In the United States the
automobile workers union has given up indexation to the cost of living; this
applies both to Ford and General Motors.

Social mobility has remained almost intact in the United States and in the
PKG. It is increasing in Great Britain and Italy.

Everywhere the battle hinges on reducing operating costs, of which salaries
make up two-thirds and sometimes more. Everywhere except in France. where
the administration is hanging on to very unrealistic parities.

Foreign restraints are being added to domestic ones: increase in domestic
interest rates, exchange subsidies for imports. additional cost imposed on
exports.

Profit margins are at a historic low point. The administration seems power-
less to hold back the wave of dmnds. Under these conditions. maintaining
the foreign constraint puts firms in a real vise. '

The only realistic and urgent way out would be to give the franc a break from
the EMS so that the monetary trend could correct the inflation differential.
This break would only be a temporary measure, but would be necessary as long
as opinion had not been thoroughly convinced that the realities of world

competition cannot be avoided.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Valeurs Actuelles"

9720
C80: 3100/559

— FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SPANISH MAGAZINE INTERVIEWS PSOB'S mum
PKMlSOl Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 26 Apr 82 pp 29-31

[Interview with Spanish Socialist workers Party Secretary General Felipe
Gonzalez by Jose Manuel Arija: "Ielipe, Tired of Cslvo"—date and place of
interview not specified]

[Excerpts] The situation of the Union of the Democratic Center [UCD] in the
light of the electorate's voting intention is more than worrying, as can be
deduced from the opinion poll on the preceding pages. But that, according
to what opposition leader Felipe Gonzalez says in his interview, is good for
nobody.

But its leader, Prime Minister Leopoldo Calvo-Sotelo, is in an even worse
situation than the Centrist Party. Not even many of those who say that they
will vote for the 36!) regard Calm-Satelo as having the caliber to lead the
country. "There has been a drastic leadership situation in the 061) since
Adolfo Suarez' disappearance fro- the chairmanship," Gonzalez aserts. "This
indicates that the UCD is directionless, since it has nobody capable of di-
recting its own ideas." Since 1977 Felipe Gonzalez has been interviewed by
CAHBIO 16 every 6 months. In this way the socialist leader has rendered
accounts publicly at the sale tine as expressing his opinion on the national
situation throughout the difficult stage of the transition.

In the present interview a possible socialist election victory, the 23 Feb-
ruary [l98l--date of attempted coup] trial and the contents of the future
Spanish Socialist Workers Party [P803] government program are, among others,
the specific topics he discusses. The results of the poll--"which do not in-
press me, because it is the ballot boxes which natter"--were also analyzed,
and his replies begin by explaining the causes of Calvo-Sotelo's lack of a
lead among those polled.

Felipe Gonzalez: Calvo-Sotelo did not achieve that lead, among other things,
because the people are far more intuitive and shrewd than they appear. Calvo-
SOtelo has had a far better press than any prime minister of a democratic
government in the world can imagine. Nor do I know of any similar instance,
or less harassment from the opposition's ranks, or, even more clearly, of more
determined support from the country's most representative opposition party.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Despite these circumtances, which theoretically should help the image of

the conduct of the government and its prise minister, the voters detect that
there isnot sufficient ability to make the necessary response to the problems
which the country is experiencing. hence the deterioration in his image.

CAMBIO 16: In view of all this, is Calvo-Sotelo, in your opinion, any good
or not as prime minister?

Felipe Gonzalez: I sincerely believe that he has not demomtrated that he is
any good, at conducting the country's government. And that is what is re-
flected in the poll.

CAMBIO 16: If it was made clear throughout these months that Calvo-Sotelo was
no good, why did you harass him with so little vigor?

Felipe Gonzalez: Whether somebody is any good or not is demonstrated essen-
tially with the passage of a reasonable amount of time in office. A govern-
ment's task cannot be judged after 3 or lo mnths. Last June the govern-ant
had an economic program agreed with the trade unions from the viewpoint of
industrial relations. And it had an autonon and municipal policy not only
agreed but pledged with the principal opposition party, ourselves. Hence

in those first few months it could be said thatlthe balance sheet of conduct
was favorable.

And so what happened? That program was never inlemented, and now we find
that the government was unable to inlement the-agreements or to conduct an
effective policy to resolve the problem confronting the country.

CAHBIO 16: And between now and the election will you continue to support
Calvo-Sotelo, even if you still.- find that he is no good?

Felipe Gonzalez: It is difficult to say in advance. Our intention is always
to set democratic coexistence in freedom as a priority of the party above
what might be merely electoral interests. In our opinion, it is more import-
ant to safeguard the interests of democracy as a whole than to attempt to kick
a government when it is down.

The first people who should be concerned about this situation reflected by the
polls are the medaers of the government themselves and their party: something
which is not happening, because in some instance we see rather that what

they are conducting is a policy of opposition to the P80! rather than a go-
vernnent policy. All that we can and should do is to hope that the ballot
boxes will change the country's political course.

CAHBIO 16: If the state of the polls were reflected soon in reality, what
would happen in the UCI)?

Felipe Gonzalez: It is not desirable for democracy that an internal rift should
occur in the 1160. At the level of the entire state there is a force represented

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fairly homogeneously, which is the P803, and another, which is less homgen-
eous but has a certain ability to win support, which is the DCD. Until other
political forces capable of filling that gap energe, I find it difficult to
assess as positive a collapse or crisis of the 060. On the contrary, it
would be politically negative.

CAHBIO 16: Does the offer of a coalition governnnt to safeguard against
crisis still stand?

Felipe Gonzalez: The possibility is receding, and I find that natural as the
election approaches: but we would never be opposed to an operation which
would serve to safeguard denocracy's interests. For that reason we should

attenpt to ispart a positive nature to the election canpaigns by putting
forward platter: and not nercilessly criticizing opponents, as others are
doing in acne instances against us.

CAHBIO 16: The first camaigi will be in Andalusia. If the 1161) fails, could
the general election be brought forward earlier than expected?

Felipe Gonzalez: when an election result occurs in which the right wins in
Catalonia, in the Basque country or in Galicia, nobody takes a great fuss.
However, certain sectors of opinion believe that possible victory for the
Socialists in Andalusia would have greater consequences than are logically
to be expected. I do not find that fair from a denocratic viewpoint. It is
necessary to be able to accept the results both if a reactionary force wins
and if a progressive force wins.

CAHBIO 16: Could the socialists fora a coalition with the mists go govern
Spain, if they need their seats to achieve a najority?

Felipe: Gonzalez: I rule out a PSOE-PCE coalition govemment, because it is
not good for Spain as a historical blueprint, nor is this the tile for it,
nor-to be frank-«lo we trust the commists who night be in a government.
According to the poll, the co-Iunist vote is declining. I believe that in the
touring elections and within the political spectrum of the left, the concept
of the tactical vote which could bring the socialists to power will begin to
be assessed for the first tin.

CAHBIO 16: Sone questions froa journalists and son replies from centrist
politicians say that a possible socialist general election victory could
provoke a coup. What is your opinion?

Felipe Gonzalez: I find that a stupid thing to say. Those who provoke that
psychological reaction are in fact covert putschiats. Those who reply in

that way are on the other hand mable to defend their conduct from a demo-
cratic viewpoint and are atteapting to instill fear in the public. 0n the
other they are also toying with the armed forces. In my opinion, the attempted
coup which took place in Spain was not against a leftwing government but
against a rightwing governaent.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
That mans that there is a section of the civilian and nilitary populations
which is not in agreement with democracy and which will attempt to elininate
the system in order to replace it by a dictatorship, not that it is opposed
to a socialist government which, I an certain, will not provoke reactions of
that kind, even because of the very prestige of the armed forces.

CAHBIO 16: It has been announced that the P803 has now almost finalized its
government progran. will it present it soon?

Felipe Gonzalez: He will present the program at the right moment, at the
next election. It amuses u that the Socialist Party is being asked for a
detailed program, which we are in fact preparing, when nobody has presented
one so far since 1977. As far as we are concerned, econonic policy will be
aimed essentially at coﬂaating unewloymant.

All the conplenentary masurea necessary to colbat unenploynent will be
adopted or implemented, fron the viewpoint both of the financial system and

of mnetary policy, public invest-ants policy or encourage-ant of private
investment and so forth.

We socialists believe that a good policy of creating employnent must pay ser-
ious attention to small and nediun enterprises, although without forgetting
big enterprises interests.

CAHBIO 16: ﬂillthe socialists, when in power, ask the Spanish people to
work harder?

Felipe Gonzalez: In a comtry in a state of crisis. It is only possible to
make progress when a mentality of najority collective effort is created. It
would be a matter not so much of working harder as of encouraging a necessary
feeling of solidarity and a psychological attitude of endeavor. In addition.
a politico-cultural program to recover somewhat Spanish society's creative
drive, with the moral basis of gaining credibility in society and creating
momentum to make progress, should be inplemented. The people have nore wis-
dom than they are credited with and do not expect uracles; they want an
atmosphere or confidence and solidarity with the aia of surmunting this
situation of sluggishneas in which we are living, politically, culturally
and economically.

CAMBIO 16: Will you continue to visit Calvo-Sotelo at the Honcloa Palace?
Felipe Gonzalez: Of course. We have had a good any meetings to discuss and
talk about matters of general interest—Into than are known publicly, because
we are not going to make publicity every time we nest. And I believe that

we should continue to hold these nesting: in the inediate future.

COPYRIGﬂ‘r: 1982, Infomcion y nevistas, S.A.

cso: 3110/12;

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
LEFT ATTACKS I'VE FOR BIAS, INCOHPETENCE, CRONYISDd
Liberal Press
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 5 Apr 82 pp lob-50
[Article by Encarnacion Valenzuela and Sebastian Moreno: "One, Big and Bad"]

[Text] Five months after Fernando, Castedo was dismissed by the government and
Carlos Robles Piquer gave a new direction to this country's only television entity,
the issue of television (and its use by the party in power) has again come to the
forefront on the current political scene. '

Five months ago, the criticism of the general director (Castedo) was coming from

a DC!) [Democratic Center Union] unhappy over what it deemed excessive criticism

of the government in the newscasts. Now it is the opposition (specifically, the
Socialist and Conunist Parties) which is complaining that Robles Piquer's ("Robles-
pierre" as he is called in the establishment) television is reporting in a biased
manner favoring DOD and limiting the news space devoted to leaders and parties to
the left of the latter. The criticism is becoming sharper. because it coincides
with a time when the country is preparing to vote (during May, in Andalucia, and
perhaps a few months later in general elections). This week, the secretary general
of the Commist Party submitted a motion to censure Robles Piquer the propriety of
which was disapproved (for reasons of procedure) by the president of the Cortes,
Landelino Lavills, at the petition of 001). If it had been put to a vote, it is

quite possible that the government and Robles .Piquer might have ended up losing;
although (according to the opposite version) the television viewers who complain
that the newscasts of democratic Spain in 1982 are increasingly reminiscent, for
whatever reasons, of the NO-DO [Documentary Films and Newsreel Co] of other times,

would have won .

The newsmen working for Spanish Television [TV'E] received the first notion of what
was befalling then a few days after Carlos Robles Piquer assumed his position,

last October, as general director of the public entity (which also includes Nation-
al Radio and Radio Network), when Red Cross Day was celebrated.

Those responsible for "Information Services" decided (as had been customry in
recent years) to handle the subject casually, and merely send a camera crew to
film the queen's presence at one of the boards of petition.

110

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In mid-morning, "orders from above" caused them to see their mistake. Through
those orders from the new general director, they were told that cameras were to
be sent to the boards, where not only the queen was requested for the Red Cross,
but also the wife of the president of the government, the wives of various minis-

ters and Roble Piquer's wife herself, all of whom appeared on the screen on that
day's "newscast."

Shortly after the dismissal of Fernando Castedo and the attempt made by his group
of young professionals for 9 months and 14 days (with relative success) to show
on the television screens in Spanish homes the real situation on the streets which
those Spaniards were experiencing, the experiment had ended.

Carlos Robles Piquer, aged 56, a diplomatic with a great capacity for work, and
brother-in-law of Manuel Frags, for whom he claims to have great adniration and
with whom he began his political career as general director of information and
popular culture. arrived in television in response to a "patriotic appeal" (in
his words) from President Calvo Sotelo, willing (as he has proven) to offer
programing in keeping with the Spain which used to be entertained by watching "The

Girls From the Red Cross" with a "ye-ye" Conchita Velasco, in the neighborhood
movie theaters.

Ramon Gomez Redondo, a television director and Socialist consultant for the public
entity remarks: "Robles Piquer considers television to be the leisure-television
of the aggressive person and not a reflection or a window opened onto reality."

Gomez Redondo adds: "There are clear signs of the return to the old television of

officialdom, the return to the traditional methods of submission to the network in
control which necessarily emanates from the government and, in returning, resuming
even censorship in this lavish Francoist 'revival' that Prado del Rey seems to be

celebrating."

Ramon Gomez Redondo is a Socialist, and hence his statement could be labeled parti-
san in the official televised media. But there are agreeing with it many of the
informational professionals queried by CAMBIO 16, who are not so willing to allow
themselves to be quoted by name, owing to the wideness of the corridors in the
building in which they work.

One of them commented: "There is censorship and, in particular, there is incompe-
tence."

Example: During Castedo's time, the general director was scarcely ever consulted
directly regarding the feasibility of issuing a report or not doing so. The chief
of the "information Services," first Inaki Gabilondo, and later Pedro quuicia,
two newsmen in his confidence and with extensive professional experience. made the
decisions. The directors of the three "newscasts" (Jesus Hermida, Permin Bocos
and Joaquin Arozamena) had a free hand to give priority or more space to one
report or another, depending on their professional criterion.

The example continues: Today, the decision as to what will be reported on the
three "telecasts" is made in the general director's office, at a meeting held
every day at 1000 hours by the high—ranking officials of the establishment, in
which the "newscast" directors (Joaquin Arozamena, Manuel Raglan and Alberto
Delgado) do not participate.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At "1000 hours in the morning" when Spain is drinking coffee, when nothing has

happened yet. it is already decided which news will be reported, and which will
not.

A Rested Medium

An executive (dismissed) from Castedo's group comments: "Television. like radio,

has the advantage over the newspapers of being able to report instantly what has
happened, an advantage that Spanish Television has given up. In this country.
most of the real news is heard first on radio, is read in the newspaper and,
finally, seen (if it is seen) on television."

The director of the "Information Services," Joaquin Castro, conveys to those in
charge of the "newscasts" the "orders from above" which certain newsmen suspect
may be reaching them exaggerated because of too much obedience to the chief.

Castro, who comes from the art critic's world, was dismissed as head of the infor-
mation on the presidency of the State government by the Csstedo group “for profes-
sional incompetence," according to an "ex" of that group.

But Castro is one of the few television news-en who is a militant in UCD. His
care regarding fulfillment of the "orders from above" is total. And the "orders
from above" are aimed (as Robles Piquer himself has reiterated to the point of
surfeit during his months at Prado del Rey) at not allowing "mines" to be set.

Robles Piquer and his adherents interpret as "mines" the possible "shots" that the
alleged "Reds" situated on Spanish Television's organization chart could make to
achieve the preaching of ideas not to the government's liking from the cameras.

The newsmen have heard Joaquin Castro say: "Television belongs to the State, and
a little more to the government?; even though television is governed by a statute
that was prepared and approved by Parliament, which implies (by law) that it
belongs to everyone and is for everyone.

But it is known that the incident which gave Fernando Castedo the ouster as Robles
Piquer's predecessor was the fact that Felipe Gonzalez appeared for 3 days in a
row on the "telecast" first news. Now, Felipe Gonzalez almost never appears any
longer on a "telecast“ first news.

The Socialist Party members have kept track of how much time each of the political
parties is appearing on television. A recent study provided the information that
the leader of the opposition was shown on the screen merely 2 minutes and 60
seconds in all, on the three "telecasts" combined, over a period of 1 month
(between 25 February and 24 March). The president of the government, Leopoldo
Calvo Sotelo, appeared on the screen for 36 minutes and 28 seconds during that
same month. And what is even more peculiar, Robles Fiquer himself (who is not, or
should not be anyone politically) was on the screen for 5 minutes and 35 seconds,
more than twice the length of time for Felipe Gonzalez.

However, there are television newsman who do not agree with the Socialists on the

criterion for gaging whether television is biased nor not using as a timing guide

whether Frags appears on the screen more than Alfonso Guerra, or whether New Force
is mentioned more than the Communist Party.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!
One of these newsmen remarked to CAHBIO 16: "To give an example, no one judges
DIARIO 16 or EL PAIS politically by the number of times that a politician appears
on their front page. One assumes that this 'honor' is not such an honor, but

rather a reflection of the reality that has occurred in Spain during the preceding
2b hours.‘

But this latter guide is the one that least prevails in the television of Robles
Piquer which, however, does appear to react to the opposition's criticism regarding
the number of minutes for political personages. For example, last week, after
Alfonso Guerra and Santiago Carrillo complained in the Cortes that Adolfo Suarez
and Francisco Fernandez Ordonez are virtually banned from appearing on the screen,
the "telecasts" on the following days presented pictures of Adolfo Suarez and
Francisco Fernandez Ordonez after several months of absence from the cameras.

No one would be surprised if they soon disappear again... until someone complains.
And, meanwhile, the international news will continue to have more space than the
national news (a feature of the Francoist press), the weather more than the oppo-
sition, and soccer more than the national news outside of Madrid and its govern-
ment, add the newsman.

In Spanish Television, they have their own numbers, numbers (claim those close to
Robles Piquer) which take into account the fact that the total space dedicated to
the newscasts has declined; mainly because the noon one, which used to take an
hour. now consumes only 30 minutes.

According to a recent study of the TV! technical office (based on percentages of
the time of the news reports, not on combined minutes), the news on UCD last
October (during Castedo's tine) accounted for 22 percent of the national reporting,
and that on P802 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party], 26 percent. And (the study
adds) those percentages were the same last February. The Communists have dropped,
it is true. from 16 to 13 percent; while Popular Alliance has risen from 14 to 26
percent.

The official story on why Robles Piquer is shown on the screen so much is differ-
ent ("the general director is news, and although he does not like to be shown,
those in charge of the news reports consider him news"). Those circles also
stress the fact that Castedo appeared often last October (they counted 17 appear-
rances for him on the screen, lasting 51 minutes and 1 second); without regard
for the fact that. last October, the dismissal or discharge of the general direc-
tor of television was, of itself, one of the hottest news items on the national

political scene.

As for the matter of the weather occupying more space than the opposition politi-
cians, Robles Piquer's adherents find it natural. They claim that this holds

true in the television of the developed countries, and admit that one of the goals
of the current group's management is to reduce the volume of political news, some-
thing which "was making the'atmosphere tense and the respectable public fed up."

And, meanwhile, the discharge of the most professional newsman at Pardo del Rey is
continuing as well. This is related to the reappearance of the announcers on the
"newscasts" and, specifically, the new girls without professional experience but

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
very pretty indeed, who read more or less what has happened in the country in a
tone of one completely glosaing over those events, seated in the places which

have held professionals such as Rosa Maria Mateo, Clara Francis, Victoria Prego or
Elana Marti.

With what criteria? When it was time to distribute the positions of those respon-
sible for the "telecasts" after their arrival in power, the new heads (applying

the theory of "moderation" which reached then from "above") awarded the roles and
excluded many professionals. based upon previous labels of unknown origin. Assign-
ed to a post on one of the "telecasts" was a newsman described as pro-UCD; and,

as his assistant. a professional whom Castro called "Red," to compensate. The

two newsmen. both of whom are independents. are still making mutual jokes about
their labels. In another recent instance. they received the shock that President
Calvo Sotelo asked to be interviewed (when he appeared on television upon complet-

ing a year of his term) by a professional when he had removed from the "telecasts"
for being a "leftist."

"In my 15 years at Prado del Rey. I have seen some things; but what is going on
now is the most unprecedented." commented another newsman a few days ago, claiming
to have personally ascertained that none of the three "telecasts" on television
reported the news of the death of the youth Ignacio Montoya. in Trebujena. who was
shot by the Civil Guard on 2 March; not because of censorship. but rather incompe-
tence. "It was overlooked by those on the first 'telecast' and those on the
second did not report it because the first had not done so. and the same thing
happened with the 'final edition.'"

It is because of incompetence and not because of plots by the superiors that the
media professionals think that Alfonso Guerra (like many television viewers) has
gone so far as to say that television is engaging in coup-oriented propaganda

in its reporting on the 23-F trials. In fact. before the trial began, the RTVB's
[General Directorate of Spanish Radio Broadcasting and Television] upper "eche-
lons" discussed how to report so as not to make this mistake. An editor for the
"telecasts" expresses the opinion: "The fact is that they don’t know how to act
because there are scarcely any professionals. The real professionals, those who
know how to report on what they want to report...they are kept in the hallway.
ignored. or else they went home a long time ago."

The First Are the Last

Not even certain sources close to the party in power consider the work done by
Robles Piquer's group to be bringing favorable results for UCD. Those sources
note that, in the recent list given in EL PAIS. measuring the time that the poli-
ticians spent on the screen last nonth, the first places are monopolized by govern-
ment officials of the second rank. who are not the ones determining the country' a

policy.

In order of appearance. after Calvo Sotelo, there are shown Santiago Rodriguez
Miranda. minister of labor and social security; Ignacio Aguirre. state secretary
of information; Luis Gamir, minister of transportation and communications; Jose
Luis Alvarez, ninister of agriculture and fishing; and Federico Mayor Zaragoza.
minister of education.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sun u..---._ an... en...-

Except for the easy excuse for the presence of Aguirre (the spokesman for the
presidency of the government), how can one explain the fact that the minister
of labor appeared on the screen three times more than the first vice president
of the government, Rodolfo Martin Villa, or that Jose Luis Alvarez appeared once
owing to a works project that he was Opening, while the other ministers are

incapable of appearing before the camera unless they engage in a triple somer-
sault?

In the corridors of Spanish Television. where since Castedo's departure they have
seen a return of the perpetual faces from Francoiat television, they do have an
explanation ("it is the doing of Rafael Anson"). Anson, who was general director
of radio-television before Caetedo and before Arias Salgado,once again has a "hand"
in his former establishment. And Rafael Anson, who is engaged mainly in preserving
the image of half a dozen UCD ministers, knows how to install his own people so
that they may appear on the screen frequently. This would appear to prove that

not even Robles Piquer's television is devoted to pro~governmenta1 politics, but
rather to showing the countenances of those with influential jobs, provided of
course that they belong to UCD.

Another who has returned is Luis Ezcurra ( a regular holder of a high-ranking post
at Prado del Rey for life, and at the Plaza de Oriente demonstrations when they are
called), who was installed in an office as soon as Castedo left and before Robles
Piquer appointed him to anything (he is now chief of television international
relations).

As a rule, the other direct collaborators of Robles Piquer have been dissociated
from the medium of television and from journalism. The only journalists with high-
ranking posts are personal friends of the general director: Manuel Calvo Hernandez,
who was assistant editor of YA (and to whom is attributed the "telecasts'" enthusi-
ass for showing scientific congresses); and Rafael Ortega, coordinator of foreign
correspondents, who was director of National Radio in Rome when Robles Piquer was
holding the post of ambassador to the Vatican.

Other names come from that Frags Ministry of Information in which Robles Piquer
held high-ranking positions; such as Jesus Moneo, new director of the technical
office; or Enrique de la Hos, former commissioner of festivals in Spain, who has
unseated a prominent composer, Miguel Angel Corie, in the RTVE'a orchestra and
chorus office; or the director of the Spanish Radio Network, Luis del Val, who at
one time headed the General Directorate of Cooperatives.

But the philosophy of the new group heading “tele” has been that of not "draining"
the intermediate level posts of those appointed by Castedo, whose functions have
been taken away from them, but not their salaries. This has entailed an inflation
of the ”Information Services" table of organization, the cost of which has increas-
ed by 50 percent in recent months.

The bureaucratic burden is such that a reporting space like the nine ofclock
"telecast" has a director, an assistant national director, an assistant interna-

tional director, a national coordinator, an international coordinator, a deputy
director, an editing secretary, a chief of economic and labor reporting, an
assistant chief of labor reporting and a chief of parliamentary reporting.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All of them, of course, collect bonuses of up to 125,000 pesetas in addition to
their salaries, which are already rather large as a rule.

Rut the standard in Spanish Television is this statement coined in its offices:
Here one earns a salary for being Spanish, and a bonus for working." In other
words, the 9,600 workers on the TV! payroll have an assigned salary equivalent to
that earned by other Spanish citizens in other business firms. If they do not
earn any more it is because they are in the halls (in more direct language, they
have no work to do). At the time when they become associated with a program, they
are assigned an extra bonus for working; a system which caused the maintenance
of the TVE payroll to cost us Spanish taxpayers 31 billion pesetas last year.

The bonus, to make matters worse, does not require exclusive dedication on the part
of those who collect it, at least on the high-ranking level: Luis Losada, director
of "weekend news reports," works in the press office of the RENFE [Spanish National
Railroads]; Angel Urreiztieta, director of that "weekend news," is press chief of
the Ministry of Labor and Society Security; and Ramon Barro and Aurelio Rodrigo
(director of "telecast" and coordinator of "final edition," respectively) also
work in the press office of the Health Ministry.

Jose Luis Sanz, editor of "final edition," is press chief of the Ministry of Health
and Consumer Affairs; Angel del Rio, assistant director of "open editor's office,"
also works as press chief for CEPYME [Spanish Confederation of Small and Medium
Businesses]; and Pedro Gonzalez, assistant international director of "telecast!

1s press chief for BANESTO [Spanish Credit Rank]. Other RIVE professionals are
also well placed in other government press offices.

All these problems have cropped up similarly in 10 of the 11 regional centers (the
exception is that in the Canaries, which operates in a model fashion). Owing to
the budget needs, those centers are closed in the afternoon after they have finish-
ed their regional area broadcasts; and this prevents their being connected with

the evening "telecast." If the latter needs news from editors outside of Madrid,
it has to hire them as extras (and with extra pay, of course).

while the "telecasts" are declining in quality, the same thing is still happening
to the other reporting spaces which are not only declining, but even disappearing.
Spaces such as the current international news report, "Objective," that on topics
of collective interest, “Hand to Hand," and that critiquing the media itself,

"Take the Floor," have become a thing of the past. All that remain now are three
programs of public debates: "The Key," "This Country" and "Voices Without a Voice";
but the latter two are aired simultaneously on both networks.

And, meanwhile, television is engaged in entertaining, like a boob-tube. Apart
from the news reports, the key questions are: "will'Inigo'return?" and "will'One-
Two-Three'return?" There are many films, many American films made for television,
and soon there will be a great deal of soccer, especially the World Soccer: a
formula already used (actually, without much success) in Francoist times.

A well-known director claims' "This will be difficult to stop because the philoso-
phy of the First Network director, Enrique de las Cases, is that of airing on prime

time things such as "300 Million" and "Applause" (two low budget programs because
of alleged concealed advertising). and all types of musicals and contests."

20

IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
eves use as“... wv- was...

But the contests and the musicals do not concern the leftist political parties so
much as the elections, first those in Andalucia and later the general elections,
with reporting which they consider totally partial to the government.

According to the minute count made by the Communists and Socialists, the reporting
on ministers and the government increased from occupying 22 to 69 percent of the
space devoted to national news from October 1981 to February 1982; while the report-
ing on political parties during that period declined from 52 to 13 percent.

Communist Motion

The conclusion reached by the Communist Party after reading the results of its

last study was that it should submit to Parliament a motion of censure against
Robles Piquer which might have succeeded (they had backing from Socialists, Basques
and Andalucians) if it had not been excluded from the agenda by the president of
the Cortes last Tuesday.

The aborted Communist motion states: "This parliamentary group has noted the persis-
tence and seriousness with which TVE has been violating the principles of imparti-
ality and pluralism, and others set forth in the Constitution and the Statute on
Radio and Television. Consequently, it censures the action of the general director
of the public entity, and calls upon the government, implementing Article 12 on
Radio and Television, to resolve the dismissal of the general director."

while Socialists and Conmunists pledge to continue raising the issue both outside
of and within Parliament, no party has yet protested over a news items which the
"telecasts" (significantly) omitted last weekend, despite the fact that it occupied
the front pages of the newspapers.

It involves adecision of the Constitutional Court which, although it does not bear
out the arguments of the private television company, "Antena 3," that had filed

an appeal against the government postponement of the decree which was about to
authorize the establishment of private channels at the end of last year, does
indeed open the door for the creation of private broadcasting firms. The court
responsible for overseeing its fulfillment decided that private television is not
necessarily imposed by the existing legal system, although within the framework of
the Constitution this policy decision could be accepted by the government (which,
after its "reconquest" of TVB, is in no hurry to have more television entities in
existence); and the leftist parties, which were never advocates of private broad-
casting firms, are not interested in allowing free stations immediately either.

Inaki Cabilondo, director of RTV 16, argues: "Nevertheless, until private televi-
sion exists, it will be impossible to solve the essential problems of state tele-
vision." He adds: "50 long as there is a just one television system, this medium
will continue to be considered a constitutional authority, like the Cortes, for
example, dissociated from the purposes of a normal communications medium."

Cabilondo gives a reminder that this proposition was brought up during the night
of 23 February, when the high-ranking officials of TV! (including himo were

discussing whether or it it was feasible to show on television the seizure of the
Congress by Tejero and his Civil Guards.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"As a matter of mere informational interest, there would not have been any doubt;
the video would have had to be shown immediately. But TVE is an institution
transcending an informational medium." He remarks: "And so long as there is
only one, the professional battle will be irremediably doomed."

BSOB's Guerra
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 5 Apr 82 p 47
[Article by Alfonso Guerra: "The One-Dimensional Television")

[Text] The arrival of Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo in the presidency of the government
means the "Kabulization" of Prado del Ray. The latest experiment begun at RTVB
after the approval of the Statute and the appointment of Fernando Castedo to the
directorship was halted with the cruelty and firmness of the scalpel. After
Castedo's wishes had been extorted, a useless dismissal was achieved, and steps .
were taken to make the first appointment of the great right (Calvo Sotelo version)
or of the natural majority (Frags Iribarne version): Carlos Robles Piquer. And
immediately, there were purges, persecution, the stoppage of programs and the
rerun of Prancoism on television.

If the government risked the political scandal entailed in forcing the dismissal
of Castedo without the presence of any of the reasons for dismissal stipulated in
Article 12 of the Statute, it was not, of course, to allow his successor to conti-
nue that first, halting experiment in pluralism in the media subordinate to the
public entity; but rather to restore in its entirety the governmental model of
television perpetrated during the Franco era. And this is what we have, what is
obviously: a television with its back turned to reality, one-dimensional in its
tastes, its ethics and its cultural message, whose leaders, intentions, methods
and end product can only be described as a rerun of Francoism.

For example, during the 4 and a half months of Mr Bobles Piquer's term. the RTVB's
official statistics show the spectacular escalation in the image of three person-
ages in Spanish public life: Leopoldo Calvo Sotelo, Manuel Frags Iribarne and
Carlos Robles Piquer who. in an abuse of authority bordering on megalomanis, far
surpasses, for example. the president of the Congress of Deputies and the vast
majority of political leaders.

A sign of the governmentalization of the TVB news reporting is the return to what
George Hills, director of BBC programs for Spain and Latin America, defines as an
archetype of "non-news, germane to the news media in undemocratic regimes": the
social activities and travel of ministers and other high-ranking government office

holders.

With the TVE news reporting space heavily controlled, and administered on the
basis of a unilateral political plan, with decreased reporting on national issues
and political activity and increased reporting on sports and weather forecasts,
there remains a residual area enabling the old friends to satisfy their own clien-
tele: and so, with TVE regarded as a "private preserve," it is not surprising that

a member of the RTVB Board of Administration (from UCD, of course) should manipu-
late a report and furthermore beconvinced that this is a normal practice. And

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.-.. ire----... ava- a»...

when something is upsetting. it will suffice not to report it: disinformation,

concealment of facts. The most recent instance: incidents in Lebrija and Trebu-
Jena.

If major events are approaching, for example, elections in Andalucia, they ...
the director of the regional center among the long list of advisers of the honor-
able ministers; which explains why Tele/Andalucia has been converted into a pedan-

tic bulletin of UCD, eager to reflect, with care, the Andalucian excursions of the
government ministers.

As for the non-informational programing, one notes a decline in the production it-
self. There haa been an elimination or soft-pedaling of "controversial" programs,
and those of an open, participatory type ("Take the Floor," "Objective," "Hand to
Hand," "The witness," "Between Two Lights," "Music, Maestro," etc., in the first
instance; and the "problems" of "The Key" and "In This Country." in the latter).
There has been a return to the old formulas: "Open Studio" has returned; "One,
Two, Three" has been announced for after the world games; and "Your Turn" is
already on the air. In short, the television of the past, the forms of entertain-
ment of the past, the comfortable culture of the past and the careful exclusion of
alternative cul'utes, intended not for adults, not for free citizens, but for
subjects on corditional release, who are childish and assiduously protected from
reality.

This policy has caused a widespread situation marked by personal exclusions. A
total of 61 top-rank appointments (public entity, associations, regional centers)
have been officially reported to the Board of Administration. It is impossible
to assess how many other second-rank appointments have occurred during the 4 and
a half months of Robles Piquer's term.

But. based 0n the cherry theory. it is not rash to assume that the removal of
individuals and positions (and, if need be, the accumulation of the latter) will
double or triple that figure. At the present time, professionals of recognized
quality are suffering a greater or lesser degree of exclusion (in some instances
absolute). and working, when they do work, on tasks that are beneath their compe-
tence.

In the context of an authoritarian relationship with the Board of Administration
on the part of Mr Robles Piquer (a position which affects the UCD board members,
but which they do not dare oppose), there has been a gradual curtailment of the
board's authority, with the complicity and submission of the Centrist board members
Unaccustomed to undergoing any kind of democratic control, Robles Piquer prefers

to state his obligations to the board as "matters of courtesy," being painstaking
to the point of exasperation in minor matters and acting without giving an expla—
nation in the more serious ones.

The current situation of TVB necessitates a demand for responsibility on the part
of the general director and Mr Calvo Sotelo's government. Spanish society so
demands, and it will achieve this.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

2909

C80: 3110/126
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'TIMES' ASSESSES SOVIET POLICY IN LATIN AMERICA
”0411.59 London THE TIMES in alglish lo May 82 p 9
“Editorial: "Hill the Soviets Slip In?"]

[Text] To find the key to Soviet policy in Latin Antics one has to look at
and listen to Cuba. Opinion in Moscow any have been confined in the main to
criticism of British "inerialisn" and American "hypocrisy". In Latin America,
Cuba has been vociferous in its support for the Argentine junta, whose generals
only the other day were discussing colldaoration with Washington to contain
Cuban-inspird subversion and terrorisn in Central America. Underneath

these contradictions, however, it is possible to discover a very clear long-
term Soviet interest in the dissipation of Washington's power and influence
throughout the American hemisphere.

The Soviet Union is beset by pressures on its own periphery-«alias. Afganistan,
Iran and Poland. The men of the Krenlin see these pressures not as proof of
communisn‘s inherent untenability as a systen of political control, but more
as evidence that the world outside is determined to destroy them. Their
strategy is thus stategically defensive, in that they have to meet their basic
feelings of insecurity by permently extending the outer perimeter of their
defenses and seeking to destabilize all other societies which they inevitably
regard as hostile.

In those terms it must be necessary for the Soviet Union to encourage as mch
agitation as it can in Latin America, since for historical reasons, that
agitation can most conveniently be targeted on a symbolic hatred of Uncle Sam.
Russia's patronage of Cuba was correctly seen as a vital first beachhead in
this design; and that is what it has been. But beyond that the sheer vola-
tility of the continent has fond Marxist minds as web as everybody else
seeking to observe patterns in the ebb and flow of Latin American politics.
The Cuban foothold gave encouragement to guerrilla movements wherever they
could get started. In January 1966, for instance, the Latin American solid-
arity organization was set up in Havana after a tri-continental conference
attended by all Latin American mist parties which endorsed recourse to
"armed struggle", in the continent, in that group incidentally, were two
Argentine terrorist organizations, the m and the Hmteneros.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Url'lbana. slur. UNI-l

In 1970 the accession of Salvador Allende in Chile was appropriately cele-
brated by the establishment of close links between Havana and Santiago, which
bracketed the continent while terrorism in Argentina continued to receive
moral and naterial support. Until the fall of Allende in 1973, and the grad-
ual elimination of terrorism in Argentina-at an appalling social cost—later
in the decade, it must have seemed likely to Hoscow that the toe of South
America could move decisively out of Washington's orbit, and if that happened,
could Brazil—the real jewel of South Antics-"have been far behind?

It was not to be so, though there remained an ambivalent relationship between
Buenos Aires and lbscow which was certainly more comlicated than the siwle
certainties of terrorism and anti-terrorisa would imply. However in the Late
19703 Soviet and Cuban interests switched back to Central America causing
President Reagan's Washington to become almost obsessed with the threat this
might ultimately pose to the future stability of hxico itself. It was that
pre-occupation that encouraged Washington to try to enlist more allies from
the South to help contain the damage in El Salvador.

Moreover, in addition to giving support to «Inversion, the Soviet economic
presence in Latin Amrica was continuing to grow. Its trade with Latin America.
excluding Cuba. grew ten times between 1970 to 1977; its credit to Latin Am-
erica, excluding Cuba, rose in that period from 2 per cent of its total cred-
its to developing countries to 25 per cent. Though these figures do not
suggest economic dominance in the area, they certainly help to position the
Soviet Union to take further political advantage of any other frontier dis-
putes which might occur on the continent.

It has never been Soviet policy to put all its strategic eggs in one basket--
the Nazi Soviet pact is eloquent enough testimy to that. So when the
Galtieri junta invaded the Falklands the Soviet Union was quite satisfactor-
ily placed to exploit the situation to its advantage. Soviet-Argentine rela-
tions have anyway been very good since even before 19w when Argentina ig-
nored President Carter's call for a grain elbargo on the Soviet Union after
the invasion of Afghanistan. Since then Argentina's co-ercial dependence
has grown, with 80 per cent of her grain crop and 50 per cent of her total ex-
ports going to the Soviet Union. In August 1979 a Soviet military delegation
had already been in Buenos Aires to capitalize on Carter's ban on arms sales
to the junta. These earlier contacts enabled Moscow to provide Argentina
with intelligence about the British fleet presumably with the hope, or maybe
the assurance, that they will be able to secure listening posts and access

to other maritime services in return. Arm sales may also be stepped up

in the wake of hostilities with Britain, not least because Argentina may not
receive credit from anywhere else to buy arms in the Western world.

The decisive declaration of American support for Great Britain will have pro-
vided Moscow with much extra propaganda in Argentina. Whatever regime emerges
in Argentina after the crisis, therefore, is bound to be bruised and even
more wary of Washington than its predecessors. It will thus be all the more
susceptible to Soviet approaches. That cannot be avoided and it explains why
the American administration was so desperate to prevent the crisis deteriora-
ting to a point of outright hostilities.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ilouever, this opportunity for the Soviet Union is not the only consequence

of the crisis. In European term. the alliance and its posture of deterrence
have been iueasurably strengthened both by the decision of the United States
to back its major ally—in spite of its an inter-American difficulties—

and by the spectacle of Britain's will to use force to uphold international
law and protect her citizens. That nessage cannot have been lost on West
Berliners, who are, in one sense, the Palklandera of Europe; and if it is not
lost on West Berliners, it is certainly not lost on East Berliners and their
Soviet patrons. In the central area of Bast-Heat tension, where the deterrent
has long been taken for granted, but more recently doxbted. that point of
reassurance out be significant. 11m prospect of Soviet strategist" fishing
in the troubled waters of the South Atlantic may be disturbing, but it nust
be set against the more inportant principle that has here been vindicated-

upholding the law, and enphssizing the credibility of a policy of. deterrence
wherever it applies.

COPYRIGHT: Tinss Newspapers Limited, 1982

cso: 3120/62

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FRANCO-JAPANESE COOPERATION 0N ARIANE. SPOT. AIRBUS DISCUSSED
Paris AIR 4 COSlDS in PrenCh 26 Apr 82 p 9

(Article: "Presidential Trip to Japan: Aerospace Cooperation in the Forefront
of the Tokyo Symposium on Advanced Technologies"]

[Text] During President Francois Hitterrand's trip to Japan, the dominant theme
was technological development and the Franco-Japanese cooperation in this

field. The aeronautical and airspace industries were kept in the forefront
during this visit. especially during the symposium on advanced technologies
organized at the initiative of Mr Jean-Pierre Chevenement, minister of Research.
The symposium was opened by President Francois Hitterrand who took this opporé
tunity to mention France's privileged position in the aerospace sector.

The symposium brought together 220 representatives of Japanese enterprises and
23 French participants, among whom Prof Hubert Curien, president of CNES [Na-
tional Center for Space Studies], and Messrs Roger Chevalier, vice-president
of Aerospatiale. Lathiere, managing director of Airbus Industrie, Jacques
Benichou. president of SNECMA [National Aircraft Engine Study and Manufactur-
ing Co.], and Giraudet. president of Air France, who presented reports or made
speeches. In particular, Professor Curien underlined French self-sufficiency
in the space field and its capability for bilateral or multilateral coopera-
tion. Among others. he mentioned SPOT [Earth Observation Probe System] and
Ariane, two realizations of particular interest for Japan. Mr Roger Chevalier,
recalling French achievements in the field of turbo-propeller aircraft (Trans-
all and AIR 62), suggested that the French and Japanese aeronautical indus-
tries could cooperate on new developments in this field. Hr Bernard Lathiere
mentioned the operations of Airbus lndustrie. the first flight of the A.3lo,
and stressed that the A.320 could provide an opportunity for a Japanese-
European cooperation, both in the field of airframes and in that of engines.

Japanese Interest in Ariana

Prof Hidemasa Kimura. president of the Council on Aeronautical Policy, remarked
that Japan was behind in the aeronautical field since this industry amounts to
only one fiftieth of the automobile industry; for his part, Hr Masao Yamanouchi,
president of NASDA [expansion unknown], emphasised that the Japanese must know
their partners better and must exchange information, especially on the systems
already developed. The president of the Defense Council of Japanese Employers

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WK OFFICIAL U35 URL!

(Keidanren) stressed that France occupies a leading position in the aerospace
sector in Europe and expressed the opinion that it should be relatively easy
to implement a cooperation in this field. Hr Eiichi Ohara, president of Fuji
Heavy Industries, however, remarked that aerospace operations are only subsid-
iaries of large groups which lack experience in advanced technologies. Final-
ly. Hr Hasato Yamano, vice-minister and director of the Agency for Science

and Technology, expressed the opinion that the best way to start a technical
cooperation with France would be to have Ariane launch the satellites that
Japan cannot launch itself.

Need to Express Political Determination

After Mr Pierre Giraudet had recalled the need to develop a ISO-passenger air-
craft based on new technologies. the A.320. Hr Benichou remarked that this
project could open the way to a cooperation on engines. Professor Curien
showed that the MOS [expansion unknown] and SPOT projects are compatible and
stressed the advantages which Ariane could offer in launching heavy Japanese
satellites. as well as those offered by French-developed equipment.

Mr Chevalier invited Japanese manufacturers to come and visit the French
helicopter manufacturing plants. Hr Bernard Lathiere concluded that now was
tte time to go beyond generalities and repetitions and to proceed to realiza-
tions. but that talks and exchanges of information would not be enough and

that it was now necessary to show political determination.

Our correspondent in Tokyo. Alfred Snoular, who represented AIR 5 COSMOS at
this symposium, thinks it unlikely that concrete results will come out of
trese talks in the near future; howeVer, according to Professor Curien, the
atmosphere was "remarkable" and "favorable". and Professor Curien declared
himself optimistic as to the possible use of Arisne to launch Japanese satel-
lites. During these talks, France did not asked for anything. It presented
offers for a technical cooperation that would be profitable to both parties,
an important step in a field where, until new, words have been stronger than
actions: our correspondent reports that the Japanese manufacturers who in the
past were invited to visit French aeronautical facilities could not extend

a similar invitation to French manufacturers visiting Japan, the reason given
being that the Japanese industry works for the American industry. '

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

929a
cs0: 3100/606 END

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY