FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10169
9 December 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 64/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transiiterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and encloaed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(FOUO 64/81)

CONTENTS

MIC

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

Pfeiffer To Replace DGB Chief Vetter
(Dieter Straubert, Reiko Tornaw; STERN, 22 Oct 81)

FRANCE

Banks' Future After Nationalization Projected
(Olivier Darronce; COWIEN'I‘AIRB, Autumn 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

POLITICAL
SWEDEN

Conservatives Change Leadership. Seek 'no Heal Rift:
(Jonas Hultkvist: VECKANS mam, 15 Oct 81)..............

MILITARY
ITALY

Defense Minister on Military Policy, Middle East
(Lel io Lager io Interview; EUROPm, 16 Nov 81). . . . . . . . . . . . . .

-a- [III-WE—I

rnn AW!" 0 V I"... A". II
FRANCE

SWEDEN

fUﬂ Uf“ $51M U§L Wu}

GENERAL

Briefs
some Purge
Code Section Head

Business Organ: Governnent Broke 0.5. Technology Pact
(Gunner Hagtorn; VECKANS APPARER. 12 Nov 81)..................

Business Organ Criticizes Datasaab in Technology Transfer Case
(Editoria1;VECI(ANS APPARER, 12 Nov 81).......................

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UR OFFICIAL Isl-Z ONLY

ECONONIC FIIERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMAN

PFEIFFER TO REPLACE DGB CHIEF VETTER
Hamburg STERN in German 22 Oct 81 p 318
[Article by Dieter Strsubert and Heiko Tornow: "No Justice, Only Mercy"]

[Text] How the German Labor Union Federation happened to choose
Alois Pfeiffer as successor to Heinz Oskar Vetter.

For a long time Ernst Breit, chairman of the German Postal workers Union, was
considered a promising candidate to follow in Vetter's footsteps. A year ago,
however, he turned down the career in Duesseldorf because he wanted to stay in
Frankfurt with his wife who was seriously 111. Following her death 4 weeks ago,
speculations about Breit spread again like wildfire, but again he put an end to
the rumors. The occasion was a session in Travemuende of the federal executive
committee of the German Labor Union Federation. He said: "I am not available."

The incident is casting a light on the difficulties the German Labor Union Fed-
eration is facing, trying to find a new first man. What is wanted is a union
leader who can represent the opinions of the 17 leading functionaries to the
outside, reducing these opinions to the smallest common denominator. and who
will not interfere internally with the powerful leaders of the individual unions.

Because people like that are rare, last summer Heinz-Otto Vetter was considering
the option whether he should not be his own successor. Vetter indicated his
willingness to be available once more. and he expected to be called to save all
the personnel problems of the organization.

But nobody called him. Because nothing in the German Labor Union Federation is
done against the will of Heinz KJuncker. chief of the Public Service, Transpor-
tation and Communications union, and his colleague Eugen Loderer. leader of the
Metalworkers Union. Neither one of then wanted Vetter any longer. In loderer's
opinion, Vetter is simply too old (vintage 1917). Loderer and his organization
are fighting for earlie. retirement. Kluncker has been opposed to Vetter's ad-
ministration for a long time. ("You have no political line") and he finally
wants a man in Duesscldorff's Hans-Boeckler-House on whom he can rely.

Vetter, disappointed because his offer has been rejected, recently complained
about his powerlessness also publicly: He did not even have the right to rep-
resent the opinion of the German Labor Union Federation to the executive

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-OR ()l-‘l-‘Il Ml. Mali ONLY

committees of the 17 member unions. Whenever they do listen to him, Vetter com-
mented bitterly, "it is only to show hum mercy."

In the future Alois Pfeiffer will probably share in such mercy. The agreement
to make him the new chairman of the German Labor Union Federation came after
Ernst Breit's refusal. because there is actually nothing objectionable that can
be said against the former woodworking expert and ex-chairman of the small
Horticulture. Agriculture and Forestry Union. Pfeiffer does not have any power
within the organization that could be used to gain influence. Furthermore, a
decision in favor of the 57-year-old economic expert of the German Labor Union
Federation would not be a commitment for a very long future.

Even the chancellor cannot find any fault with Alois Pfeiffer. Helmut Schmidt
likes to hear the story in Bonn that he is very appreciative of the econopolit-
ital abilities of the future chairman of the German Labor Union Federation.
During the most recent meeting between the chancellor and Pfeiffer, however,
the first argument erupted. when the conversation turned to the austerity bud-
get, Schnldt rebuked the union leader: "Aloia, your figures are not accurate."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr A6 & Co.

8991
C80: 3103/88

FOR HFFK'IAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IZSI-I ONLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

BANKS' FUTURE AFTER NATIONALIZATION PROJECTED
Paris COMMENTAIRE in French 30 lS,Autumn 8? pp 393-401
[Article by Olivier Darronce. "French Banks Under the Yokeﬁ7

[Text] One year ago I attempted in this same column to evaluate the "Glories and
Hoes of French Banks" (COHMENTAIRE, Ho 11, Autumn 1980). I demonstrated that
French hanks experienre their glory when they are independent and free to adapt to a
moving market and to display their spirit of innovation. but that they are woeful
when they are saddled with a complicated network of institutions, rules and proce-
dures from another era imposed on them by the government. I decided a few months
ago to provide a conclusion to this article by surveying the steps a liberal
government should take to be true to itself and to allow French banks to complete
their process of change and to raise themselves to the ranks of the international
marketplace in Paris. These steps could be summed up in two suggestions: that the
government step aside and that it restore a true market.

Unfortunately things have changed. The pendulum was swung far to the opposite side.

Now we have promises of a fully nationalized French banking system—-albeit vague,
wishful promises. Even after the meeting of the Council of Ministers that conse-
crated the principle, people are still playing guessing games as to which banks
will be nationalized and which ones will be spared.

As for what tomorrow has in store for both groups, it is a well-guarded secret.

ﬂow can one help but be surprised that the nationalization project, one of the main
issues in the recent elections, has elicited so few proposals and comments in the
months preceding and following the electicns. There have been a few embarrassed
interviews, some rumors. and some rare, almost confidential written pieces1 which do
10: seem to comnit anybody aside from their authors. Literature prior to 1978 was
richer, although no clearer. People were looking forward to being enlightened by
the prime minister's program speech last July--but he asked more questions than he

answered.

Why so much mystery.sccrccy and esthetic vagueness? Is it sadism, a desire to hide
from the "nationalizahles" the ways in which they will be handled up to the very

1 Pierre Uri, "Nationalization of the Financial Sector," in SOCIALISH AND INDUSTRY;
ACTES DU COLLOQUE POLiTlQUE INDUSTRIELLE ET NATIONALISATIONS (Paris 1930); Thomas
Lefranc, "L‘lmposture monétaire" (Editions Anthropos, Paris, 1980).

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l’l-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

last moment? But beyond them, the entire economy is involved. is it a lack of
preparedness, because the Left's victory went so far as to surprise even its own
people? But this victory is already a number of weeks old. Is it a conflict be-
tween an old "catechism" and a new reality with which it has to cope? But up to

now, this "catechism" seems to have had no trouble in handling the shock, since they
they have not found anything more urgent to do than to nationalize banks. Is it
because of tensions between extremists and moderates within a very protean party?
Probably so, and this is not terribly reassuring.

in any case. here we are, reduced to the gloss of obscure writings, or even to
psychoanalysis, in an attempt to understand just what they want to nationalize,
why, and how--and of course to hear "That isn't what we want." The "charter" be-
tween the President and the French people is certainly blindingly clear....

Just What Do They Want to Nationalize?

They want to complete the nationalization of credit begun in 1945. Therefore all
the banks that are no; nationalized to date will have to be, except for....The
exceptions are in fact numerous-~foreign banks, for a start. The reason for it is
elcar--but what gifts wouldn't we offer them to help them_penetrate the French
market! Then there are the nutuals: Crédit Agricole, Credit Mutual, Credit
Coopératif, etc. Why are they escapino nationalization? Because they represent
many vorers, but officially because their organization, attitude and policies
already follow the lines desired by the President-elect. To think of it, here is
an original criterion in public law that deserves to be noted down. The question
itmwdiately comes to mind: did the banks nationalized in 1945 have an organization,
attitude and policy that pleased the elected President?

And then there are a further 65 banks, not listed by name, that are spared because
they do not have the one billion francs in residents' deposits. The optimistic
local market had in the beginning welcomed the rumors that only a few of the
largtst private banks (specifically Paribas and Indosenz) would be nationalized,
or that rather than nationalizing banks, the government would be content with
holding a majority share in their capital, thereby preserving the identity of each
institution. ”he president and the prime minister quickly dispelled these illu-
sions.

The government had the choice between the arbitrary and the absurd in this case.

it would have been arhitrnty to nationalize only a few additional banks: where
would you stop and on the basis of what criteria? However, it would also be ab-
surd to nationalize a hundred banks of all shapes and sizes that altogether occupy
only a marginal place on the market. The arguments in favor of nationalizing banks
(see infra). for what they're worth. are hard to apply to 15 percent of the banking
market. So the government bravely decided to mix the arbitrary and the absurd

and nationalize 36 banks (there is a sort of irony in this figure...). It appears
that the industrial power of private banks is more dangerous today than it was 35
years ago. One must understand that they are out to get investment banks which
escaped-—fraudulcntly they think--the 1945 nationalization. But where did they

go, with all the changes in status they have had? To find them. the best thing to
do is to make a wide sweep--at the risk, however, of seeing a few of them, out of
the 65, escape the net.
FOR (ll-"HUM. I'SF. ONLY

At this stage, we inevitably arrive at the twofold conclusion that ideology and

a sense of balance are uul good house-mates and that despite its enormous freedom
of nuneuver vis-J~vis the eloctorate—-or perhaps because of it--the Socialist
Party is Euyfully embracing ideology. Optimists refrain.

This having been said. there remains a semantic ambiguity. One usually says
nationalization of credit. Does this refer to all institutions that engage in
banking operations or those bank operations that are generally regarded as essen-
tial? The two interpretations do not agree. Credit operations can be "national-
ized" without assigning the capital of private banks to the government. (This is
what the radicals of the Left proposed in 1978.) But all banks would be affected
by this. nationalized banks as well as mutuala and private banks. The trepidation
of certain heads of nationalized banks is understandable.

But what does it mean to nationalize credit operations? if that means to direct.
control and guide them. then that has already been done. Between credit limits
and mobilization at the Bank of France. ceilings on this and floors for that and
the invitations to banks, endorsed by the government. to join in establishing
agencies of doubtful usefulness (CEPHE for instance) or to grant credits to firms
that are not creditworthy. what means doesn't the government have? Our authors
recognize this fact readily and are the first to find fault with the resulting
distortions in market operations--but it's "the fault of capitalism." Let's go to
the source. "Therefore. because of a lack of complete control over the banking
and financial system. the exaggerated interventionism of bureaucratic capitalism
leads to the sclerosis of its own structures, without any kind of overall policy
ever successfully neing implemented.2" And this is why your daughter is mute!

We are told today that the National Credit Council or the Banking Control Commis-
sion needs to be reformed. Before buying new tools. shouldn't we take stock of what
we already have and decide what we can and want to do with them? If this is not
done. everything is nationalized (except for the exceptions...) and twice--at a
premium.

Why Nationalizc Banks?

This is where advacates of nationalization are the most long-winded. It is not
easy, however. to pick out the main ideas, as the concepts are so imprecise and
confused and it in so difficult to distinguish reason from pretext. At least one
of the favorite arguments of nationalizcrs. the absence of competition and a ten-
dency toward monopoly-~15 missing here, since they have decided instead to de-
nounce the fierce competition prevailing in the banking profession. The reasons
given to justify the nationalization of credit can be summarized as follows:
abolish financial power; acknowledge the public service feature of banks; give the
Plan the means to enforce its law.

1. "Abolish financial power," or in other words. free the government and firms
from the influence of financial capitalism. but also free banks from the influence

of profits.

2 lhomas Lefranc, o". cit., p. 186.

FOR ()FFICML USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hie Left has always had the impression it is running up against a Wall of Honey.
4e know that this wall is nothing more than a mirror of its own inconsequences.
full or mirror, it wants to break it. Recent bitterness has revived the former
nyths: private banks fought hard against nationalization, hence against the
Left, in 1978 and in 1981. This they are remembering and punishing. The allergy
is real. To justify it doctrinally. a double myth is used: banks, through their
shares in corporate capital, through credit blackmail, indeed through their un-
limited powers gathered at shareholders' meetings, completely control the economy.
Industry's and banks' interests differ, are even opposite. as banks try to direct
industry along a path favorable to them, sucking the blood from small and medium-
sized firms only to cast them aside when they have no more blood, etc.

One would certainly have to have a student's naiveté to believe, for instance,

that the Coapagnie de Suez‘ minority share gives it control over St. Cobain-
Pont—d-Nonsson, or that a bank could merrily kill off a customer. As a service
industry with considerable resources committed to this end, banks are the first

to be interested in the health of their customers. As for those (the prime
minister. for example) who accuse banks of speeding up the demise of firms in
trouble by withdrawing their aid, do we have to remind them that the courts

readily penalize banks that have unduly prolonged the activities of a non—viable
firm by imprudently providing it assistance at the expense of its suppliers,
competitors and even customers? Conversely, do they believe that nationalized

banks will finance firms in a poor financial position and disregard the solvency

of their customers? This is a strange concept of a deposit bank whose own

solvency is based on the security and liquidity of its assets. In France, it is
well known that the industrial fabric is fragile and the right to guarantees is

not only inconsistent but obsolete. If the national government or a local govern-
ment intends to ensure the perpetuity of a firm that does not have an acceptable
financial Standing or the guarantees that a bank normally requires, should it force
the hand of the bmlkS--Ol’ instead take the initiative itself for this firm, that is
establish the institutions and procedures (like the former Harkets' Fund or the
1RD: dear to hr Savary in the Midi-Pyrenees region) that would make it eligible for
bank credit? It is always a delicate task to evaluate whether or not a weak firm
should he backed because of its underlying potential. This is the job of an insur-
er and not a deposit bank. It should be properly fulfilled by ad hoc institutions
and it is in no way necessary to nationalize banks so that they respond to the

request.

grofit alone guides private banks, and in its name they
have imposed competition between nationalized banks and have forced them to accept
the profit criterion. This is a total misinterpretation. It is not private banks
that have set the tone. but the economic and political environment prevailing
since the fifties. The same environment would have produced the same effects if
all hanks had been nationalized. On the contrary. it is nationalized banks that
have tempered with competition and have made it fierce, because they are not held
back by the concern for profits and liquidity. Thus they have led the entire pro—
fession to do foolish things, especially by the unrestrained development of tellers
windows—-this waste denounced by the Socialists. The need to finance their com-
puter equipment and to respect the new ratios rightly required by the central

bank has led them recently to a sounder evaluation of things. This fortunate
development would have been usefully completed by their denationalization. But
alas, total nationalization is now going to bring them back to irrational action.

it is further said that
FOR ()FHUAL LSE ONLY

Moreover, what criterion do they intend to substitute for profit, to guide the
management of nationalized hanks? Discipline, of course, accompanied by a total
lack of interest in the results, if banks are expected to behave merely as tellers—
payers. and the allocation of credits depends on the Plan. But what if you want
independent and responsible banks? The Yugoslav experience where the pendulum
never stopped swinging between anarchy and a brusque return to bureaucratic cen-
tralization shows what we can expect from self-management. Freed from the profit
discipline, the "independent" bank cannot help but be confused and out of control.

2. "Distribution of credit is a public service that requires government appropria-
tion." This is a statement of principle that immediately elicits a flood of
questions: are banks confined to distributing credit? What mechanism is not
indispensable to the functioning of the whole in an economy as integrated as

ours, and how do you choose if you are not planning to nationalize the entire
economy? is a public service something you're prepared to lose money on?, and so
forth. In the case of banking, the label public service is justified by two
grounds as surprising as they are contradictory: banks manage "the money of
others," and banks have inherited the "royal power to mint money."

Norkcrs' savings, they say, are diverted from uses that would be in the national
interest and used in speculative ventures that are of little economic interest
but are highly profitable. The question is are workers prepared to invest their
savings at their own risk for the profit of small and medium-sized businesses in
trouble? The Communist Party replies unquestionably, for itself, saying that it
intends to nationalize banks but not bank deposits.

Banks‘ reinvestment of savings leaves the use up to the saver. This is precisely
how hanks create money. Does one have to look to history and remember how govern-
ments have manipulated coins or the privileges granted by them to issue notes

that are legal tender to realize that the government should assume the same rights
over today's money, bank money? The prime minister is not afraid of accepting
responsibility for this play on words and we are left confused. Are they thinking
of the lucrative dishonesties of sovereigns of yesteryear? In fact, coins and
notes are legal tender: to avoid any confusion, a single issuer is recommended.
For coins, if government appropriation is not a given, then it is logical that it
have a monopoly. Do they want to make bank checks legal tender. and give a single
bank a monopoly over issuing representative money?

in truth, banks--mere financial intermediaries--find themselves creating money
without even thinking abOut it. But is it the banks themselves that create it or
their customers who request credit. or a deficit budget, or exporters who con-
vert foreign currency into francs, etc.? The times when money is created (the
famous counterparts of the money supply) are of secondary interest. It is the
total amount of monetary liquidity (quantity and velocity of circulation) that
counts, and keeping it in harmony with the increase in the national product. This
overall control is the primary task of a central bank. You can make fun of the
more or less elastic definition of monetary liquidity or the doubtful effective-
ness of control techniques, an area where France's backwardness can be attributed
entirely to the laziness of the Bank of France. Overall control--and only overall
control—-is needed. The nationalization of banks has nothing to do with this
affair; it is beside the point. To demonstrate this, one need only point out that,

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NIN

for the better or the House, credit ceilings are the primary way of controlling
monetary expansion today and. ever since they have been in force. the nationalized
banks are the ones that have violated them the most.

3. "The Plan must be given the means to enforce its law." It is true that
general financing conditions also change with the role of the Plan. Before the
Plan was simply a generalized market study, the government's thoughts on the main
forces in the economy. These thoughts focussed on modifications to be made to
market operations so that financial resources and expenditures could find their
optimum adequation through the market. If the Plan has become more restrictive,
if from indicating the possible it has moved to defining the necessary, a resource
problem could arise. honey becomes a rare commodity that should be rationed

so that it will be channeled toward basic objectives.

The concern is understandable. But, as we have already seen, all the components,
institutions, tools. and procedures for selective credit are already available.
No essential part is missing. What could "completion of the nationalization of
credit? add to it? Doesn't this craving for means hide tremendous uncertainty as
to the ends?

Mnuy reasons do not make a good reason. There are no logical argwnents in the
paraliberal framework the Socialist Party claims to protect that are convincing.
This is a vain test in courage and lucidity for the Constitutional Council,

which is responsible for deciding whether "public necessity" "apparently" requires
the nationalization of banks. Let's look at the thing simply. The visceral mo-
tiVes are well known although they remain unsaid: the reasons put forward are only
pretexts or alibis. Are these motives compelling? f not, it is one of two
things. Either the nationalization project is merely the recital of an old
"catechism." that becomes all the mtte eloquent as it becomes more categorical:
you want to believe it nore than you really believe it, you nationalize because
you said that you would. out of loyalty to yourself more than because you

believo in it, albeit indifferently. Or else things are much more serious than we
haVu been told: here we are in the position of the sick person who doesn't know
the disease from which he is suffering and thus is entitled to imagine it is

cancer.

To reach a decision. we must go down one floor in the conscience of the national—
izers and question the ways and means. and thus the underlying ends.

L'hat Mt ans. h'hat Plans?

it is here as if by accident that the fog is the thickest. Here i: is the
beginning of September and we know only one thing: nationalization is urgent, a
bill is to be submitted before the end of the month. what will it contain? will
it go beyond the principle of nationalization alone? "111 it leave the “details."
that is to say the methods. to other laws and regulations? Has the government
only defined these methods?

I do not want to go into compensation of shareholders. That is not my purpose
here and it would deserve an entire article. dut how eculd it be fair? ‘N\e
closer it comes to equity. moreover. the more costly it will be. If the expense
were charged to the very companies being nationalized. it would be a harsh blow
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

to their operating account. But should we dwell on such a commonplace concern?

Then let's go back LO the fate of the banks themselves. Since we are reduced to
making hypotheses, I will advance two clearly separate ones.

The Benign Hypothesis

The opinion is rather generally held by the public and by the banks themselves
that nationalization: will change very little in the firms' operations. People
tmst in the past. Is Credit Lyonnafs managed very differently from private
banks? lbs it suffered from nationalization? Hasn't it profited from it in cer-
tain respects? Some bank employees hope to gain advantages from a rather gener-
ous government agreement and from a charter based on the civil service. This is
obviously a false hope but the popularity of the project keeps it alive.

Some managers may also think that the firm is going to retain its identity and
procedures and that, moreover, by becoming a sovereign risk for third parties,
they will not have to worry so much about its accounts and balance sheet. This
optimism has some grounds in the short run. The minister of economy has had
reaSSuring words. The prime minister has said that he doesn't want to "upset the
structures or affect :he legal status of existing networks." It is true that the
former has also said that between the previous government's laisser-faire policy
towards national firms and the bureaucratic centralization denounced by foes of
nationalization, there was a happy medium ('2) to be found. The latter claims
that he is applying across the board (H the 1945 documents on bank nationaliza-
tion and the unsaid things in his speech leave room for all kind of interpreta-
tions as to the extent of the threat.

The benign hypothesis has against it its apparent lack of logic: are they going
to nationalize 36 banks just to maintain the status quo? Moreover the minister
of economy must be aware of the risks nationalization will entail for bank
management, by abolishing the safeguards mentioned earlier. The Left has mixed
feelings with regard to the three nationalized banks: these are antimodels that
should therefore be. renatlonalized. However, they are believed to be as dynamic
as private banks. The minister for his part knows what tempers the value of this
"dynamism." Does he really think he is offsetting the lesser influence of the
traditional operating rules by closer supervision and stricter rules of conduct?
Hr Bloch-Laine’, president of Crédit Lyonnais just a short time ago, complained
about never receiving; any orders from the authorities and thus feeling like an
orphan. lie was undoubtedly waiting for a personal invitation to observe the
credit ceilings. . . .

The Radical Hypothesis

It finds its strength in the weaknesses of the benign hypothesis. which can be
accused of only paying lip service to the idols and of betraying the reasoning
behind nationalization. This reasoning actually takes many forms: a number of
people how.- circnlated different scenarios. I will outline the major arguments
from the works of l‘. Uri and 'l‘. Lefranc:

(a) it is Important to create sySteas of institutions specialized in investment
(riatlonal investment Bank and its satellites, the regional investment banks), in
financing foreign trade, and financing small business, etc. Banks, although not

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

excluded from theSe activities, would be subordinate to these specialized insti—
tut ions and would serve merely as authorized intermediaries. They would in fact
be confined to the short term and the French franc.

(b) Banks must be consolidated after being nationalized, or in other words the
profession must be restructured and banks grouped around a number of limited
poles (about ten), enough to preserve pluralism.

(c) Credit should be selective and should follow the guidelines of the Plan. This
selectivity will find its full meaning with medium— and long-term credits, but

will be extended to short-term credits, even if only in a negative sense to pre-
vent financing of fixed assets or currency speculation.

(d) Refinancing of banks should be reformed. the money market abolished and banks
restricted to applying directly to the Bank of France to cover their needs. This
will protect the domestic market against the deleterious effect of international
interest rates.

Let's not go into any further detail. We do not have a precise project in front of
us but arguments, which have many variations and could give rise to endless com-
binations and compromises. Let's bet however that future proposals, either
official or not, will borrow little or nothing from these arguments that claim

to be consistent with the main idea behind nationalization.

Internal Contradictions

Just mentioning these arguments is enough, moreover, to show the many internal
contradictions in the Socialist project. I will list five of them.

Rest ructuring vs. Pluralism

with the 300 some banks in France, many of which are often only specialized branch-
es of larger groups, the socialist thinkers talk about a plethora. This is a
frightening idea that reflects either a troubling misconception of the work of a
bank or else a desire to reduce it to the mere distribution of credits--at the most
computerized. From this perspective, to reject the bureaucratic colossus that

a single bank would be and to keep ten banks or so in the name of pluralism is a
sick joke. The bureaucracy is already sensitive about the size of nationalized
banks. It could only get worse if those banks were to get fat on the spoils of
private banks and at the same time get rid of competitors who are now forced to
offset their inferior resources by a surplus of imagination. The banking profes-
sion is already overly concentrated in France, and the minister of the economy is
the first to say so. To replace the current growth of banks of different sizes,
specialities, styles, business approaches, methods, etc. by ten stereotyped mon-
sters would narrow the choice of customers between banks as well as between avail-
able services. Mort-over, forced specialization would mutilate the few banks that
will remain in competition and create monsters: giving a national investment

bank a monopoly (Wci' subsidized credit runs directly against the decentralization
so popular just a short time ago.

10

FOR OH-‘K'IM, "SF. (”ELY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Restructuring vs. Employment Guarantee

Any merger entails a narrowed assortment of goods and services on the market, it

is true, and justifies it through rationalization and a reduction in costs. For

a labor-intensive industry such as banking, an improvement in productivity is
brought about by a reduction in staff. Bank employees have been apprehensive over
the computerization of their establishments, as it eliminates jobs. One could take
the opposite approach and point out the many new services it would make possible,
and hence the commercial employment it would generate. With the restructuring,
this advantage disappears. Do they intend to reduce bank employment~-and they
should have the courage to say so--or curb the computerization of banks and re-
place underemployment by poor employment?

Plan vs. Autonomy and Responsibility

However, the Plan is drafted, it is restrictive and imposes an outside rule of con-
duct on institutions, which. however, are supposed to be responsible for their
operations. There is a subtle distinction between the main political guidelines
contained in the Plan and the individual decisions that will still be the purview
of the normal decision—making structures (7). The verbal precautions aimed at
averting interference by the government at the top and the unions at the bottom
alone show the pressures the banker will be under in his everyday work. It is not
encugh to put forward two contradictory principles in the hope that they will auto-
matically be reconciled in actual fact. Either the nationalized banker will make
this decision, as the private banker used to do, on the basis of traditional opera—
tional criteria, i.e., profit, and pay no attention to the Plan, or he will be only
an executing agent, with no responsibility by definition. Any compromise would not
be legitimate and would heighten the disadvantages of both situations. of course
it would be different if the Plan, instead of giving directives to banks, were to
create market conditions that would enable banks to use the activities benefitting
from their favors, according to their own criteria. But in that case nationaliza-
tion is not needed. as private banks would do the same.

Selectivity for the Sake of It

The prime minister is asking banks to add to the criteria they use in granting
credits the national interest. This is keeping them amused. Banks pay close
attention--and have for a long time--to what they call less pompously, and with-

out brandishing the blue. white and red flag, the economic interest of the activi-
ties they finance. And the government already has all the means needed to stimulate
their attention if necessary. But what more could it do with them? Our authors
readily acknowledge that short—term credit operations. the best-defined task left

to the banks. have little or nothing to do with selectivity. It applies to

medium- and long-term credits, but they are being taken away from banks....

Abolishing the Money Market vs. Maintaining a Market Economy

They want to protect the autonomy of domestic policy against the contagion of inter-
national interest ratrs. They are not proud of the overall control of the money
market which pas: experience would prove ineffective. They will not allow banks to
lend more capital than they collect by refinancing on the market. The central

bank is supposed to be exercising close control over resource "deficits." On a

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical level, they plainly want to return to discount ceilings (and to hell
and super-hell). as they flourished in the fifties. Thus the timid attempts to
set up a money market in France will be swept away. undoubtedly to the great joy
of the Discount Department in the Bank of France, which has critical employment
problems. and to the great satisfaction of the offices in the Bank of France and
the Ministry of Finance whose latent economic planning has resisted 30 years of
so-called liberalism.

So we have short circuits and banks will lend only as much as their deposits.

This being the case. either they will have to be encouraged to increase their
deposits, i.e., their tellers' windows and worsen the famous waste, or they will be
reduced to the status of teller-payer. What will remain of the market economy and
of the hope to see market mechanisms create an economy with authoritative resource
allocations?

The radical hypothesis is definitely no more logical than the benign hypothesis.

It in fact is like an unstable connection between two series of principles which
are consistent internally but incompatible one to the other: nationalization,
restructuring imposed specialization, partitioning. closer supervision of banks,
planning and selective credits, on the one hand; and, decentralization, autonomy
and responsibility of the economic agents. and a market open to the outside world,
on the other. The first series closely follows the most traditional Marxist line.
The second, in contrast, is a recent addition to the doctrine, and may be
opportunist but in any case is alien to it. What is the precise meaning of this
addition? Do they mean to be reassuring, or to reassure themselves? "hat does it
mean to stress the minor position of the public sector even after nationalization?
Expanding the public sector is either something good, and then why make excuses

for it. or something bad, and then why give it to it at all? Do they want to ensure
the originality of the French socialist experience and ward off the demons of
collectivism? But what a surprise it is to see collectivism so fiercely repudiated
by the people who want to give the collectivity whole pieces of the French economy!

In the final analysis. what is the relative importance of each series of principles
in the nationalization project? It probably varies according to where each is
located in the socialist spectrum. Contradictions between principles can only
reflect conflicts in proclivities within the Party. the Parliament and the govern—
men t .

Where Are We Going?

Let's sum up. The decision to nationalize banks has been made and it will soon be
ratified by Parliament. He have now turned our backs on what could have been con-
sidered-~hefore the presidential elections-as the direction French banking should
take. The liberation timidly sketched in 1966 has certainly made little progress
since. The course was at least maintained and, since 1978. the hope for new
progress was not unrealistic. Today the course has been reversed. “hat is pro-
posed is nothing other than an exacerbation of the evils with which banking is now
afflicted. Thus it is no longer a question of advancing but of defending, no longe
a question of improving things but of trying to make the best of a bad situation.

What are the odds? We must realize that they are against us. Nationalization has
its own dynamics. It is what is called "the strategy of the break.“ P. Uri

12

FOR i)!’Fl('l-\l USP CNIN
FOR OFFICIAL IJSE ONLY

referred to this and said that a liberal government must not be given the oppor-
tunity to come back to nationalizations one day. that the situation must be made
irreversible and the tracks must be covered to this end. Let's move on to the
questionable compatibility between this strategy and the devout respect shown for
the democratic alternatiVe. In France where conservatism is pushed to such a point
that the achievements of a revolution will never the questioned again, nationali—
zation is a break in itself. It is not a question of coming back to it; banks
were never denationalized. and neither were insurance or Renault. Let's, in
addition, take a look at the diverse attitudes of the extreme Left: small groups
of naive or impatient revolutionaries denounce the inconsistencies in the
Socialist's nationalization program and want everything right away; the official
communists. more political. are generally satisfied and ramble emulously on about

responsibility, pluralism. etc. They know that the important thing is that the
break be complete and they rely on the rationale of nationalization. which is to
move step by step. It is in this perspective that the nationalization of banks
finds its priority. Take credit. take pricing profits and tax profits as well,
and you will have the firms before ever having touched their status. Nationaliza-
tion, whether you like it or not, leads to collectivism. The contradictions are
not meant to frighten the narxists. They develop dialectically—-and inexorably.

This having been said, the process. however relentless it may be, is neither
linear nor continuous. Dynamics encounters resistance. the fear of international
lawsuits. and possible challenges from the Constitutional Council that may give
reason to stop and think. within the party in power, factions are pulling in
opposite directions.

People are still afraid of cullecrivism. "The State will not establish control
over everything," "We will not upset the structures!" "Our model is Renault,“
they say. After all let's take them at their word. let‘s not get too excited
about the apparent irrationality in this or that proposa1--we have to learn to
live with irrationality. Under the circumstances, good sense dictates that we be
inconsistent rather than giving way to a fit of logic.

COPYRIGHT: 1981: S. A. Commentaire

9805
CS): 3100/80

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONSERVATIVES CHANGE LEADERSHIP. SEEK T0 HEAL RIFTS
Stockholm VECKANS AFFARER in Swedish 15 Oct 81 pp 50-53
[Article by Jonas Hultkvist]

[Text] The Conservatives, with Ulf Adelsohn as the new party leader
and with a much younger leadership. are exhibiting a new face. but
what about their profile? There are many question marks in regard

to Ulf Adelsohn as the Conservative convention gathers next week in
Fnlun. And there is a lack of clarity in regard to the continued
role of Costa Bohman. At the same time certain rifts can be detected

in the party. The success of the Norwegian Conservatives is inspiring,
but can that success be copied in Sweden?

When the Conservative Party holds its convention next weekend at Falun. it will
demonstrate the same determination and unity towards the future as the Social Dem-
ocratic Congress did recently. The Conservatives will get ready psychologically
for next year's election. For the Conservatives an economic action program for
the rest of the eighties. "A New Way." will also be a unifying element and a
platform for the electoral effort.

Like the Social Democrats the Conservatives hope to designate a prime minister
next year, and there is some reason for this optimism. Just like the Social
Democrats the Conservatives have a favorable wind.

But in contrast to the Social Democrats the Conservatives will approach the

election with a new and not wholly non-controversial party leader at the top and
new and younger people in other leadership positions. The Conservatives will show
a completely new face--the question is whether they will also exhibit a new profile.

Took Command

Costa Bohman succeeded in achieving during the seventies what few people thought

he could do: he became the "strong man" which that small, mismanaged and strife-
torn party needed. and succeeded in bridging the gulf between the light-blue and

dark-blue factions.

This is no easy inheritance for Ulf Adelsohn to dischange--30 years younger than
his predecessor. without parliamentary experience. without any ties to the
ultra-rightwing core of Conservatives, and with a "non-Swedish" appearance.

14
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
'JR Ur. r :2. . .vr. 'I.'w.'.

Adelsohn is the obvious successor in line with the party'u long range strategy,
whose father is Carl Bildt. Gosta Bohman's righthand man and regarded by many as
the most powerful figure in the party. Adelsohn has been skillfully launched as
such.

Many Questions

The strategy succeeded--except for the seat in parliament. Ulf Adelsohn was at
times reluctant to follow the prescribed course and in 1976 he refused a seat in
parliament which went to Ander Wijkman.

There are still many questions in regard to Ulf Adelsohn when he takes the helm of
the party in a few days. Hany people consider him indeed charming and dynamic but
too shallow. And in regard to certain questions crucial for the Conservatives it

is oat known where he stands. He has not expressed himself in such key questions

as defense. security and equality before the law. As a key Conservative expressed
it. "there are many unknowns in regard to Ulf."

On the other hand. he is believed to have the ability to attract younger voter
groups who do not have normal ties with the middle class environment. According

to the recently published report. “Swedish Voters." by the political scientist

Soren Holmberg. the Conservatives have increasingly won the support of young people.
In the election of 1979, 20 percent of the new voters supported the Conservatives.
the highest figure since the 1956 election.

A rejuvenation of the party's rank and file appears thus to be underway. This is

in conformity with the rejuvenation in the party's leadership, where the 34-year-old
Georg Danell will be party secretary. and the 32-year-old Carl Bildt joins the

party executive board along with, among others. the 37-year-old Anders Bjorck, at
the same time that the older gentlemen, Steffan Burenstam Linder and Eric Kronmark.
first and second vice-chairman respectively, are putting on their hats and leaving
the stage.

Unclear Role for Bohman

The fat: that Lars Tobisson. the departing party secretary. is only changing roles
in the party presidium and will become first vice-chairman is to be seen as a
balance. The same goes for Ella Tengbom-Velander. 60-year-old councilwoman from
Helsingborg, becoming second vice-chairman. in accordance with the nomination list.
But most important of all for continuity is that Costa Bohman will remain in parlia-
ment for at least a year and will be the party's chief spokesman, at least in
economic questions. His role in the party in the future is still uncertain.

"Costa will never relax his hold on the party." says a person from the circle of
advisers around Costa Bohman. "Even if he sits in a boat out in the Sundskar
fishinn. he will want to participate in formulating policies."

A future problem will be how Ulf Adelsohn will handle himself in this situation.

Cracks in the Hall

The party meeting will show outwardly a well—polished facade. That is absolutely
necessary for tho electlmu But that detznotmean thattvercarc notcracksinthewa]

l .
r'Hk UFFH'L—N. i=5} 'l'\l,\
Recently, five members of the Conservative Youth League in Vasterbotten were
cashiered. They had, from the ultra-conservative viewpoint, critized the chairman
Cunnar Hokmark, somewhat noteworthy in as much as Hokmark himself is one of the
most "dark blue" individuals. The result was that 15 individuals from the Vector-
hotten Conservatives refused r: allow themselves to be nominated for 1982 parlia-
mentary election.

What first appeared to be a minor matter on the peripheryquicklybecame something
unre significant. Even if the Conservatives in the North are very conservative--for
example they regard Uli Adeisohn as a "typical libera1"--this is evidence that the
Conservative Party is not quite as homogeneous as the party leaders want to suggest.

Perhaps the most important question for the Conservatives in the next year will be
how the party can, strategically speaking, capitalize on the lessons from the
Norwegian parliamentary election.

One can detect in leading circles of the Conservative Party differences as to
whether the Norwegian situation is applicable to Sweden. Thus, Lars Tobisson shows

a tendency to cast a glance at Norway, while Carl Bildt warns against blindly look-
ing at the development in Norway.

Lars Tobisson said, "As party secretary I have always had the ambition to catch up
with the Norwegian Conservatives. But every time we thought we were doing so, new

figures have come from Norway showing that the Norwegian Conservatives are pulling
ahead."

Lars TobiSson points out, however, that the difference today between the support
Norwegian and Swedish Conservatives enjoy in the electorate is not so great. The
Norwegian Conservatives received almost 31 percent in the election, while the
Swedish Conservatives, according to the Swedish Institute for Public Opinion, had
26.5 percent of the voters. "But it is worth noting that center in Norway still
got 16 percent altogether. That is just about as much as the center here in
Sweden. according to the most recent public opinion poll."

lars Tobisson desires to point out the similarities in the Norwegian and Swedish
situations, but he also wishes to maintain that the Conservatives (Sw) must try to
cooperate with the center. "We won't win the elections by ourselves."

Encouraging

Carl Bildt is more careful in making comparisons with Norway. "Many in the party

make a comparison in order to encourage the party workers. But I think you have
to look at each country in itself. At the same time it should be noted that

Conservative gains are a common trend in all the four Nordic countries."

Carl Bildt says in addition, "The goal is partly to make a better showing than in
the 1979 election, and partly to create a three-party government."

What tactics should the Conservatives then follow up to the election in order to
attain this three-party coalition?

"There won't be any common platform." Lars Tibisson says. "But we won't go out and
hack at each other unnecessarily."

16
FOR OFFICIAL IZSE ONLY
Hm UH l. Lu. car. .I.\l s

The goal which the middle class has in common is the struggle against social
democracy. "And thus there is room for compromises with the center," Carl Bildt
believes. "On the other hand. we have no scruples against cooperating with the
Social Democrats if our views in basic questions coincide."

Taxes and Defense
But there are areas where there can be no compromise:

One is the tax question. we cannot accept the government's agreement with the
Social Democrats about a reform in the marginal tax in 1983. instead of 1982 as the
Conservatives desire.

Another area is the defense question. "Falldin in his letter to Costa Bohman
established certain firm goals for the upcoming defense resolution. But there is
a tendency within the government, in the Liberal Party, not to attain them, and even

go father than the Social Democrats. If that is the situation when the resolution
is presented. yes, then there will be a struggle."

How willing the Conservatives are in general to compromise remains to be seen.

Friction between the Conservatives and the center is increased by the fact that the
Conservatives this fall are preparing their own savings program, which will be

presented in November or December and which will be more austere than the govern-
ment's l2 million.

The Conservatives support in general the economy measures which the government
pointed to in its economic crisis program. But the Conservatives in their own

program are intending to be tougher, for example, in regard to aid to undeveloped
countries. then the government. It is not unlikely that one can end up under the

1 percent goal.
Incompetent Social Uemocratic Leadership

In addition. a Conservative resolution during the autumn session of parliament will
result in a tough examination of the government's policy of industrial support.

The Conservatives believe there is strong opposition to the flow of billions,
administered by the Department of Industry. The recently proposed and very criti-
cal investigation of industrial support has the party's full support. The intent

is to examine the situations where the state has been forced to intervene to support
industry and may result in a motion in which the Conservatives will demand a com-

plete end to support for industries. such as the Swedish Sugar Corporation and
Swedish Petroleum, or in some type of upper limit as to how much can be granted.

”It is. for example. unreasonable to hand out 700 million kronor to an incompetent
management in Swedish Petroleum, while at the same time reducing the funds for
pensions by the same amount." Cari Biidt says.

According to Lars Tobisson. the questions the Conservatives will present in the
election are:

The economy. No to lunds. reduced public expenditures, and lower taxes.

E'OR ill-"5" 1-H. [51‘ “N! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Schools. Education must be improved. 00 away with "the indifferent school."
Sweden is in danger of falling behind internationally.

Housing: Home owners should not be threatened with elimination of the deduction
rights.

 

Ulf ndclnchn (richt, above), and his new party leadership: Georg Dannel (extreme
left), :crxpr Tin:srer of pinnnzng who will become party secretary; Lars Tobisson.
party secretary who will become first vice president, Ella Tengbom Velander (below,
loft) municipal council woman who will become second vice president: and Carl nildt,
his grey eminence, who ;: joining the new party executive board.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUK \II‘I‘ILIAL val. UI‘LI

The Center in a Vise When the Conservatives Grow

 

1. Social Democrats

2. Communist Left Party
3. Center Party

4. Liberals

5. Conservatives

6.

Election Results

A Norwegian pattern? During the seventies the Swedish political center has been
increasingly pressed between a stable socialist bloc and a growing Conservative
Party. Source: Swedish Institute for Public Opinion Polls.

COPYRIGHT: Ahlen + Ackerlunds tryckerier. Stockholm 1981.

6893
C80: 3109/26

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M1 LIT’iRY ITALY

DEFENSE MINISTER 0N MILITARY POLICY, MIDDLE EAST
PMl9l7l3 Milan EUROPEO in Italian 16 Nov 81 pp 9-11

[Interview with Lelio Lagorio. Italy's defense minister, by Stefano Silvestri:
"unitary Policy: Italy and the Middle East"]

[Excerpt] [Question] The increases in defense spending are high-~29 percent in the
case of the 1981 budget (with inflation running at 22-23 percent) and 34 percent for
the 1982 budget.

[Answer] This is only apparent. First, the major increases concern expenditure on
personnel, to whom the communists pay great attention and who in 1981 received in-
creases of 35 percent, plus a 60-percent increase on training and 27 percent on in-
frastructures. This year expenditure on personnel will increase by a further 35
percent, training 40 percent and infrastructures (barracks) 35 percent. As for
actual weapons, in 1981 we have kept below the inflation rate (with an increase of
only 7 percent). This coming year we are making up for that with a 24-percent in—
crease, but let nobody tell us that we have grandiose plans. In January 1981 the
supreme defense council, at my suggestion, decided to postpone the modernization
plan envisaged in the 1975 laws by 5 years, thus scheduling its completion for 1990
instead of 1985, because we do not have enough money and because some weapons, such
as the new tornado fighter-bomber, have proved to be very expensive. So much for
our supposed giantism. This is rather a policy of miserliness.

[Quesrion] Perhaps the communists have changed because of pressure from the pacifist
movement. You once astonished the radicals by signing the referndum for the aboli-
tion of military courts. You would not join a peace march now, would you?

[Answer] Well. perhaps that is a little exaggerated. There are different roles:
mine is to help formulate an institutional government policy for peace, and I
believe that I an doing my duty well, first by taking the comiso decision and then
by attending the NATO meeting and being the first to propose--before the nordic
countries or the Germans started talking about it--the zero option, that is. the
offer to the Soviets to eliminate all long-range nuclear weapons in both the Eastern
and Western blocs. And this has become NATO's position, which is something that I
am pleased about: it is a specific, not merely declamatory, political act.

[Question] 50 do you dislike peace marchers?

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

[Answer] No. Peace marchers are always friends. Of course they can also become

allies when their marches are politically well orientated (as in Milan, not as in
Rome, I mean). As for the advocates of unilateral disarmament, I consider them

morally blameless but politically naive, and in any case they are in a minority in
Italy.

nest on at oes not a ter t 2 act t at ta y 3 now 8 rec ma nstny.
[Q 1 ] Th d 1 h f h I 1 i NATO' 1 1

[Answer] Yes. without Italy's political stance the Atlantic Alliance would risk
losing the hediterranean and Germany could slide toward neutralism. Our policy is
now the keystone in the system. I acknowledge this, but I do not understand why I
should be ashamed of it. On the contrary, NATO serves to maintain peace. Berlinguer
himself has said so several times, and perhaps he will say so again soon, if it is
true (though I certainly hope not) that we will have further general elections in the

Spring. Between elections he seems to forget it.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Rizzoli Editore

CSO: 310b/43

2]

FOR OFFK'IM. (SF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL FRANCE

BRIEFS

SDECE PURGE--[President] Mitterrand has ordered [Pierre] Marion (director of the
SDECE) to initiate an investigation within the service and conduct a purse.
Mitterrand believes that it was deliberately and consciously misleading for the
SDECE to have caused the President's office to believe for 3 days that Goukouni

[Oueddei of ChadLhnd been overthrown. [Text] [Paris RAMS PATCH in French
20 Nov 81 p 90] (COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Coqedipresse S.A;/

CODE SECTION “mm-Bernard Cuitton, minister plenipotentiary and former secretary
of the North-South Conference, will take over as director of the code and mail
union in the Ministry of Foreign Relations. [Text] [Paris LE LETTRE DE
L'EXPANSION in French 16 Nov 81 p S] COPYRIGHT: 1981. Groupe Expansion 5. A.

CSO: 3100/132

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL SWEDEN

iiUSl N553 ORGAN: GOVKRNKENI' BROKE “.8. MIKEY PACT
Stockholm VBCKMS AE'FARER in Swedish 12 Nov 81 pp 36-hl
[Article by Gnnnar Hagtorn]

[Text] ‘Jhnt happened within the board of Stansaab in the fall

of 19??? To what extent was Minister of Industry Nils G. Ksling
in agreement with it--and why did the government not see to it
that continual reportswere sent to the United States on the de-
liverien effected? (This was part of the delivery terms.) And
why do members of the board of Datasaab (formerly Stansaab) be-
little the importance of the so-called extractors to the aircraft
control center in Moscow? The questions pile up. Gunner Hagtorn
of VEKMB AWARE}? started looking into the matter via revealing
board minutes and dozens of interviews.

'lhc negotiation: to merge Stansaab and Datasaab—both owned for 50 percent
by the state and Saab—Scania. respectively--were concluded in May of 197?.
Stanoaab. at the time. had a Russian order for an aircraft control system
for Moscow Airport. among others. to an amount of approximately 320 million
kroncr and signed in 1975.

'Z'he delivery prosupposcd an American license. The application for such a
License had been submitted. but. in the spring of 197?, the license had
:ztiil not been granted. Efforts were made by the company as well as at
[EOVPTH'IPHL leve‘. to expedite the processing of the license at the license-
ggranrinr, authority of the ”.5. Department of Comerce. The license still
uiid not arrive.

in the fall o:‘ 1077. the matter had become critical. It the license was
not, granted noon, the delivery could not take place in time. and the
system contracted for would thus not be in operation in time for the
Olympic Games in Moscow in 1980. Even worse: Stansaab now began seriously
fearing that :t would not be possible at all to get the necessary license,
and that they. therefore. would not be able to deliver the system at all.
At Ssansaab. the various scenarios were analysed (including the economic

consequences):
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a 1i censv nt all--with the result that the entire deal would fall
:h.

limitml license, subject to conditions, with the result that only
.11‘ the system agreed upon could be delivered.

mt th-- components which the Americans regarded as militarily
live, and for which they would not grant a license, could be procured
mre.

:- s;tornr~- rooms of Stansaab, all of the equipent was meanwhile ready
:-.ipmr=nl. to the Soviet linion--and was accumulating interest and
vy bzn‘d-n on th-- liquidity.

r: Hoot-21:1: nl ‘::'hich Chief Executive Handed Over New Limited License
ration

stormy riveting oi‘ the board of directors of Stansaab on 15 September

it appeared that Gunnar Wedell. chief executive. in July of the same
had handed in a new and limited license application. In this applica-
the. to thr Americans, sensitive master radar statiomin ACC (Area

01 Center) with several functions had been omitted.

inform! -.o:; was “men by Gunnar Wedell. chief executive, in answer to
act queenon from the representative of Saab on the board. Pehr Lager-
n'; tho: '.in:;r~ chic-f executive of Saab-Scania). The reply had the effect
Lagern'mn rvmslered his dissent in the minutes of the handling of this
<- license uMlc—r.‘ He pointed out that the chief executive did not

r. the board that certain functions had been omitted from the license
cation, and tho! the board had not approved the action taken by the
executivu.

nuormr. m-nt on to point out that the limited scope. of the license
cation mum involve limitations in the performance of the aircraft
nl system, and that this was 'a departure froe the agreement made
the Russian cur-ton or.‘

or four l'nnrr: rrnmt-ers, among them Viggo 'vlsntml (also of Saab-Scania).
(-d out, nccnrdinn to the minutes. that it, also to them, was news

'Lhe lir-‘nso application had been changed. as far as the scope of the
ory was concerned.’

or. the :i'mtion was much more serious than from what appears directly
lhv abovc--i' was: a question of limitations of the scope and perform-
of th-- :xircz-uf': control system. jeopardizing the entire deal. This

m Gunnnr Modell. chief executive, had made cuts in the license applica-
.-o ‘.hoI the syn-ten quite simply would not function when installed in
oviel. l'nfcn!

van if the Russians. contrary to any reasonable expectation. would
t on air-era re. control system which did not work. the situation would
be critical. The completed equipment in the storage rooms was now
24 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only partly covered by the license application--and would then have to
be rebuilt.

The new license application of the chief executive was granted by the
United States on 10 October 19??--but this fact ought not to have given
rise to too much happiness within Stansaab.

5h» [M investigator, Hagnus Lemmel. as well as several independent ex-
perts confirm that an aircraft control system within the framework of
the new license would not have functioned in the Soviet Union.

However. according to Lennart Lubeck, at the time. a member of the board
of Stansaah (later on also of Datasaab) as well as division chief within
the Ministry of Industry. the system would. 'of course. have functioned'
even if Stannaah had stuck to this license. According to Lubeck, it was
merely a question of a 'more or less elegant solution.‘

but this in hot the truth, as will be seen from the following facts:

The Russian domestic aircraft (BO-#0 percent of the air traffic) carry
no transponders. And, in order to guide aircraft which lack such equip-
ment, both primary radar and the extractor for it are needed.

Lennart Lubeck admits that it was'crystol clear‘that the extractors were
omitted both in the application and in the license subsequently granted.

Why does Lennart Luheck then claim that the system would still have been
arle to function. a claim that is so easily refuted? He probably does
nol want to admit that the breach of license became a fact as soon as
Stansnnh started delivering the equipment in the late fall of 1977.

it must be difficult to make anybody believe than a company delivers--
and that thw customer nccepts—-a commodity which will not work. Two
possibiliticr tLvn remain:

(1) Neither Sinnranb nor the Soviet Union understood that a delivery
in accordanc~ w? h the license granted would result in a system which
would not mark under Russian conditions.

(“l Stnnﬁnnliznlendcd (and informed the Russian customer accordingly)
to deliver n workinu ny:'ea—-evcn if it did not have the license for
:..c.h u syntr-m.

(a

Ruling: “ndnr awediﬂh law, Board Bears Ultimate Responsibility

The fire: on" of these alternatives ought to be discarded because of
its nhsnrdjly--nnd that is also what happened. Then remains only
nluuumciw-Immhcrtwo.

It is more difflCJlL to ascertain with whom within the company and/or on
the owner sidr (Shah-Scania and the state) the responsibility rests.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Minister of Industry Nils G. lsling has publicly pointed out that, under
Swedish law, the board has the ultimate responsibility for the actions
of the company-—that is formally correct. But, in the present case,
this is less interesting seeing that it is not a question of a viola-
tion of Swedish law. It is more relevant to point out the political
responsibility connected with the state-owned enterprise.

As far as the board is concerned, it is quite clear that the license
question was a matter for the board to decide. The matter was, indeed.
dealt with intensively at one meeting after the other.

It has not been possible to find any proof or signs that the board
delegated the license matter to somebody further down in the company.

0n the contrary, there are indications as well as clear proof that the
question was delegated to people higher up--and. first and foremost, to
the state owner side.

At the stormy meeting of the board on 15 September 107?, a letter was
drafted to the Minister of Industry, Nils G. Ksling. The idea was that
the letter was to be signed by the chairman of the board, Arne Callans.
chief executive of the Investment Bank. The letter explained that the
license requested had not yet been granted by the Americans 'on account
of special circumstances.‘ Stansaab, therefore, was faced with 'big
problems.‘ And if the license (it was here a question of the original
license application and not the one that had been cut) was not granted.
the board would have two alternatives only:

(l)'breaking the delivery agreement with the Russians;

(P) delivering without a license or exchanging the components
which were sutject to license.'

The latter alternative aimed at the possibility, if at all, of replacing
from elsewhere the vital components and the software which the Americans
did not want to let the Soviet Union have.

The letter concluded with the statement that 'both alternatives go beyond
what lies within the field of responsibility of the board.‘ The board,
therefore, censidered itself ‘preventcd from taking a decision without
having beforehand obtained the government's views in the matter.‘

However, the letter never reached the Ministry of Industry--the explana-
tion being that it was never signed, nor mailed.

A reason why the letter was not sent was that the alternative possibility
of exchanging the 'sensitive' components had been left out.

in this situation, the only thing left for Stansaab was to back out of the
entire deal of 3P0 million kroner, take the losses from the equipment
ready for delivery and pay damages to the customer for breach of delivery

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unless the license was granted 'within the near future' (according to the
board's own letter).

But. at the same time. all reasonable hopes of a license which would cover
the delivery in question had already been eliminated. This was brought on
by the company itself. At the same board meeting. the chief executive had
revealed that he had changed the license application so that it no longer
comprised a system that would function.

According to the minutes of the board. changing the license application so
that it would cover the delivery contracted for was never discussed. And
it was hardly to he hoped that the reluctant U.S. licensing authorities.

on their own. would extend the license beyond the scope of the application.

Stnnnaah Discussed wilful Breach of Embargo

If the board did not deliberately consider breaking the U.S. embargo. the
only thing left for it to do would be to let the whole deal fall through.
however. an intentional breach of the embargo was discussed by the board:

And it was not a question of a matter which could be quickly decided upon.

Several alternative actions were discussed by the board. “hat was proposed
as the most expedient way by the chief executive was to start shipping

the completed equipment without license--officially calling it a 'loan'

to the Russians until a license. if possible. could be arranged later on.

The chief executive thus suggested that the board commit an absolutely
clear breach of the embargo by referring to the delivery as a 'loan.'

The board did not. on 15 September 197?, jump at the proposal by the chief
executive. which indicates a certain instinct of self-preservation. But
it is equally interesting that the board did not unanimously and flatly
reject the proposal. According to the minutes. only two persons commented
on the proposal.

Lennart Luheck stated that the procedure would have 'extensive commercial
policy and diplomatic consequences.‘ and that the board. therefore. would
have to await an answer in the license question.

Costa anerberg stated that the political risks involved were considerable.
'for which reason the hoard ought to contact the government in the matter.’

According to the minutes. after having discussed the matter. the board did
arroe to 'writn the government. explaining the serious situation of Stansaab
and making it clear that the company can no longer await an answer in the
license question without serious economic consequences.‘

However. one thing the board could not agree upon was the formulation of 'the
letter to the novernment.‘ For that reason. it was decided to convene

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nu -xtrnordinary board meeting 'the following Sunday at 10 a.m.'--provided

the 'ordinary members or the board do not by then agree on the formulation
of the letter.‘

Callans and Soder unv» big Blanks in Their Memories in an 'Important' Question

1hr opinions were thus divided as to what the board should tell and/or re-
queet of the minister of industry and the government.

The fact that thv matter was to be discussed only by the ordinary members

of the board, and that they were also to try to arrive at a decision outside
of the board room is, however. a clear indication that it was a question of
very sensitive isnurn about which the members did not want to have anything
wrilten in the nznuins.

The extraordinary meeting of the board the 'following Sunday' never did
takn p1ace—-and the ordinary board members thus clearly agreed on the
forTHluLion of the letter to the minister of industry/government at an in-
formal'mnnting a' Stan: which was not recorded in the minutes.

Arne Cnilans says that he cannot recall what decision was made--nor what the
letter to the government contained.

Guuuar Seder, then under-secretary of the Ministry of Industry, recalls that
the license issue was brought up at that time by Stansaab in the ministry.
He says that he rumerbers that his colleague in the department, Lennart
Lubvck. participated 1n the discussion. and that they were discussing legal
aspects of the license issue. However, Gunnar Seder does not recall any
details, nor wha' decision was made.

Thu mutter was brnnnht up in the Ministrv of Industry not just in response

to tne 'requnﬂt' from the board but also in another way. then. on 10 October
1‘77. the Americans approvud the limited license application. a number of
renuircncnts worn wade of the Ministry of Industry and the government.

Our of the Americnn conditions (entered in the minutes at the board meeting

or Stnnsnnb on 1? Octorer 1977) was a'written assurance that the limitations
contained in the rresent application compared with the original application wil
be observed both on the part of Stansaab and the Ministry of Industry.’

Under-secretary Robert Nilsson (whosunoeedadGunnar Soder in the Ministry of

Industry in the fall of 1077) states that he 'did not understand' that the
above conditions were made.

Roivrt ﬁilsson, however, remembers another license condition directed to the
Ministry ct Induulry/novernment: "We were to be prepared to send reports from
the company to the Anericunu--unless the company chose to send them directly.’

Accorning to this, the hinistry of Industry was thus to act as some kind of
pnmivn mail-box. But that was, of course, not the case. On behalf of the

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rovrrnrent, tho Ministry of Industry was actually to guarantee that
Stansnab would, at least every 6 months, report to the United States on
the detiverien made Lo the Soviet Union. The purpose was to see to it
that Stansnnh would not violate the license regulations. Gunnar Seder
confirms that this was the condition. and that the government undertook
such responsibility to guarantee compliance with the license regulations.

License Breach Applied in Practice to Entire System Package

However, the reporting from Stansaab did not take place as agreed upon,
and the governmen' failed to live up to its guarantee. As explained in
the 1H3 report, among other places. Stansaab thus violated the license re-
gulations. And, as shown above, the violation of the license regulations
took place continuously from the start of the deliveries in the winter of
1'?" until they were completed in 1979. The violation of the license
regulations did not only involve the so-called circuit board but. in
practice. the entire hystem package.‘

Hans Herthen. chairmen of the board of the new Datasaab from 1978. has ex-
plained on several occasions that he did not have the least knowledge of
the Iiccnse breach. however. it seems undeniably strange that the question
of an additional LiCcnnc to cover the deliveries that were taking place

was not followed up by the new Datasaab board. They thus did not even
submit an application:

A question which remninito he answered is:

Did the new ihtnsnah board not read at least the minutes for the last 6
nonthr of the Inard of Stansanh?

And finally:

thy did the Hinis=ry of Industry not fulfill its commitment concerning the
reporting on the deliveries.

Saves H Years of nhﬁPHPCh and Dnvelopment Efforts

th' kind of rz'Lrnry damage has the Datasaah affair caused the United State:
ihe Anoricanr are. at ehe very present, looking into the Swedish violation.
Nohoey within :L+ Department of Commerce in Washington wants to comment on
”:33; antil the report i:' ready.

A: the rrcent visit On Sweden by 7.5. Minister of Defense Caspar Ueinherger.
accordinn ‘o "hnt VBCKANS AFTARER has learnt. the following criticism. among
o'her 'hings. of the SVvdinh licensing violation was made:

1h» Sovieé Union hns snved 5 years of research and development efforts.

It will cost the "nited States hundreds of millions of dollars' to adopt
courtermcauuren in the form of modifications of the American weapons systems

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dntnuunb (and the new owner LHE) maintain that the infringement of the re-
gulntions of the export license has not made it easier to use the aircraft
control system supplied for military purposes. But this is being con-
tradicted by military experts.

"An aircraft control system which includes primary radar extractors may be
used for military purposes as well," says Lieutenant-Colonel 01a Lindgren
of the Swedish Air Staff, Stockholm.

Has the Soviet Union then really saved 5 years of research and development?

"The Russians are good at letting the West do the basic research for them
in order, subsequently, to handle the application themselves. That,
certainly, applies in this case," says 01a Lindgren.

Hilitnrily, the major pain to the Soviet Union would be an increased ability
to process uickly in computers information from military radar stations.

By means of the extractor technology, which 'sorts out' and expedites the
transfer of information from radar stations, it becomes possible to process
observations rapidly in computers. The Soviet Union may thus be in a
penition to takn faster and moretifective countermeasures against attacking
missiles and aircraft, military experts state.

Extractor--Hraiu of Aircraft Control System

The so—cniled vxtrnctorn delivered by Datasaab to the Soviet Union without
a license are part of the very brain of the aircraft control system. They
eliminate interfering information from the radar stations and pass on
(extract) useful information to the computers in the aircraft control tower.
Without the extractors, the aircraft control system of Datasaab would not
have functioned in the Soviet Union. This is explained by the fact that
i)-““ percent of the air traffic (domestic aircraft) lack the so-called
transponder. To guide aircraft without transponder, both primary radar and
extractor are needed. Aircraft with transponder (informing the aircraft
control personnvl or flight, course, altitude, speed, etc.) may, however,
be guided by means of secondary radar only.

"Without the extractor, the aircraft control personnel only gets radar in~
formation which cannot be processed in computers," says Lieutenant-Colonel
Ola Lindgren, radar expert of the Swedish Air Staff. "It would be like
mixing the data technology of the forties with that of the eighties."

An expert at the Defense Materiel Administration of Sweden (who prefers to
remain anonymOus) says: "The only information one would get without ex-
tractor is a poor primary echo from the aircraft which lack transponder--
and this could not have.been used for traffic control. All of the aircraft
control personnel would, without the extractor, have to sit out at the
primary radar stations."

Dntasaab would thus not have been able to deliver an aircraft control
system that would work to the Soviet Union if the company had wanted to

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stay within the framework of the license. It is not likely that the Soviet
Union would have accepted getting an aircraft control system which would
guide only 50-?C percent of the air traffic.

   

Icnnart Lubeck: Arne Callans:
Reduces value of Does not recall
the extractors Asling'e reply

 

Gunnar Wedell: Robert Nilsson:
Contemplated Did not understand
'uillful' breach U.S. conditions?

of license

comzcn'rz Ahlun & Akerlunds tryckericr, Stockholm 1981

7%?
C50: 3109/35

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CRITICIZES DATASAAB IN TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER CASE

NS APPARER m Swedish 1? Nov 81 p 29

On nrcount of batnsaab's handling of the license case,
nd the Swedish trades and industries are still in a
»Zannnnt position. To put it bluntly, we have been
-ee-hnnded--ard are now left painfully exposed. The
sun that we can do in this situation is continuing to
hninc innocent.

violation of the license regulations, Datasaob has saved
in H years of militarily important research and development
t will cost the United States hundreds of millions of

LP ropmir the damage through improvements of its own

:. This claim was made from the American side during
-fense Caspar Heinherger's official visit to Sweden

urnl that the United States. in describing the consequences

3 thn 'culprit' will tend to exaggerate the matter to some

ens like this. one should, for example. also ask oneself

lhv trend of public opinion at home may play in acquiring

for defence purposes. For equally natural reasons. tho

-den in the opposite--toward playing down and underestimating
=3 or Sinnsnab/Datassab'e ascertained violation of the license

2 thumb that 'the truth' lies somewhere in between the two
2 is often the case. probably also in this case the most
exsnent. ‘his 'truth' is. however. not a good basis for
luatr the consequences of the violation of the license re-
IF Swedish-American trade relations and to the transfer of
:h in important to the Swedish trades and industries. These
“e inntead determined. to a considerablh extent, by the way
:ited States. in its own interest. chooses to interpret the
”J19.
32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.hn' this interpretation will he remains still to be seen--and trying to
~vnlnnte the commercial policy consequences may, therefore, for the present,
Imount ro speculations only.

iowevcr, it is fully clear that. on account of the actions of Datseaab,
:wudnn and the Swedish trades and industries have got into a very unpleasant
ziiuntion. To put it bluntly, we have been caught red-handed--and we are
:cw loft painfully exposed.

the worr' thing for an to do in this situation would be to continue to
prcinnd being innocent. to make transparent excuses. to try to wriggle
out of if.

“.r 'Hir is what 1n 51::1 gozng on.

it» rirkr involan--nnd 'he foolhardiness of it--are the greater seeing
Phn' .w'n:mab wnn pnr:!y owned by the state, and the Swedish government
IrvrrPrthPd h; 'hc Hinisrry of Industry). moreover, had undertaken the
rsrpor":hili:y or a guarantee to the United States . the purpose of which
war to prevvn! on? breach of license on the part of the company.

Thr cwnrnnrec fro? the government--to see to it that continuous delivery
rnport; from Detasnab be submitted to the licensing authority of the
1.5. inpnrtmeti or Ccumorcc--seems not to have worked at all. The re-
rcriinn from the company did not take p1ace--and the government did not
re; an: attention.
or IW77, the chief executive of Stansaab. in the presence
.ative on the board of the Ministry of Industry, proposed
rnse as the most appropriate of different alternative

rnce of the representative on the board of the Ministry of
:icf executive admitted having limited the license applica-
esult that the application did not even cover the deal

entirely impossible to continue summing up the case.
:Rht tc he sufficient to show that the Ministry of Industry,

>ut a doubt, must have been aware of the fact that the

\s a matter on which one would be liable to burn one's
'helvnn. they did not bother to check whether the company,
rcen- by the state. was handling the matter correctly.
Ier, failed to fulfill their own license condition--their
port to the United States on deliveries effected.

~ explanation has been produced. the Ministry of Industry--
s chief officials--will. against the background of the

s suspected. for good reason, of directly or indirectly
Violation of the license by Stansaab.

ntions also have to be directed to the board of Stansaab
he hoard under the chairmanship of Hans Werthen in the
/Datasnah.

n lmard minutes and interviewing a number, in several
reluctant. persons, VECKANS AFFARER has been able to

he course of less than a week, that Stansaah/Datasaab. under

ens" vhich the company itself had requested, simply was

on to provide the Soviet Union with a reasonably fUnctioning

1 system. And that the breach of license thus was a reality

deliveries started in accordance with the Russian contract.

the explanation why the board of Stansaab, which devoted
n? of time and so many efforts to the license question,
r this?

reasonable explanation for the fact that the new Datasaab
en discover the matter once rumors started circulating

1nd that the chief executive of Stansaab and. later on,
five of Datasaab, around the turn of the year 1977/78.
ton for discussions with the “.5. licensing authority.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He is said to have returned with the message that the Americans had now
cnugh: on and were ready to grant an additional license for the militarily
sensitive equipment which they previously. for a couple of years. had
stubbornly refused to approve for delivery to the Soviet Union.

Against the background of the said person's previous actions in the
licensing question at Stensaab (where, to the board. he proposed, among
other things. a deliberate violation of the license regulations). this
information cannot relieve the board of Datasaab of its responsibility.

corvamn'r: Ahlen & Aker’lunds tryckerier Stockholm 1981

'l'\ .-
'1

I:

cso: 3409/3" END

35

FOR CFFICIAL USE ONLY