APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00060R0001 0001 0080-0

1979 I I I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010036-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8229
17 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010038-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIWS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is reconsended that the JPRS number. title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Intonation Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. ".8. Government Printing Office, Hashington, 0.0.
201.02.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author. personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 6. llowell, Old
Hensfield Road. Rooster. Ohio, 1.4691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North clebe Road, Arl ington, Virginia 22201.
enouocaarmc om L Net-on No. 3. Recipient’s mm... No.
ms was _—
. I! Q

. 'epm are

17 Janua 1979

0. Pecloming ole-ism” kept.

a "CI

   
 
 
   
     
      
   
 
   
   

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE. (P000 6/79)

No.
l0. Pvelert/Tealx/I'eci UM No.

II. Cesium/Gnu No.
I). Ty ol Re I e Pedal
Cogent! PO!

 

 
 

. Paloma-g (Mammalian Name and Adana
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

n. Spenaoclag Ovaeeiauloa Name and Address

As above

IS. Sunkmeuuy Notes

       
       

Ahameu

The serial report contains political/economic information on west European
energy. finance and trade policy matters as well as developments end trends
in the doctrine, programs and problems of the major communist parties,
including their relations with commiat parties outside the Heat European
area. '

  

. Key I'otda and Document Analys-a. e- Deampreu

Political Science _International Affairs _Lmenbourg
Sociology _Austria _Netherlands
Propaganda _Belgiun _Norvay
Economics _0anada _Portugal
Energy _Cyprus _§_ Spain
Industry _Lbenmark LSueden
Trade _Ll-‘inland _Swirzerland
Finance _xjrence _Turkey
_Greece _United Kingdom
m. Hamilton/0” v-Eaded rum _Icelnnd _X__Heat Germany

_xﬂltaly

m. COSA‘I’IFieI-llova 5c, 51), 10

For Official Use Only. . cm) e . 61
Linited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. m I

some tuna.» umv. aoun 1’35 FOR" MAY BE REPRODUCED vacant-0e mesa-”a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/8229
17 January

TRANSLATIONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE
(9000 6/79)

Comm

DENMARK

Oil Consortium to Quadruple Production
(VECWS MAKER, 30 NOV 78)....-see-oeeeooooesoeooeeoeee

FINLAND

'rrede lesnce, Inflation Pictures Improve
(vecms ”PM“. 30 “V 78)....00'OOOOOOOOOOOII0.0000IOO

FRANCE

Francois-Poncet‘ s Pleas for Z’oreign Minis try liintod
(“aha 6000‘: YARI: “Am. 15 Dec 78)eeeoeeoeoeesseoseee

Senate Adopts 1979 Civil Aviation Budget
(AIR ‘ cows. 9 Dec 78)eeeooeeeeseseeeooooeeeoeeooooeoss

lntre-Psrty Reconciliation Attupts Described
(Andre Lesueur; VALBURS AGNELLBS, 18 Dec 78)............

Leftist Stake in Larzsc (2st Expansion Noted
(P. ll. Hansen-Cute: VALEIIRS ACTUBLLBS, 18 Dec 78).......

Briefs
Vietnamese Pressure French
Kerguelen Islands Reinforce-en:
Conunists Lose Jobs

nut

00. P01, P81 Youth lbvanent Lenders on Future Politics
(Lsnfreuco Veccsri; L'EUROPBO, 1 Dec 78).................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

reeks, Reeponeibility of Civil Defence Planning Diecueeed
(P..quu. Dt mco; RIVISTA “1191“”. Jul-Aug 78)e ee ee

SPAIN

Deeocrecy in ”CD: Power Struggle in Leadership
(MID 16' s ”V 78)...0IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'0...

Briefs
Security Secretariat

SWEDEN

Exporte Rice Continuee; 1979 Seen as Even Better Year
(VECKANS AFPARBR. 7 Dec 78)...........................

NEST GERMANY

Soviet Economic Activities in PRC Detailed
(Juergen Knrrh; STERN, 9 Nov 78)......................

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

26

b1

48

69

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DENMARK

OIL CONSORTIUM T0 QUADRUPLE PRODUCTION
Stockholm VECKANS APPARBR in Swedish 30 Nov 78 p 00

[Text] Copenhagen--The Danish Underground Consortium (DUO) will quad-
ruple its production of oil in the Danish part of the North Sea. The
firm wants to invest close to 1 billion kroncr in the Corn field which

is expected to produce between 1.5 and 2 billion [as written] tons of oil
a year. This would cover a good 10 percent of Danish oil consumption
which lies around 15 million tons. So far DUC has extracted oil from

the Dan field alone where production is around 0.5 million tons or 3 per-
cent uf Danish consumption.

In early December 20 Danish and foreign companies will bid for production
rights at the Conn field (no Swedish company is among them). It is prob-
able that several companies will join forces for this billion-kroner
project. Director Nogens Rorvig of 000 estimates that the field could

go into production by 1981.

The Corn field could be a very short-term oil project. since the rock
there is very hard to penetrate. At worst the oil field could be emptied
out after only 1 or 2 years.

The Danish Underground Consortium hea sole rights to oil extraction on

Danish territory. The firm was founded by the A. P. Holler shipping con-
cern which also owns 30 percent of DUO. The rest of the company is owned
by a number of big international oil companies.

Since 1962 DUO has invested 1.4 billion kroner in drilling, production
equipment, etc. Last year the Dan field produced revenues of 225 mil-

lion kroner but it will take another 6 or 5 years before the oil field
has paid for its costs.

COPYRIGHT: Ahlens 6 Akerlunds Tryckerier, Stockholm, 1978

6578
680: 3109

FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FINLAND

TRADE BALANCE, INFLATION PICTURES IlDllOVB
Stockholm VBCKANS APPARER in Swedish 30 Nov 78 p 7

[Text] Finland has finally come to grips with its
difficult balance of peyments problem and its equally
difficult inflation problem. But the price is an
unemployment figure approaching 200.000.

According to goyernment forecasts Finnish unemployment could rise to

200,000 in the beginning of 1979. 1111s corresponds to between 8 and
9 percent of the total labor force. And there are few new jobs. In

September 163,000 people were out of work in Finland but there were only
5000 jobs available.

This high unemployment is the price they are paying for an improved
balance of payments and a moderation of inflation. There has been real

progress in these areas.

The very big deficits in the balance of payments in recent years (8 per-
cent of GNP) have been eliminated and this year there will be a surplus
for the first time since 1969.

The battle with inflation has been more successful than it has been in
Sweden. And Finland has had one of the highest inflation rates in the
OECD consnunity since the oil crisis but in September consumer prices
were only 6 percent higher than they were in the same period the year
before.

It is unlikely that there will be any great improvements next yeer
either in the balance of trade or in inflation.

Naturally it was not possible to allow unemployment to continue to rise.
Therefore economic policy has been increasingly expansive since the
middle of last year. '

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100010036-0

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

when the trade balance lm

(Trade balance d
billions of Flm

and the lnflatlon rate dm

whlle unemployment rim

(Annual consumer
Percentage of or

growth starts to recover.

(Gross Natlonal F
Percentage of an
change)

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010036-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pour programs to stimulate the economy have been presented -- in June

and December 1977 and in March and August 1978. These programs heVe been
supplemented with an easing of the credit market and doveiuations, most
recently an 8 percent devaluation in February.

The stimulating measures have been directed toward creating new jobs
without upsetting the improved external and internal balance. For this
reason it is primarily public consumption that has been expanded -- in
3 years it has increased 16 percent (see table below).

Of course an effort has also been made to strengthen private investments.
These have declined almost 20 percent in 3 years. Industrial investment
volume has declined 35 percent. To date investment stimuli have had
little success. But a decent increase is expected for next year.
According to industry's own research institute (ETLA [expansion unknown])
the increase could be as large as 15 percent for industry.

Volume Changes in Percentages

Private consumption - 1.0 1
Public consumption 15.9 3
Private investments -19.2 2

" " (industry)-35.b 15
Public investments - 7.0 2
Product exports 37.6 a
Product imports -15.0 3.5
Gross National Product 3.2 3

Exports Up 40 Percent in 3 Years

However the increase in industrial investments has more to do with sales
increases than with economic policy stimuli. To date only export market
demand has risen. Domestic demand has declined sharply.

Actually the recovery in Finnish exports has been remarkably rapid. In
1975 and i975 export volume declined 15 percent and Finnish export firms
lost 17 percent of their share of foreign markets. In the 3 years up to
and including 1978 export volume has increased between 35 and #0 percent
and the share of foreign markets has grown by over 20 percent.

The rapid growth period for exports is over, at least for the time being.

Both the government and ETLA are counting on a volume increase of 6-5 per-
cent next year, more or less corresponding to market growth.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[upland dcnwnllc donmnd must he atlunlnlod. It Is hoped of course thnt
buulnvnu Inveulmrnln will plch up. “ul households loo wlli sec eone
rise in tholr standard of llvlng after 3 very lean yeara. however this
will be limited to between 1 and 1.5 percent.

However that will not be enough to improve the employment situation.
Unemployment will increase a little more next year. In the last 3 or b
years the number of people employed in Finland has declined by around
150,000.

COPYRIGHT: Ahlene a Akerlunde Tryckerier. Stockholm, 1978

6578
C50: 3109

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UPPNHAI. "SI-2 ONLY

FRANCE

PMNCOIS-PONCET‘S PLANS FOR FOREIGN MINISTRY RINTBD
Paris PARIS MATCH in French 15 Doc 78 p 122
[Article by Michel Gonod]

[Text] People are already getting worried on the Quai d'Orsay and in the em-
bassies. Scarcely had Jean Francois-Poncet closed the door on Louis de
Guiringaud, his predecessor, when he announced: "I want to make a modern
and effective tool of the Quai d'Orsay," which clearly means that up to that
moment it had not been either the one or the other. In the Ministry of On-
derstatement what Jean Prancois-Poncet meant was iumediately understood.
People are already playing the cruel game of forecasting: which will be the
heads to roll at the time of the inevitable smbassadors' waltz? "J.f.p."
has not shown up with ideas of settling accounts, however. lie is above all
the president's man and this mission was given him from above. It seems a
praiseworthy ambition that Giacsrd should seek to renovate a ministry by-
passed by events long ego. If anyone should be astonished by anything it
would rather be that this reform has been delayed for so long. Michel Debre,
10 years ago, had suggested a housecleaning. A report had been published,
the "Racine Report," from the name of its author, a state counsellor. how-
ever, it was quickly filed in the category of bothersome documents and for-
gotten. After Debre, under the last de Geulle government, it was the turn
of Michel Jobert to attempt the operation. he also was the president's man,
he also had been secretary general of the Elysee Palace. Unfortunately,
Georges Pompidou was sick and no longer had strength enough to impose reforms.
This one was forgotten.

that criticisms are made of the Quai d'Orsay? Its slowness, its timidity,
its outworn methods, in short what is called "teacup diplomacy." Anecdotes
abound illustrating the "old-fashioned" style of our diplomats. To give just
one example, remember France's representative in Chad, authorised to meet
Francoise Claustre, who had been held for months by the ‘l‘oubous and robbed
of everything. Remember what he took to the prisoner: a rose!

The reform that Jean Francois-Poncet wants to carry out involves men as well
as means. He has the ambition to give more importance to our consulates so

that French people abroad can receive decent treat-ant. he will also take up

6
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the problem of trade relations with foreign countries. Jean-Francois Deniau,
the minister of foreign trade, has observed in his travels the quality of the
foreign cosmercial attaches. For example, the Germans put industrialists in
those positions, men from the private sector. and no longer diplomats as we
French still do. Too many contracts within our possibilities have passed us
by in the recent past because of our lack of qualified representatives.

On paper, "J.f.p." has all the qualifications for success in this "reorganiza-
tion and renovation activity." He has a great name: his father, Andre
Prancois-Poncet, was a member of the Academy and ambassador to Berlin during
the Hitler era and to Rome during the regime of Mussolini. lie made a good
marriage: his wife, Marie-Theresa de Hitry, is a granddaughter of Handel.
He made a brilliant record in his studies: doctor of sciences, licentiate
in law, major in the RNA [National School of Administration], a Harvard di-
ploma. Furthermore he is a good skier, he plays golf, he is elegant in his
appearance and finally he is a career diplomat. However, he has never been
an outstanding member of that closed club which is the Quai d'Orsay. he has
not succeeded. He has never had a higher rank than that of first counsellor
of the Embassy in ‘l'eheran. The cause of this is politics, because "J.f.p."
is also a politician. Bis diplomatic career has suffered from it. lb was
at that time a centrist belonging to the opposition and he was an anti-
Gaullist and European candidate in the legislative elections of 1967 and
1968. That cost him the position of ambassador to Madrid and led him to
leave the diplomatic service and go mark time as a private citizen.

It was in Lot-et-Garonne, where he was a general councilman for 11 years,
that Francois-Poncet made his political career. In May 1978 he waI. elected
president of the General Council thanks to the votes of the Left Radicals.
Giscard appreciated this: it was the choice that he was dreaming about for
all of France, in other words a halt to political contracts, perhaps a new
majority, almost social democracy. of course, the Left Radicals who elected
"J.f.p." are not ferocious opponents. They are radicals of the "Cassoulet
tendency," the tendency of Felix Gaillsrd, Maurice Paure, Pierre brousse or
llenri Caillavet. th mince words? This is the famous center-left toward
which Giscard would like to pull the majority. Compliments have been rain-
ing down onto the new minister since his appointment. Even Michel Rocard
went to see him on his own account with the confidence that "France was go-
ing to have the best foreign minister in the history of the Fifth Republic
in Jena Francois-Poncet!" Oh, shocks!

COPYRIGHT: 1978 by Cogediprease SA

12, 116
C50: 3100

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

SENATE ADOPTS 1979 CIVIL AVIATION BUDGET
Paris AIR A COSMOS in French 9 Dec 78 pp 13, “8

[Unattributed Article: “The Senate Has Adopted the 1979 Civil
Aviation Budget“]

[Text] At its Friday 1 December 1978 session, the Senate adop-
ted by a vote of 180 to 102 the comprehensive estimates of
Titles III and IV of the civil aviation budget for 1979 and by
a vote or 185 to 90 the comprehensive estimates of Titles V and
VI of the same budget.

In the course or the deliberations, all the major questions
being asked in France with respect to air transport, aircraft
construction, airport infrastructures, air navigation and re-
gional air transport were reviewed by both majority and opposi-
tion senators, while the minister tried to answer most of the
questioners. In general, the interest of the Senate debates on
the 1979 civil aviation budget was much keener than that aroused
by the discussion of the same budget in the National Assembly
on last 9 November (See AIR A COSHOS, No. 7&0).

we present below some of the chief topics discussed during the
_examination of this budget:

Air Transport: It is in a state of complete change, observed
Hr Marcel Portier, a special reporting secretary. The deregu-
lation policy of President Carter is forcing the companies to
change their approach: they were made to adapt their strategy
to a situation marked by a new increase in the number of pas-
ssngsrs transported and by a decrease in unit receipts, and this
change necessitated an increase in productivity. within that
context, the general situation of Air France seems to be satis-
factory, since, oxcept for the Concorde--tor which the working
deficit will be on the order of 3&0 million francs, according
to the reporting secretary-o'ths subsonic sector is holding
steady.“ That being the case, Mr Fortier noted that “The cost-

8

POR.OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

price scale used by Air France is higher than that, not only of
Third world companisso-which is to be expected-vbut also of
many of its European competitors."

On the same topic, Hr Legrand, reporter-advisor for the Commis-
sion for Economic Affairs, believes that “At a time when the
international competition is fierce, the attitude of the flight
personnel engaged in piloting the Boeing 737s in teams of two or
three is all the less defensible in light of the fact that the
latter are well paid, and that supplementary efforts are re-
quired of the ground personnel.

Transportation on Request: Senator Fortier took the occasion

to praise as an interesting initiative the establishment of
“Charter Funds“ created Jointly by Air Charter International,
Europe Acre-Service and Euralair, to exploit a potential market
too frequently snatched away by foreign airlines; and he re-
marked on this subject that “The major third-level companies
possessing equipment that can be used for this type of transport
(Caravslles, F-28s and F-27s) would also be desirous of availing
themselves of these funds."

Regional Airlines: "Have these airlines made an effort,” asked
Senator Bernard Legrand, “to calculate the amortization costs,
in the case ofoan all-weather facility, for the equipment capa-
ble of supporting it? Have they taken into account the loss of
passengers already booked as a result of departure delays or
numerous flight cancellations because of fog?“ If one under-
stands the desire of local groups to affect air connections with
Paris, and to that end to see to it that airlines are given guar-
antees of air traffic, which in fact amount to subsidies, are
these companies not satisfied with the knowledge that their los-
ses are definitively being absorbed by the local residents in-
volved?

0n the same topic, Hr Portier sees the appearance of a “fourth
level' in France. He means the small companies with capital, in
which the chambers of commerce participate and which, with airb
craft capacity smaller than or equal to that of aircraft at the
bottom of the scale of third-level companies, are opening routes
which the latter do not consider profitable to serve, but which
local residents deem indispensable in freeing them from their
present isolation. ”It goes without saying that no form of Gov-
ernment aid could be granted except in full possession of the
facts: that is, the companies must provide the administration
with all the information needed to evaluate the strict propriety
of their current operaticns.‘

The minister of transportation then stated that his department
is ready to tend its services to give rights for six years,

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and not annual rights, to any corporation whose financial struc-
ture is solid. "In fact," he reaffinmed, "the rights are pres-

ently being given for three years and attended from year to year
if the airline is giving good service.“

Air Navigation: On this subject, of quite recent interest, most
of the senators were much more aggressive and even trenchant,
concerning the Government's role than their colleagues in the
National Assembly had been several weeks before.

Mr Fortier believes that it would be desirable to organize a
tight coordination between the various European control centers,
and that it would be appropriate to rethink the design of air
space. He believes, after due consideration, that the creation
of a public organization which would have as its mandate to con-
trol French air traffic in its entirety would not resolve all
the problems, but that such a solution would at least have the
advantage of creating no further problems within the public sec-
tor. It would seem, however, continued Mr Fortier, that the
personnel is opposed to this out of fear of a takeover by private
control. “If one reflects,” declared the special reporting sec-
rotary,'%hat the air controller has a responsibility nearly as

weighty as that of the pilot, his salary seems to be minimal in-
deed.“

Hr Legrand, for his part, thinks that "The deliberations of a
commission mandated to inquire into this problem would contrib-
ute bits of information and new thinking which would help in
seeking out the agreement which will ultimately have to be made.
For nothing is worse than a conflict that simply disintegrates:
the bitterness of those who feel lack of understanding or frus-
tration carries within itself the seeds of further conflicts."

Hr Heric, armed with huge stacks of statistics and wage reports,
denounced the decrease in purchasing power suffered by air con-
trollers and noted that the latter simply wish to regain the
purchasing power they had in 1970. He also denounced the inad-
equacy of control equipment and noted that one of the objectives
of Plan VII, which was to increase the number of air control
units and to create new provincial control centers, would not be
attained. According to Mr Boucheny, the union organizations
ought to be believed whcn they say that about 1000 technical and
hOO administrative Jobs should be created.

Hr Le Theule, in reply, spoke more about control than ccnt‘ol-
lers. He reminded his hearers that, "Contrary to what is com-
monly believed, air space is not allotted 80 percent to military
and 20 percent to civilian air traffic needs. The unit surround-
ing the air space delegate has a goal of studying problems as
they arise and of making Joint regulations: and considerable
progress in this domain has been noted.“

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aircraft Construction: According to Mr Moric. current policy
would effectively result in making the Aerospace Agency “Just
get by," in that it would no longer be a source of ideas or a
provider of Jobs and would. on the short term, assume the role
of a eub-contractcr at the mercy of foreign powers. “A poor
little nationalized company," exclaimed the senator, "where the
servile functionary prevents others from taking risks and the
struggles of people are more frequent than the deoisicne of
industry.“

Mr Andre Merio stated that the socialist group considers that
“Our industrial system and that of Europe in general will soon
undergo difficult confrontations in which their very survival
is at state,” and that the Government program in civilian air
transportation “is gearing down to a point where our competi-
tors are gaining major advantages.” The socialist group con-
siders as urgent the construction of the Aozoo JET equipped
with era-56 engines, and it is seriously thinking of building
the Ball version of the Airbus (with four GEM-56 engines),
which would be able to play an important role in the market,
in remodelling thousands of Boeinge and DC-Be, which will be
more than 20 years old in 1981.

The A-ZOO JET project, declared Hr Le Theule, could be one of
the components of the Airbus family. Recalling for the Aero-
space Agency and especially for Airbus Industries the effects
of launching the B-lO version, the minister noted that the only
real problem was that of moving swiftly from a monthly produc-
tion of two to four and even six, aircraft in the course of the
next three or four yeare. '

COPYRIGHT: Air 6 Cosmos, Peris, 1978

8117
050: 3100

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

INTRA-PARIY RECONCILIATION ATTENPTS DESCRIBED
Paris VALBURS ACTUBLLES in French 18 Dec 78 pp 26-28
lrticle by Andre Lesueur: "Harchais' Brain Trust"]

[Text] The communist apparatus faces its intellectuals:
for an attempt at reconciliation. The contestants have
not been disarmed.

"Cultural revolution"--this is a strong term. A morning daily the other
Monday dared to use it in connection with the meeting organized at the Vitry.
for last Saturday and Sunday. between the communist intellectuals and the
Communist Party directorate.

This as a matter of fact is more than just an attempt at "recovery” of the
intellectuals by the communist leadership--intellectualr who have been
keeping the internal challenge going ever since the legirlative elections.
In their remarks. some people furthermore revealed that the most lucid among

those present had right away figured out the limited significance of this
meeting.

An outstanding cultural site had been picked: the huge auditorium of the
Jean-Vilar Theater. There was the usual decor of communist meetings: long
tables. soberly lined up opposite a podium on which the political bureau was
seated. But for this meeting there was a rather unaccustomed ceremonial
which quite visibly was intended to prepare an atmosphere of warmth and
reconciliation.

On Saturday. as a matter of fact. in a kind of parade of congratulations,
the political bureau members. one by one, began by shaking the hands of some
400 intellectuals present. It is true that the clever selection of parti-
cipants-peraonal invitations had been sent out-from the very beginning
kept any incorrigibles away. First of all, the entire team of the magazine
DIALECTIQUE. led by communists who are keeping the challenge going. And

Mr and Mrs Jean and Nina Kehaysn. guilty of having written, in their book
"Rue du proletaire rouge." some truths about Soviet society which the
authors of "L'URSS et nous" did not want to print.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The credibility of thie meeting however required that non be invited who
for the poet 9 nonthe had been inepiring criticiee within the Co-uniet
Petty. They include in perticuler the hietorian Jenn Blleinetein. the
philoeopher Louie Althueeer. end Mr Joan Bony, e journeliet with FRANCE
NOWBLLB. the Centrel Conittee‘e weekly end author or one of the dieputed
bonke entitled ”‘l‘rente ene de eilitentieee; un conuniete e'interroge."

hr Althueeer did not reepond to the invitation. But at Vitry. on 9 end 10
December. one could obeerve the preeence of non who ueuelly ere hie epokee-
een in the Conuniet Party, euch ee Heeere Georgee Lebice end Etienne
Belibar, both of when ere philoeophy profeeeore.

At the beginning there wee a "briefing" by Mr Georgee Harchaie. a ter-
choeen in preference over "introductory report" eo ee to underecore the
internel cherecter of the neeting end the deeire of the cmiet boeeee
not to intervene in it in e direct nenner.

In e cal: end concilietory tone of voice-dire Helene Pereelin. e writer,

nevertheleee considered it "Zhdenovien"-hr Hercheie developed a epeech in
three perte.

Firet of all, "enti-commien." beceuee "inperielien" no longer hoe "the
neane for conducting e uteriel war," it ie engeging. the Conuniet Perty'e
eecretery-generel eaid. in en "ideologicel wer" egeinet retioneliee and

it exelte rotor-ion.

Next cane the exploitetionnby the right end the eociel deeocrate-o£ the
reflection engaged in by the cmiete on the eoeieliet countriee. Evi-
dence wee preeented in the for: of the "imoble cenpeign egeinet Vietnam."
Coneequence: even though the French co-uniete "reject the idee of going
off in eeerch of a Iodel that ie very clone to eocieliee" end even though
eocialien. ee i-ploeented in the Beet. doee not correepond to their viewe.
the overall belance of the eocieliat countriee ie coneidered "generally
poeitive."

finally, there wee the need for the commiet intellectuele to be in the
front line in order to defend their perty ageinet which en ideologicel w'er
is underway. Neceeearily. the diecueeion "wet teke place within the party
primarily."

In eunery: an eppeel to the perty'e patriotic. to confront external
aggreeeion; and e wetclmord for the intellectuele to ceeee their interven-
tione in the "bourgeoie preee."

In the eyee of the chellengere (about one-tenth of thoea present). the
atteble tone of the epeech did not conceel the hardening behind the scenes.

And within the four groups, which conducted the diecueeion, criticie-e were
lively—for the firet tine et an officiel party neeting.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ISIS ONLY

Thus, the criticisms of Mr Jean Rony-n-a target of severe reprimands during
the preceding week from Mr Maxine Grcnetz, who is in charge of Counnist
Party international reletions--in connection with an article published in

[.3 Home in which. regarding Europe. he had developed theses which were
rather close to thaw of the Italian Communist Party. Hr Rony considered the
”briefing" presented by Mr Marchsis to be nothing more than a "closed matter."
intended to "bring about the digestion of the March 1978 defeat."

"The letter." he observed, "can to a great extent be blamed on the consunist
party."

Mr Rony concluded hie rensrks with a quotation from the novel by Milan
Kundere entitled "La plaisanterie," reading as follows: "Optimism is the
opium of the inbeciles."

An evident allusion to the good conscience of the coununist leaders.

Hr Ugo lanucci, an attorney from Lyon. in turn challenged the self-satisfaction
of the apparatus. Denouncing "the men of narble. the men of certainty. who
turn out to be harmful to the worker movement." he drew the following indig-
nant retort from Kr Charles Fiterman:

"There is no potential assassin in the party ltdershipl"

A less lively exchange broke out between Mr Bernard Kara, assistant editor-
in-chiet of ECONOHH. ET POLITIQUE, and Mr Elleinstein:

"The collaboration by Jean Elleinstein in 3mm is disgusting," sallied
Hr Bernard Marx.

"Stalinist!" replied the party thus addressed with vivacity.

nrs Helene Parnelin started talking about Stalin. Scoffing at the "bludgeoning
of speeches" and the "chorus of wailing women." alternately expressed in the
comunist press." she ads the following thrust:

"L'RUHANITE is saying 'nass' and is acting likes 'bogey-wonan!‘ The
Cos-unist Party is being re-Stalinizedl"

Then Hrs Parnelin called for a vote on a notion in favor or the signers
of Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia.

Criticisms were voiced also on the subject of the countries of the East.
Messrs Eugene Cotton. Georges Girard, Raymond Jean (a writer and leader of
the challengers from Aix-en-Provence) and above all Mr Claude Frioux. one
of the five co-authors of "L'URSS et nous." in substance said this:

"The regimes of the East do not have a generally positive balance to show."
The challenge was also expressed in sometimes insulting terns. Without

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

causing a stir in the auditorium, Mr Etienne Balibar used the term "paranoid"

in describing the analysis of tho anticommunist campaign as presented by
Mr Harchais.

The shortcoming in all of these remarks was represented by an absence of

common language. The "institutional" intellectuals wanted to present a
united front.

Hr Rene Andrieu. editor-in-chief of L'RUHANITB denounced these "magic words"
to which certain communists are too sensitive: gulag, Stalinisa. Historian
Claude Hazauric accused Mr Elleinstein of developing a "social democratic

line." Hr Paul Boccara. the party's official economist. called for solidarity
with the socialist countries. Hr Philippe Hersog, another economist. uith a

rather cold temperament behind a romantic front. castigated certain communists
guilty of going back to "reactionary theories."

And here is the conclusion on Sunday: Messrs Guy Besse. Guy Hernier and
Maxims Gremetz. the reporters of the working groups, presented sugar-coated
summaries to an assembly suddenly aware of having been manipulated. It

expressed that by warmly applauding Hrs Mireille Bertrand, the reporter for
the fourth group. who presented a faithful activity report.

The Vitry meeting did not change anything. But, just a few months before the

23rd Congress. it was simply organized. according to one participant, as a
"useful outlet."

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "Valeurs actualles"

5058
680:3100

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

LBPTIST STAKE IN LARZAC CAMP EXPANSION NOTED
Paris VALBURS ACTUBLLZS in French 18 Dec 78 pp 34-35
[Article by P. H. hansen-Cstta: "The Opposition Camp"]

[Text] Opposition to the expansion of the military camp
at Larxac: last point of support for leftiem in France.
Pretaxt for the defense of special interests.

"The expansion of the Larxac camp means the permanent presence of an army of
frustrated individuals. People of South of Aveyronne, lock up your daughters!"
The General Union of National Education (CPDT [French Democratic Confedera-
tion of Labor]) has no arguments other than these in opposing the expansion

of the military post located on the almost desert limestone plateau which
extends above Nillau.

The violence of opponents of the camp is not only verbal; on 1 December, a
legionnaire on leave was attacked in the region. This revival of tension
is explained by the notification contained in prefectural decrees as to the
cessibility of certain land needed by the army. For the "resistors" of
Larzac. this is a death blow.

Since 1970, la nouergus has been swept up by 1eftism.That year, during a
UDR [Union of Democrats for the Republic] congress at La Cavalerie, a little
village of 800 inhabitants, situated in the very heart of the plateau,

Hr Andre Panton, at that time secretary of state for defense, announced the

project to expand the military camp at Larzac from 3,000 to 17,000 hectares
(in order to permit realistic modern weapons firing).

"The expansion project should have been explained to the interested persons
through administrative channels." confided a high-ranking defense ministry

official. "By leaving it to a political party to confirm a rumor, which had
been making the rounds for several months. we only stiffened the opposition."
For the UDR, the announcement of the expansion was an election argument.

The local population had, as a matter of fact. been demanding the camp's
expansion since 1956. In 1963, nine farners were ready to cede 2,600 hectares

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 24 May 1965. Mr Andre Maury, at that time the socialist mayor of Hillau,
now a member of the general council. had his city council adopt the following
declaration: "we want the military camp to be occupied as much as possible."
Hr Maury has since then been in the opposition camp. Haster Julian. the
general council neaber from Nant, came out in favor of expanding the camp in
1967 and then changed his mind and opposed it in 1973.

Here are the reasons for these shout-faces: pressure from the minorities and
the conviction as to s victory of the left in March 1978. But public

opinion in Avsyronne is in favor of the military. A member of the Era

[Rally for the Republic]. Hr Jacques Godfrain, was elected in Hillau last
March with 55.28 percent of the votes.

Because of the adoption of positions in favor of camp expansion, the defense
ministry thought that it should go easy. It underestimated the development
of leftist movements and the influence of roquefort manufacturers.

In 1963, a “group of land owners bordering on the camp" in a letter to the
minister of the armed forces deplored the abandonment of the expansion
project following "protests staged by a few suppliers of sheep milk for
roquefort." The latter as a matter of fact were very influential in the
Hillau chamber of commerce. Now. one of them, the brother of the owner of
the biggest roquefort company, happens to own a dairy that is included in
the area covered by camp expansion. But the real contribution of this high
plateau to the manufacture of cheese is minute. In 1977, Larzac produced
12,500 hectoliters of milk. Now. the year before. the cheese makers had to
sell off a surplus of 20,000 hectoliters.

Besides. the support of some cheese makers for the cause of Larrac has been
fading. That did not interfere with the virulence of the camp's opponents.
Nor have their financial resources declined.

With the help of French and foreign aymphsthizers, the opponents have
established GPA (Agricultural Land Owner Groups) consisting of persons
owning 1,128 hectares worth close to F6 million. A portion of this land

is to be taken over by the army. The rest, so explain the organizers of the
GPA, is situated in areas preventing the properties of the army from con-
stituting a piece of land belonging to a single tenant.

The "resisters" also launched "Operation 3 Percent“; their friends are
taking that percentage from the taxes and are turning it over to a war
cheat close to F2 million; 3,000 persons participated in this operation.

This organization surprised the authorities; they had overlooked the
presence of one particularly skillful personality. A former regular who had
become a Legion fighter in Africa, Hr Guy Tarlier in 1966 bought the new
never, a limestone plateau farm covering several hundred hectares. as had
just one idea: to prove that Larzac was not dead.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tall. powerfully built. 46 years old. with a pleasant face that rather ill
conceals an inflexible character, Hr Tarlier is a leader of men. He has
become the leader of the farmers although not all of them have blind con-
fidence in this bold man. In contrast to most of the "resisters," he is
neither a mystic, nor an antimilitarist. He is simply the boss of an enter-
prise. The CGT [General Confederation of Labor) section in Millau was not
wrong when. lest year. it denounced the working conditions of farm laborers
on the new never fsrL. But Mr Tarlier won his bet: Lerzac is not unproduc-
tive-provided one invests a lot. perhaps too much.

Having sunk considerable expenditures into he operation, the owner of new
Deva: knows that the sale of his land would not cover his expenses. of
course he denies that explanation.

"Only my attachment to the soil justifies my resistance," he told me as he
received me in his luxuriously restored home.

Other model operators include two brothers, Jean-Marie and Pierre Burguiere.
Very devout practicing Catholics, they developed along with a portion of the
local clergy: from the conservative right to revolutionary Christianity.
The elder brother, Jean-Marie. who is 60 years old, a typical citizen of
Rouerget, with a pink face surrounded by a short beard, explained to me:

"Our novement has not been taken over by the leftists. we only want them
to be present here. They give our fight its real dimension: disapproval
of a France that sells arms. That is the Gospel which inspires us."

Vehemently he asserts that he gets checks in dollars, in an. in florias. which
his cause receives from thousands of persons. he is visibly sure that he
is accomplishing a mission.

But the Burguiere brothers merely rent their farm which belongs to the
Hillau hospital. For a moderate sum: 100 hectoliters of sheep milk per
year (or 330,000). Now, the hospital administration would like to sell the
land for F3 million. A threat which the two brothers find difficult to take.

In the livingroom in which they received me. there was a priest. the Abbot
Maseran. of Millau. An ascetic figure with sslt-and-pepper hair, a blad‘
leather jacket over his shoulders. as is one of the "theologians" of the

"Larzac cause." with a vague smile, which never seems to leave him. he
says:

"we are also fighting so that the land may belong to those who work it.”
He thus tries to justify the presence of about 30 persons, who are strangers
to the region and who, without title. occupy several farms belonging to

the army. Around them there are some religious: pastor Herve aott,
creator of the research center and the meeting for peace where. with the

support of foreign "specialist." resistance to the army is being developed

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(newspapers. listening to military broadcasts during maneuvers on the
plateau, etc.); pastor Jean Goes. who is in charge of the International
Hovenent for Reconciliation. a pro-Soviet outfit; the Abbot Robert Pirault.
"special envoy" of the bishop of Orleans." Hsgr Riobe. who passed away
last summer.

In this devout region. the role of these clerics and some local priests
has been decisive. An official of the real estate administration, Judged
with purchasing land for the stay. noted:

"In March 1972. 103 persons pledged never to yield their land to the army.
In spite of their desire to sell thereafter, they felt bound by this pledge
which in some cases had been forced upon them. Without that pledge, eore
than 80 percent of the area would already have been purchased."

Defections however are numerous among the opposition members. The latter
now admit that only "27 operators. who oppose the expansion of the camp.
are left within the perimeter."

According to the defense ministry, only eight farms are seriously affected
by the camp‘s expansion. But the resettlement of those farmers in the
region has been planned. Their refusal is motivated only by "resistance"
or by fear of rsprisals.

The "reaisters" want to ignore the economic fallout which would derive from
the camp's expansion. the creation of 60 civil service jobs (200 job
applications are on file with the camp personnel office). the creation of
82 housing units and aid for the construction of a new hospital at Hillau.
the construction of a railroad line, and revenues of about P70 million for
the department as soon as the new camp's cadres and permanent party have
reported for duty.

An official of the organization, which has been established to counter the
activity of the left. the hovenent for Order and Peace in Larrec, said:

"They have lost. The camp will get its 17.000 hectares. And they know it."
By way of an echo. Hr Jean-Harie Burguiere said:

"The situation is going to get more radical. We have nothing to less."
About 30 CR5 [Republican Security Company] men have just arrived on the
plateau. They were not there a year ago.

COPTRJGHI: 1978 "veloure actuelles"

5058
C8083100

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BRIEFS

VIETNAMESE PRESSURE FRENCH--ﬂanoi has been pressuring various French
companies. among them ELF-ERAP, to prevent them from signing any big
contracts with the PRC. Should they do so. the contracts they have with

Vietnam will probably be revised or repudiated. [Text7 [Raris VALBURS
ACTUELLBS 1 Jan 79 p 11/

KERGUELBN ISLARDS RBINFORCEHENT--Because of the more and more frequent
presence of Soviet fishing fleet vessels on the Kerguelen Islands shelf.
France has decided to reinforce itself logistically there. Fuel supplies
will be established and mooring facilities provided. Moreover, within the
framework of the bilateral agreements with other nations that fish the area,
foreign commercial vessels are to take French observers aboard. These

agreements are to be renewed annually. £5ex§7 [Faris VALBURS ACTUELLES
1 Jan 79 p 1.1]

COMMUNISTS LOSE JOBS--Forty jobs were elininated in January at the CDLP
[Book and Press Dissemination Center], the distributors for publishers who
are close to the PCP. Fifty-three jobs had already been done away with

in May 1978. Among those to so was Antoine Spire, literary director for
Editions Socisles [Publishers], who last fall in TEMOIGNAGE CHRETIBN
criticized the attitude of the PC? during the [March 1978] legislative
elections. [Text] [Paris VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 1 Jan 79 p ll]

C80: 3100

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

DC. POI, PSI YOUTH KNEE"? LEADERS ON FUTURE POLITICS
Milan L'EUROPEO in Italian 1 Dec 78 pp 20-22
[Article by Lanfranco Vaccari: "If This Compromise Bnds:]

[Text] As risks increase for the government, the youth movements of the
06 [Italian Christian Democratic Party]. of the PCI [Italian Commist
Party]. and of the PSI [Italian Socialist Party] try to visualise what the
future will be like. Ever since the center-left. up to now, they have
always guessed correctly.

Rome, November—In '53. iunedietely after the elections. the Christian
Democratic Youth denounced the centrist crisis and imagined a relationship
with the PSI. which did materialize at the beginning of the 60's in the
formula of the center-left. Inl973. during the center-right Andreotti-
Malagodi parenthesis. the Socialist Youth Federation. well before the P81
euI-it. affirmed the impossibility of returning to an alliance with the

ac on the basis of the agreement by which the country had been governed
during the 10 preceding years. And it was always the 7631 [Italian
Socialist Youth Federation]. that fixed its attention, before all others.
on the strategic alternative of the left.

These were the most sensational anticipatory precedents. And now what do
the youth movements of the main parties visualize as the future political
order of the Chigi palace? While the forlula that supports Andreotti
continues to wear away, at the moment when ever-insistent rumors talk of
a break in the legislature, around a table are seated Hassimo D‘Alama,
secretary of the Comnist Youth Federation, Enrico Boselli, secretary of

the Socialist Youth Federation. and Marco Pollini, secretary of the Dc
Youth Movement.

Over the discussion, like incumbent phantons,hovered the Co—unist preoccupa-
tion to show that this is not the night in which all cats are grey; the
Christian Democratic eagerness to wave its own unmistakable and distinct
identity, just as those Abruzzi shepherds who, in September. when

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
their flocks come down to the plain and mix in with each other. out the
ears of their sheep so that they will be immediately recognizable: the
Socialist effort to proclaim their own difference with respect to an
equivocal past. the sase way that women do who. having obliterated their
old wrinkles with facial surgery. so about with the "before" photo to
show the difference.

This is what Fellini. D'Alema. and Boselli said to each other.

Fellini. The problem today is to overcome this political stage. The
solution is not easy. he one has a magic formula in his pocket and there
will be periods that undoubtedly will require time. On the one hand. nor-
mality must be restored among the political forces. within a framework that
includes the majority and the opposition. 0n the other hand. it is
necessary to safeguard sose of the positive elements of this stage: the
effort for convergence. the elimination of many ideological prejudicial
questions; the reduction of the risk of s nc-rct confrontation, dangerous
for democracy.

D'Alema. Now I can speak in the name of the opposition. because this is
precisely what provides the normality of which Pollini speaks. But his is
a wrong road. He considers the stage that was opened up after 20 June a
parenthesis and not the beginning of a historically new period. One
question remains unanswered. How is this parenthesis to be closed. with
what effects on the political-economic life and on relations amonL the
parties? It seems to as that this cannot be done without a resultant
serious trauma. On the contrary. it is necessary to give some time. some
chance to the experiment of national unity, probing the outlook that was
outlined. not without ambiguity. by More during the last months of his
political activity.

Boselli. This is one of the most penetrating of the array of points in

the discussion within the left. It is worth retracing a little history.

we were the first. as far back as five years ago. to ask for admittance of
the Communists to the government, not only the majority. but let us be
clear. The interpretation given by the PC! to the policy of national unity
has been translated into the loss of a fundaeental characteristic of the
democratic system: dislectics among the various forces. what we have
called conflictive democracy. without very clear, firm points. both of
departure and arrival. national unity became a shapeless heap. in which the
failures stand out because it is impossible to reconcile their very diverse
interests. To again set in motion mechanisms that are vital for the
democratic system is of utmost importance.

Fellini. If. on the one hand. we are convinced that a governmental
alliance that includes the Communists would reduce political dialectics

and. unintentionally. would therefore result in fact in limiting the

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
prospect of liberty and democracy, on the other hand, we do not think it
is possible to return to the old plans. Everything has fallen through:
the former ambition of the center-left to break up the unity of the groups
of the left and to than detersine the governmental majority; the illusion
that the participation of the PC! in the government could stabilise this
country by lessening all tensions; the proposal of the historical compro—
mise. And neither is it possible to continue to maintain .aat tho only
protagonists consist of the 0c and the Communists. Therefore we re-propose
a discussion with lay parties, taking care. however, to understand that
there has been a break with the past. In resuming this discussion with
the Socialists. we cannot agree to reduce ourselves to the status of a
conservative component of Italian society.

losslli. Certainly this is our opinion of the ac. from what we have
known of it, from its history, from its policy. this, however, is quite
a different matter. we are not trying implicitly to inputs couplst intentions

to you. He do not consider Pnnfoni, or Porlani, or Gallonl o coupiats. But
neither do we consider Galloni to be more to the left than Porlani, or

Panfani core to the right than any other person. In this our appraisals
are very different from those of our Communist comrades.

D'Alesa. Let us go step by step. The crisis that we are experiencing-
and not we alone, but also the entire capitalist world--is very profound.
The problem is that not everyone is aware, has the same consciousness,
of that crisis. The Christian Democrats have a very strong tendency to
deny this state of affairs. arrayed as they are for the sole purpose of
defending the system. from that, and from the nonacknowledgnent of the
need to open a new phase in the development of the country. comes the
counterattack from the pro-Doroteo and Fanfani sectors. The DC, a certain
DC, is set on protecting very specific social interests. But, if these
interests are not dealt with and if a radical process of change in the
society is not set in option, this crisis will not be overcome. This is
today's job.

Boselli. Not only this. Even if we have trouble in indicating alignments
and formulas for the period subsequent to that of national unity, it is
necessary to again set up sole mechanisms without which the democratic
game will degenerate. And to whoever spoke of the ispossibility of
governing this country with 51 percent of the votes, we say that it is
equally impossible to do so with 80 percent. The problems in existence
on 21 June, two years ago. are still with us. in fact, they are worse.
There is a widespread feeling in Italy that a government is being formed.
Therefore we must--and soon--restore the fundamental mechanisms of
democracy-~of course within the unitary, honest, and responsible framework
of political forces.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

D'Alene. But thin in e nietehen point. There ere countrieo thet ere
governed with M percent in which there in e reel poeeibility of en
elternetive; and yet ell the problene ere etill there to be reeolved;
no knot hee been undone.

Follini. A: eoon ee there in telk of e future politicel belenoe. one

thet in different free the preeent one. the Connuniete nenifeet e euepicion
in which I eeen to note e feer of ieoletion-frenkly unjustified. The
inplied idee. the nurnured eccueetion. ie thet we end the Socieliete long
for e return to the golden yeere of the center-left. Let ue eee if thet
in ectuelly the cent. In the neentine. for our pert. we nuet be cereful to
evoid two error-e; the firet. thet of entrusting the repreeentetion of the
entire left to the PSI. with the consequent ectuel reetoretion of the
politicel eituetion of the old center-left; the eecond. thet of under-
eetineting the Socieliet dineneion. with the preeueption thet the gene
coneiete wholly of the reletionehip between ue end the Connuniete. Now.
would thie be e center-left? would e Dc-PSI reletionehip thet in neither
the old. treditionel governnentel reletioneehip. one thet exieted out of
reel politicel neceeoity. nor en inetrunentel. end therefore nonexietent.
reletionehip be e center-left. even if brought up to dete. revieed. end
corrected? I think not. Just ee i believe. however. thet e glaring
nietehe in being node by thoee within the Dc who teen to be eining very
hurriedly et cepturing eocieliet poeitione for the purpoee of reetoring e
belence thet will ebruptly put en end to thet which hee been defined to
the third pheee of ltelien politice. Doing thie neene they heve not
underetood whet hee chenged within the Dc. in the firet piece. but eleo
within the PSI end the Pet.

D'Alene. Let ue rpeek pleinly. putting diplonecy to one eide. He ere
now witneeeing e etrenge gene being pleyed by the verioue eidee. 0n the
one hend. the Socieliete epeelt of en elternetive of the left. but in very
wngue terns. piecing it one does not know where. 0n the other. fron the
left the policy of netionel unity ie criticized. Very well. But whet ie
ectuelly heppening? Thin initietive in feet oervee to deetebilite the DC
leederehip group thet ie aligned with the choice of e unitery policy. The
Socioliet etteck. in the bends of noderete forcee thet operete within the
no beconee en inetrunent to etrike et thoee eectore of the perty thet

heve pledged the-eelvee noet eeriouely to e unitery policy. And. eince
the conditions for governnentel perticipetion by pertiee of the left do
not exiet et preeent, the finel result will be the neinteneuce by Chrietien

Denocrecy of e poeition of hegemony end of predoninence. with very eerioue
r‘OkOe

Pollini. Thin inege of e no divided in two (on one eide. e noderete group
which at eny coet eine et recovering the PSI; on the other. e lore edvenced

2h
5 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

group.prisoeeroi a political choice that sooner or later should lend us
to an intensification of a relationship with the Pct. seems very schematic
and very contrived. I believe that. with regard to this political picture.
there is a party approach that is norc unitary then what is gathered from
o'nlese's words.

D‘Alens. Not sine. Fonfenl's. Porleni's. and Bissglie's words. You
have to reckon with than.

Boselli. But he hits does not speak otherwise.

D'Aleea. The essential thing today is to oppose the plan for preservation
of the status quo that is advocated by certain Christian Democratic sectors.
It is enough to see how the Confidustria [General Confederation of Italian
industry) acts when it is ties to nahe contracts: it scene like an ideo-
logical holy war. not a labor union controversy. This is really not the
tl:e to make hypotheses for the future. such as the alternative of the

is t.

losclli. To hide behind a finger does no good. if this government is

in difficulty. if crisis is in the air. if there is talk of a shuffle. it

is because. in the setter of cone fundanental setters. there are conflicting
interests that are irreconcilable. Therefore. we either remain stalled,

or we try to find solutions other than national unity. Certainly there
are varying positions within the left. But this is not an isnutable datul.
He believe that the no is a focal point of decisive strength in the desecra-
tic systea in this country and therefore we believe in the possibility of

a government that includes leftist groups without resultant trauaes or
splits. Here i reject the concept of a dictatorial Dc. He are not in
Chile. It is necessary to get through the national unity stage in a posi-
tive sensor and likewise not to cause the matter of alignment to become an
impassable barrier. a wall.

D'Alcee. I again repeat: the essential thing right now is to force the ac
to take a stand on a series of very specific questions having to do with

the socio-econoeic situation of the country. The majority that has gathered
around Zaccagnini must be stimulated to lead a fight within the party and

to wake known these sectors that continue to argue in terms of current and
absolute authority (consider the matter of Donet-Cattin and the Ministry

of Industry). offering resistance to perverse preservation of the status quo.

Boselli. Evidently. in order to succeed. you are living in the illusion of
bringing your Isabers to the next Christian Democratic congress.

D'Alene. No. We do not want to induce ours to vote for Zaccsgnini. You
are the ones who are causing yours to vote for Fonfani. And that is even
worse.

COPYRIGNT: 1978 Rizaoli Editore

25

9&3? 3106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

TASKS. RESPONSIBILITY OF CIVIL DEFENSE PLANNING DISCUSSED
Rosa RIVISTA HILITARE in Italian Jul-Aug 78 pp 59-65

[Article by Haj Con Pasquale Di Marco, PAI; passages enclosed in slant-
lines printed in boldface]

[Text] The note of "necessity“ sounded for the first
time on this matter in the "White Book on De-
fenee";Italy's emerging commitments under in-
ternational agreements; the trials involved
in various kinds of calamities that have occur-
red in Italy of late; the alarming case of
the radioactive Russian "Cosmos“ satellite,
and other troubling and unforeseen happenings
all give one to consider the problem of Civil
Defense, and impel one to take a close look
at the status of Civil Defense in Italy.

Writing about Civil Defense, though, is a mat-
ter of duty, be it only to help shape correct
notions, remove perplexity, put some order
into the various subjects involved, and cla-
:ify any misunderstandings there may be.

Civil Defense: Definition and Aims

Civil Defense is a compound problem that has long been dealt
with at the international level. It is made up of many dispa-
rate elements, but they all share two points in common: a com-
mitment to it beginning in peacetime, and the instantaneous (I
should say the quasi-automatic) nature of its implementation
in an emergency.

The Army's military nomenclature says that Civil Defense is the
"complex of measures, of prearrangements, of provisions, and

of activities which a state plans and implements in time of
peace, in view of needs in case of var, for the purpose of
sustaining the war effort in a continuous manner and of guaran-
teeing the strength of the domestic fronts.‘

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICMI. USE ONLY

From this definition, aside from the typical emphasis on wartime
requirements, we find that a "domestic front" has been singled

out, which erases the boundaries of the conVentional separation
between the front lines and the hinterland, not only because of
the enormous destructive potential of modern weaponry, but also
because of the availability of deliVery systems capable of car-

rying the effects of the use of such weapons to any target what-
soever.

From this derives the need for an organization designed to pro-
tect the population, one which is also capable of assuring the
continuity of the essential aspects of government and production
within the nation, including support for its military defense.

Civil Defense, therefore, is an integral part of the overall
national defense, and is intimately bound up with military stra-
tegy, which means that Civil Defense and military defense must
constitute a homogeneous whole reflecting the overall effective-

ness of the nation's defensivo arrangements (Global or National
Defense).

Of recent years, however, the concept of Civil Defense has taken
on a broader significance than the rudimentary concept, which
assumed it was necessarily associated with wartime requirements;
this expansion in scope underscores the wisdom of seeing the
system firmly in place even in peacetime.

If fact, any exceptional event (major natural disasters or other
grave emergencies) which may affect only part of the country,

far from being confined to the zone in which they actually oc-
cur, can trigger tremendous consequences for the nation's entire
economic and social structure and -- even in peacetime -- require
the coordinated deployment of the same civilian and military
forces which are the outward embodiment of the entire national
defense apparatus, albeit on a proportionately smaller scale.

At this point it would be well to spell a few things out plainly:
we often hear people talk indiscriminately of Civil Defense and
Civil Protection, as if they were one and the same. /But Civil
Protection is only one partial and sectorial aspect of Civil
Defense;/ we shall consider this fact more at length in the
course of this discussion. For the moment, we can draw one ini-
tial conclusion: by "Civil Defense,“ we properly mean that

body of measures to have ready, as well as of actions to be ta-
ken, in case of emergency: first in order to prevent, if pos-
sible, and second to deal with the disaster, mitigating its
harmful effects, making rational use of available resources,
heightening to the utmost the survival capacity of the popula-
tion, safeguarding the economic-productive apparatus of the
state, and, in case of war, supporting the national war effort.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’FICML USE ONLY
Civil Defense Missions

The Defense 'White Book" spelling out the missions of Civil De-
fence in peace and in war lists them thus:

assuring continuity in the executive and administrative
action of the state;

maintaining the highest possible level of morale and of
ability to cope among the citizenry in emergency situa-
tions: informing the public, providing training;

prevention and hence prearrangement of adequate protec-
tion and rescue measures (Civil Protection) so as to
achieve the utmost possible reduction in losses of
hunan life and property;

safeguarding the public health and the

rational allocation of the agencies and means of pro-
duotion;

supplying, stockpiling and distributing raw materials
and stores;

keeping the telecommunications and transport systems
working;

utilizing the merchant fleet for transporting supplies
and for assisting in evacuation operations in case of
emergency;

integrated and rational deployment of manpower to cope
with the aforementioned emergencies;

protection of resources vital to citizen survival and
to the continued effectiveness of military defense.

The orderly operation and supervision of all activities involved
in Civil Defense are, generally speaking, the responsibility not
only of individual Ministries, but also of local and regional
bodies.

Analysis of Civil Defense Missions

Preserving Continuity in the Executive and
Administrative Action of the State

This is a requirement that has to do with both the central organ-
ization of the state and with its peripheral apparatus.

First of all, this implies the necessity for:

providing, seeking out, completing and organizing, in
peacetime, alternative decentralized and protected

28
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

intorcommunienting antes, providing connections with
the appropriate national and international telecommu-
nication networks;

consolidating and expanding the telecommunications
system and the news broadcasting system for the po-
pulation;

keeping the operational rules and procedures for ci-
vilian bodies up to date at every level.

Maintaining the Highest Possible Level of
Morale and of Ability To Cope Among the
Citizenry in Emergency Situations:
Informing the Public, Providing Training.

This mission requires not only a modern, locally accessible sys-
tem of public information, but also training for Cadre in pub-
lic relations techniques at all proper levels of government ad-
ministration, which will operate not only in response to the
events involved in the particular situation, but also with an
eye to building clear-cut and correct opinion among citizens

in relation to the countless problems connected with the emer-

gency, so as to assure a united national spirit. To this end,
we shall have to:

make use of the commonest of the mass media - press,
radio, TV, cinema, theater, wall posters, lectures,
demonstrations, etc.;

prepare and distribute educational materials;

publicize evidence of what the government is doing in
this area;

enable the population, through adequate training and
preparation, to take care of itself, and to think
about effective emergency protection against any
possible emergency in peacetime and in wartime.

Minimizing Losses and Hence Timely Provision
of Adequate Protection and Rescue Measures.
Civil Protection

Civil Protection is /a special area of Civil Defense/, and em-
braces any activity designed te protect the safety of the po-
pulation and-its property, and to assure rescue and succor

during states of emergency stemming from natural disaster and
frOm acts of war.

The critical missions of Civil Protection are:

obtaining citizen collaboration and publicizing the
basic standards for behavior in cases of emergency
(passive protection);

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preventive measures and firefighting or other kinds
of damage containment (active protection):

constant monitoring of levels of radioactivity all
over the country:

setting up an integrated alarm system;

developing a well thought-out shelter policy, which
will include protection of industrial plants and
workers in such plants;

planning for the orderly evacuation of populations
in extreme cases. '

Safeguarding Public Health and the Environment

From this perspective, certain activities take on special impor-
tance. They are: planning for medical and hospital care and,
in general, all those activities which are covered in public
health policy. These measures must provide for:

the civilian health organization available for first
aid, shelter, and medical care for civilians;

supplying and storage of medical supplies and of
health and hygiene equipment;

suitable publicizing and training in the techniques
of first aid, survival, and mutual support;

swift and efficient identification and control of epi-
demics and epizootics, and adequate measures for dis-
infection and delousing;

supervision of health and sanitation standards and
of sterilization and decontamination of food and
water;

restoration of areas which may be contaminated.

Rational Allocation of the Agencies
and Means of Production

There is no doubt that the importance of production of consumer
and manufactured goods, etc. increases with the rapidity and
reliability with which these goods can be made available. There-
fore.the agencies and sources of production must be provided with
a balanced combination of all factors -- including their sites --
which will ensure that they will be able to perform their work.

Supplying, Stockpiling, and Distributing
Raw Materials and Stores

While this particular topic is important to every nation, it is
particularly vital to Italy, considering its limited self-suf-

30
I FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfflﬁlAL USE ONLY

fielency and its dependency on foreign sources of supply. We
need only cite, in this connection, our requirements for fuels,
for raw materials for industry, for food shipments, ctc., to
provide some idea of the vast dimensions of the problems that
must be dealt with. Not to mention the management of this gi-
gantic flywheel of national security, which involves ad hoc di-
rectives and arrangements with the Ministries concerned for
drafting sector-wide plans for their particular Jurisdictions.
From all this, one sees even more clearly how urgent is the need
for getting all of this sector coordinated and planned well in
advance of an emergency situation.

Protection of Resources Vital to Civilian
Survival and to Continued Effective—
ness of Military Defense

These activities, along with the preceding ones, share the basic
feature of capillarity in that, like the countless tiny streams

that carry down to the river beds the waters that feed them,

so innumerable streams must bring into Italy, safely protected,

the consumer and other goods which assure both the physical sur-
vival of its citizens and the continuing vital supplies for the

armed forces as they go about their institutional tasks.

Therefore,this sort of protection is a crucial and vital part
of national security; lacking it, the entire nation would be
plunged into the throes of probable crisis should enemy forces
seek to undermine its effectiveness, its vitality, its very
existence.

Keeping the Telecommunications
Networks in Operation

The field of telecommunications must move towards quantitative
and qualitative guarantee of the operability of telecommunica-
tions plants and services, so as to handle all requirements of
the national defense. Among the principal requirements to be
met we might list the following:

reducing vulnerability against any conceivable type
of attack (including sabotage, which is quite likely
even in situations which fall short of a.shooting
war ;

availability of alternate means of telecommunications,
including mobile facilities, and reserves of equipment
and power generators;

plans and firm arrangements to assure techical effi-
ciency and guarantee continuity in services;

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USS ONLY

a central and peripheral organization for coordina-
tion and control of all telecommunications activities.

Maintaining Operability of Domestic
Surface Transport Systems and
Navigable Waterways

The Transport Ministry is responsible for central planning and
organization to run and coordinate traffic on roads, railroads,
and domestic navigable waterways, as well for study and plan-
ning for all possible utilization of alternative routes other
than the major communication lines.

Protective measures must also be designed to reduce the vulnera-
bility of power stations, substations, plants, and all infra-

structures required to assure operability of all the foregoing
communications systems.

Use of Ports, Airports, Civilian Aircraft and the
Merchant Fleet for Transport and Supply and for
Aiding in Evacuation Operations in Emergencies

It is the responsibility of the Merchant Marine to take all
steps required to assure the uninterrupted flow of maritime
traffic in time of war or emergency.

Even more than air transport, the maritime shipping lanes con-
stitute, by reason of their conspicuousness, a field of the
national economy whose phenomena reach beyond the national
boundaries to tie in with similar phenomena in the global eco-
nomy; hence the necessity for a clear directive to undertake
an extraordinary planning task, so as to guarantee the coun-
try's survival in an emergency.

Specific problems calling for early planning at the national
level are:

organization of ports and landing areas;

port evacuation and offshore mooring for merchant
vessels;

training and instructions to the merchant fleet in
case of war, etc.

Utilization of the organization and equipment of Civil Avia-
tion, in time of emergency and of war, is an increasingly impor-
tant problem in relation to the rapid and continuing growth of
this sector, upon which specific tasks may devolve in situations
which only air transport, by reason of its peculiar features,
can handle efficiently,'such as.fcr example:

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ready availability of aircraft and crews for any rapid
transportation requirement;

return heme of all aircraft abroad;

scattered and decentralized ground facilities for air-
craft}

reactivation, according to need, of emergency lending
strips no longer used in peacetime.

Bverycne emphatically agrees that both air and maritime transport
are vital for purposes of evacuation or dispersal of populations
from residential areas in various kinds of emergency. Both these
activities must be planned and tested well ahead of need.

Integrated and Rational Deployment of
Manpower To Cope with Emergencies

Planning for systems and means to guarantee continuity in the
nation's production and for its human capital is a fundamental
task.

It must be noted that the word "manpower“ is used here in a very
broad sense which embraces not only manual laborers, but all
persons who may be qualified to make any helpful personal contri-
bution to the national defense.

There must therefore be an organization in place whose mission
is to single out, identify, and make available to the Civil
Defense system the intellectual and manual workers the system
needs to achieVe its purposes. Some of the particularly deli-
cate aspects involving close cooperation between military and
civilian organizations are, in this area:

selection of the people to be assigned to specific
duties in the handling of civilian-military coopera-
tion 1 , without compromising the efficiency of
either organization;

the problem of citizens working abroad, for whom some
decision must be made as to whether or not they should
be summoned or brought home for the emergency;

the question of establishing a national civilian res-
cue organization to be used in case of natural disaster

(1) “Civilian-military cooperation“ means any coordinated action,
planned or unplanned, jointly taken in case of peacetime or war-
time emergency at any level and in any area of activity by

agents of military defense and agencies of another government
Ministry er Ministries.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(for example, not only in the United States and the
Eastern European states, but in many other countries

as well, there are already organizations for emergency
civilian rescue and aid).

Civil Defense Organization in Italy

From an examination of the specific characteristics of Civil De-
fense, features which have been found everywhere on the basis

of past experience -- it should be noted -- one basic and over-
riding concept emerges, and that is that Civil Defense is an
all-embracing endeavor which, at the national level, involves
the activities of all the Ministries, each of which contributes
to it, in greater or lesser degree, in the area of its specific
competence; and that it cannot be improvised, but must be care-
fully planned, with at least the rudiments of its organization
ready for full deployment in case of emergency.

The problem has aspects of an international nature, however, and

constitutes a matter of paramount inportance, for Italy, for example,
within the framework of the Atlantic Alliance. From this stems

a whole series of relationships and obligations which must be
kept in mind if we are to be able to give adequate considera-
tion to some of their impact at the national level.

In Italy, our approach to the problems of Civil Defense suffers
-- as we have already said -- from the lack of a suitable exe-
cutive coordinating agency with enough authority to enforce com-
pliance by all responsible agencies with a uniform and concerted
national effort, and to implement with scrupulous consistency

at the executive level all directives issued in this connection
by the proper authority.

The requirement, which stems primarily from the responsibilities
of the political authorities, has been stated repeatedly, but
the measures thus far taken, mainly in response to particular

situations, have not always proved effective, timely, and sound
when viewed as a whole.

Insofar as is incumbent upon them, the military authorities -- ob-
viously concerned with the problem -- on 1 February 1962 esta-
blished the Military Center for Civil Defense. This interforce
agency, operated directly by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was set

up for the following purposes:

to perform the tasks of coordinating /within the mili-
tary structures/ civilian emergency studies and plans
prepared by other Ministries, and to help in the draft-
ing of such of them as lie within the competence of

the Defense Ministry;

3‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OIFESA NAZIONALE

NATIONAL DEFENSE

Military Defense

Civil Defense

 

to collaborate, at the national and NATO levels, in
the study and definition of emergency plans of special
interest to National Defense, in such a way as to in-
sure that the activities called for are correctly
stated and carried out;

to share information in the area of Civil Defense

with the various government Ministries, gathering
and exchanging data relating to it;

to keep abreast of developments in Civil Defense
studies at the international level;

to assist in the formulation of national opinions in

response to issues raised from time to time by NATO
bodies.

Within the sphere of the other Ministries, outside the military
sphere, other agencies operate autonomously in varying capacities.

The first such body is the /Civilian Protection and Firefighting
Directorate/. PL 996 of 8 December 1970 established this Direc-
torate in the Interior Ministry, for the purpose of undertaking
"in concert with the other civilian and military administrative
offices of the state, and with the assistance of all territorial
and institutional public agencies, the organization of Civil De-
fense, making provision for emergency rescue and assistance ser-
vices to populations stricken by natural disaster or catastrophe."

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

        
 

.-. ..~-o———..‘

CIVIL DEFENSE

3-..-
-

Continuity of Economic and produc- Civil Protection
government tion apparatus

action

Broadcasting Transport Health

 

As part of its share in performance of the foregoing tasks, the
Interior Ministry's major contribution is its operation of the
National Fire Department (Vigili del Puoco).

Also involved in this area on the executive level should be the
Regional Offices and Committees for Civil Protection, the Pre-
fectures, and the mobile rescue companies and squads of the Fire
Department.

There may also be involvement by special Carabinieri anvaolice
units, as well as by some ”auxiliary” organizations, particularly
noteworthy among which are the Italian Red Cross, the ham radio
operators, the Scouts, and many others (UNUCI, the Service Clubs,
the Alpine Club, various charitable organizations, etc.).

The whole matter, however, is currently in a transition stage,
partly because the enabling legislation for PL 996 has yet to be
enacted; for the auxiliary organizations in particular, there

is a need for specific definition of tasks, chain of command,
etc. Until now, as reported in the Defense White Book, the Armed
Forces have made outstanding contributions in the rescue and suc-
cor of populations stricken by grave natural disasters, in the

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sphere of their particular competence in "civilian-military
cooperation."

The following agencies are also worthy of special mention:

The Interministeriai Supply Commission (CIR). Established on 31
March in the Prime Minister's Office, its mission is to draft
legislation and regulations suitable For the ordering, in time of
crisis and in the sectors of agriculture, food, and industry (with
the-exception of petroleum products). of n1 rumnnnm. mnndies:um
storage facilities, distribution, and consumption in line with
civilian and military requirements.

The Interministeriai Commission for National Transport Studios
(CITN). Established on 6 December 1909 in the Prime Minister's
Office, it provides input in the form of thinking and technical
consultation, and its function is one of coordination in problem-
solving and in setting up specific activities relating to surface
transport for emergency civilian and military use.

The table of organizations operating in Civil Defense areas at
the national level is completed with entries for the more impor-
tant of them, set up at various times in the past, and having
particular responsibility for sectorial coordination:

The Interministerinl Homdng Group for Civil Defense Coordination.
Established on 30 May 1973 in the Prime Minister's Office, its
mission is:
to look into the more urgent unsolved problems which
have already been under study for some time, such as
decentralization of government Ministries, related
problems of telecommunications, etc.;

to study problems of a regulatory nature with a view
to increased efficiency in the operations of the save-
ral bodies involved in Civil Defense;

to draﬂ,appnqadakc legislation for setting up the hoped-
for "Organization“ in the form of a "permanent top-
level body for coordination and monitoring of Civil
Defense activities."

This group, which includes representatives from several Minis-
tries at the Director-General level, has not only once since its
founding, however.

The Technical Coordinating Group for Civilian Emergency Plans.

It was established on 13 September 1973 in the General Directo-
rate for Civilian Protection and Firefighting of the Interior
Ministry. With authority delegated by the Prime Minister's 0f-
fice, the president of this body is the Ministry's Director Gene-
ral for Civilian Protection. Its members include representatives

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
or all the Ministries concerned, and they meet when necessary
to perform such tasks as formulation of national opinions on
particular problem areas for presentation at NATO meetings.

The Interministerial Commission for the Study of Industrial Mobi-
lization (CISMI). Founded by a decree on 28 February 1967 in

the Industry, Commerce, and Crafts Ministry, its mission is to
study and plan for mobilization of industrial plants engaged in
work essential to the National Defense.

The Interministerial Civilian Protection Committee. It is to be
activated for emergency service by the Interior Ministry under

the provisions of PL 996 of 8 December 1970, and its mission is

to promote coordination among Civil Protection emergency plans,

to consider advance preparation of government intervention plans
for rescue operations and following the cessation of the state of
emergency, and gathering and spreading of information deemed help-
ful for the purposes of protecting the civilian population.

Interministerial Technical Commission on Civil Protection. Also
set up under Article 3 of PL 996, its task is to lend assistance
to the Interministerial Civilian Protection Committee.

National Advisory Commission on the Protection of Cultural Assets
in Case of Armed Conflict. Instituted by ministerial decree on
15 January l962 in the Ministry of Education, and subsequently
transferred to the Cultural Assets and Environment Ministry. Its
mission is to formulate proposals for the implementation in Italy
of The Hague Convention of 14 May 1954 on the protection of cul-
tural assets in theeventrof armed conflict.

The Interministerial Commission on Evacuees and Refugees (CIER).
Founded in 1954, it is headed by the President of the Military
Center for Civil Defense Studies. Its mission is to p1an opera-
tions involving the removal of evacuees and measures for control
and relocation of refugees.

Other agencies which have existed only on the occasion of certain
exercises are:

The Joint Interministeriel Organization for Emergency Repairs
(OMIRE), whose purpose was to provide prompt repairs of damage
to logistics installations vital to the war effort.

The Central Fuel Committee (CCC), for determining the needs, pro-
gramming supplies of raw materials and finished products, formu-

lating production schedules, and allocation of available products
to meet the needs of the armed forces and the civilian population.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusions

The outstanding features of Civil Defense thus far set forth here
bear witness to the exceeding complexity of its nature.

In practical terms, there is notonn Cabinet Ministry that is exempt
from at least partial responsibility for Civil Defense. And when
one adds to this the fact that in Italy such matters are dealt with
by a vast range of subordinate agencies at different levels, each
of them turning out studies, proposals, and new activities which

in most cases are totally uncoordinated with each other, one can
readily see the reason for concern over the limited homogeneous
development of Civil Defense in our country. Further, such de-
velopment as there has been is governed primarily by inadequate

and obsolete legislation which it Is of vital importance to bring

up to date, so as to avoid shortages, shortcomings, confusion,
uncertainty, and the like.

It should also be noted thatcertninquarters (the Interministerial
Supply Commission and the Military Center for Civil Defense Stu-
dies) have already come forward with practical suggestions of re-
markable scope, which will, in any case, provide some helpful in-
put to guide the decisions of the competent national authorities.

Some particularly pertinent studies, having to do with both the
supply sector and the top-level organization of Civil Defense,
are still under consideration by the competent authorities,and
therefore, lacking the blessing of official decision, they still
cannot be dealt with here.

We can only say that, insofar as "supplies" are concerned, the

CIR study points to some solutions that might be adopted to assure
the nation the means of survival in an emergency, while the CMSCD
study suggests setting up an organization to provide overall co-
ordination among the various branches of Civil Defense both at

the center and on the periphery. Specifically, this central

body should also act as a forum with a clear mandate to formu-

late policy, and hence not necessarily perform only technical
functions.

For all these reasons, we have contemplated placing it at the
highest possible level of the executive power of the state, out-
side the military sphere, but within that of the Prime Minister's
Office, partly in view of the overall coordinating functions
which would be assigned it.

The suggested solutions are also in line with the findings of
studies and with the significant implementation achieved on a
worldwide scale in the wake of the proliferating social and eco-
logical problems connected with the uncontrolled increase of
populations as contrasted with the erratic, inadequate, and

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WPICIAI. "Sh ONLY

completely unbalanced increase in the output of consumer goods
and products.

In brief. an adequate, carefully planned, and operational Civil
Defense will obviate the unknown hazards of hasty improvisation
which can yield only inadequate if not actually negativo results
in the event of any serious peacetime or wartime emergency; to-
gether with Military Defense, it can help build a credible deter-

rent for those who otherwise might contemplate threatening the
peaceful existence of the nation.

Maj Gen Pasquale Di Marco is a graduate of the
Modena Military Academy Infantry and Cavalry
Schools and has held several assignments
with the Army General Staff, among them that
of Chief of the 1st Detachment. He has com-
manded the 59th (Calabria) Infantry Regiment
and the Legnano Infantry Division. He is
currently serving as President of the Mili-
tary Center for Civil Defense Studies.

COPYRIGHT: RIVISTA MILITARE PERIODICO DELL‘ESERCITO, ANNO CI,
NUMERO "/1978

6182
080: 310"

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

DEMOCRACY 1" ”CD: POWER STRUGGLE IN LEADERSNIP
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 5 Nov 78 pp 32.35.37

[Text] in a congress whose outcome was neither as bright as some would have
wanted nor as disappointing as others feared it would be. the UCD [Democrat-
ic Center Union] sent out its first democratic roots. although a large
sector of its base feels it was inadequately represented.

hours before the close of the First UCD Congress. Joaquin Garrigues. former
leader of the Liberal Party. which was absorbed by the government party.
and now minister of public works and urbanisation, said. with a touch of
his own brand of caustic humor. "Me? I'm happy. I managed to place five

of my people on the Executive Committee and as many on the National Council
of the movement."

Garrigues, perhaps without intending to. was in fact splendidly synopsiting
the big show that had been organized to portray a democratic image of the
party led by Adolfo Suarez.

The power struggle. which consumed most of the energy of the delegates.

and the disenchantment of many of the delegates from the provinces, who on
occasions felt that the calendar was being turned back to the days of
Francoism. were the two outstanding aspects of the first centrist congress.

A total of 37% hours of continuous work. over a period of 3 days. 19-21
October, proved to the 1.792 delegates assembled in Madrid's National
Palace of Congresses and Exhibitions that the internal tensions among the
distinct groups that make up the UCDo-democratised Prancoists. Christian
democrats. liberals and social democrats--still exist and that. for the
time being. the 80.000 grassroots militants do not control this party,
sired by the gods of power.

The basic facts are that the 11 motions discussed. setting forth the UCD's
ideology and its political. economic and social platforms. were adopted

by overwhelming majority votes and that not a single proposed amendment
reached the floor for open discussion in the plenary sessions.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The candidacies supported by Suarez went unopposed and became sole candida-
cies. The urns were used. not to oppose. but rather to rubberstamp the
chairman's decisions. hore than 30 percent of the delegates. judging from
the results of the voting, do not consider themselves represented on the
Political Council and on the Executive Committee.

Suarez Wins

Adolfo Suarez's leadership emerged strengthened by the event. which was
attended by about a dozen and a half invited representatives of the European
conservative parties, and the social democratic trend of the 060 emerged
clearly strengthened as the president headed the party toward more pro-
grassivism.

Nevertheless, the congress. from its very start. was lively. Everything
seemed to be well in the bag and bundled for a clean sweep by the social
democrats. But th- mayor of Madrid. of the party's Christian democratic
wing, was the first to throw cold water on the program.

After a few courteous words of introduction by Suarez. Jose Luis Alvarez
lost no time in launching into a half-hour speech embodying a complete
political platform, which was vibrantly urged on and applauded by the
assembled rank and file. In their box seats the social democrats went pale.

Alvarez. elected the day before to be the 060's official candidate for

the mayoralty of Madrid, with just 2 opposing votes. 2 abstentions and l
invalid vote out of 22, lashed out full tilt against anything that was not
Democratic Center Union. and he explained just how the party should pro-
ceed to act. "Let us remember." he said. “who it was that brought democracy
to this country. It did not come from the left, nor from 'platajuntas'

[see below]. Let us remember the work of Susrez's frist government, which
brought about the political reform..."

The minister of finance. Francisco Fernandez Ordonez. complained: "To

say that it was they who brought democracy to the country is a bit much,"
he said in the presence of CAHBIO 16. "As if the opposition did nothing.
Besides, he forgets that some of us, like Alvarez de Miranda and myself.
were in the Platajunts [composite name by which the two opposition groups
exiled in France during Franco's regime came to be known after mergingl."

Joaquin Ruiz-Gimenez. the Christian democratic leader of the ID [Democratic
Left], who was cheered by the congress when his name was cited as being
among the guests. was also less than satisfied with the mayor's speech.
when this newspaper asked him about the possibility of his joining the

"CD. he responded. "I personally am prepared to support the UCD party line.
however. the decision must be left to my party's congress. Nevertheless,

when one hears speeches like that of Jose Luis Alvarez. one experiences
serious doubts."

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One member of the UCD's Madrid region executive group called the mayor's
speech "electioneering and out of tune."

The commotion stirred up by the mayor started a rumor in the palace
corridors that the Christian democrats were preparing a list of candidates
to counter those backed by Suarez and that Jose Alvarez would be their
candidate for party leader. The mayor of Madrid headed off these comments
with a handwritten note. released to us by the congress' press office.
denying that he had had any such intent and that his speech was in any way

related to any such maneuver. Later he asserted that Suarez had advance
knowledge of his speech.

Alejandro Royo Villanova. who attended the congress as a delegate for
Valladolid. stated that he did not understand why there should have been
such a commotion. since "the chairman and Rafael Arias Salgado both received
copies of Jose Luis Alvaraz's speech 2 days before the congress."

Defeated

however, hundreds of journalists circulating among the delegates in the
corridors. lounges and main hall of the palace were able to sense in the
atmosphere the existence of a Christian democratic offensive on two fronts:
a debate on the issue of the party's constitution and bylaws and on the

proposed list of members for the Executive Committee and the Political
Council.

The Christian democrats. advocates. in their own view. of greater democrat-
ization of the party. open candidacy lists for elections to the party's
directive organs. and nonexistence of any "official" list. saw their pro-
posed amendments demolished. one by one, by the committee on bylaws.

The undersecretary of the Ministry of Justice. Juan Antonio Ortega Diaz-
Ambrona. who in the beginning had been excluded from participation in the
committee's proceedings and who had succeeded in entering them at the last
minute. only because another member had ceded him his seat. was the most
active defender of all the proposed amendments. "He has not failed to
intervene in a single one of them." said a member of that committee at

6 in the morning on Friday. after 12 hours of debate. "Hhat a man! What
vitality!"

The amendments that reached the floor were: that Executive Committee be
increased from 30 to 35 members. that this committee be guided by the
decisions of the Political Council. and that there be three representatives
on the Political Council from each parliamentary group. The amendments
proposing that there be three vice presidents and that elections to the

Executive Committee be based on a proportional system were killed in
committee. -

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Christian democrats. although defeated in the bylaws committee--in the
plenary session only 38 votes were cast against them. with 27 abstentions--
succeeded in placing 10 members on the Executive Committee, "more independ-
ent of the party leadership and of Adolfo Suarez."

The social democrats. for their part. were preparing a counteroffensive.

They withheld their trump card until the last moment. Francisco Fernandez
Ordones affirmed. “If there is a second slate. I will present a third one.

It won't win in the plenum. After the reaction from the bleachers to Jose

Luis Alvares'e speech. it cannot be said that the congress has a social
democratic majority. But I will present the slate and we'll see what happens.“

A Real Social Democrat

when the comment was made that Se Carneiro had actually been as loudly
cheered as the mayor of Madrid. Francisco Fernandez Ordonez acknowledged
indirectly that the Portuguese CDS [Social Democrat Center Party] leader's
speech had also been part of his group's strategy. "Sa Csrneiro.” he said.
"is every bit a true social democrat. I caught him just a half-hour before
and explained to him that this is not Portugal and that it was most important
he lend us a hand."

By noon Friday. 12 hours before the deadline for presenting slates. no one
any longer expected the Christian democrats to present one. Tacitly. by
then, some of them had recognized that their effort had gone for nought.
and their main concern was. like that of the other groups. how many of them
would take part in the slicing of the cake.

As the delegates anxiously paced the rooms and corridors of the palace.
munched on food or hit the whiskey in the coffee lounge--during these 3 days
all previous sales records were exceeded. with daily receipts of over
250.000 pesetas--the lists of candidates began to circulate.

As he walked toward the Palace of Congresses with other delegates. after
having dined on veal cutlets in a nearby cafeteria, Arturo Hays. deputy
undersecretary to Vice President Abril Hartorell. asked jokingly. "Don't
you have the same feeling as when. in school. you went to pick up your
grades?"

Lists for all tastes passed from hand to hand. However, the real one was
being hammered out, since the late evening hours. between Adolfo Suarez
and Rafael Arias Salgado. huddled in a simple basement office precisely
below the bar.

There must have been a leak. because a little before midnight the second

major conflict of the congress exploded. on the issue of the lack of pro-
portienal territorial representation.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Madrid Committee was the first to mobilize. Working against time. the
delegates from the province of Madrid. dissatisfied with the number of
places allocated to the province on the party's directive organs. put
together a proposed list for the Political Council. headed by Abel Cadiz.
chairman of the DC!) in Alcala dc llenares. who. according to his own esti-
mate. could mobilize 10.000 members.

The list. with strikeouts and blank spaces. was read to the plenary session
after presentation of the "official" slate by the chair of the congress.
presided over by Perez Llorca. leader of the congress' centrist parliamen-
tary group.

"he Represents Teruel?

"hen the lists were published. the provinces rebelled. Almeria's reaction
was the most contentious. Before stalking out of the palace. the Almeria
delegates announced that they would cast blank votes the next day. The
Baleares. Canarias, Granada and Soria delegations were also fit to be tied.

The Aragoaese delegates also considered that they had been slighted and
came right to the point. One of the delegates seized Suarez by the sleeve
in the assembly hall and said. "Me of Aragon will simply not go along with
this. How is it that no one is representing us?" The party chairman.
embarrassed. could hardly respond. "Well.” he said. "for that matter. I'm
from Avila. and there is no Avila representative." "No one representing
Avila?" exclaimed the Aragonese. '"nuey have you! what more do they want?
And what about Teruel...? It has absolutely no one representing it on

the slate."

The chairman left. disconcertcd. Not to La Moncloe. but to rectify "erratas."
The Mallorca delegates. seeing that Santiago Rodriguez Miranda. a social
democrat. was on the slate for the Political Council. complained to the
chairman. "But what do you mean?" Suarez asked. "was he not the one you
requested?"

The Mallorcans explained that Miguel Duran was the one they had recom-
mended. and Suarez met with Martin Villa. Arias Sslgado. Sanchez Teran and
Enrique Calavis. who was in charge of organizing the congress. Twenty
minutes later the group reappeared. smiling. and the "official" slate for
the Political Council. which had been read to the congress. was modified,
an hour and a half after the deadline had passed for the submission of
candidacies. Rodriguez Miranda was replaced by Miguel Duran for Mallorca.
and Enrique Sanchez by Boles Forslada for Zarsgoza.

0n the closing day the plenary session started one hour late because of
the Madrilenians. who had been caucusing since 9 am in the UNESCO salon.

After many discussions the 138 delegates of that province decided to free
the delegates to vote as they wished. This was done in order not to com-

65

FOR OFFICIAL ﬂSE ONLY
FOR OI’VNZMI. ".‘IH ONLY

pal the 50 delegates who had been handpicked for the delegation by the
party chairman. and who were known as "the Ayate 50." to bite the hand
that had picked them. But the remaining 88 had clearly decided to cast
blank votes if the list of candidates they had hastily presented the
night before was not put to a vote.

It was not. Peres Llorca. in an effort to introduce a measure of competi-
tion that would have given the matter a more democratic aspect. explained
to the plenary session that. despite the irregularities of the proposed
list. the chair wanted the decision to come from the plenum as to whether
the list should be put to a vote. The plenum voted "no".

The Almeria delegates also lost no time and called a press conference to
explain that they. the province with the most members in the 000 after
Barcelona. numbering almost 3.000. with only 2 representatives on the
party's directive organs. would cast blank votes. "He have had too many
problems with this congress and think we are not represented to the extent
we should be." said Francisco Solar Velero. an Almeria deputy. "how am I
going to explain to my constituents that I am not to blame. that I fought
to the very end but was given no satisfaction?"

Useful Idiots

”Hut they've done to us has no name." said another Almeria delegate.
visibly agitated. "We worked enthusiastically for months and months. then
came here with the best intentions in the world to help make the 000 a
great party. only to find that everything had been decided and handed
down from above and that we are mere extras. useful idiots. There are
people here who have not changed in the least and who continue in the old
ways of the past."

Despite this activity. however. Rafael Aries Salgado. who would later be
elected secretary general as had been planned. displayed great optimism

at the bar during the voting. ”I'm willing to bet any amount." he said.
"that not more than 100 blank votes will be cast. "hat they say in meetings
is one thing. but how they actually vote is another. Don't forget that the
voting is secret."

Rumor's Advice

It was evidently not forgotten by the dissatisfied delegates. because in
the voting for the Executive Committee and the Political Council about

200 abstained. about SOD-almost 30 percentucast blank votes. and between
25 and 30 invalidated their votes.

This means that. counting abstentions. blank votes and voided ones

together. only 61 percent voted affirmatively for the Executive Committee
and 58 percent for the Political Council. Snares was proclaimed party

‘6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chairman with 82 percent of the delegates present voting in hin fewer.

"It is a sour grapes vote." commented Abril Martorell when he learned of
the high persentaga of blank votes. "it is the natural reaction of those
who failed to get on the ballot and of their entourage."

At the conclusion of the voting the 060 Executive Committee consisted of
seven Christian democrats from different constituencies, five liberals.
five social denocrats--the sost active group hacking the congress-- five
for-er members of the former Popular Party. and the rest free of any
allegiance to Suarez.

All of the sinisters are on the Erecutive Connittee--except Gutierree
Hellsdo. who is not active in the UCD--notwithstanding that the day before
the congress closed. Mariano Rumor. president of the world Union of
Christian Democrats. cautioned Suarez against having then on the Executive
Connittee. "if the government goes into crisis." he told him. “you will

he saddled with outgoing officials in key positions in the party."

The final apotheosis was provided by Suarez and stars from the world of
the perforaing arts. Suarez evaded the topic of the general elections.
railed against the govern-ant of "neutrals" and. sold cheers and shouts
fro. his fanso-"They envy you!" "You're a genius! Since you were a
childl"--criticized the right and gently tweaked the ears of the left lest
there be some concern because. for the moment. he seems to be leaning
toward the party's lost progressive wing.

And so. too. was it understood by Encsrnita Polo. who at the stroke of

midnight. to the dellriu- of the delegates. sang four choruses oi ”Paco.
Paco. Paco...“

COPYRIGHT: 1978 CAHBIO 16

9399

as": 3110

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L
?0R OVPICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

BRIEFS

SECURITY sacmmn‘ruﬂariano Nicoloe, current director general for
security, Juen Joae Roaon. the civil governor of Madrid, and Antonio
lbanet Priere. the captain general of Barcelona, are the three candi-
dates for the new Secretary of State for Security. Hith the creation
of this new state aecretariat. the Public Order Under-secretariat

would be aboliahed. [Text] [Madrid canto 16 in Spanish 2!. Dec 78 p 7]

080: 3110

‘8
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SWEDEN

EXPORTS RISE CONTINUES; 1979 SEEN AS EVEN BETTER YEAR
Stockholm VECKANS APPARER in Swedish 7 Dec 78 pp 5-6

[Text] The forecasters agree -- Swedish exports
will continue to climb rapidly next year too.

This despite the fact that the biggest purchasing
nations will tighten up on their imports. But
there is great skepticism about the optimistic
predictions of the long-range report for the years
after that. That calculation would depend on a
big international economic boom at the beginning
of the 1980's.

There seems to be widespread agreement on Swedish export developments up
to the end of next year:

According to the Market Institute's fall report export volume will rise
7.5 percent this year and 6.5 percent in 1979 (using the calculation
methods used for national accounts).

The Federation of Swedish Industries published its "Industrial Market
Report" this week. This estimates a 7 percent increase in both 1978 and
1979.

This coincides very well with business plans as measured by the SCB
[Central Bureau of Statistics] export survey in November. Businessmen
are expecting a value increase in exports of 14 percent this year and
12 percent next year. This corresponds to a volume increase of around
7 percent for each year.

According to the long-range report (LU) which came out Monday, however.
export volume will rise an average of 8.6 percent a year in the 6-year
period 1978-83.

These figures must be regarded as extremely optimistic. Nith volume
increases of 7 percent for the first 2 years of this period -- 1978 and

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SH ONiX

I070 -- the average annual increase for the 0-year period 1960-85 would
huVe to he 0.b percent. The last time the figure was that high was in
I97! when the international economic boom was at its height.

HoweVer volume Increases of U-IO percent were common during the boom
your: in the 1000's. Thus if the international economy returns to the
conditions prevailing then it is entirely likely that the LU predictions
will provo correct. But right now there is great skepticism about such

n devulopment.

 

Export Market According to the sea Export Survey

Key:
1. Percentage

The curve shows the export market situation for all industrial products
except ships. it is based on the quarterly SCB export survey and shows
the difference between the number of firms reporting positive or nega-
tive views concerning developments.

Export firms expect that improvement in the foreign market situation
will he moderate during the second half of 1979 after the sharp rise this
year.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USR ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂoweVer LU predicts that some of the big Swedish export increase will be
produced by continuing to regain foreign markets. This is assumed at

a rate of 1.5 to 2 percent annually. e.g. 10-12 percent for the entire
6-year period.

This makes the forecast much more likely. According to the kl [Market
institute] calculations Sweden's share of the market for manufactured
goods (except ships) in the 0500 area will grow 8-9 percent in volume
during the 2 years 1978 and 1979. in that case a total recovery of 10-12
percent up to 1983 appears quite probable. The improveuent in the Swedish
market situation this year end next will also affect the first years of
the 1980 s.

LU estimates that world trade volume will rise 6-6.5 percent per year in
the period 1978-85. This would cell for an acceleration of the growth
rate -- this year the increase in world trade in less than 5 percent end
next year it will be only half a percentage point higher.

Big in the "wrong” Markets

Up to now Sweden has had "bad luck” with world trade. The biggest in-
creases in recent years have come in lands where we export relatively
little, such as the United States and Japan. The table below is taken
from the "Industrial Market Report" and shows development of product
imports (by volume) in 1977-79.

Share 1977 1978 1979

Norway 12.7 5.3 - 9 0
England 10.9 2 8 a
Host Germany 10.1 5.0 7 7.5
Denmark 9.0 - 2.6 0 2.5
Finland 6.0 ~ 8.5 - 1.5 5.5
United States 5.0 13.6 8 6
France 5.0 1 6.5 5.5
Total 59.5 2 2 3.5
Entire OECD 6.3 5 6

The seven countries in the table are Sweden's most important export
markets and account for almost 60 percent of Swedish exports in 1977.
But their volume of imports -- weighted according to Swedish export
ratios -- is rising slowly. The total increase for the 3 years 1977-79
is only 7.5 percent. At the same time the total import volume in 0:00
countries rose 16 percent.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1hese diiierences nppenr clearly in the export survey. Businesses esti-
mate that Swedish exports of industrial products to Nordic countries

(28 percent of our total exports) will decline by 8 percent in value.
This corresponds to a 10-15 percent decline in volume. instead there
will be big value increases in exports to underdeveloped countries. OPEC
countries. the United States and Canada as well as Japan. countries that
purchase a total of 20 percent of our exports.

Firms expect next year to be a little better with Nordic exports rising
6-7 percent in terms of value. But the biggest increases will still be

in our less important markets, especially those lying outside Western
Europe.

The preceding diagram seems to show that businesses anticipate a decline
in export prospects toward the end of next year. By end large the
growth rate of export value will hold its own. increases of 16 end 12
percent respectively in the first half end second half of this year com-
pared to the same period lest year. An increase of 8 end 1.5 percent
respectively for the two halves of 1979.

But they don't appear to believe that the market situation will show
much improvement after the turn of the year. The number of firms
counting on an improved market situation drops from 59 percent in the
second half of 1978 to 30 percent in the second half of 1979. The de-
cline is especially noticeable in the area of engineering products.

LU Too Optinistlc

The reason for this shift could very well be that firms are cautious
when they evaluate the situation a whole year in advance. it should
also be noted that over 60 percent of the firms responding expect the
market situation to remain unchanged after the big improvements in 1978
end the early part of 1979.

But even with a positive interpretation of the export survey there is no
support in business anticipations and market evaluations for the export
calculations in LU. These call for a sharp increase in the economic
growth rate in the United States and Hestern Europe in the early part of
the 1980’s. Of course this possibility cannot be ruled out entirely.
But at the moment there is not much to indicate such a change with only
a weak recovery in Hestern Europe and big inflation problems in the
United Stetes.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI.IEH UNIX

Export (——) och import l-—-—-) L... ....
sanonaronoum

8!. t son
an: (' ) :g73".?.‘35 (3)

£970: ‘00

   

   

Exports and Imports (Source: SCB)
Key:
1. Seasonally adjusted, a. Value
in millions of kronor 5. Volume
2. Seasonally adjusted 6. Price index
3. Thousands

From January to October 1978 import value uns onl

y 1 percent abovo the
same period last year. Exports rose 16 percent. But now imports are
rising again. in October He in

9,200 million kronor --
1977.

".060an

Mi: nu. scs

   

Valutarosorv (3)
"hf Kala R-Hhmm

    

Key:
l. Trade balance in millions. Source: SCI!
2. Exchange balance in millions. Source: National Bank
l. Currency reserves in millions. Source: National Bank
to. Thousands

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Currency reserves stayed abOVe 20 billion kronor in July, August and Sep-
tember but fell to around 19 bllllon In October. The balance of trade is
still showing a large surplus hocher and the exchange balance shown has

improVed someuhat.

     

' mam oxporrprﬁ‘ﬁarknadsandolar

MW <2> memo“)

v. :.-L ‘ ' . ' ' :
-...'.' ..'... 0-.— a . .-. ;
__ £ . . : . .

          

Key:
1. World trade, annual volume change in percentages
2. Relative export prices, annual change in percentages.
Source: Market Institute
3. Market shares, annual change in percentages. Source: OECD
a. World trade
5. Swedish exports

or 6-0.6 percent a year from 1978 to 1983 -- are to prove correct.

COPYRIGHT: Ahlens 6 Akeriunds Tryckerler, Stockholm, 1978

6578
C80: 3109

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL us}: ONLY

“881' GERMANY

SOVIET BCONMIC ACTIVITIES IN FRO DETAILED
Hamburg STERN in German 9 Nov 78 pp 80, 82, 84, 86, 88
(Article by Juergen Rurth]

[Text] Anetol' Yakovlevich Tsemyanskiy has been a member of the CPSU for

16 years. he also has been a member of the association of banks of Reason
for 4 years. As a comunist he is an advocate of dialectical and historical
materialism a la Lenin. As a banker he is a consistent believer in the free
market economy.

There is no contradiction in this for the 34-year old Soviet man. Because.
as he clarifies it for me while drinking a glass of vodka in the executive
office of his East-Rest Trade Bank in Frankfurt. "I am not here in the role
of a missionary for socialism but as a businessman."

There are now about two dozen cosmunist capitalists of comrade Tsemyanskiy's
type in the PRC. They are part of an advance guard of troops whose number
will be greatly increased in the coming years according to a decision of the
Kremlin. The goal of the red business troops is: to win profits for the
good of the glorious Soviet Union.

now that is done was recently shown by the Bast-Rest Trade Bank, which is
in all aspects a branch of Soviet state banks. in the presentation of its
business report, bound in silvertone. as is the style of bankers. The in-
stitute was able to credit its partners in Moscow with a year's profit of
0H2,636.ZOO-foreign currency that the traditionally deficient mother coun-
try badly needs in its foreign trade.

Other Soviet firms are hardly less profitable in the PRC, for instance. the
Schwarzmeer and Oatsee Insurance company (Sovag) in hamburg (yearly turnover
of 00112.6 million); the Transnsutic corporation, an overseas shipping agency
in Hamburg and Bremen (100 million); the liquor firm Pludimex trade company
in hamburg (25 million); the machine exporting firm Neotype Teﬂmsheksport
corporation in Bergisch Gladbsch (60 million); the Vesotra shipping and trans-
portation corporation in Cologne (10 million); the Sorbren chemicals trade

corporation in Duesseldorf (50 million); and the lumber and cellulose firm
llussholz corporation in Cologne (300 million).

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'thIL-H :IHym ”L... ah" my... many inmm lumen of Mn Inamuzllw SUWII'HUNION
uhUTh to interested VH6 citizens. Soon Niiyutcnko. who is also the first
secretary of the USSR embassy in nonn and news coordinator for the Moscow
press agency NOVOSTl, wants of course to demand payment of 0H6 yearly “to

be able to show in color how beautiful it is in the Soviet Union."

The first business principle of the Russians in this country is to avoid any
conflict and to carefully observe the laws. Oleg Kirsanovakiy, the head of
the Veaotra shipping firm in Cologne, for example, hardly allowed himself one
free weekend in his first year in the West. Instead he studied German laws
like the constitutional law of business that, inclusive of election procedures
and commentary, comprises 1,565 pages.

"We do not want to do anything that is not_allowad here, and have to know
therefore what is allowed." says Kirsanovskiy.

The Russians can also use their knowledge of the laws for dealing with the
German bureaucracy without problems. New arrivals from the East like to

call themselves businessmen, members of a bread of directors or chairmen

on their visiting cards and the trade register. According to German law they
are then self-employed and do not have to get a work permit at the department
of employment like guest workers from Turkey. Spain, or Austria. "Athough

I am also a guest worker,“ Tsemyanskiy says with pleasure, “but I am an em—
ployer-that is a great difference, na szorovye."

As entrepreneurs, the Soviet managers adapt themselves totally to their
German colleagues. Even in the case of a work conflict they would show
solidarity with the employer camp without hesitation. The Soviet firms

would go along even if they were asked by the German association of employers
to lock out their personnel during certain strikes. Teemysnakiy: "He set

in a way that is usual in the PRC."

In normal times, however, the 100 employees of the East-West Trade Bank com-
pany of Frankfurt-including six Russians-can count on the good will of

their boss. They are paid as well as their colleagues in the Deutsche

Bank and get the usual benefits of bank workers. Besides paying part of the
costs of transportation and providing their own cafeteria (specialty: Ukrain-
ian cabbage soup with Frankfurters) they also offer money bonuses for extra
hard workers. The best workers are sent to Siberia once a year-for rest.
Roselinde Seiffer-Rau, chairman of the business council, who is also the

chief of personnel of the bank, says: ”No one has ever been fired here."

Doris Puerbert, official of the union for trade, banks, and insurance com-
panies, also says that the Russians are ”not difficult" employers. "If things
were in all banks like in theirs, we could be completely satisfied."

The Soviets strive for a proper image with their business partners, too.
Taemyanskiy's trade bank did not forget to praise the Deutsche Bundesbsnk

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. .- m-u I-u..nm..... ll.lnl|- , uiull- m ”mu .ut-un .I ihllulICL' oi lllu liul'llh‘ill
money market in 1977 with a series of decisions concerning credit." And
the Schwarzmeer and Oatsce insurance company of Hamburg still proudly in-
cludes in its list of board of directors Toni Schmuecker. the chief of V".
although he had already given up his mandate in May last year.

It is all the more difficult for the reputation-hungry Soviets to tolerate
the accusation that they occasionally act too fiercely in the capitalist
competition. For a long time German ahipowners have complained that Soviet
ships have been offering their freight space at much lower rates than Hestern
shipping companies.

The 58-year old chief of the Transnautic corporation of Hamburg. Konstantin
Plyushchnikov. does not tire of denying such charges indignantly: "we are
accused of being cheaper because sailors on Russian ships allegedly cost
less. But look how many poorly paid Pakistanis sail under German flags."

When things become very difficult Plyushchnikov sends his German partner
into battle. Bernhard Dettmer, a Bremen shipowner. has every reason to

fight for the Russians. With his 49 million capital investment he is a

part of Plyushchnikov's Transnautic enterprise. He confirms: "We cal-

culate according to indisputable business principles."

By means of close work with German partners the Soviet entrepreneurs are
trying to stop the possible suspicion of questionable business practices

in the ERG. The German firm Simox of Juelich near Aachen has an 11.8 per—
cent share in the vodka and Crimean champagne business of the Russian
Plodimex in Hamburg. The Hesotra transportation firm of hamburg managed

by Comrade Oleg Kirsanovskiy has given to Kuehne and Nagel KG of Hamburg.

to the Bundesbahn related Schenker and to the trucking firm of the Neckermann
son-in—law Hans Pracht a 16 percent share each. Together they ship across
the Baltic. down the Volga into the Caspian Sea and on Iran and the Far
East.

The Soviet chemicals business under the business name Sobren in Duesseldorf

is flourishing with a 49 percent share by the Brenntsg AC, which belongs to
the Veba concern. Printing machines, electromotors. refrigerators and sswh
ing machines are marketed by the Soviet merchant Sergey Grigoryevich Ishchenko
under the name Neotype of Bergisch Gladbach together with the Anton Ohlert

KG of Cologne (25 percent share). The enterprises of Gratenau and Bessel-
bacher of Hamburg and Bremen, P. H. Earth and company, as well as Jacob
Juergensen have a 66 percent share in the lumber business of the Russhols
firm of Cologne.

Edzard Germelmann of the firm of Anton ohiert, which has a share in the
Soviet enterprise Neotype. answers the question what it is that can persuade
a German entrepreneur to do business with the conunists: "We have been
doing business with Russia since 1871, and as a partner of a Russian firm
all doors are open to us in Moscow."

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The strategy 01 uduptntlon ol the Soviets in the PRU rubs off into thelr
private lives. The comrades act in hamburg. in Cologne. and in Frankfurt
like the native entrepreneuers. Owning exclusively Daimler-Benz models

they drive defensively through city traffic. Neotype chief Sergey Ishchenko
listens to pecifying Kossck chairs on stereo cassettes in his Mercedes 280

so as "not to drive too fast“ in the sharp curves of Bergisch Gledbach.

Hesotra transporter Oleg Kirsanovskiy dared to go into the traffic only with
a driving instructor at his side in his Mercedes 280 88 when he came to the
capitalist "est a year ago. "In Moscow I traveled only by subway." the
transportation expert excuses his timid changeover to the fast employer-
limouaine. His compatriot Konstantin Plyushchnikov, the highest agent of
Transnautic of Hamburg. has himself chauffeurad for the sake of safety.

Vladimir Hilyutenko. the publisher of SOVIBTUNION REUTB. is an exception.
who occasionally drinks a little more than the law allows and then drives
faster through the streets than the police allow. But he risks this only
because he feels secure as an embassy official with his diplomatic plate.

The Soviets live right next to their German neighbors in houses and apart-
monta which they rent through their firms. Host of them are here with

their wives and children. Sometimes they even have close contact with the
population. The bank director Tsemyanskiy complains: "Recently my daughter

Nina had her sixth birthday; our three-room apartment of 75 square meters
almost collapsed with all the visitors."

To spare themselves visitors that are too pushy the communists excuse them-
selves with the explanation that they need rest at home after their hard
jobs. when it is their hobbies they are always eager for the company of
Germans. Sergey Ishchenko in Bergisch Glsdbach does not turn down any op-
ponent from a relaxing game of chess. And the chemicals businessman Vladimir
Bykovskiy likes to go looking for mushrooms and fishing. He likes advice
from the natives. "Recently I not someone using grapes for trout bait.

i tried that too and even got a bite."

Nikolay Nikologorskiy, vice chairman of Sovag of Hamburg. is a passionate
soccer player in this Hansa city. Proudly he reports that playing in the
Transnsutic team he won 6 to 1 against selected taxi drivers of hamburg and
3 to 1 against the kickers of the Finance Office.

At most the Soviets have problems in the PRC with the education of their
children. So far there are Russian schools only at the trade firm in Cologne
and at the embassy in Bonn. The 6-year old Nina Tsemyanskiy in Frankfurt

had to go to school. "According to Russian law," discusses her father
Anstol' the problem. "she does not have to go to school until the age of

7. If it should become necessary I will teach my child myself after work."

Russians do not send their children to German schools on principle. Beside
the fact that only a few teachers speak Russian in this country. the parentts
do not trust what is being taught in German schools. especially history. The

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

little Russians would not go far in German classes anyway. Their parents
are ordered back to Russia after 3 years. or after 5 years at most. There

they teach new cadres in their positions at the foreign trade apparatus.
based on their experiences in the West.

By this rotation of personnel more and more Soviet functionaries learn
western managerial science, and the Kremlin gets a more complete view of
the Western market from information of its deputies.

This is becoming more and more important for the Soviets, because they are
now also starting to increase their exports. The most recent example of
marketing made in the USSR: The patent firm Lisenzintorg of Hoscow started
a cooperation bureau in Essen with the Ferrostesl A6, a trade company of

the Gatehoff nines in Oberhausen. The Russians want to sell licenses to the
whole world now via this outpost in the Ruhr region. They are offering
Soviet techniques for the production of special rollers by centrifugal
casting for the production of rolled metal products, or techniques for steam
cooling in blast furnaces. The newest hit offered by the Ferrostssl sub-
sidiary firm: a Soviet drug for treatment of cancer.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 STERN

9232
080: 3103 END

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY