POI OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10669
I9 July 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 44/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘0

NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials frou foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. there no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was su-erired or extracted.

Unfamiliar nenes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nanas preceded by a ques-
tion car]: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

OOPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP 0P
HMIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
REST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 44/82)

Courau'rs

rm: FORCES

BBLGIIH

SP's Tobbeck on Cruise Missile Sites. Socielist Strstegy

(Louis ‘robbsck Interviev; VEIJ mm. 19 Jun 82) l
FEDERAL REPUBLIC or 0mm:
Alternstive Dcionse Strstegy Needed for Emdeswehr
(Rolf l’srdelvitr; STEIN. 9 Jun 82) ........................ 9
ITALY
Criticsl Anslysis of M10 Strstegy by Gen Sslntisllo
alum mlrm. M’Apr 82) oeseeeeoeeeesssseeessseeeoeo 15
POLITICAL
FRANCE
Internal Dissension Anon; PC? Leadership Examined
(Irene Allier; LE mum. OBSERVA‘I'EUE. 22 any 82) 29
Aron. Eontsine on Detente. Polend. Ger-say. North-South Issues
(Eric Eoussel; PARADOXES, Apr 82) ......................... 3!.
Hum”
PEARCE
Recognizing Eneny. Meeting. In European Theater
(Clouds Delbos; m D'AUJOUID'EUI. May 82) 66
UNITED mum
"IKE TDBS' QUESTIONS VALIDITY OF DEM! CUTS
(Editorial; TIE TIMES. 1 Jul 82) . 1.9
- a - [III - WE - 150 F000]

90. amt-nu, I” ONIV
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER FORCES BELGIUM

SP'S TOEEACK ON CRUISE MISSILE SITES, SOCIALIST STRATEGY
Amsterdam VRIJ NEDEILAND in Dutch 19 Jun 82 p 8
[Interview with Louis Tobback by Jef Coeck]

[Text] Louie Tobback. chairman of the Belgian eocialiete'
parliamentary delegation. is known for wearing hie heart on
his sleeve. when he knows a thing for sure, or feels it, he
says it. And it makes-no difference whether it to criticism
of hie opponente. the closing of nuclear power plants. or, as
in this case. the controversial placement of American cruiee
aieeilee in hie country. "Give us Americana again at last
who can read and write.”

Belgian Prine ninieter Uilfried Hartene'e Catholic-liberal coalition, which, as
is well known. poeeeaeea plenary powers, will soon face a number of impor-
tant decisions. There ie the semiannual evaluation of the missile question.

It can be reasonably expected that the path of leaet resistance will be chosen.
and that a definite decision will be postponed another 6 months. According to
the Pleaieh eocialiete that is a kind of swindle. Karel van Hiert, the party
chair-an. has declared that the decieion has been aade long since, and that he
knows where the new cruise missiles will be put: in the little village of
Plorennee in the Ardennee.

Furthermore, before the recess of the Belgian regional parliaments a Broad Pub-
lic Discussion on nuclear energy nuet flare upo—for that discussion is still
not ao broad in Belgium that the population must be drawn into it.

Louie Tobback, the noisy chairman of the Plemiah eocialiete' parliamentary dele-
gation. has meanwhile announced that as of 1 July he wants to put an end to the
cabinet'e plenary powere. How Tobback will bring that about is completely un-
clear, but anybody that asks questions about that is a chronic old grunbler.

We are talking with the defense specialist Tobbeck about nuclear rockets. nu-
clear power plente. and the future of his Socialiet Party.

[Queetionl Not long ago DB HORGEN said that in some Elemieh part circles
closing the exieting nuclear power plants is being advocated on t Netherlands
nukhel. Has nobody heard here that the PvdA [(Netherlande) Labor Party} has
abandoned that poeition again?

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P03 OPYICIAL US! ONLY

[Answer] Oh. yes. certainly we know about that. That is why we do not want to
get entangled in the PvdA'a dead-end strategy! In the matter of nuclear power
plants we simply want no new ones added. .Closing the power plants that already

exist is an untenable line. And it is precisely that point that the PvdA is
always trotting out again!

[Question] It is quite logical that the SP [Socialist Party] does not advocate

the closing of nuclear power plants, since the Socialist Hilly Class built them
for years as minister of economic affairs.

[Answer] Look here, that is so typical! A malicious remark that shows little
grasp of democratic processes! Claes never had a single power plant built. The
government we have participated in since 1977 has established and respected a
monxtorium, a stoppage of the construction of nuclear power plants.

[Question] Moratorium? During the same period Deal-3 and Tihsnge-Z have been
erected! '

[Answer] But that decision had been made earlier...

[Question] You are not going to claim that Claea is against nuclear energy,

are you? He put out a "White look" that was largely in favor of nuclear power
plants.

[Answer] No, in that white Book he left the choice open...

(Quotation from the white Book, 1978: "Prospects concerning the capacity to be
installed. Under the minimal hypothesis. toward 1989 a nuclear power plant of
1,300 megawatts must be added; under the maximal hypothesis that must be done
by 1986. At this moment it may be reasonably hoped that complete mastery of
this energy technology will be achieved very rapidly. In evaluating the risks

it must not be forgotten that every industrial activity involves certain risks."
Etc.. etc.)

Tobhack: Do not forget that the situation is somewhat different on this issue

in Flanders from the situation in the Netherlands. There you have a broad
public movement against nuclear energy.

[Question] Here, too. The VAKS (Verenigde Actiegroepen voor Kernstop [United

Action Groups for a Nuclear Stopl) are very active. The SP systematically
yteers clear of them, of course.

[Answer] Not true. Every time the VAKS has asked for a discussion we have re-
velvvd them.

[Question] Nothing has ever come of it.
[Answer] Yes, there has.
[Question] What, then?

[Answer] It will suffice if you take cognizance of the amendments that we are
presenting with a view to the Great Energy Debate that will soon be held in

)8! ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE OIL?

parliament. Then you would see that we take good positions on it.

[Question] In the meantime, of course, nuclear energy has become an opposition
issue.

[Answer] No. no. Just compare Claes's views with those of Knoops (the liberal
secretary of state for enerSY).

[Question] I have never said that it could not be worse.
(Scornful laughter resounds through the room.)

[Answer] Listen, I am not planning to accept all VAKS's positions unquestion-
ingly. No matter how appealing and full of good intentions they may be. I my-
self an against any additional nuclear power plant and for develop-en: of
alternative sources of energy. But I am not against nuclear power because it

is nuclear. I am not a green bay.

[Question] Shall we now lake the traditional transition iron nuclear energy to
nuclear rockets? The cabinet has announced that after the NATO sulmit meeting
in Bonn it nay possibly make a decision about the placement of the missiles.
"her decision is that. in your opinion?

[Answer] The decision has already been aade and it is yes. "hat is the issue,
essentially? It is a satter of Reagan's knowing for sure that he can set those
things down in Belgium if he needs to do so. Hell. he has that certainty. Be-
fore his departure for Europe the American President said: "We aust salute the
Heat Ger-an, British, and Belgian governments for their leadership in this
critical issue." Surely that is clear? Apparently he cannot count on the

Netherlanders, but he can count on the Belgians.
[Question] Such a statement is at most an indication. not proof.

[Answer] I agree, but there are also the statements of our defense ninister,
the Liberal Vreven. He speaks and acts as if to hi: it were a natter of course

that those nisailes are coming.

[Question] 0n the other hand. there is the “new flexibility" of the CV? [Chris-
tian Social Party]. lt participated in the latest anti-missile demonstration of
0 June. At the demonstration in October of last year it was still completely
absent.

[Answer] Oh, well. The CV? is mainly participating in the coming elections.

[Question] You think the CV? has its eye on the municipal council elections in
October and is trying to take the wind out of the socialist opposition's sails?

[Answer] It is trying, but will not succeed. Among people who think at all,
its cynicien can only increase the abhorrence or the CVP.

[Question] But it cannot be denied that the Catholic colunn and its political
arm, the CVP, are under great pressure from opponents of the missiles. Let

POI OIPICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me mention the christian Labor Movement, the Interdiocesen Pastoral Consulta-
tion. Pam Christi, and whatever they all call themselves. I might also say,
night I not. that the CV? is just democratically bowing to the majority posi-

tion?

[Answer] You might say that. yes. And I think that is fine. The main thing
is to keep the missiles away. If the CV? helps us do that, so much the better.
It also furthers polarization, and that is a bonus. That way still more of

the conservative-minded CVT'ers will flee to the Liberals. A splendid thing!
If we can force the CV? to declare itself on more issues. maybe we will attain
a healthy democracy in Flanders.

[Question] "here are the missiles to be located? The SP first said Zutendsal,
then Kleine Brogel. and now Plorennes. when I hear that I am inclined to be-
lieve the sinister of defense, who says that the SP wants to get at the truth
by lies. Why do you not simply admit that you do not know?

[Answer] Because 1 do know. It will be Florennes. And I should like to point
out that you must read a little more carefully. It was not the SP but be HORGEN
that ever said that they would be placed in Zutendesl. That they were destined
for Kleine Brogel was stated in the confidential report that Minister Simonet
sent to the members of the parliamentary committee on defense and foreign af-

fairs...

Confidential
[Question] My head is whirling. You did say that they will be in Plorennes?

[Answer] Believe me, it will be Florennes. Not Zutendaal or Arendonk or
Bachten-de-Kupe. FZorennes! We have the best conceivable reasons for saying

that so positively.

[Question] What reasons?

[Answer] Hell. unfortunately. I cannot make that known; that is confidential
information. But if Vreven should say tomorrow that it will definitely be
Saint-Hubert, I am prepared to state that he is lying. It is no worse here
than in the United States; did you know that? The Hormone of Salt Lake City
were informed in advance of the placing of the H! rockets in Utah. Not only
that, the president takes account of their objections and ultimately does not
place the HX in Utah. The Belgian is not even supposed to know that there will
be rockets in his country. And what does the minister of defense do? He puts
his tongue in his cheek. “Aha. you are trying to get at the truth." As if

that were a reproach!

[Question] Vs; are assuming that the 48 Belgian rockets will also be placed
in Belgium. Strictly speaking that need not be. There is a scenario conceiv-
able by which Belgium and the Netherlands temporarily push their rockets off
on each other. Suppose questions are asked about the matter in the Second
Chamber. "Is it true that they are in n1astricht?" Then they are transported
superfast to Belgium, and than the Netherlands minister can declare in all
conscience that there is not a cruise missile to be found in the whole of the
Netherlands. In the reverse direction it would, of course, work in exactly

the same way.
FOR OPTICIAL 08B OIL!

[Answer] ﬂaha! If that is true we had better cease our resistance. Si non 3

veno a ban trouato. This smells of Orwell! This presupposes such a large dose
of reetriotlo mentalis (narrowwmindedness) that it must have came from o Chris-
tian brain.

[Question] The socialist Stemerdink has found out that the CDA [(ﬂetherlands)
Christian Democratic Appeal] is toying with such a plan.

[Answer] There you are. I think the Holy Ghost has been at work here.

[Question] Surely it does not matter a straw where those things are located?
Their great strength lies in mobility.

[Answer] Where in Belgium they are placed does indeed make no difference at
all from the military point of view. If France is willing to take then off
our hands and they are then set up right by the Belgian border, that gets rid
of the problem as far as I am concerned. After all, I cannot prevent the
French from putting their Pluto rockets there.

[Question] Hith all your talk about where they will or will not be placed. you
have really been focusing the discussion on an irrelevant point.

[Answer] I have not focused the discussion at all. The SP is continuing to
urge that no new rockets come to Belgium at all. That does not alter the fact
that the residents are concerned about the place where they are set up.

[Question] And are the residents wrong about that?

[Answer] 0h, people react subjectively and emotionally. I. too. Bygienically
it makes no difference whether my drinking water, so long as it is well con-
trolled, comes from under the churchyard or not. But I would rather not know
about it.

[Question] Reagan comes to Europe and suddenly the NATO summit meeting seens
to be being held not in Brussels but in Bonn. Apparently the Americans feel it
is fun to whispbr secrets with the social democrats.

[Answer] I have it from a good source that it was not Schmidt but the liberal
Genecher that invited the American President to Bonn. Schmidt has no secrets
to whisper. At the last SPD [Social Democratic Party of Germany], where I was,
by the way. he had to promise that the missile issue would be reviewed in the
fall of 1983. For the Americans Schmidt has now more than ever become an
unreliable partner. I am not initiated into the secrets of the ClA-it is dif-
ferent with the KGBl-but I could imagine that behind closed doors in the
United States there is consideration of the replacement of Schmidt by Strauss.
0r Kohl; that is still the greatest point of uncertainty. To put it euphemis-
tically. Schmidt is being very poorly repaid for the services he has rendered.
The ﬂoor has done his duty. the Moor can go. Let it be a lesson to all other
social-democratic leaders.

Pork and Beans
[Question] Is this anti-Americanism?

FOR OPPICIAL 083 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] No, I am not anti-American. I am against this administration, just
as I was against the preceding one. I hope from the bottom of my heart that
before too long a time there will be an American government that I can stand
behind. The Kennedy line, Cyrus Vance-day full sympathy goes out to them.
Give us Americans once more at last that can read and write. I have sat and
watched French television broadcasting the show from Versailles. There was a
interpreter of 14th century Are Nova balladee on. They are smooth. light bits

of music. but you could clearly see that they were over the head of the cowboy
Ronald. who understands only his own pork-and-beans culture.

[Question] Oh. I thought you were about to go after the Sun King Hittersnd?

[Answer] I must admit that what I have gotten to see of Hitterand lately is a
real disgrace. I am almost inclined to say that it would do Thatcher credit
that she left. if it were not that she so urgently had to wage war. Vbrsaillss
is a blot on the socialist scutcheon.

[Question] Reagan once let it slip that if necessary he would deploy the cruise
missiles withOut nuclear warheads...

[Answer] That is outright insulting, for it appears that Reagan thinks we
Europeans are idiots. Rockets are always stationed without warheads. The
warheads are often kept kilometers further up. Naturally you can also load a
cruise missile with a bar of'pralines. But let we agree that in that case the
cost of the whole system seems a trifle extnnmgant. "hat Reagan is demo-
gogically aiming at is this. If you have 60 cruise missiles you fire off 39
of them with conventional charges to keep the opponent's defense system busy.
Only one of the rockets has a nuclear warhead, and on the other side they

do not know which it is. That makes the system relatively cheap. too.

[Question] If we had to do it all ourselves it would come out a bit sore ex-
pensive. it is true. A number of European gentlemen, including Tindemans. our
minister of foreign relations (and the CDA'ers Penders and Janssen van Rosy).
have set up an international pressure group to deal with European defense ques-
tions. How acceptable is it for Tindemans to play a prominent part in that?

[Answer] Completely unacceptable. This club just wants to try to keep the
peace movement in check. It is a new movement from the extreme right, way

over toward the fascists. That can be seen from the program and from the names:
Strauss. Otto von habsburg, von Kielmannaegg... Tindemana is now trying to
deny that he has anything to do with it, but his credibility in the matter has
been reduced to nil. I have the evidence in hand: documents. facts. The
meeting at which the European Institute for Security Questions was founded was
held at the Bgmont Palace in Brussels. By the way. Bernard (to his assistant),
that reminds me that I must ask the government what that piece of nonsense cost.
(To me again:) The Egmont Palace is made available by the Belgian government
for official and prestigious occasions.

[Question] I keep coming back to your way of conducting the opposition. Ask-
ing questions is fine; action is better. Won't you agree with that?

[Answer] That is why I have switched over to action in my own electoral dis-
trict. Louvain. I heva formed a list there with SP'ers, communists, and the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

politically homeless. The advantages are legion. If snall leftist groups keep
coming up with separate lists, they will never get a seat. In the Belgian
electoral system the left-over votes go to the biggest party; i.e., the CVP.

I also feel that the childish disputes of leftists along the-selves have just
got to stop. Not that I have now becone a comaunist; I an not that crazy.

The united list is also an appeal to the politically hoaeless: “As it is, you
and those like you are everlastingly going to stand on the sidelines. I want
to put the old slogan of the Netherlands New Left into practice: 'If you want
the party further to the left, join in!’"

[Question] Excellent, butwhanwill you bring in that way? Phrase-Iaking friars
and denotratic denagogues? I notice, for example, that the sound anticlerical-
isa that certainly still exists within the party is systenatically denied by

the leadership. To say no sore.

[Answer] I am what you call a sound anticlerical; Christians do not interest as.
"hat interests me is that people who are progressive, or call it leftist. not

be kept apart froa each other because of those dashed colunns. Indeed, the dan-
ger exists that you are going to form a club of social workers. The M know
all about that. I an particularly excited about the dialog that we in Louvsin
can engage in with the politically honeless, the independent leftists. They
are the salt in the nasal They Open the way into a world other than the party
world. Because of its position as the underdog in Flanders the party is get-
ting scared of its own shadow. Cold water fright! It looks as if the 5? had
become a sort of tribe where you do not get the right to speak until after the
initiation rites.

[Question] Exactly. At the SP congress early in May Jef Ulburghs, the Catholic
pastor from Limburg, was allowed to take the floor. Nice for hin, but what did
he have to say? He talked about "socialism with a human face, the encounter
function, and new and fresh analyses." Is that the kind of fashionable chit-
chat the SP needs?

[Answer] No. But it should first be said that not everybody is such a chilly
aaterialist as you and I. Sole people also have spiritual needs. Second,
there is note to it than the words he uses. A man like Ulburghs is a living
reproof to the whole party. What he is doing there in Linburg among imported
laborers and other oppressed people, in short, his involvement, is a hundred
tines as great as that of the ordinary SP militant.

[Question] Agreed; that nan was at the Limburg mines hack in 1970 during the
weeks of wildcat strikes. I did not see the 8? there, then still called the
BSP [Belgian Socialist Party]. So sincerity and the Breakthrough idea consist
in your having to wait 12 years before get up to the trough a little bit?

[Answer] th should you not be willing in politics to start saall? It was

not until Van Miert came in as chairman in 1977 that things began to change
gradually. Because you are half Netherlands I will make another coaparison
with the Netherlands. Hhat we are now striving for is not the Breakthrough

of the Netherlands party in the 1950's; we want the New Left in power. This is
mourning: if anyone should ever try to cleanse our party docwnents of every-
thing that might disturb the believers, I would resign ihnwdiately. Why is
our greatest concern for the Christians? That is just a sociological fact.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IQucstion] Then it is not a latter of votes, or. to continue in that style. of
minnim, noulo?

[Answer] Not in the negative sense that you are giving to it. But it is a
hatter of winning people. You cannot get around the power of nulbers...

The conversation has now clearly taken a different turn. The politician has
gradually lost all trace of swagger and smart cracks; this is not a laughing

matter. I still try to find out what the party has to offer the Breakthrough
crowd. "Blood, sweat. and tears. But do it anyway," is the ansver. The euk-

vard feeling creeps over me that I also have Jehovah's Witnesses and Hormona
standing beside me on the sidewalk. But you can get rid of then by the idle

use of God's name. I no saved by the telephone. Another journalist, this
tine from the BR! [Belgian Radio and Television (Dutch Service)], wants to
talk with the parlianentary delegation leader.

COPYRIGHT 1982: VN/BV Heekbladpers.

8815
C80: 3105/18?
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

TIRE! FORCES m REPUBLIC 01' 6mm

ALTERNATIVE mm mm mm son mum
HsnburcminGemn9Jm82pp18-SO
[japan by vol: Perdelwitz: meither Red, Her may

5mg cuticswuumismuumngmwurm
nored mice are better suited to offense thm defense— and
in case of war we would only be left with the choice between
capitulation and nuclear suicide. Is some kind of "alter-
native defense" a. way out ?

it bottom. it is really quite simple. If the wersew Pact mounts an attack
against us, we defend ourselves by conventional means until everyﬂzing is
kaputt in our comtry. Then, we defend ourselves with battlefield nuclear
weapons until all of Central Europe is keputt. And after that, we defend
ourselves with the strategic mcleer missiles of the Anericens until the
whole world is ksputt. Even officers of the nudeswehr's general staff
view the consequences of W's existing ”flexible response" doctrine in
this nexmer.

The core of this doctrine which has been official NATO policy since 1967
is that an attack should be repulsed as close as possible to the frontier
so that there will not be a "protracted struggle on the soil of the me."
The Bonn defense white book of 1975 states that nuclear weapons should be
used "as late as possible but as early as necessary." This mcertsinty re-
garding the use of moles: weapons is intentional. me snow should not
{mow "hat the NATO response will be end therefore be deterred out of fear
of a general nuclear war.

But what if this deterrence does not work ? Are we then really rather dead
than red ?

1.3 in a fortress under siege, it seem, the hmdeswehr leadership in its
ministry up on Bonn's Ilerdthoehe hes taken shelter behind the deterrence
doctrine. It has done so despite the fact that it can no longer be over-
looked that the west German any—"one of the finest combat forces," as
:Linister Hans Apel has put it—cm no more survive in its present state
than the eeurims when the em opponents like to point to by saying:
"Died out-too mch amor, too little brains."

POIOFﬂClAllSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lardthoehe is being challenged from several directions at once—not that it
seems to bother the armchair strategists one bit. Even the usually pro-mili-
tary Hamburg weekly DIE m was saying recently: "0n Eardthoehe, clinging
to old strategies and systems is deemed more important than looldng for new
departures; Defense Minister Apel has gone fishing intellectually."

There are more than enouga reasons to look for new departures—tout:

There is the peace movement which considers President how's same policy

of "re-arming in order to disarm" absurd and dangerous and would rather die-
am right away.

There is the growing number of critics of all stripes politically who think
they know by now what the secret behind Helmut Schmidt's sixties' philosophy
is. The me, he said than, can only be defended "at the cost of total de-
struction." Given the fact that two-thirds of the 6,000 nuclear weapons de-
ployed on me soil have a reach of less than 120 kilometers, they must per-
force explode on German soil once they are fired. This is tantamctmt to de-
fense throng: suicide and that is why the critics are looking for ways to
mount an "alternative defense."

Then, there is the forthcoming lack of personnel which will force the handse-
uehr to trim dovm. Lower birth rates will reduce the number of available con-
scripts to below the 200,000-man annual minimum by 1987. Prologing military
service would help very little, as the hmdeswehr has detemined. Each month
of added service would make up for Just 10,000 of the missing conscripts;

but at the height of the lower birth years, the shortfall would amount to at
least 70,000 to 30,000 men.

Finally, there is the lack of funds projected for years into the future which
will call for economy measures. During the been years, the politicians gave
the military Just about amthing they asked for; but now costs have out-
stripped the ability to pay. Last year, the Bardthoehe budget could only be
preserved intact by taking up a collection among the other ministries.

Where only the newest and most complicated equipment was good enough. there
grew up an am that put the fear of God even into high-ranking military men—
not only those on the enemy side but on our own side as well. With the'Ieo-
;m.rd 2, " a maxim of technical sophistication has been reached which can

just barely be handled by the consripts.

«.‘onurbations Are Dangerous for Tanks

i—mw critics also consider this type of equiment dangerous for other reasons.
hooked into defense operations close to the border, the Bmdeswehr has equip-
ment at its disposal that is suitable to re-fighting the Blitzkrieg: of World

as: II. Peace researcher Lt (:01 Alfred Mcchtereheinsr (ret) calls the Bandea-
uchr a "composite of the Afrikakcrps and American expeditionary forces."

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The hmdeswehr, with its fast armored forces, would indeed be an exceptional
attack force. For that matter, that is what it is supposed to be, since de-
fense operations close to the border would be impossible except by mounting
quick counter-thrusts, in the opinion of the militaw experts. But the neigh-
bors to the Ehst, who have had painful experiences with attacking German are
nice, might be justified in worrying about this type or equipment, critics
say, askim: themselves Just how seriously we take article 2‘ o.’ the Basic
law which calls the preparation of an aggressive war ”unconstitutional."

Wen high-ranking Osman military men doubt that the Btmdeswehr, in its
present tom, is ideally equipped to defend the m. ”I believe we have the
wrong kind of military equipment," Major General Guenter Vollmer (rot) says.
"1-!e not only wish to defend ourselves; it even says so in our Basic Law. For
defensive purposes alone, we do not need tanks! Us have armor plating on
just about everything; and tanks are an incredibly suitable attack weapon."

The senseless 'ﬁiyper-aophisticsticn of teclmolog" applying to fully mecha-
nized, armored any units comes in for criticism by Brigadier General Franz
Laue-hettler. The price of prcmss is that these troops can be used on al-
tost "half the terrain of Gemany" only at the greatest risk, he claims.
The densely populated combations along the Rhine, the hain and the Ruhr
would be a dangerous environment in which to operate for tanks suited for
combat in the open. And tanks would be of no use whatever in about 30 per-
cent of the territory of the 1786 covered with woods and highlands. Uhle-
alettier knows whereof he speaks. He is a Panzer general himself.

lie feels the arm has reached a "cul-de-eao."* Equipped with more and more
perfect amaments, it cannot be used in a large part or the area it is meant
to defend. Because perfect equipment is dependent on peifsct supply, each
combat soldier must be bashed up by three support personnel. And this gigan-
tic supply operation itseli‘ is such a delicate business that it met be pro-
tected in turn—by combat troops that are then missing at the front.

In addition, this train acts as an intellectual drain on the combat units,
he says. 'i'ne supply units are composed of the most intelligent conscripts
for the most part; the combat units often have to make the best of it with
the "dumbest." "In our high-tectmoloy amiss," Uhle-Hettler says, "the
huge non-combatant units constitute the cream of the crop. The combat units
just get the low-fat milk most of the time."

Soldiers Should Go Back to wanting
Jo: this reason, the Panzer general calls for doing without armor. ﬁne sol-
diers should climb out of their "Barton" amored personnel carriers and make

their way through the woods lightly med like the infantry or old. "Who else
could dislodge the snow from the mzoen ?" Uhle-Ucttler asks.

-“- Franz Uhle-‘Jettlen 'Combat Area Central amps. wagers oi‘ Hyper-Irechnolog
for the Armed Porces," Olzog Publishing House, Itmioh; 260 p.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

i'ajor General Jcchen Ioeser (ret)* goes one step further. He, too, deplores
the "paralyaaticn of the armed forces by an oversized administrative apps;-
ratus" and the 'hypebtechniaation and hmaucratiaation" under which the
"striking power” of the Bundeswehr rust suffer. lie, too, knows whereof he
speaks. Loeser was an armored infantry general. If the no cannot be defen-
ded by its existmb- military forces, Loeser we, then this causes down to a
choice between capitulation and nuclear suicide.

But ‘uoeser believes he has found a. narrow alternative that lies between
"red" and "desd"-"conprehensive defense" using conventional defensive
weapons while at the same time rencuncing the use of battlefield nuclear
weapons.

This plan which originated with Stamberg peace researcher Horst Afheldt
some years age“ makes a lot of sense. This, however, would call for com-
plete re-thinking which might be painml for some of the generals because a
:rultitude of small engagements—in which the sarcasm would be worn down
and at length forced to retreat—would take the place sf decisive battles
foudnt by fast—moving armored units.

The basic idea. is this: If the Warsaw Pact really enjoys as massive a supe-
riority as HATC- always claims, it would mice no sense for the West to pre-
pare for battle, matching the other side tank for tank and cannon for cannon.
Under such circumstances, the mamerically inferior side invariably loses.

It is therefore senseless for NATO to structure and equip its divisions
exactly as the ‘Jarsaw Pact does because in a direct confrontation it would
be bound to lose. "l'he West mat pay back in another coin."

The coin :oeser and Ai'heldt have in mind is this: Smll units are distributed
throughout the territory of the ERG. It is their primary task to defend the
area that has been assigned to them in peacetime and with which they are
familiar. Wherever the attacker enjoys superiority, they pull back and even
percut him to roll past them in the woods. Most of them are only lightly
med; their main weapons being small, portable precision missiles to deal
with the snow armor. Ahfeldt has come up with the surprising conclusion

that if each of these 12 to ZO-m units—which he calls "techno-consumes"—
:mcclzc out Just three anew tanks, the Red Army will reach the East bank of
the Rhine with just one tank and will have to give up.

Technically, this would not be a problem even today. The Btmdeswehr's enti-
tank rockets are extremely accurate; their hit ratio is more than 80 percent.
They are also small. easy to transport and inexpensive. They do not even cost
one percent of what a tank costs and there is a tremendous political advan-
tage they have, too. They cannot be used in an attack, but on defense they
are hard to beat.

—-—-————

"-‘ Jochen Lesser: "thither Sled, Hor'neid. Survival without Nuclear ‘Jar—
.-‘. Security-Political Alternative“ Guenter 01203, l'lunich, 280 p
M ilorst Ahfeldt: "Defense and Peace," earl W, Htmich, 346 p

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nut Ahfeldt's plan has a big drawback, which is also political. It presup-
poses close cooperation between military and civil defense and as a con-
sequence a greater degree of militarization of the PR} as well as the

supply of anus to the population even during peacetime. 'lhe tedum-comndoes
would practically have to keep their missiles in their cupboards at home.

Loeser, for his part, calls for a nix of small combat units and conventional
armed forces. The small unite are to delay the anew advance with the larger
units mounting lightning center-than“. "me attacker would be faced with
over new surprising situations." Iceser em. "dhen he has captured a snail
sector, he is hit free new resistance pooloets firm the depth of the network
which are hard to pinpoint with an intensity of fire which has an unexpected
effect in conjunction with the many roadblocks and reinforcements of the
terrain. Mry little forest gully. every firebreak. every valley and every
Izill becomes a problem for the attacking amored units."

In the neutral countries of Europe—above all in Austria and in Switzerland—
cinilar defense strategies have already been put into operation. 'mey have
one major advantage and sons major disadvantages. Armed forces of this kind
are suited for defensive purposes only and therefore cause no fear among the
neighboring countries; but at the same time they create a risk of the weapons
falling into the wrong heads and having war spill over the entire comtry.

Figuring on a "Protracted Nuclear Var"

{artisan-like fighting methods have proved their effectiveness 'before after
all. maria; the past 40 years, only one regular any has been able to defeat
a guerilla arm—the British arm in Malaya in a war that lasted fron 1948
to 1957. But “so Dze Dow's battle for China, Tito'e victory over Hitler
and the Vietnam ‘Jar all are convincing proof of the chances for victory of
such fighting methods.

The war in Vietnam, however. also shows what sacrifices such a battle de-
mands. For decades to come. large sections of the country will still be
studded with dude and contaminated with chemical defoliants. In Germany,
the consequences would be none the lesser. A hmdeewehr study reached the
conclusion that a. conventional war of 20 days' daugtion would wreak the
same destruction as a nuclear war lasting 5 days.

i‘or this reasm, peace researchers as well as the peace movement are already
going one step further. If deterrence no longer represents a credible way of
preventing war, hou then can war in Central amps be prevented at all ?
There are four proposals being discussed in addition to Afheldt's and Lee-
ser'n defensive strategy alternatives:

unified air-ope should itself become a nuclear superpower.
The countries of Central «Europe—led by the m; and the Gnu—should become
neutral and miclear-free.

’12- Self I‘erdelwitzﬁieiner nrsmer: "Hostage Europe," one & Welter, 352 p

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The me should capitulate in case of an attack but should then resist occu-
pation by resorting to civil disobedience.

01-, Central Europe should be at least partially disarmed while members of
the three political parties represmted in tho Bundestae; call for a reduc-
tion of nuclear arsenals.

:‘md‘rod ermer of the cm considers at least part or the nuclear weapons
on German coil superﬂuous, if we were to rears its conventional forces.
Jucrgen lloellemann of the me thinks that most battlefield nuclear weapons
in the me can be dispensed with but calls for a "substantial" reduction of
the number of tame in lbstern Shrope to make up for it. And Egon Bohr, the
.: ‘1': security expert, wants to see no nuclear weapons deployed at all in
countries which cannot themselves decide on their use—which is another way
of swing that he favors a moleaasi‘ree zone in antral Europe.

But Bohr did not make any headway with this proposal in the discussions of

the international cocnission chaired by fomer Swedish Prime Minister 0101‘
Palm. This disarmament st'mb' group—in which former v.3. Secretary of State
Cyrus Vance and CPSU central oomittee member Georgia Arbatov also took pert—
uould only recommend a 150-kilometer wide nuclear-free zone on both sides of
the .astcrn border of the no. The fact is that most nuclear weapons are
<f.~plo;,'cd outside this belt even now.

or the four proposals aimed at lessening the danger of war in Central :lurope.
only the lost one—involving partial troop reductions by both sides—seems
at 2.11 realistic at this time. mt some skepticism is called for. The nego-
tiations on balanced troop reductions which have been going on for 9 years
in Vienna. have not even been able to agree on how new soldiers each side
actually has at present. As for the other three proposals, they would touch
upon the suprenncy of the two superpowers in their spheres of influence and
a: such meet with resistance.

Eleanvlzilo, the 13.3. defense department is at work refining the ill-starred
deterrence doctrine. A new "defense guidance" by the Pentagon has now come
11') nit}: calculations on a "protracted nuclear war." DIS m was incensed—
eut only because these plans became public Just a tow days prior to Reagan's
trip to the PRC. "Secret plans should stay secret." the paper said.

Te.) highest court of mm member country Norway, on the other hand, pulled
tin omcrmncy brake at Just about the same time. me state, the court found,
does not have the right to force young men to take part in a war in which
the-- met fight against mankind using nuclear weapons.

C:..'.‘.‘.IG:.'2 1982 Cruner -;' Jahr AG 8: Co

9473

c.:.'-: 3105/544

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER NRC-38 ITALY

canton. ANALYSIS or mo same! I! on: mum
Rome unsn mutant in Italian liar-Apr 82 pp 23-39

ascerptﬂ RIVIS‘I'A HILITARB, which \mnts to be regarded more and sore as a
highly qualified forun for the exchanging of ideas. is happy to publish an
article by Any Corps General Luigi Salatiello.

‘l'he incisive thoughts contributed by this article unquestionably are in con-
forsity with the role of the author as an aerging personality, giving evi-
dence, as they do, of his unusual analytical ability in complex and delicate
areas of military doctrine and policy.

The article is also particularly valid and definitely authoritative by virtue
of the triter's exceptional preparation and many-sided experience. for during
hie prestigious career he has performed very important consand and staff
tasks and held positions of great ‘esponsihility within the domain of the cen-
tral organisations of the Hinistry of Defense (among other things, he Ins been
Director General of Hotor Vehicle transportation).

An originality of concept is evid ant in the my the various parts of the arti-
cle are put together thich reflects a definitely personal nanner of looking
at eilitary ubjects of great significance.

Particularly characteristic of the article is the fact that it includes pro-
posals and views \hich certainly will he the forerunners of mitahle further
doctrinal works on the part of "the people engaged in doing this work."

The deductive rigor of the author's inquiry into the subject matter gives
linear coherence to the analysis which, conducted under the aegis of e cau-
tious realin, constitutes a model of mstbdology and is distinguished by
stimulating motivations of useful dialectical unrest.

while thanking General 8slstiello for his courteous and uelcoee cooperation,
RIVIS‘rA unmet hopes that the article will encourage a constructive debate

in a vivifying context of opinions. men are the prinary carriers of the
development of silitary though.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Introduction

In recent months, military problems. and, more particularly, problems of mili-
tary policy, lave been the center of attention where public opinion is con-
cerned. All the comnications media. from the daily newspapers and the
periodicals to radio and television. have been occupied with them. Experts,
nonexperts and even the man in the street have talked about them. Two sub-
jects, in particular. have polarised these discussions: the deployment of the
Pershing 2 and cruise missiles which are intended to reduce the discrepancy
between the two nuclear powers confronting each other in Europe, and which
decidedly favors the Warsaw Pact at present. and the United States' decision
to put the neutron bomb into production. That we would return from the
Buromisailes and the above-mentioned boab to a discussion of NATO strategy
as inevitable. and that is that happened.

Sensible things. others which are less sensible and some things which are
simply foolish were said. Some co-entatora endeavored-mecessfully—to be
objective, while others. appointing themselves interpreters of the anxious
longing for peace which quite properly animates almost the entire human race,
lost sight. not always in good faith. of the fact that a are living in a
world pervaded by tensions of all kinds (frequently bloody ones) and fell into
the facile rhetoric of disarnamsnt as if peace had not always been in danger
of being broken by the sword for as long as the world has existed. Finally,
not a few, who are the servants of a class—struggle ideology which know only
one fatherland, resolutely declared theeselves to be in favor of naintaining
the unclear "status quo" in anticipation of negotiations which are destined
to be of no avail.

Hell-known scientists meeting at Brice discussed nuclear energy and, more
generally, the goals which science should pursue. in a learned manner, and
they agreed unanimously and without any reservations that science is unfaith-
ful to its basic purposes if it does not aim at the moral and material ele-
vation of unkind. One cannot fail to be in agreeaent with that attitude
while at the same time not condesning those who have devoted themselves to
maintaining the safety and ensuring the survival of their reqective coun-
tries. and also not forgetting that imp-which is never justifiable when it
takes the fora of offensive \mr--has always constituted a potent factor where
speeding up scientific progress vms concerned.

Those are opinions and discussions \hich fortunately have not cracked the fir:-
ness of the parliamentary majority on which the present administration relies.
The courageous and opportune confirmation given last August to the decision

to accept the installation of cruise missile bases in Italy in a process

which started with the invitation to our allies to begin negotiations concern-
ing a balanced reduction of the number of theater upons does credit to our
politicians-«or at least to those capable of discerning the true interests of
Italy through the cloud of lies raised to sake it difficult to judge impar-
tially.

Such lively participation by the mass nedia and the public in problns of
military policy, and more specifically military problems, is an extr-ely

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

desirable occurrence. I aentioned that a few nonths ago in a study wich
appeared in this publicationl. stating that "national defense is a need with
all Italians have in cmon and it is right that its nines. its subject
astter and the ways that need is satisfied should be aidely known and dis-
cussed in every center capable of contrihnting ideas."

The Minister of Defense. Honorable Lelia Lagorio. hinself, in presenting the
estinate of defense expenditures for 1901 to Parlisnent. asserted. with con-
sidersbl sore authority than I have. that "the purpose of this increased
activit is to be found in a desire to bring the problems of defense out of
the linited area within thich the aployees of the ninistry operate. The
problems of defense, are political. social and econcnic problens inch are of

interest to the entire Italian population because the people are directly in-
volved in then."

Having said the above. I should like to try. in the pages unich follow, to
put at the service of the readers of RIVISI’A HILITARZ the expertise and
experience daich I possess after 65 years of service, putting a little order
into nany things which are correct, incorrect and tendentious that have been
said in recent tines regarding the strategic courses being taken by NATO and.
above all. to put forward sane new ideas both in regard to the defense of
Europe and the military instrunent destined to provide it.

For that purpose, having defined the concept of deterence, we will see met
its structure is like and how it as nodified. little by little. by the ad-
vent of the atonic bulb. ‘Ihen. after su-arily exanining the repercussions
the nuclear factor has had on ground operations. I will focus on current NATO
strategy in the mropean theater. too. in order to judge thether the new
theater weapons and the neutron bonb are going to affect that strategy. and.
if so, in that aye.

In a third section, I will object that strategy to a critical exanination
and state a personal opinion of any our—an opinion daich will not be binding
in any any upon official Defense circles \dlere their ability to guarantee the
defense of western Europe against the danger of aggression. or their lack 0'
such ability. are concerned.

Finally. before bringing this article to a conclusion, I will go into the sub-
ject of the difficult econoeic situation in which our armed forces now find
the-selves.

Critical Examination of hA‘l‘O's Current Strategy

Unfortunately, we have to state, frankly. that RAIO's current strategy is not
very credible either on the conventional or the nuclear level.

On the conventional level because the ratio of the respective forces is so
unfavorable to NATO as to nske it necessary. if there was not to be a quick
and irreparable mrrender, to increase the intensity of the response at a
rapid rate of speed until the threshold of the first nuclear strike we
reached.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole. this theory did not provide anything at all that was new. from
the conventional point of view. because a defender has aluys, at least fro.
the tins when ear nade itself rational by providing itself with laws, prin-
ciples and rules, had recourse to all the neans in his possession. once the
lines along which the attacker is loving have been identified during the
initial resistance at forts. to block those penetrations in they have cone a
certain distance and then to reconquer the lost territory. if possible.

But there is sore to it than that. A pitched battle. which is the fundamental
act toward which the strategic naneuverings tend becsu. of its consemences.
duich. if they are not decisive, provide the side which prevails with con-
siderable advantages as far as continuation of operations is concerned. and
which is highly draaatic because of the large mnber of sacrifices in nsn and
nateriel which it requires. obeys a logic and follows a pattern fron which it
cannot deviate. if one allows for the exceptions which prove the rule.3 The
logic is that of every test of force in thich each of the tan adversaries

seeks to prevail over the other and does not wait to do it until his back is
against the wall.

The pattern can be merited as follows. The side \hich names the initia-
tive and attacks. and which has the resources to permit to do so. presses its
attacks urgently because it knows that tine is on the side of the defender.
who. since he is unable to be strong everywhere. keeps sany units in reserve
and concentrates then where the prssure is the most violent. In its turn. the
defending side oust prevent the fighting from qreading into the open country,
there-is I have observed in the past—the aggressor can sake the weight of
his superiority count, and for that purpose. while asking use of adequate
tactical depth, nust not concede any successes to his adversary thich would
conpronise his winning the battle.

So gradualness in responding, where conventional airfare is concerned. does
not make senu tactically. It is only acceptable if one wishes to express

a political intention to avoid slurp and dangerous accelerations in reacting
to aggression—an intention which unquestionably is praisemrthy even if not
very realistic for one of two reasons—either because battles are not won with
prudence or because the ratio of the respective forces to each other is so

unfavorable to one side that it can only hope to put a stop to the aggression
by acconplishing a saxinal acceleration of its reaction.

It is not credible on the nuclear level because it seas very inprobable and
not very realistic to ac to believe tint the Soviet Union would be able to
"absorb" without reacting to that limited number of nuclear strikes. even
though of slight power and denonstrative in nature. with. according to NATO.
were supposed to denonstrste its firs intention to resist aggression at all
costs. It aiglt lave been able to do so in the days of its nuclear inferiori-
ty. Int uhy should it do so today when the terns of the confrontation have
been reversed? And if it was not willing to give in. as seas logical, a
chain reaction would be set off whose final, disastrous outcose would be a
general nuclear war.

18

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand. let us not forget that the keys to the Alliance's nuclear
power are alnost entirely in the lands of the United States and it is hard to
see why that country would be under an obligation to use tha when what as
at stake. in addition to the defense of Europe. was its ow: survival.

In spite of official declarations of loyalty to NATO, there are unequivocal
indications of a progressive cooling off of America's interest in the
Alliance. 'roo frequently the European partners in the Alliance have dis-
sociated thuaalves from United States policy vis-e-vis the Soviet Union and
have not supported having recourse to subtle "distinctions." Too frequently
the European nations have professed, without having the scans to support it.
to have developed an autonoaous role vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. And finally,
there too frequently has not been an. and there still is no, agreenent along
those European nations on the evaluation of international events and the
attitude to be taken toward the Soviet Union. It is not inprobable that the
hypothesis that. without greater cohesion in the Western national policies
and an effective strengthening of the Alliance, the Anericens will renove
themselves frol NATO will turn out to be true. The establishent of e nobile
emergency force in the United States, which has been in the news recently.
could foreshsdow a revision of Anerican policy toward Europe, if not specifi-
cally in the sense of a separation fro- UA‘IO. then at least in the sense of a
different conception of the military contrilntion to be given to the other
nabers of the alliance.

This energency force (RDF). which will be ready in 1985 and will be made up of
3 Arny divisions, l of nerines. 2 battalions of Rangers. 2 groups of special
forces (Green Uerete), the pertinent airborne carriers and adequate logistical
support, would make it possible for the United States to have the benefit of
the advantages of a central position with respect to the entire globe which
the Soviet Union enjoys on the mropean-Aaiatic continent.

The advantages of a central position from the nilitary point of view are well
known. They lake it possible to deploy only a portion of one’s power at the
borders and to maneuver the main body of one's forces as necessity dictates.
It as precisely by virtue of that position that the Central Powers in lbrlri
war I and Hitler‘s Gemny in Horld War II were able to take headway against
preponderant forces for years. achieving successes in the first phase of
operations which were all but decisive. and the reason they finally were de-
feated was that. since their strength consisted predominantly of ground forces.
they were not able to paralyze naritine transportation and the role of such
transportation was essential for the Allies.

The Soviet Union would have a better chance of successfully exploiting its
central position now than the for-er central regimes had, in view of the

fact that the Soviets have naval power. against the European nations. the
noninsular Asiatic nations and the United States itself . if the latter were
engaged in Europe. In its turn. the United States would be in a position to do
the sue thing by developing its energency force on a world scale, thanks to
the airborne and naval carriers available to it at present and in which it

has an indisputable eupr-acy. within the fraeork of a return to its role

of the winery econonic power in the world and the chupion of freedol which
the new administration is pursuing in a decisive manner.

19

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OI-‘FK‘IAI. USE ONLY

If the above-aentioned forecasts were reliable. what reasons does the United
States have for nodernizing (Pershing 2) and strengthening (cruise nisailes
and neutron boobs) mum's potential in the European theater? It can be eup-
poaed that it has done so for psycholong reasons looking in no directions,
as follows:

Hith respect to their allies. that the theat of the inadequately opposed
Fussisn nissiles could be conducive to compliant behavior—end there is no
lack of indications of such a trend. With respect to the Soviet Union. which,
strong in its conventional-forces superiority and convinced that the United
States would not be the-.first to pull the nuclear trigger, could "precipitate
natters" and "dictate" to one or more European nations or launch air-ground

operations destined to achieve rapid auccess since the Europeans lacked the
will to fight.

I imagine that nany people, when they read these forecasts. will believe that
they are the result of s pessimistic attitude, but it is the duty of people

who prepare for war not to be optinistic and to adopt a coldly realistic ray
of looking at things.

I renenber that the officers rho, at the beginning of Iy career, introduced
ne to the couple: subject of operational problens (and first of all the un-
forgettable General Saltinii). taught use that. when evaluating the enay's
possible lines of action for the purpose of determining our out plan of
maneuvering, it is necessary to give proper consideration to the line of
action of the enemy which is nost unfavorable to us. even if it is not very
probable. I do not think that such a wise rule has becone invalid, even
though the tines have changed.

Points of Departure for a Revision of NATO's current Strategy

I will not presume to suggest a new and different strategy on the basis of
my own powers alone.

I can only indicate, in theft“: of suggested points of departure. the direc-
tion in which it would be necessary to move to avert a third world war and,
if unsuccessful in that, to linit its scope.

I. It does not seen realistic to suppose that nuclear explosions. first
warning uplosions and then selective ones. wold be the only ones that took
place.

It seaas more logical to think that they would end up setting off a ur in the
European theater which would devastate Europe.

2. In the sane way, it is not very probable that a nuclear war in a particu-
lar theater will be dissociated fro. a general war. One would grow out of
the other.

3. Consequently it can be presuned that the United States will not launch the
firat strike. which, spiraling, would involve it in a nuclear war.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. In the one way. it follows tint the response to a conventional attack,
which is what the Soviets probably would launch if they undertook an aggres-
sive love, even though their doctrine, for propaganda reasons, puts the accent
on a coebination of "nuclear" and "traditional." cannot be anything but con-
ventional, without any hope of nuclear succor which would not arrive—a hope
thich night have a negative effect or aorale.

5. If the preceding hypotheses are plausbble, an inproving and strengthening
of our conventional forces would be absolutely necessary. not for the purpose
of [ringing then to the level of the Soviet conventional forces. which would
entail unacceptable financial and social burdens for the Western dssocracies,
but to obtain a ratio of forces Idlich wold sake it possible to have an
adequate chance of withstanding the initial attack while awaiting reinforce-
nenta which. however. should not be Late in arriving.

6. In addition to being predictable. it is also probable that nuclear
weapons will be banned. In the seantine. since any soratoriun which would
freeze the present Soviet superiority wold have to be rejected. it will be
necessary to go ahead with the nodernisation and strengthening of European
theater weapons. If the Soviet Union becane sure of a reluctance on the part
of the United States to pull the nuclear trigger, they could be the ones who.
in the face of an inferiority which sight be a synptos of psychological
disarmament, would take the initiative in setting off linited and selected
nuclear explosions for the purpose of turrying up the surrender of the Heat. .

7. Although, as well as can be foreseen, a nuclear war appears inprobable
today and toaorrow, the ideological conflict which divides the Hestern deno-
cracies fro. the Marxist world, together with the eve-present expansionist
inpulse of the Soviet Union, lakes a nilitsry initiative by the latter, trust-
ing in its formidable conventional-surfare force. possible at any tine.

There is an additional reason for believing in that possibility. The new
American adeinistration, for the purpose of restoring thrust to that coun-
try's foreign policy and building up its allies' confidence, has launched a
progran ained at strengthening its silitary apparatus which. in addition tn
the developnent of the anergency force we have already talked about. conten-
plates strengthening and increasing its strategic nuclear deterrent (with the
acquisition. anong other things, of new intercontinental sissilee-the FIX--
100 3-1 bosbers and an undetermined umber of the revolutionary "stealth”
bonber. That decision constitutes a guanine teclsxological challenge, and
only two courses are open to the Soviet Union in the face of that challenge:

“Either to take up the gauntlet and. to keep pace with the high level of 0.3.
technology. augnent their already considerable nilitary expenditures to the
detrinent of expenditures for social purposes, with have been seriously in
arrears for years, the bringing internal probless about free which it is
difficult to perceive a way out for thee;

—Or. if tine as pressing, to attack western Europe and confront NATO with
the fait ecconpli of a note or less extensive invasion and uncontrollable
developnents.

21

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Italian Situation
He cannot conclude our labor without taking a look at the Italian situation.

As far as the operational problens are concerned, we have nothing to add to
the transitory allusions which were made in the preceding paragraphs, and all
the mate so in regard to the subject matter which we ha e dealt with in detail
in other works which have appeared in this publication, with reflections
which we believe are still valid.

On the other hand. there is an urgent need to emphasize the critical
situation the army finds itself in share materiel is concerned. which. to-
gether with the inadequate financial compensation accorded the officer and
noncouissioned officer cadres and the feeling of isolation from the central
fabric of the country's life to which they point, not unjustly. is the cause
of profound discontent—a situation wose importance should not be under-
estimated.

men, a few years ago. for reasons not unlike those which are asking their
appearance once again today. the restructuring of the aray was implemented
(but it would have been more truthful to call it a redimansioning), 87
battalions or equivalent units were done away with. the number of combat
vehicles ans reduced by 900, 450 artillery pieces were retired from service
and a considerable number of territorial logistical and administrative organ-
izations were dissolved. At the same time. a different structure of the field
army was impleeented by centering it. in order to put it in step wish the
nuclear age, on the lrigade as the basic. combined-arms large unit. "hen the
brigade was created, it was necessary to give up a good many divisional
comands and all the regimental co-Iands. either to prevent duplications or
to slim down the chain of couand. The abolition of the regimental cor-sands
represented a very painful sacrifice in view of the heritage of traditions
connected with them. even though the pain as moderated, in part, by the

fact that the glorious battle flags were turned over to the battalions.

what remained men the operation as completed—3 army corps col-lands, lo
divisional conands, 26 brigades of various kinds (armored, mechanized.
motorized, mountain troops and paraclutiats) and various tactical and logisti-
cal support organisations—wers regarded as quantitatively sufficient to

present either a deterrent force capable of discouraging any threats from the
northwest within the framewrk of a limited conflict or a defensive capability

in line with the missions assigned by NATO in case of a general conflict.

1 said "quantitatively" on purpose because. from the qualitative Point of
view, there is a different story to tell. As a matter of fact. the opera-
tional efficiency and readiness of units is measured in terns of the quality
of materials and their reliability, strength levels. the competence of the
cadres. the training of the personnel and the Quit which animates then.
There is no doubt, at present, tlmt. where materials and strength levels are

concerned—factors which are almost exclusively dependent upon the availa-
bility of funds—we have been pursuing an involved course for years which is

the result of and is characterized by inefficiency. and consequently it is
impossible to perform the "minimal" tasks scheduled for performance.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The cuts of which we have spoken were not accomplished without producing
trauaa and the chief cf staff at that time, who had the courage to take the
initiative in carrying them out, ran the risk of unpopularity. But to avoid
making those cuts it would have been necessary to have offset than with an
atraordinary endowent of funds for the purpose of modernising the materiel
in the hands of the troops and to have caused a rapid and strong inprovement
in the quality of the units kept active to take place which enuld have pro-
duced a pronounced improvement in combat capability. And, in actual fact,
the Parliament, with a psrceptibility which is to its credit, launched a pro-
aotional law (No. 372) in 1977. as it had already done for the navy. and had
extended to include the air force immediately afterwards, which allocated
1.115 billion lira to the arny to be spent in annual installaents whose
amount had been fixed by the budget legislation.

Unfortunately, the shortage which had accumulated during years of scanty
attention paid to the military institutions by the politicians was a great
deal larger than the appropriation which was allowed. Added to this as the
fact that they did not have the farsightednese to index the financing. and
consequently it was consistenty eroded by inflation and the continuous deter-
ioration of the value of the lira in exchange for foreign currency.6

The fact is that, since installments anounting to a total of 916.5 billion
lire had been appropriated and expended from 1977 to 1981 and since an
appropriation of 198.3 billion lire as anticipated for 1982, the special

law can be considered invalid at the end of 1982. while on 31 July 1981 the
cost of the new ten-year modernisation program marked out by the general staff
of the army ems estimated at 6,374.5 billion lire. or four times larger than
the allotment previously granted by Parliaaent. To this must be added the
fact that the ordinary budget, which is chronically insufficient, is almost
completely consumed for training expenses. the funds for which also turn out
to be less than what is required. with a deficit \hich aaounts to approxi-
mately 200 billion lire for the 1981-1982 two-year period, thus making it
necessary to reduce expenditures drastically, to spend every last lira for
supplies and to defer larger and larger nunbers of acquisitions from one year
to the next. Consequently-aodernisation aside—if the ordinary appropria-
tions are not increased by at least 100 billion lire a year at 1981 prices,
the critical situation in which the army is struggling could expand into
gemine paralysis. And love of my country persuades me to pass over the
cuts nade in the arned forces' budget this year with the truly praiseworthy
intention of reducing the public deficit, but the‘ suspicion that it would be
easier to aake cuts in the areas in which the responsible people at the top,
although resisting strenuously. are accustomed to be compliant in the end and
a base provided with leans of producing pressure and the ability to conclude
contracts does not exist, is a legitinate one. And the natter is all the more
deplorable in that we occupy one of the very lowest places on the list of
NATO countries there the amounts allocated to defense are concerned, whether
one calculates in terns of the percentage of the nation's overall budget or
in terms of the gross national product.

In the face of these deficiencies, the following requiraents can be listed
briefly:

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "Personnel" Component

It is necessary to raise the strength levels and increase, with appropriate
incentives, the mmber of long-tern volunteers needed to operate the sellers
and sophisticated weapons systems.

The "Fire" Component

For antitank defense, which is an area of vital importance on the future
battlefield, which will be dominated by armored vehicles, a: Inst integrate
the action of the recently-acquired T0" with a starter-range missile system,
which night be the French-Geraan hilan, and fill the minimun-range gap with
an individual weapon which, it is to be hoped, will be one of Italian produc-
tion—if the Folgore is completed (but it is said that it will take nore than
15 years)--but it may be one of foreign origin.

For antiaircraft defense, with the operational capability of low-altitude
Hawk-Helip system attended to 1993-1995 by a series of improvements, it is
now necessary to think of a light missile system, a conventicnal weapons
syst- for defense against low-altitude and very-lmltitude targets and
a self-defense weapon.

Studies are going on in regard to all three of the requirenents listed above
which are apected to culminate in the furnishing of prototypes, and those
studies are financed, in part, by means of contracts. And here, although it
is not my intention to get into an argument dth tne general staff of the
army, I should like to call for a display of prudence.

Poverty sometimes pushes us to use our money poorly, in the sense that, in
trying to economize, ae end up acquiring equipment thich has been outstripped
by technological progress and which, all things considered, costs as such as,
if not sore than, equipnent which is a great deal better but whose only
defect is the- fact that it cane from abroad although it could have been co-
produced in Italy.

I an referring, as some readers will already have realised, to the so-called
"self-propelled twin antiaircraft" weapon which, since it is of rather modest
caliber and was not provided with search or guidance radars in the initial

version (and I do not believe, objectively, that the chassis that was
selected-«hat of the No. 113 V‘l‘l‘, which originated in the United States and
was coproduced in Italy—makes it possible to do any better), would only
partially solve the vitally important problem of defense against low-altitude
and very-low-altitude targets. Although I regard the desire to use only
Italian technologies which was the basis on \hich the choice was node as e
connendable notive, I would suggest that, before making an irreversible
decision to move on to series production, the prototypes be subjected to a
rigorous program of experimentation, while also comparing them with foreign
systems designed for the sane purpose and seeming to be superior in perfor-
mance. There is plenty of time to do it.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For artillery on the ground. since the I’ll-7o progr- concerned with the 155/39
howitzer on wheels has been completed, we are noving ahead. on a trilateral
basis (Italy, the m and Great britein). with the development of the SP-70.
which is the tracked version of thean and which. it is calculated, will be
operationally effective until the year 2000 and beyond. He would also like to
get into a quadrilateral prograe (United States. the FIG, Great Britain end
Prence) for the production of a saturation weapon on a self-propelled chassis
and with a range of 35 to 62 kilometers. ‘

‘l'he Combat Vehicle Component
Tanks

No new acquisitions are progrmed in this area. although our line of tanks
was in need of soae quantitative expansion, but it would be a serious mistake
not to provide for the following:

-A general overhauling of those vehicles rhich have reached the liaits of
acceptibility (10 to 12 years of service or. as an alternative. 10.000
kilometers of operation), to prolong their life of reliable service for a
second ten-year period.

-lncreasing the operating'capability for all, or nest of. the Leopard tanks.
bringing to the maintenance facilities the nost important iaproveaents sug-
gested by the club consisting of the countries which use that type of tank,
among which inprovenents—as has emphasised earlier—the introduction of a
nodern firing systee, or at least its principal coaponents. is a basic require-
ment.

-Participation in the French-Gama agremaents concerning the decision as to
that tank is to replace the French Mix-30 and the Ger-an Leopard 2 in
approxinately 1990 to 1995. l have reason to believe that a request in this
regard given to the PRC by us on the govern-ental level would be given serious
consideration since we use the Leopard tank and that could be converted into
great advantages for Italian industry, as well es—obviously—for our army.

Vehicles for the Mechanized Infantry

Now that a considerable umber of tracked H-ll3's have been nodernised,
partly by civilian industry (the VCC-l version) and partly by the motor
vehicle transportation installations (the VCC-2 version), which made it pos-
sible to transport the infantry accompanying the tanks (although they could
not fight fro- the vehicles). a successor for then is already under 'tcudy.

It is natural to wonder why advantage has not been taken, and is not being
taken. of the opportunity to acquire a wheeled, protected vehicle to serve
alongside the future VCC and satisfy the requir-ent in question. An any of
liaited sire, like ours. not only needs tactical nobility—that is, the

ability to aove and fight any (rm roedswbut also strategic nobility-that
is, the ability to travel long distances on roads in a short tine in order to
transfer units from one operational sector to another, distant one.

25

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Wheels, which always have been aynonynous with strategic nobility. have nade
enornous progress even on diversified terrain. and he cost of acquiring
and naintaining the: is less than it is for tracks. There is no serious
basis for the objection that using vehicles of a larger type increases the
logistical burden.

The Vision and Night Fighting couponsnt

Taking into account the inportance the night environ-ent he assumed because
of the protection it offers non and vehicles, there is a desire to acquire
mbstantial quantities of apparatus for the intensification of light for

guidance and firing and at the seas tine to becons faniliar with thernal infra-
red technology. UhOse effectiveness for long-range weapons systus is
recogmised by everybody.

The cost of the required items nentionad above, not including the overhauling
and modernising of the Leopard tanks, thich, in view of what the other coun-

tries which use that vehicle are doing, I regard as an indispensable step that
cannot be postponed, is estinatsd at approxinately 2,600 billion lire, to be

financed in annual installnents through 1991. provided that the asmption of
an annual 31 increase in real terns in the ordinary budget. as agreed upon at
the 28 January 1981 session of the Suprene Defense Council, becones operative.

Let us hope that Parliaaent and the govenaaent will take the arny’s fate to
heart, as they did in 1977 (but the situation of the other two arsed forces
is no better) and act accordingly.

If they do not. it would inevitably be necessary to take another look at

the role assigned to us within the orbit of NATO. together with our opera-
tional possibilities. That would be a review of the situation which, although
initiated by the highest-ranking military cat-sanders, Inst inevitably be
referred back to the highest-ranking political decisior-akers, who are the
ones responsible for the fundanental choices concerning national defense.

Conclusion
It is time to conclude this article.

we are of the opinion that the conviction that the enploynent of nuclear
weapons would not do anybody any good will soon gain a good deal of ground
and that consewently they will be interdicted and destroyed. In the lean-
tine. it is necessary that we should rennin alert and give naxinun coopera-
tion to the United States so that it will nove ahead with the European
theater's nuclear progran.

If there is a war in Europe. it will be necessary to respond to an attack,
which in all probability would take the for- of conventional warfare (un-
less, if NATO's present condition of inferiority continues and becoues lore
pronounced, the Soviets want to wcceed by strong-aria nethods by appropri-
ating the idea of limited and selective nuclear strikes to thenselves) with a
defense which also was conventional. without waiting for sone nuclear assis—
tance which is not going to be provided.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Naturally. if we wish to resist aggression. it will be necessary to streng-
then and inprove our conventional forces to bring that to a level which. with
the help of the factors which traditionally ad: in favor of the defense
(depth, knowledge and organization of the terrain, planned firing, etc.), will
nake it possible to confront a quantitatively superior fighting force success-
fully.

The European countries nust realise the need to take that effort as soon as
possible. closing ranks and endeavoring to bring about a nilitary cohesion
which, added to the existing econanic cohesion, will endow a unified

policy which, ensnared in national interests, finds it difficult to nake the
right decisions. with a lace tangible significance.

Western Europe possesses the neans it needs to be able to play a role of its
own in the world if it does not think it can take up an internediate position

and oppose either the Soviet Union or the United States. Our position is
and will be beside the Anericsns because the naterial and norsl ties which
unite us with than are too mnerous and too solid.

The Anericans. in their turn. are not unannre that our respective fates are
linked together and. once they have put their on econony in order. will help
us, in their om interests, to get out of our current difficulties. And if.
then, to regain prestige in the wrld, they slmld decide to draw up their
general strategy in global terns end, consequently. to renegotiate, on a
new basis itich was profoundly different free the present one, their parti-
cipation in the ailitary organization of NATO, no one can doubt that they
will be at the side of the free nations in their hour of need, just as they
were in World liars I and II. although without previously having located bases
and expeditionary forces on their territory.

we have already spoken of the obligation Parliansnt has, for us Italians, of
allocating to the srned forces the fouls which are absolutely indispensable

to make the- credible in carrying out their principal aissionuthat is,
guaranteeing Italian independence and Italy's republican institutions. Let
us renenber that even a great thinker who died recently, a man who was fit:

in his Catholic faith and a pacifist by conviction and not out of opportunisn,
the French philosopher Jean mitton, wrote8 that "to nake sure that there will
never be a war. it is necessary for it to be possible that one will take
place at any nuent.”

A paradox. certainly; since Guitton, like any other nan of good sense. would
have preferred, in a free world finally free of ideological, polit icsl,
econonic and social tensions—thanks to the efforts of all people of good
will—for the Nuts mich today are invested in arunents to be enployed for
the naterial and noral elevation of unkind.
W8

1. "Le sue.- avanzata” Edvanced Defensa. nvrsn mums no 5,

Septenber - October 1980.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

be

5.

6.

8.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ninieter was referring to the greater frequency, by conpariaon with
the past. with which the top Iilitary leaders and the head of the depart-
nent, hiaself. speak in public.

For a thorough diecussion of this subject. see "Alcune correlarioni fra
tattica e strategia" acne Correlations between Tactics and Strategﬂ by
the sans anther, ”VISTA murm Nos 7 - 8. 1973.

"Spunti per una nuova concezione difensiva" Uoints of Departure for a
New Defensive Concepﬂ. nvrsu murm No 3. 1976; "01:.“ avanzata"
mvsnced Defensg. ”VISTA nuns: lo 5, 1980.

Bone conbined-erns brigades. quite different fro. the single-branch
brigades (that is. coepoeed exclusively of infantry units). which per-
forned epic deeds during ibrld Var I. were already present in our any
for particular purposes (brigades of alpiniata for use in lountainms
environments. infantry tripdes for territorial defense and brigades of
paraclutists for strategic uncovers).

The Italian war industry. although it had gained leading positions in sone
areas, depends upon foreign countries (the United States of Anerica, the
ms. the United Kingdo- end France) for a large nuaber of licenses and con-
ponent parts.

In this connection. see:

Clifford D. Bradley: "Confronto ruota - cingolo" Emparison of “heels
with Trackﬂ, MR. Hay - June, 1981;

G. Avelli: "Mani corarrati" anored Vehicleﬂ, RIVIS‘IA mums: No l.
1%2.

"La pensee et la guerre" ahought and Raﬁ. Ed. Desclee de Brouwer. 1969.

COPYRIGRT: RIVISTA HILITARE PERIODICO DELL'BSERCITO NO CV sumo 2/1982

9258
C80: 3105/2250

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
momanmouu

POLITICAL MOB

1mm 018833810“ mono P61? LEADERS!!!) MI!!!)
Paris 1.! W OBSERVATEUR in French 22 May 82 pp “-65
[Article by Irene Allier]

[Test] In their quest for a new party line, Conmist
leaders and nilitants are sesrching, hesitating and
groping-mneomrincintly.

"Its successive changes have discredited the entire party leadership."
exclains Jean-Michel Catela. co-director of REVOLUTION and a nenber of the
Central Co-ittse, speaking before the entire political bureau.

"The party's foreign policy is, if I nay say so. outside our policy," Felix
Danette. another Central Co-ittee e-ber. raarhs ironically, in front of
Maxine Grenets. head of the foreign affairs section. ”It is reputedly
sligning itself with the 0888., while neglecting our participation in the
govement."

"In organizing our struggles." suggests econoeist Philippe lerzog as he
addresses Wars of the 061'. "there is no need for workers to fight a
govern-ant of which we are a part, while fighting against the nansgsnsnt of
their cowanies!”

"here are we indeed? In the social hall of the tiny village of Sacles
(Bssome) where the PC? has noved fron ll through 13 Hay to lend an
unprecedented etnosphere to a Central Couittss session. broadened to include
the first secretaries of the federations. An odd session. without agenda

or general resolution. This tine, no high priest has been privileged to
officiste at the usuel high nsss. Even Georges Herchsis did not ascend to
the pulpit to deliver the word. In a few words--but what wordsl--he
restricted hinself, as an introduction, to report the heavy toll of disasters.
"where are we? Hell. we are in the governent. but after losing one eillion
voters. and with e party that is not in gear. Obstacles are everywhere:
internally the najority of conrsdea have not grasped the significance of the
thh Congress, nor that of the lag which we uperiencsd in 1956 and which is
still affecting our actions today. mteide the party. public opinion equates
us with the USSR. Our inage is tarnished in the areas of liberties and
deeocracy. "hat is to be done? Conrsdes. it is your turn to share your
experiences."

29

summon“
InltlﬂﬂClALlli£0NLY

Evidently the conrades are ill at ease and tense. Hill the federal secretaries
dare to say that the leadership has lost all credibility, that it is being
whispered in the ulls that the leadership does not convince anyone when-

after having waged its well-known battle against the Socialist Party-it now
claims to join that party in leading trance towards Socialian throug linited.
progressive and denocratic refer-a? Sone venture to say so, without daring

to open the issue of participation in govern-ant. "It is all right to echo

the words of those Comnists who still cone to cell neetinga." Catala says.

ironically. "But it would be better still to be concerned with the opinions
of those she no longer attend than...” A pregnant pause.

The leadership had organized this session to feel the party's pulse. First
diagnosis: the pulse is weak and irregular. Those attempting to offer this
drifting party sone politico—social prospects compatible with its role in
government are opposed by the uncontrolled reflexes of those who are reluctant
to change their ways. One of these. for instance. is Etienne Pajon. who.
pretending not to hear that the PC? is in the govern-ant. stubbornly states:
"If we are having troubles. the reason is that neither the Connunists nor
public opinion are sufficiently aware of our own position. and of party
policy." (as opposed to that of the government, of course.) Later. hazine
Grenetr lets the cat out of the bag. As is known. the PCP officially advocates
a French policy of steering clear of both blocs. This does not prevent the
nan in charge of PC? foreign policy fron forgetting that imperative in favor
of his own deep-down preference: "The international scene." he states. "is
characterized by e counter-offenseive on the part of inperialisn in order to
restore the military suprenacy it had lost." Better still, new Grenets
announces a major decision (nade, of course. with the political bureau's
blessing): a decision to lend support to a powerful ”peace narch" in Paris
on 20 June. To be sure, the idea will not originate with the PCP, but with
some 100 "well-known person,“ whose signatures it is presently collecting
(they are said to include the inevitable Aragon and Bdnonde Charles-Roux,
Gaston Defferre's wife. as well as nerve Basin.) To be sure, slogans would
be worded in such a way as not to enbarrass the govern-ant: "Neither
Pershing nor SS 20," for instance, and the PC? has been invited to take part
in it. Still, the PC? has decided to send 100,000 Connunists into the
streets for the occasion. “he could be fooled? "There is indeed sons
contradiction there," a Central Connittee neeber concedes.

Second diagnosis: the Party is having doubts. The leadership is only
partially successful in its attenpt to show a united front when facing the
militants who are balking at the PCP's participation in government. "insofar
as it is capable of conviction." says one nenber of the political bureau,
"the leadership is gradually convincing itself that the Socialist experilent
can succeed" and that the Connunist Party nust play its part in it. however,
it is still being torn apart whenever. in foreing policy, it aust take the
inescapable consequences of its choices in donestic policy. The titernan
sffalr is a glaring denonstration of this fact.

what happened? In early May, Yves Horeau. foreign policy columnist for
L'HUHANITB, publishes a series of articles concerning the Halvinas,
violently directed against Great Britain. Hihtout hesitation and without

30

FOItOFﬂKJAl.USB(NNLY
summon“

any rhetorical hedging. he, like the US$11, sides with Argentina. On 10 Hay,
in a lengthy interview, Georges Harchais does attanpt to establish a
precarious sort of balance between "the murderous madness of the British
priae ninister, the Argentine forces' nilitary coup. and the nanipulations
of the United States.” but it is an arduous path that leads bin to his
conclusion: "Weapons must be silenced to asks way for negotiations.”

And, then, on 16 May. a draastic turn of events: on the French television
progran "Le Grad Jury-I.e Honde." Charles Diternsn. ninister of state—and
of trmsportation-declares, out of the blue: "In the few najor articles
published in the paper (L'HUHANITB) I felt that their authors (sic) were
extras in their positions and that their argunsntation was sonewhat
excessive. Argentina connitted an arned coup; this is a fact that cannot

be ignored.” Astonisbent and anger at L'aunmn. This is the first public
indith of the Central Co-ittee's newspaper by a Columnist leader. ”This
is an attack against Leroy. against Harchais.” people whisper in the hallways.
Piternan had not stopped there: in the ass breath, he had inplicated the
Conunist group in Parli-snt which Just the day before, had abstained froa
voting on the bill concerning audiovisual natters. "I do not wish najority
groups to tone up with different votes." he said. "I prefer then to vote
together. I believe that, if they don't get together, with exactly the

sane position. it's unfortunate."

Saving the Hayors

“hat was the director of L'lllmANITB to do? Defend the journalist. one of

his trusted hen? Protest the "attack"? Not at all. Questioned on 18 May

on France-Inter. Roland Leroy creates a new sensation: ”My opinion is exactly
the sane as Charles Piternan's. but I was not there when the articles were
published.” And. to everyone's astonishnsnt, he adds: "Pro- now on, the
60-min must put an end to their habit of being so cocksure of everything.
at every accent, and of settling every case once and for all, as if they
possessed revealed truth."

In a news conference. a few hours later, marine Ora-err hinself. disconcert-
ingly latter-of-fact, will declare hinelf in total agreement with Charles
Piternan's criticiulls. "He do Iuch arguing in the Party," he concludes,
satisfied.

Coupletely disoriented. the general nenbership sonetines wonders if its
leadership has gone used, and whether all this does not conceal sons double-
cross. There is indeed a runor that the leaders are divided and nay be
keeping a foot in both caaps: one group, apparently in the ninority. would
be on the failure of the socialist expeth and would suggest that the

PCP prepare to pull the chestnuts out of the fire. ﬂow? By keeping a few
free spots for itsself within govern-ental solidarity: by abstaining in
certain secondary votes, by criticising certain decisions. by pointing out
the PCP's own positions. Then, at least. should a failure of teh Left occur,
the PCP coulc say: "We were right in stating that the PS had taken a turn to
the right. He did all we could. The failure is not our doing..." Such an
attitude would explain the PCP's stubborn refusal to do its self-criticisn for
the 1977-81 period, which ranged fron the breakup of the Leftist Union to
participation in govern-eat.

31
summon?!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Nonsense." reply those whose thesis is held by the majority. "If the Left

is removed from power, the PCR is lost, along with the Left, and mutually
doomed to disappear. It is therefore to its advantage to do everything in

its power to insure the success of the Left. Its very survival is at stake..."
This second line of argumentation is the one officially developed by the
Couunist leaders. regardless of tendencies. At any rate, this is the

thesis followed by the two leading Comniat ministers. who are undertaking

to use their governnent experience in deriving from it a new line that would
be coherent and would have long-tern workability for the party.

However. that thesis is not enough to mobilise a party that has been sluggish
for more than 6 years, inhibited by its 1981 failure at the polls and paralysed
by fear. should it stir, of disturbing the government. Furthermore, in

what direction should it stir? In Saclas, some people have tried to find
their bearings through the fog, to offer sane anchoring points and some sort
of future to failure-weary militants. First of all, through unity, which is
becoming fashionable again, as nunicipal elections are approaching. In

her speech on that essential point. Madeleine Vincent recalled the PCP's
starting position: "He went proportional, one-round-only elections. and

joint Soc-ialist-Co-uunist lists everywhere. Re are not going to get them.
however." she warned. “Therefore we must prepare ourselves for a compronise."
For the PCP this conpronise invovles saving its big-city mayors. The

party wants to keep then. even where the PSF has got ahead since the 1977
municipal elections. Such is the case in Saint-Etienne. for instance. To
save a [mayor such as] Sanguedolce. the PCP would even be prepared to let

the 93? have the majority of municipal council seats (although until now the
PCP had held the majority there). Will the PSP accept?

Some twisted ninds have glinpsed a vulgar tactical intent in this "unity at
any price" order of the day, and in the compronise being contemplated.

Hasn't this a betrayal of the strategy of the 26th Congress, which provided
for a permanent affirmation of the PCP's personality and identity? The

party as a whole still needed to be presented with an outline of the long-
range policy. This take was entrusted to Paul Boccara, the unforgettable
inventor of the theory of ”capitalism monopoliste d'Btat" [monopolistic state
capitalism]. (dubbed CHE). that not so long ago led the PC? into some
unfortunate avenues. No matter. Today Boccara is developing prospective
theories which, while lacking contact with mediate reality. do not lack
interest. According to the substance of his explanations to the Central
Conaittee, the world will have emerged fron this crisis in 20 years. Perhaps
capitalise will. too; we must not delude ourselves. However, the expansion
of the public and nationalized sector and the total nationalization of credit
will have turned France into a country with a nixed economy, neither a state
capitalisn nor a socialism after the Eastern bloc, and in that economy the
workers--provided they have been able to seize their opportunity-will also
have been able to gain nanagerial powers and give the econony some motives
other than profit alone. Is this complicated? "I nay be the only person
able to denonstrate this, but I . demonstrating it." replies Boccara, amid
the indulgent sniles that greet this theory. which say be complex but has
the rare merit of existing.

32

MWWONLY
In a Spot

At any rate, on 18 Hay, L'mnr has a page one headline reading
"iianagenont Is Your Business." In other words, 30 years after the Italians.
the Prmch (lo-mists are conteoplating a talus overlo or 20 years froe now

of civilian (and economic) society tron within. in order to transform it.
"This is how we'll aonage the solution to tho crisis," a militant rooarka
ironically. Still, Cabamea, in his report in L'Mll’ﬁ, enthusiastically
writes: "Let's beconc financiers to control the use of public aid prograoo."
Can such anbitiouso—and renoteu-objectiveo overcono the inertia of a party
that has been idle for so long? Paul Laurent who, in his cspcity so
secretary of the organization. hasn't until now been able to overcone it.
presently hsa his ronodies: in simple. straight-forward terns. he suggests
that the Central Co-ittee replace the leaders of inactive cello and sections.

In short. there are changes in the air for useless cadres. For his part, Guy
Hernier. who is in charge of intellectuals, is getting ready to set aside
those he has been using for the past 3 years: they have becono unusable

for the POI-"a “new practice"! Con all this crosto an illusion? "The Party
is in a spot, and will remain there for a good 10 years to cone."

Mating fro- s nenber of the political bureau who is not known for his

lack of orthodoxy or for indulging in noodo. that diagnosis counts heavily.

COPYRIGh‘l': 1982 "lo houvel Observeteur"

11936
(:50: 31001717

33

”WLWONLY
{UK Ul'llbuh 035 URL!

POLITICAL FRAME

ARON, FORUM ON bums. POLAND, m, mom-soars 188038
Paris PARADOXES in Trench Apr 82 pp 63-56

[Discussion with Ray-0nd Aron and Andre Pontaine by Eric Roussel: “Detente:
Hyth or Reality"!

[Text] In its Spring issue. PARADOXES is presenting s rather
exceptional docinent. An infoml discussion between two
first-mate personalities. the authors of equally authoritative
works, Raymond Aron and Andre Pontsine, chief editor of LB
WNDB.

For the benefit of our readers, these two clear-sighted observ-
ers of international politics have accepted to converse. to
coepare their views on the present state of the world and es-
pecially on the burning questions of the hour: the end of
detente. the Polish crisis. German neutralisn, as well as
North-South relations. As will be seen, their analyses of
all these problems sometines differ. However, it will also
be noted that their views on essential points concur, which
only goes to show that there is only one possible strategy
against the Soviet threat and the state of economic war in
which we find ourselves.

One more word about our guests before we get to the heart of

the latter. Not to introduce them, of course. since they

are well known, but to mention that Raymond Aron gave us last
fall a very stimulating essay. "Le spectsteur engage" (The
Engaged Spectator] (published by Julliard. see Francois Fejtoe's
article in our November issue), and. that, soon afterwards,
Andre Fontaine published "Un seul lit pout deux reves" [One
Single Bed For Two Dreams] (published by Psyard), a history

of detente which is a sequel to his famous history of the

cold war.

A major book which has served as starting point for our
debate.

[PARADOXES] Raymond Aron, you have read Andre Pontaine's book; what is your
Opinion?

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Raymond Aron] Let us skip the compliments and one single reservation. this
is too much of a "pure narrative."

[Andre Pontaine) This is precisely what I intended to do.

[R.A.] In "Republique Imperiale." I thought, I had gone too far myself in
that direction. but it was a much more abstract and less detailed narrative.
This being said, let us get down to the content. You call your book a
”history of detente." However, after reading it. it is not clear whether
the Soviets considered the detente as a good time to lull the West into a
false sense of security and continue their expansion or, on the contrary,
as a time of real appeasement. You did not come to s decision on this point
of essential inortance to understand that period.

IMP.) Don't you think that, during these two decades, the Soviets have had
two conceptions of detente?

(R.A.) Hell. no. I don't. I believe that they never had but one, including
under Khrushchev.

ELF.) I wonder whether. early in the period we are talking about, the Soviets
did not think that the 0.8. lead in the field of armament was such that
they would be hard put to catch up. It seems to me also that, in the years
1972-73, the Soviets showed a certain desire to establish an era of coexis-
tence. Of course. later on, events got out of hand because of Hatergate...

In fact, I think that the Soviet dream is a dream that stretches over an in-
determinate period, that it accelerates at times, and at other times, on the
contrary, it slows down. I always had the impression. including right after
World Her 11. that there were hesitations and probably several schools.

In.“ Hen, by definition, often have msbivalsnt feelings, and it is naturally
hard to exclude this theory a priori. As for Khrushchev after the 1962 crisis.
it seems certain to me thtt he became aware of the 0.8. military superiority
and that he undoubtedly wanted a period of detente. But we must add that an
extremely tense situation had been deliberately created by the Soviets because
of the Berlin ultimatum. You begin in 1962. Out 1962 is the end of the
period that started with the Soviet threat of signim a treaty between the
GDR and the USSR; such a treaty would have led to a unilateral modification
of the status of Berlin. So that, in hindsight. it appears that the years
1958-1962 have been a period of Soviet diplomatic offensive which was not
based on military superiority.

IA.P.] But, still, did not at least the illusion of such a superiority follow
their sputnik?

lR.A.l Not so. The Russians may have believed that the United States were
stupid enough to take seriously either Kennedy's election campaign statements
(missile gap) or Mao's fomlas such as "the East wind is prevailing over the
west wind." And at that time. with the sputnik and the first Russian missiles,
some Americans believed that the Soviets were going to produce massive quan-
tities of intercontinental missiles. Soon afterwards, however, we could note
that they did not mass-produce these long-range missiles, but medium-range
missiles like the 881. and the 885.

35

1’03 OFFICIAL I183 ONLY
a-.. we. .vueaa vases ensue

Therefore, before the period you are dealing with, there was the Khrushchev
period with, let us say, a "Soviet brainwashing" of the West. In 1962, this
offensive which was based on a blufﬁ ended, probably because. in the fall, the
Soviets became aware that, after all, Kennedy was to be taken seriously.

[A.F.] Curiously enough, Khrushchev has left the memory of a peace-loving man,
whereas he took great risks. He probably was one of the last ideologists: he
strongly believed that communism would work. Much more so than his successors.

[R.A.] Yes, he belonged to that first generation who still had an ingrained
faith. But. to come back to detente, there is no doubt that, from the fall

of 1962, Khrushchev tried to adopt a new style of relations and that, in
Kennedy--surrounded by Harvard people who had conceived the theory of arms
control (red telephone, etc.)-he found an interlocutor. The result of this
change of mind was the July 1963 agreement on the suspension of detectable
nuclear tests. At a time when, precisely, the USSR and China made public
their historical dissension.

[A.P.l The coincidence of these two dates. besides, is very significant. For

the first time, the two giants were signing a treaty which their principal
allies--China on one side, France on the other-refused to sign.

lR.A.l Definitely. To summarise, I would therefore say that I believe that
detente was sincere in that it was a useful basis chosen by Khrushchev after
his 1962 failure. I believe that the Soviets then understood that there was
a minimum amount of cannon interests that should be preserved or, to put it
more clearly, that a nuclear disaster had to be avoided. But I would make
the reservation that. apart from that, they never taught their people any
other theory but that of the unavoidable opposition between the two blocs.
Therefore, they accepted a temporary coexistence but, in their mind, it has
to end in a final victory of their world.

[A.P.l Yes. with the slight difference that, after 1956-1955, the dogma of

the unavoidability of war between the two worlds-which had been in favor under
Stalin--was abandoned. With the mental reservation, of course, that the
superiority of the so-called progressive forces would be such that the final
war could be avoided. Therefore. there was an adaptation.

[R.A.] ... as a function of nuclear weapons. And at the time much more as a
function of nuclear weapons than as a function of detente. Stalin's successors
did understand that the final war would have to be a nuclear war.

[A.P.] Definitely, but it also appears to me that on all these questions, the
Soviet military thought is much less refined than the Western thought.

IR.A.I That is right; first, they do not use the essential concept of the

United States, i.e. dissuasion. Like Clausewitz, they say that war is the
continuation of politics by other means. They never say that nuclear war

would be a joint suicide. They say that it would be a frightening war but
that there would be a winner and a loser.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IA.P.] That is true. But in their private conversations at the and of the
1950's, it appears that the Soviets did tell the Chinese: ”Your adventurism
leads to war.” And this has also been at the root of their difference. This
being said, it seems to me that a prolonged period of detente started in 1962.
From that point, we have arrived at a bizarre situation since the word detente.
which initially described a stage. is now describing a situation.

lR.A.I Yes, and I have always considered that the rupture in the style of
Bast-Heat relations started at the end of the Cuban crisis. at the time when
Khrushchev's offensive ended. And one peculiar fact among others is that the
long war in Vietnam was associated with a somewhat different type of relation.
In a way, it was an accident.

IA.F.] That is it, an accident, a diversion and, at the same time, I think it
contributed much to the USSR's strategically catching up with the United States.
Indeed. is it not extraordinary to note that in 1962 the ratio of strategic
forces was roughly 5 to l in favor of the United States and that, 10 years
later. the first SALT agreement consecrated a certain Sovietic superiority?

(R.A.] Yes, but only for intercontinental missiles; a characteristics of the
United States is that. periodically. they will design great plans (Kennedy's
1.000 minuteman in 1962); nevertheless. it is true that their apparent military
superiority as far as arms are concerned dates back to these years during

which the United States were obsessed by the Vietnam war. This also explains
why the United States no longer want to intervene in the world.

[A.F.l The best illustration of this attitude is Central America, where the
United States are intervening less and less. whereas for a long time they
considered this part of the world as a private preserve.

lR.A.l Yes, and to this must be added the fact that thells. military budget

has continued to decrease after the Vietnam war. Finally, we realize now that
the United States cannot rearm massively without profound changes in their
economy, and Reagan is now unable to get out of the contradiction into which

he has placed himself: to reduce taxes and. at the same time, increase military
expenditures. The USSR, on the contrary. is rearming as much as it can, which
is a threat to detente. In fact. the inequality between non-nuclear forces

is increasingly in favor of the Soviet Union and it is not sure that the
Russians will always resist the temptation not [as published] to take advantage
of it since. contrary to the Americans, they are acutely aware of the ratio

of forces.

[A.P.l And I believe we can say that the Soviets, who never use the word
dissuasion. are often practicing it to protect what they have. It is certain
that, in the case of Poland. dissuasion has been given full play.

[PARADOXBS] Could we now briefly and seriously discuss the Polish crisis?

[R.A.l In this respect, I think we can say that, over a surprisingly long
period, a phenomenon very uncommon in the Soviet world has taken place in
Poland: a popular revolt with an alliance of the intellectuals and the

37

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI UI‘I'LULAL U§l URL!

proletariat. This, in my opinion, has been the cause of the Poles' illu-
sions which, paradoxically, were still reinforced by the attitude of the
Soviets who, certainly, wanted to avoid as much as possible a direct inter-
vention that would have been in contradiction with their great European
policy, the objective of which is to get Germany out of the Atlantic sllianca.

[A.F.I Yes, a peculiar fact in Poland is that the revolt actually started in
-l956, at the time of the Poznan riots. Little by little, a certain liberal-
ism had been instituted in Poland. Besides, Gierek had understood that the
Poles were deeply opposed to communism and that the only way to make them

put up with it was to improve the standard of living of the people. This is
why he wanted Poland to become a large exporting power, another Poland, which
implied a formidable indebtedness at the start--although the results appeared
positive for a time--and a de facto sharing of the power with the Church.

Already then, however, Gierek was worried about the future and I well remem-
ber his telling me during an interview that everything would go well as long
as the crisis of capitalism did not worsen too much. Already then, he felt
that Poland would have trouble exporting to markets suffering from a recession.

This said, the second aspect of the Polish crisis which I find interesting is
that dissension took months to develop, whereas, in Hungary, the intervention
had been more brutal. The main difference between what happened in Hungary
and Czechoslovakia on the one hand, and in Poland on the other hand, is that,
in the first two countries, the party apparatus escaped Russian control-which
resulted in the arrest of Dubcek and the execution of Imre Nagy--whereas in

Warsaw the party apparatus remained faithful although it had lost control of
the situation.

Another extraordinary fact is that the military coup took place before anybody
on Solidarity's staff had been informed of it, whereas it was believed that
the union had many sympathizers, including in the Army.

[R.A.] I agree with you to recognize the illusions of the Poles, but when it
comes to a comparative analysis of the three countries, I would not put it
exactly as you do. I do believe that we must make a distinction between these
three cases: Czechoslovakia, where everything came from the top since, after

a change of majority inside the party, a wave of liberalism occurred-~without
any troubles and without much popular enthusiasm either-Hungary, where there
also was a crescendo, as well as a violent revolution. And, finally, Poland,
a case very different from the other two since what occurred was a sort of
diffuse revolution supported by loose structures--the unions-~which brought
about a disintegration of the party.

The surprise for us, as you said, was to find that Solidarity--which was
everywhere--had not anticipated all this. As far as I am concerned, during
tre last few weeks it seemed obvious to me that a "normalization? was about
to take place.

[A.F.] It was unavoidable. I think that from the moment Solidarity's congress

appealed to workers in socialist countries to follow the Polish example,
provocation had gone far enough. It was impossible to imagine that the Soviets

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
would let that happen. Also, the demand for free elections waaanother great
risk for, according to the polls, if such elections were to take place in
Poland, only 3 to 6 percent of the people would vote for the communist party.
Moscow could not accept such a repudiation. And, paradoxically. I believe

that the successive retreats of the power did in fact encourage such an
escalation.

[R.A.] Yes, but we must say that these extreme forms of provocation happened
after the coup had been organised. Those who prepared the coup played a sort
of comedy by pretending they would accept all this.

[A.P.l Certainly. But we do not know, and it will take some time before we
know, when the limit of the tolerable was reached. Because, in practice,
when we went to Poland we still had the impression of a certain liberalism.

|R.A.] Yes. Before the troubles began, I had in fact been invited by the
"Flying University." The lectures, which were tolerated, took place in apart-
ments and there was an atmosphere of true liberalism; an atmosphere which, by
the way, was very different fro-thatwhich can be noticed in Hungary where this
phenomenon is due to the party. Now, unfortunately, I believe that we are going
toward a process similar to what happened in Czechoslovakia. In time, I be-
lieve. the regime will harden.

lA.P.] It will harden, but it will have great difficulties in putting the peo-
ple back to work, and it is still difficult to imagine what compromise could
be acceptable both to the Russians and to the Polish masses.

lR.A.l 0n the other hand, if the West does not help Poland, the USSR will have
to. This means that, actually, the Poles should be given a minimum amount of

foreign currency and raw materials. But the economy is now in such a state of
disintegration that no one can tell which way things will go.

In fact, if the Poles should ever wish to feed themselves, they will have to
reexamine the principles of communism, they will have to assure the farmers
that their land will not be nationalized; they will have to give them permis-
sion to enlarge their properties, in other words, they will have to do the
exact opposite of what has been done until now, since individual property was
respected and, at the same time, the regime's inefficiency was ensured by

the suppression of all encouragements to production. This is really the height
of absurdity!

For the time being. thanks to the black market, the limit of what is bearable
has not yet been reached, but it could soon be. In fact, it is hard to imagine
how a true normalisation-i.e. the accession to power of a government truly
backed by the people--could take place.

[A.P.] At any rate, for the time being, the situation is certainly worse than
in Czechoslovakia...

IR.A.] Yes, for,in Czechoslovakia,material conditions are relatively good.

And. besides, the Czech are more passive or, rather, they have adapted to des-
potism betal'than the Poles. For, in Poland, the striking fact during the

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.va v.0---O- voc- vase-o

recent period, has been that. for the first time since the war. the Poles
rediscovered their romanticism. whereas. in 1956. they had been extremely
"good," this time they allowed themselves to be carried away. and that was

the result of the party's tolerance. It is in fact paradoxical that the
unions wanted to launch "normal" union activities against a power which ap-
peared to exist no longer. They "stepped onto an eiderdown" and went too far.

My Polish friends were surprised when. a few months ago. I wrote in L'EXPRESS
that normalization was unavoidable and that the only question was to know
who would take care of it. Unfortunately. facts proved me right.

[A.F.] I wrote about the same thing in L! Hahn! and. like you. it made me
unpopular. But I do not regret it because. when you know you are not going
to do anything. you have no right to push others to an escalation. In my
opinion. this is irresponsible.

[PARADOXESI Do you think that, in Moscow. it was the army or the party who
decided to intervene?

lR.A.l As for me. I believe that, in the Soviet Union. the part) is always in
charge and plays a decisive part. The ties between the party and the army
are,l believe, extremely strong.

IA.F.l Then. you do not agree with Castoriadis's analyses?

lR.A.l Castoriadis has developed a theory. He has never studied the USSR. He
has discovered what we had known for a long time. viz. that the power of the
USSR lies essentially in the Red Army. This is nothing new. As for the rela-
tions betweer the party and the army. he does not know them any better than

we do. It is also not possible to forecast with certainty what the war policy
of the Kremlin or the army would be.

[PARADOXESI What do you think of international reactions to the Polish crisis?

[R.A.l There is not much to say. Emotional reactions varied depending on
political situations and. especially. on traditions. To the French sensibility,
Poland means something and. in my opinion. the French reaction has been largely
sincere. It has of course been intensified by political interests: that of

the socialists. to place the communists in a difficult position; that of the
opposition. to place the socialist-communist coalition in a difficult position.
As a result. I believe that. in France. there has been a certain amount of
political manipulation. as well as a considerable sincere reaction.

In the ERG. whose interest it is to maintain tolerable relations with the
Soviets. popular emotion has of course been less strong. But, now that it is
clear that the French are not willing to use the economic weapon. it appears.
as a German uniVersity professor recently said. ”that the French and the
Germans are now in tune."

[A.F.] All you say is perfectly true but. as far as France is concerned, I
think we should mention the fascination exerted by Solidarity on CFDT

[French Democratic Confeders;ion of Labor]. and especially on its general
secretary. To them. it was a self-management movement...

40

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lR.A.l that did not manage anything...

[A.F.] Right, but there certainly was a deep sympathy on their side and their
reactions were very quick. In this respect. it is highly significant that
Edmond Maire was one of the first to protest against the signature of the
gas-supply agreement with the USSR.

[R.A.] All that is true; nevertheless, we can still ask ourselves whether it
is reasonable for the Best to arm themselves against the Soviet threat and,
at the same time, to grant their potential enemy low interest rate credits.
As far as I am concerned, I have been thinking for years that this was un-
reasonable. but I must admit that, on this point, the positions of the
government and of the opposition are sisdlar.

[A.F.] That is right, and we can be sure that, if the opposition were still
in power. the agreement would have been signed... and denounced by the
opposition.

lR.A.] All we can say is that the draft prepared by the former majority, at
least, involved a smaller amount of gas. But. in fact. the results would
probably have been roughly the same. It is just that the present government
has had the weakness of shouting much louder than Giscard would have. As

a result. the discrepancy between words and deeds appears more striking.

[PARADOXBS] And Germany? Are you not worried by its present evolution?

[R.A.l On that subject, I would like to submit my latest definition of
Germany. Its first national interest is to maintain its alliance with
the United States. which gives it some security.

Its second national interest is to maintain tolerable relations with the
Soviet world. The first national interest is a prerequisite to enable Bonn
to discuss with Moscow. The second interest requires that the human benefits
gained by political concessions not be followed by excessively strong tensions
between the East and the Heat. These two interests are hardly compatible
under extreme circumstances. "hen circumstances become extreme, the Bonn
government does its best not to clash with either party.

(A.F.l I believe that the question of human benefits is very important, be-
cause Bonn leaders feel that. ultimately. it is up to them to preserve the
relative improvement in the relations between the populations of the two
Germany's which resulted from the Ost-Politik. And they know that the
Russians are going to react. should they exert the slightest reprise]. After
Schmidt was reelected 18 months ago, he did call Honnecker to order when the
latter tried to impose a unilateral increase of the foreign currency alloca-
tion which Nest German visitors must procure. B. Schmidt interrupted his
vacation but, in the end, did nothing...

lR.A.] which also shows the existence of a trap which can be summarized as
follows: all concessions from the East are temporary; all renunciations

from the Heat are permanent. This is characteristic of our negotiations
with the Soviet world. It still does not mean that the Germans are neutralistic,

kl

FOR OfFICIAL USE ONLY
eves vaagvuw nouns vs‘ut

since they need the American alliance to enable them tc have tolerable dis-
cussions with the East. All the same. the danger of a strong reaction from
Washington is always present, and the German position certainly does not
promote the will to resist in Eastern Europe.

[AFJ In fact, I do not think that those in power are neutralistic. That phe-
nomenon can be perceived at a different level. I recently went to Tuebingen
to present a lecture and I was struck to see to what extent the university
community-fsculty and students-is pacifist. with the very naive idea that

the development of a pacifist trend in the PRC could have a contagious effect
on the East.

IR.A.] Actually, all this is a way to hide a deep-seated feeling, fear of the
Soviet Union. From then on, you can find very good reasons, but everyone
knows that, at the root of all this. there is the transformation of the ratio
of forces between the two blocs. Those who lived during the 1930's know
very well what it is like to be afraid of a powerful neighbor. Here, we can
show off because we are fartrer away and because we have been told that we
would have security without war...

[A.F.] But, at the same time, we can say that the whole French policy during
the past 20 years developed under the protection of a German-".8. wall which
we thought was impregnable. Now, from the moment these two words, 0.8. and
German, are uncoupled, it is obvious that events present themselves in a very
different light.

[PARADOXESI "hat is now. in your opinion, the future of North-South
relations?

[R.A.] In this respect, I do not think that there can really be any great
policy between developed and developingcountdesas long as the schism between
tie communist and the capitalist woddsexists. As long as this schism will
oppose tao blocs of industrialized countries, such a policy will remain
paralized. The USSR has a policy of "liberation" which, actually, consists
in overthrowing moderate regimes and regimes favorable to the West; it does
not have a policy of aid to poor ccuntries. And when it grants aid, it is
often in the form of weapons and to regimes which are more or less converted
to Marxism-Leninism.

[A.F.! Yes; this being said, we are all fully aware that the East-West logic
is leading nowhere and that East-Vest relations must of necessity have a
North-South component. During the past few years, the USSR progression has
indeed taken place mainly in Third-world countries and has consistently been
aimed at depriving the West of its sources of raw materials. Therefore,

if Saudi Arabia should one day go over to the other side, that would be a
disaster. This is why it is obvious to me that the interest of the developed
North is to achieve a minimum of consolidation of the economies of the South.

[R.A.l I agree with you, but what means of action do we have in Saudi Arabia?
It is a traditionalist country and. in addition. a rich country that resists

foreign pressures. As for Africa, I believe that even if we give a lot of
money to Zaire, we will never create a stable economy there. The same is also

“2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

true of South Africa: I do not see how we could replace the present regime.
which we condemn. by another that would not be revolutionary and would give
the country such a flourishing economy. Certainly, the most solid in all
of Africa.

[A.P.] This is also the reason why governments are often more violently op-
posed to this regime in words than in deeds. All the same. I do believe that
the problem of North-South relations is of capital importance, since the
South is experiencing a formidable population growth which. moreover, is
accompanied by a rapid deterioration of its standards of living.

lR.A.] Yes, but. again. what can we do? Take Mexico for instance. "hat
action can we have in a country with an apparently stable regime. a lot of
money and oil?

[A.F.] I know that this is very complicated. but I do not see how we can
provide some sort of purpose for our societies if we neglect this problem.
Besides, if we do not do anything, many poor countries will certainly fall
into the Soviet sphere of influence.

[R.A.] I am not so sure of that. Look at what happened in Southeast Asia:

in lndian. in Pakistan, in Indonesia. These countries have experienced
serious crises, but they did not go over to the other side. And besides,

I must say it again, the countries which are of vital importance to the West
are those of southern Africa and those of the Near East. Both here and there,
our means of action are limited.

[A.P.] I still believe that, basically, people need hope. They want to be

given objectives. Now, in our western societies. we no longer have a purpose
and I believe that this situation is dangerous in that it can lead to revolu-
tionary troubles as a result of the governments' unahility to offer an ideal.

[R.A.] Maybe, but you could also conclude. like certain ill-disposed individ-
uals, that nations need war. Obviously. this is not your conclusion. but the
idea that the Europeans could he appeased by telling them that they must

send money to Bangladesh seems unrealistic to me. Certainly, we can aid the
poorest countries but. first, I do not believe that this project will enthuse
the Europeans and, second, we cannot expect a great strategic benefit from
such an aid Fer. once again, our means of action on the countries that are
vitally important to us are very limited.

lA.F.] I still believe that the concept of a purpose is fundamental, especial-
ly for the young. And I do not see what other objective we could offer but
a world economic order.

[R.A.l Yes, but was the victory of the socialist party. one year ago, deter-
mined to any extent by the prospect of achieving the world economic order you
are mentioning?

[A.P.] Certainly not. France remains a very self-centered country. However,
it is much less indifferent to the Third-ﬂorid l“cartieriste"l than it used
to he.

[R.A.l At least, that is something!
COPYRIGHT: 1982 Compagnie Buropeenne d'Bditions et Publications Periodiques

9294 63
Pen-11001110 one Alr'rreL "SR owwy
IIIICINHCJAI.USEIMNLY

HILITARY FRANCE

RBCOGNIZING ENEMY, MUNICA‘I‘ING, Ill EUROPEAN THEATER
Paris ARHEES D'AUJOURD'NUI in french Hay 82 pp 58-60

[Article by Colonel Claude Delbos: "Information on the Battlefield in the Euro-
pean Theater of Operations"!

[Text] In wartime, knowledge of the enemy through operational
intelligence is an absolute necessity. Some new techniques
have been perfected in support of this search. Used by the
combatants and the specialists, they should make possible a
continual updating of the situation of the enemy. But in or-
der to be usable, the information thus obtained must be trans-
mitted rapidly to the decision centers, where it is exploited
in real time.

Operational intelligence can be defined as intelligence making it possible to
conceive and conduct war operations. Its aim is the best possible knowledge of
the enemy. Obviously, such knowledge always remains imperfect, for the enemy
is maneuvering and he makes a strong effort not to reveal either his exact sit-
uation or his intentions. It is for this reason that operational intelligence
is a search activity that seeks, beyond what the enemy lets us see. to discover
what he is hiding from us. It is a matter of forming the most exact idea pos-
sible of the nature, position and volume of the enemy, but also of anticipating
his initiatives or his reactions. That is why the military leader--whtever his
level, tactical or strategic--must see to it that a search is made on the bat-
tlefield itself for everything that can enable him to know his present enemy
and to predict his future enemy.

Intelligence has always been one of the components of war activity, and modern
conflicts do not escape this law; but one must take care not to be content to-
day with the methods inherited from the past. The evolution of the techniques
employed in modern conflicts necessitates an "updating of intelligence."

This updating concerns all combatants, for all, to varying degrees, have a role
to play in the matter of battlefield intelligence; but it concerns particularly
the specialists in the intelligence function, those whose responsibility it is
to discover what the enemy is hiding from us. They have to make resolute use
of all the resources of the available techniques, so as to increase the depth
of their search and accelerate the exploitation of their information.

66

POI‘OPFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FlllleFICIAI.I£5EZCMVLY

The Battlefield

The battlefield, as it can be imagined today in Europe. has characteristics
that must be taken into account.

The first characteristic to be taken into consideration for the engagement of
our forces is the numerical superiority of the potential adversary and his pos-
sibility of using this superiority by manning the battlefield in such a way as
to maintain a strong rhythm and leave us no respite. For us, the only way to
respond to this is to localize and destroy by fire the maximum amount of the
enemy means of combat before they come into contact with our own forces. This
brings out an aspect of intelligence that takes on importance: intelligence
about objectives. It should be noted here that the employment of nuclear fire,
within the framework of an air-land combat, acquires all its deterrent force
only if it is capable of inflicting massive losses on the adversary. It is
therefore important to be able to strike at the right place, and to this end,
to have means available that make it possible to localize objectives in the
heart of the enemy formation.

hotorization, generalization of four-wheel-drive and cross-country capacities,
and the development of amphibious equipment give the formations great mobility.
simultaneously. the nuclear danger makes for dispersal. The result of this is
a great difficulty in finding the enemy in an emptier landscape and over ex-
panses more vast than in the past. The task is all the more arduous in that
the traditional means of in-depth intelligence, aviation. finds more and more
difficulty in flying over a battlefield that contains formidable sntiaircraft
capacities.

Because of their mobility, the reserves kept far in the rear are capable of in-
tervening in shorter times. The generalisation and perfecting of transmission
facilities, added to the mobility of the forces, make possible sudden changes
of posture and almost immediate reactions. This speed of posture change im-
poses shorter reaction times on intelligence. The ideal would be to be able t«
exploit target intelligence in real time.

Another characteristic of the battlefield is the ubiquity of the enemy threat.
The combat is in the air and on land, and aviation and helicopters enable the
enemy to intervene with fire at any point in the formation and in the rear.
Taking advantage of the intervals and voids created by dispersal. he can sud-
denly pin combatants down, infiltrate units, and create a threat capable of
throwing us off balance.

In the face of these threats. safeguarding will depend on the speed ard cor-
rectness of reactions, which themselves are a function of the speed and preci-
sion of the commund's intelligence.

There are doubtlessly a good many other factors to be studied in order to re-
view the question completely, but limiting oneself to what seems essential. one

perceives several imperatives that intelligence has to take into account today
when envisioning the conduct of operations in Europe:

65

FOIt€nﬂﬂ€1A1.USl4MVLY
ROI OFFICIAI.USI2(HULY

--search for intelligence in depth, by neana complementary to aviation;

--reduction of times for treatment of information and real-time exploitation of
target intelligence;

--centralization of items of information that are numerous but of a detail na-
ture and related to more extensive zones.

The Combatant as a Source of Intelligence

This last-mentioned point-the centralization of information relating to the
entirety of the zone of responsibility-is in reality a condition for the safe-
ty of our forces. In effect, it is essential not to be ignorant of anything
that may occur in contact, within the fornation or to the rear. This is the
first function that the intelligence system has to take on, and it concerns all
combatants. Thus, no matter what his station, the combatant must have re-
ceived training that makes him capable of identifying and localizing any mani-
festation of the enemy that he may observe, so as to get an idea of it in a
for: that can be exploited. And the leaders, at whatever level, must be con-
cerned to orient their subordinates toward the intelligence to be sought.

The generalization of optical and infrared equipment, of low-light devices,
telemeters, radars, to cite only the essential things, gives another dimension
to the possibilities of observation by the combatants on the battlefield. One
must know how to use this modern equipment to the advantage of safety and in-
telligence; the transimission facilities of the units, and even more, the fa-
cilities that will go into service in the coming years, have possibilities that
have to be taken advantage of in order to transmit information rapidly.

All combatants are therefore potentially sources of intelligence through their
observations. Nevertheless, it must be realized clearly that an intelligence
system that contented itself with these sources would be condemned to knowing
about the enemy only what he chose to show. If one wants to know what he is
hiding. one has to use particular means designed for the search for intelli-
gence, and specialists who, on the basis of the enemy's visible manifestations,
considered as indications, will know how to discover his hidden potentials.
There is indeed a battle of intelligence.

Search in Depth

Henceforth. this intelligence battle is to be carried on with the three impera-

tives taken into account that result from the characteristics of the battle-
field:

--search in depth;

--reduction of exploitation times;

--centralization and treatment of information items that are numerous but of a
deatil nature and scattered.

ln-depth search is a necessity connected with the extensiveness of the zone in
which the enemy can keep means capable of playing a role in maneuvering. The
objectives to be found are first of all the combat unita--dispersed, camou-
flaged, awaiting orders to relieve those of the first echelon--but also the
firing materiel, the launching ramps, the CP's [Com-and Posts], the logistics.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢OFFKJAI.USE(MULY

Everything that can be localized and destroyed in depth will constitute a
lightening of the task of our direct-combat forces. Our aviation, despite the
ground-to-air defenses and the enemy aviation, will doubtlessly gather intelli-
gence. But it will be largely absorbed in the tasks proper to it, in great
depth, on the scale of the theater of operations. Other means are necessary
for meeting the needs of the big ground-forces unite.

The Army’s means of intelligence are therefore intended to be developed. 0b-
servation is making considerable progress, as we have seen. Radars are pro-
gressing also-ground surveillance radars and trejectography radars--but the
interesting progress in this area will be the flying radar that will make it
possible to observe beyond 30 km. There has been progress in electronic intel-
ligence, but means of localization by radars, infrared devices and lasers can
still be envisioned. The effectiveness of deep patrols should be increased by
the use of pickups adapted to their missions.

Finally, besides the images obtained by an observation satellite that are de-
finitely exploitable to the benefit of the ground forces, overflight of the en-
emy with drones that can be sent out on programmed flight and with RPV [expan-
sion unknown], remote-piloted mini-airplanes, represents a further opportunity
for obtaining images. These machines can overfly the enemy zone and bring back
photos of it or transmit televised images. Intelligence is thus obtained in
real time, and the second imperative required of intelligence--reduction of
the time taken-~is thus fulfilled in part.

Cutting Down Time

How is the problem of time posed in the area of intelligence? Three factors
play an important role. The first is the forwarding of the intelligence. If
this forwarding is done by a hierarchical route, with each level studying and
deciding whether to transmit or not, one sees that there'will inevitably be de-
lays, which would be eliminated by addressing the information directly to the
recipient concerned. This presumes, at the regimental level or the intelli-
gence-unit level, the competence of an intelligence officer to decide on the
forwarding of the intelligence. The second factor is the necessity of a con-
tinuelly available means of transmission. The intelligence may be a notice of
alert, and it has to be able to be passed on. Specialized communication links
are therefore necessary between the intelligence officers responsible for ob-
taining the information and putting it in proper form, the intelligence-exploi-
tation units, and the CP's for the available neans of fire. The third factor
in cutting down time is the exploitation as such; but this involves the problem
posed by the centralization of intelligence for the processing of it.

Centralization of intelligence is indispensable. Bach observer, each means of
search, has, if something is found, only a piece of a puzzle, and these pieces
have to be gathered together to make the complete picture. If one imagines the
centralization of an army corps' intelligence. one sees the difficulty, at this
level, of processing, within an adequate time frame, the information coming
from the combat units and from the intelligence-search units, with each giving
its limited View within an i-ense zone of army-corps responsibility.

67

INHICIHNC1A1.USICNVLY
IIIICHﬂﬂCIAI.lEﬂi(HVLV

The teams responsible for this work in our present CP's are still doing every-
thing with ballpoint pen and grease pencil: recording, filing, sorting, compar-
ing, interpretation, visualization. These operations take time. At times of
saturation, it is not inpossible for an item of information to be lost. But
this work typically amounts to data-processing, and the computer should be able
to improve matters.

In conclusion, operational intelligence is involved today in an evolution that
has to be kept on top of, accelerated perhaps, so as to maintain in our forces
a sufficient credibility in the face of their possible adversary.

This adversary, who counts on numbers and tempo, so as to overwhelm us with his
mass, has to be countered by effective intelligence action that makes it pos-
sible to anticipate his initiatives and hit him as far away as possible. This
intelligence action involves all combatants, considered as potential sources of
intelligence. The collection and centralization system has to be based on
qualified intelligence officers and must have specialized means of transmission
available. All the means that technology can furnish for increasing the effec-
tiveness of in-depth investigation of the enemy formation must be put to use.
Finally, computerized means must be used for forwarding and pro .ssing intelli-
gence, in order to reduce the time needed for exploitation of it.

Such a system, putting varied modern means into action, has to be sparked by
specialists trained in the techniques of intelligence acquisition and in the
methods of exploitation and, especially, possessing in-depth knowledge of the
adversary. That is why it could well be that an updating of our operational-
intelligence system depends first of all on better training of the people who
serve it.

Col Claude Delbos, a graduate of Saint-Cyr (class of 1954),
served in Algeria and in the PRC before becoming an instruc-
tor at the BSM [Higher Military School] (Saint-Cyr). he has
commanded a battery of the 35th RAP [Parachute Artillery Regi-
ment] and has been chief of the training section of the 16th
RA [Artillery Regiment]. He holds the DEM [General-Staff Di-
plonal and the BEMS [Certificate of Higher Military Studies],
and after holding various general-staff positions and command-

ing the 8th RA at Commercy, he is currently in the EMAT[Land Forces
Staff or Military Academy for Communications?]

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces armees francaises "Armees d'aujourd'hui"

[1267
C80: 3100/714

48

F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(M§LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY UNITED mason

"I'll! TIMBS' QUESTIORS VALIDITY OF DBMS! CUl'S
P1011667 landon “3 TIM in $131101! 1 Jul 82 p 13
[Bditoriah "too Much on the Rhine"]

[Text] The defense white paper which is to be debated in the col-one today
is the final product of that hurried defence review which was set in notion
eighteen nonths ap when Mr Nott went to the Defence Ministry. It was brought
to a preliminary oonclmion by me and of last sun-er. It was never explained
what caused the hurry, and certainly the review suffered from the need for
such haste. since a whole raft of essential strategic questions was swept
aside and left unamered in the process.

Mr Nott's financial task see-s to have been to cut forward costings by about
eight billion pounds over the nut ten yurs. saving half of that “. in the
process, and reserving the other half in a central uncouitted fund. Bis
political task was to leave our continental European forces effectively untouched
so as not to disturb Britain's relationship with her European allies at a eonent
of sensitivity in the EEC. Hilitarily this left virtually only one option,
which was to let the aain burden of cuts fall on the navy. since both the army
and the RAF were featured lore specifically in the fornal force co-itnent to
NATO. The navy, by its very nature. deals in a less precise operational
environmental than the geographical sectors of Heat Gernany or the provision

of that country's air defence.

As a result of his review Mr Nott proposed to cut the navy by twice as much
as the any and by seven tiles as much I! the RAP—to the tune of some

five billion pounds over ten years. This was to be achieved by reducing the
active surface fleet of frigatee and destroyers from a current figure of
about 65 to one of 42: selling the carrier invincible to Australia: eliminating
the need for warships to undergo lid-life modernization which normally helps
long-life hulls tn acco-aodate changes in more rapidly obsolescent weapon
systesn; and the closure of naval dockyards. The fleet of frigates and
destroyers would ostensibly be backed by another eight ships on stand-by--not
the kind of stand-by which this suner enabled ships to be quickly activated
for service in the South Atlantic, but one in which the ships would be unable
to put to see without substantial refits--a state nearer stand-down than
stand-by.

b9

MWLIJSEONLY
FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY

There was some laudable cost control in these decisions. taken against the
background of lamentable strategy. The strategic effect of concentrating

so much of our military effort in the north German plain is that the military
machine becomes obsessively concerned win: that area, to the exclusion of the
rest of the world. The "short war" enthusiasts in the army and Royal Air
Force. dedicated to the territorial trip wires of NATO military planing, seem
once again to have won the day in the Defence Ministry. Just because our
ultimate security lies with the preservation of peace in Central Europe, it
does not follow that the main threat to that security will come in Central
Europe. 0n the contrary. most strategists now accept that the very stability
of the force-jam each side of the iron curtain has led Soviet strategists to
pursue an indirect approach through massive naval expansion and the
encouragement of indirect threats to the Western position through proxies

far from Central Europe, in Southeast Asia. the Middle East, Africa and

Latin America. With all that going on there is no need to ask why things are
so quiet on the Rhine.

Mr Nott should be asked two questions. The first is to explain why he did

not fully examine the financial consequences of a military alternative to

his progra-e of savage naval cuts--by saving on the cost of our peacetime
comitment to maintain force levels in Germany. The second would be to
explain why, given that great savings could be achieved without impairing our
war-time commitment to the defence of Germany, there is such coyness about
initiating discussions with our allies to bring about a more equitable sharing
of the defence burden.

Britain maintains 60,000 soldiers and nearly 11,000 airmen in Heat Germany.
They are accompanied by as many wives and children. The Defense Ministry rents
or owns some 45,000 married quarters, educates 28,000 children and provides
medical services for the lot. The cost of education, health and housing for
these service families is at least 450 million pounds a year which would not
fall on the defence budget at all if those troops were stationed in Britain,
with adequate plans to deploy them in Germany whenever it was necessary both
for operational training and for real emergencies. On top of that Rhine army
employs nearly 25,000 local people in servicing its peacetime establishment,
costing probably another two hundred million more.

The purpose of our troops in Germany is to deter an attack and be ready to
fight should such deterrence fail. The existing strength of sixty thousand
soldiers is barely half what Rhine army would comprise on a war establishment.
and even now is often nominally below our treaty level of 55,000. with units
serving in northern Ireland though listed on the strenth of Rhine army.

It would be possible militarily to bring home many of our army and air forces
from Germany, while equipping them with the capacity for rapid redeployment.
After the initial capital cost of refurbishing barracks, and arranging for new
married quarters. it would save hundreds of millions of pounds on the defence
budget. Some of that could go to repair the damage which Mr Mott's plan will

NI OMCIAI. USE ONLY
l-‘OIOFFIOALUSEONLY

progressively, and seriously inflict on the fleet from 1986 onwards. with
fewer ships at sea, fewer hunter-killer sub-tines on order. and the prospect
of a further savage contraction in the early 1990 's when the full effects of
this year's decisions will be felt.

These utters should be put fairly to our allies with a request for an adjust-
ment to our treaty col-itnents. Perhaps those who have misgivings about such

a transfer of resources would have a stronger case if they spent as Iuch per
-head on defence as Britain does; but none of th- does. Before that can

happen, however, the British defense establishment itself must reach a concerted
view. Hr Nott nay have successfully split the chiefs of staff col-ittee,

so that he can clai- he is not ignoring their concerted advice. Certainly

the any and MP chiefs seen to have sat beck—like shadows "yevning at the
nass"--and watched, indeed connived at, the axe falling on the navy, with no
apparent concern for the unbalanced way it was done.

They should consider the possibility that they are vrong. The certainties of
the "short war" theory-which lead to sud: an obsession with Central Europe—
are an unsound basis on which to calculate future strategy. Any British
Govern-eat must consider that the possibilities for harressnent or ninor
aggression are infinitely more varied and nunsrous at sea than they are on
that frontier in West Gernany. It is vital. therefore. that Britain should
be able to deploy forces at sea which could latch each phase of a potential
escalation, and that must include an adequate fleet of surface vessels as
well as sub-arines, and carriers. That is not preparing forces to fight the
last war (in this case, the Falklands); it is preparing, as best we can, for
the unforeseen.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Lisited, 1982

cs0: 3120/69 m

51

NI omcm. IS! ONLY