FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10635
6 JULY 1982

West Eur0pe Report

(FOUO 41/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

am publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissiona and broadcasts. Materials fron foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Tiles within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

OOPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT

(FOUO 41/82)
Commas

ENERGY ECONOMICS

SPAIN
Nuc lesr Power Is Essential to Energy-Poor , Industrial North
(MIG 16. 26 my 82) 0.0.0.1000...COCOOOosnsOoOOOaneooOO
ECONOMIC
ITALY
Stages of USSR. Italy Economic Cooperation
(Vladimir Hedvedovaky; FOREIGN TRADE, May 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SPAIN
Factors Responsible for Currency Devaluation Listed
(“”10 16' 17 "ﬂy 82) Osssoooocosta-ssoosooooosooosooosooo
MILITARY
BELGIUM
Br left!
Less Air Force Flying
FRANCE

Toulouse Space Training Center to Open in 1983
(Regis Noye; AIR 31' (1)5108. 15 May 82) .....................

Thomson-CS? Introduces New Radar. Imroved CRO‘I‘ALB Missile
(Pierre Langereux; AIR 3T cosmos. 15 May 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

m.

-a- [III-WE-ISOP<

tno nla-Irlu rel.- hmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Computer-Assisted Design Adapted for Tank. weapons Planning
(AIR BI cosms' 2‘ AP! 82) ooso...000.000....000.000.0900..

Experimental Application For Tanks. by Pierre Langereux
Uses At Military Installations

Military Transport Routes Held in Her-Ready Status
(Guy Hardy; ARHBES D'AUJOURD'HUI. May 82) .................

New SNBCHA Engine to Allow Planes Lower Altitude
(AIR ET COSMOS. 8 May 82) .................................

Briefs
Mirage IV Crashes

GENERAL
FRANCE

Aerospatiale Conducts 38D on Carbon Composites for Space Use
(A18 81 COSMOS. 8 May 82) .................................
NUCLEAR PNER IS ESSBJTIAL T0 MERCY-MR. INDUSTRIAL NORTH
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 210 May 82 pp 67-69
[Passages enclosed in slantlines printed in italics]

[Text] The Basque Country is stiﬂed because of energy. If the energy problem
is serious ttroughout Spain due to increased foreign dependency on expensive
and scarce oil, the situation is even more serious in Diskadi. This is true,
first. becaise it consumes a great deal of energy due to its high indistrial
and demographic concentration. Secmdly, it does not have energy resources of
its own. within this context. the 11.6 billion kilowatts that bemoniz should
contribute in 1990 are absolutely indispensable. That is 70 percent of the
electricity that the three Basque provinces will consume then.

The consuuption of primary energy in macadi totaled about 9.6 million TCE
(equivalent tons of coal) in 1979 and its production was 150,000 TCE. This
means its /degree of self-amply is 1.57 percent/, one of tie lowest in the
world. On the other hand, the deyee of self-supply for the entire cotntry
was 32.3 percent that year aid now is more than 34 percent.

The Basque Country does not produce coal, much less oil. It only res a mini-
mal amount of natural gas and a little electricity (run its waterfalls. In
1979. Buskadi imported 75 percent of its electricity f‘rom bordering provinces;
this percentage wait dom to 52 percent in 1980.

Mm: than half of the electricity that the Basques consume is "maheta." Re-
calling that almost all the electricity generated in the Basqxe Comtry itself
comes from thermal pouerplaits that operate with fuel (oil), it can be cm-
cluded that /only 11.5 percent of the electricity that the Basqies conane is
generated with their om mansl.

This very high energy dependency, especially at the kilowatt level, is even
more serious due to macadi's great energy consumption: 2.98 1150 per inhabi-
tant compared to 1.83 which is the average consimption per inhabitant in the
country as a mole. Energy conamption for industrial use in the Basme
Country almost doubles the cmsunption in the entire Spanish state (7.2 ‘I‘EC
compared to 4.2). The consumption of electricity per inhabitmt is more than
double: 10.95 in Diskadi compred to 2.63 in all Spain. The'ret‘cre, the Basque
energy situation does not allow for delays. By 1990, the energy needs of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basque Country will be between 13 billion and 17 billion kilowatts, according
to a study by the Ministry of Industry and Energy of the Basqne Government.
Those billions of kilowatts will have to come than saneunere if the Basqnes
tent to rave electricity.

Oil is the basic energy source today (62 percent) but the dependency on black
gold cannot continue at a time than all the countries fight to "escape" from
oil and replace it with other energy sources, basically coal and nuclear ener-
gy. The strategy included in tin study is based on these principles: re-
placement of oil, investigation of alternative sources and energy-saving
measures.

Even in the most optimistic hypotheses, alternative energy sources (solar,
wind, fusion) will not take care of more than In or 5 percent of the energy
demand of the Basqne provinces in 1990, according to data in this Basque Gov-
ernment study. Coal can increase its present participation (19 percent) but
there are problems with apply and its high degree of pollution (thermal
powerplannts) in a very densely populated zone. Conseqnently, nuclear energy
remains the most realistic alternative and Usmaniz would contribute 70 per-
cent of the electricity that would be consumed in Einskadi at the end of this
decade.

If Lemoniz is the key so that the Basques have light and energy in tin canning
years, it is also a key to Spain achieving its main energy objective: to re-
duce dependency on oil, a real cnrrency drain. This would only provide 43.4
percent of the energy consumed in 1990. The start-up of the two youps at
Lemmiz will mean a savings of 2.8 million equivalent tons of oil which, at
today's prices (at the end or the decade it would be nuch more), means an
Iannuall savings of 70 billion pesetas. an the other hand, the cost of nu-
clear mel for the two youps at Lemoniz is about 12 billion pesetas per year
today.

Lemmiz' strategic importance fcr Buskadi and all Spain lies behind the "un-
equivocal political determination" to advance and complete the temporarily
halted nuclear powerplant, according 9:: the meeting held on 12 May betwen the
minister of industry, representatives of the Basque Gwerrment and the Iber-
duero enterprise.

The last push for Lennoniz, under pressure by the terrorist offensive of ETA
[Basque Fatherland and Liberty troop], was the fomatian of the Basqne Energy
Entity at the beginning of May, the very same day that Angel Pascual mjica,
director general of the nuch plant project, was assassinated. The objec-
tives of this management company, unparalleled in any other autonanous entity,
include "the coordination and control of the activities of the Lemmiz nuclear
management company." It seemed to be the last solution to "Basque" the pro-
Ject and end the debate and violence that surround the construction of Lemoniz

The formation of the Basque Energy Entity which also includes gas necessitated

a difficult round of negotiations between the central government, the PM!
[Basque Nationalist Party] (Basque Government) and the Iberduero enterprise.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The series of attacks gainst its installations became of ismniz cost it
men 2.5 billion pesetas in 1%].

Nuclear mskadi

Gomez de Pablos. president of Iberduero, said weeks go that "the problan of
Lemmiz is conditioned by political factors am so beymd the capability of
the enterprise." He said he was satisfied with the economic chapter in the
alreements of constitution of the entity "since they establish that the be-
muniz nuclear plant and the energy trat it supplies will continue to be the
property of Iberduero."

Garcia Egocheaga, minister of industry and energy for the Beagle Goverment,
said recently that "the agreements on the lemiz nuclear poterplmt will
[xermit the Basque Country to have first-class energy euppcrt."

ErgocPBaga added that the productim of its om energy would reach 42.11 percent
or the consumptim by 1990 (today only 1.57 percent) with Lmiz. Nuclear
energy will mean 29.3 percent of the total energy in Diskadi then. This is
greater "mlclearizatiOn" than in Spain as a whole Were the nuclear energy
will mean 15.1 percent of the energy supply at tint time.

Unt 11 now, Iberduero Ms spent some 200 billion pesetas on bulimia aid termi-
nation of the project-which will take a year-means an investment of 135 bil-
lion pesetas more. The delay of a year in the start-up of the powerplant can
mean a loss of 30 billim peaetas fcr Iberduero. At this time, the halt is
costing 100 minim pesetas a day.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Inf‘ormcion y Revistas, S.A.

Til?
(.30: 3110/1“

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
STAGES OF USSR. ITALY ECONOMIC 0“)?!”le

Moscow FOREIGN MB in Bttglielt No S. May 82 pp 63-69

[Article by Vladimir Hedvedoveky]

[Text]

For many years the progress
ul Soviet-Italian trade and eco-
nomic cooperation has been good
and steady. In the ﬁeld of corn-
merce a stable trend towards
economic relations with the So-
viet Union was clearly seen way
hack in the l9SOs. in I948 the
countries signed a Treaty on Com-
ntercc and Navigation. a Trade
Agreement. an Agreement on Pay-
ments and manv other economic
documents which laid comm
tool and legal grounds for the
development of mutual trade.

Annual protocols on trade
turnover which established the
lists oi goods to be exchanged
ltettveen the two countries were
the main regulatdt'y form of So-
viet-Italian trade at that time.
Sometimes the ltalian side re-
fused licences for the export of
certain goods to the Soviet Union.
This had an adverse and de-
stabilizing ell'ect on the mutual
tmde exchanges.

One oi the reasons curtailing
Sm'iet-ltulinn exchange was the
discriminatory character of the
trade 'liheralivation‘ policies of
”iv Italian Government. By I956

ninety-nine per cent of italy‘s im
ports were freed from quantita-
tive restrictions but not the goods
coming from the Soviet Union
and other socialist nations.

At that time important changes
were occurring in italy's econ-
omy. Fixed assets were being
modernized and streamlined on a
massive scale—all to increase
output. The most intensive
growth. with the highest indus-
trial rates in Western Europe
over IO per cent per annum. was"
observed during 1959 to 1963.

An industrial boom and sharper
competition on world markets
forced ltaly’s government to

revise its policies apropos the So-
viet Union and other socialist
countries.

Italian businessmen were in-
creasingly worried by the bans
and restrictions on exports of
certain machines and equipment
to the Soviet Union as they lost
proﬁtable orders which the USSR
foreign trade organizations satis-
ﬁed elsewhere.

The Soviet Union's vigorous ei-
forts for a longoterm. mutually
proﬁtable cooperation with ltaly
were eventuallv crowned with
success. On December 28. I957.
the two countries signed their
ﬁrst hing-term Agreement on
Mutual Goods Deliveries [or
i‘lSlt-I9ol as well as an Agree-
ment on Payments in convertible
eutwncics. The switchover to a
long-term basis had an immediate
positive impact on the countries'
trade turnover.

This period was characterized
tw intensively expanding business
contacts between Soviet foreign
ll'iltlc organisations and lhlian
firms. The ﬁrst long-term agree-
ment was concluded in I960 with
the state-owned company EN! on
the delivery of l2 million tons of
Soviet oil and oil products. and
the purchase of ltalian-made syn-
thetic rubber. oil equipment and
piping.

Many far-sighted italian busi-
nessmen. “captains of industry"
Come to regard better ltaliano
Soviet commercial relations as a
matter of personal interest and
concern. They contributed a lot
to slmngcr business contacts be-
tween Sovict foreign trade or-
ganimtions. on the one hand, and
the italiun firms ENI, Monteca-
titti. FIAT, Snia Viscose. Pirel-
li. etc.. on the other.

in the wake of the success of
the linil long-term agreement two
more trade agreements were con-
cluded between the Soviet Union
and ltaly: for 196M965 and
l966-l969.

Italy's interest in greater as
ports to the Soviet Union prompt-
ed its decision to abate its dis.
criminatoty practices in crediting
loreign trade. In the late ﬁfties
Soviet foreign trade organization's
were allowed to purchase ltalian~
manufactured equipment and
machines on ﬁve-year and longer

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080009-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stateguaranteed company cred-
its. The limited nature of these
credits, however. hampered the
growth of trade and Italy started
granting long-term banking cred-
its to the Soviet Union in 1962
despite US pressure against this
step.

Mutual trade became the sub-
ject of discussions at an inter.
governmental level. The ltalian
side took certain steps to im-
prove conditions for the fulﬁl-
ment of the trade agreements
signed by the two countries; also.
the trade policy climate in Italy
became relatively better with
longer lists of goods allowed for
licence-free imports to Italy and
less other restrictions.

The changes in reciprocal trade
terms in the early sixties encour.
aged new contracts between Soviet
foreign trade organizations and
italian firms. For example, a new
agreement was signed with BM!
in 1963 effective up to 1970 for
thesaieonSmilliontonsofSo-
viet oil in exchange for products
of the BN1 enterprises. At that

time it was one of the biggest
Soviet foreign trade transactions.

In the latter half of the 1960s
Soviet-italian trade could boast
of quite a few long-term. large-
scale and mutually proﬁtable pro-
jects such as the construction of

the Volga Motor Works in co-
operation with FIAT and coopera-
tion with EN! which continues
today. These large-scale ventures
undertaken under respective
agreements between the two
countries were christened “trans-
actions of the century”.

The twelveyear period from
1958 to I969. covered by three

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080009-9
tour-vear agreements. was marit-
I‘ll with a 75-fold increase in So-
viet-Italian trade (from 66.4 mil.
lion rtthles in I958 to 493.5 mil-
lion rubles in I969). The list of
exchanged products has been con-
sidemhlv expanded. Italy’s long-
term honking credits to ﬁnance
ils exports of equipment to the
Soviet Union were of great serv-
it‘e.

.‘t the same time certain
quantitative and other restric-
tions on Soviet imports to Italy
t-ontinttod to negatively affect So-
viet-Italian trade.

The tletemiined ellorts of the
Soviet Union for discriminatory-
It‘ee relations with Italy were
rewarded. On January IS. I970.
the long-teim Trade Agreement
tor the period betWeen I970 and
W74 was signed between the So-
viet Union and Italy.

Certain principles reaffirming
the Sides' intention to support
tin-thei- pmmotion of both their
hiluteral relations and all-Euro-
pean cooperation were incorporat-
ed in the Agreement on Expand-
nl Economic. Industrial and Tech.
nit-ail Cooperation for a ten-year
term sinned in July 1974.

A new phase began in Soviet-
llztllan cooperation in the mid-
N70“, particularly. after the
"Clullkl Conference on Euro-
pean Security and Cooperation.
‘I‘ratlitmnul trade was supplement-
ed with economic and industrial
t-oon-nilion. On October 29. I975.

Soviet Foreign Trade Minister
NS. Patolichev and Italian
Minister of Foreign Affairs

M. ltnmor signed a Long-term Pro-
"l'.tltllllt.‘ of Extended Economic

and Industrial Cooperation be«
tween the Soviet Union and Italy.

During the ofﬁcial visit to Mos-
cow of Italy's President G. Leone
an Agreement on Soviet-Italian
Economic Cooperation was signed
on November 20, I975.

During the I979 official visit to
Italy of Soviet Foreign Trade Min-
ister N.S. Patolichev an Agree-
ment on Soviet-Italian Economic
Cooperation for 1980-1985 and a
Protocol to the Long-Term Pro~
gramme of Extended Economic
and Industrial Cooperation be-
tween the Soviet Union and Italy
were concluded.

The Long-Term Programme of
Extended Eednomic and Indus-
trial Cooperation of October 29,
I975, the Supplementary Protocol
to this Programme. the Agree-
ment on Economic Cooperation
for 19004985 and other Soviet-
Italian artangements on eco-
nomic matters translated the
principles of the Helsinki Final
Act into actual fact.

In the late I9705 the two coun-
tries' economic cooperation reach-
ed its highest level. Its assets are
as follows: loneoterm contractual

foundation: stabilitv: mutual
benefit; vast business experience:
many good traditions; large-

scale and good pmspccts.

In November I980 Italian For-
eign Minister E. Colombo paid an
ofﬁcial visit to the Soviet Union.
Says the joint Soviet-Italian com-
munique following this visit: ‘The
Soviet Union and Italy cotne out
for the further strengthening of
their trade. coonomic. scientific
and technical relations to the
mutual beneﬁt of both countries."

The most effective working
mechanism assisting Soviet-Italian
economic, industrial and tech-
nical cooperation is the Joint
('uliitnissitm on Economic. Scien—
tilic and Technical Cooperation
tttnctioning by now for over
Iitteen vents. lt coordinates the
drafting til economic agreements
and programmes and works out
remmmendations for largmle
etmperation projects.

The l2th session of the Com-
mission in Rome (March. ”8”
math: u signiﬁcant contribution to
the growth of Soviet-Italian trade
rtlzitinns. The sides expressed
their intention to continue ellorts
ter extending cooperation. put-
tine the increased mutually ben-
tlicial tt Me on a more balanced
and linimonitins basis, speciﬁcal
Iv. through a wider assortment of
exchanged goods. Progress in lul-
Iilling the Long-Term Programme
of Extended Economic and
Industrial Cooperation was con-
sidct'cd and agreement reached on
speedier drafting a new Long-
Iertn Programme of Soviet-Italian
Economic, industrial and Tech-
nical Ctxipcration up to I990 fol-
lowing a decision taken at the
t‘oitttnissiun's previous meeting.

Soviet-Italian Trade hit-never

( min rubles)
_ SF» t'et lWlet
I -. I‘l'urmwer ExMts lt'np_o__rts
t-m 494.6 233.! ms
MS ”26.8 638.0 788.8
Mb U785 1.0693 7093
PIN ”0101 l.090.5 7903
NH t..¢no7 I.Ilz.l 858.6
I-I‘N 2,155.1 l192.0 863.!
mu 3 .0343 MOM 9335

 

The session conﬁrmed the good
pl'tispccls :wailahle for Soviet-
ttnlian relations to expand in eco
timnics. industw, science and en-
nines-ring.

The fact that the economy of
llk' Suvit‘l Union and that ol' ltaly

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600000009-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mutually supplement each other
is important for the further pro-
gress of Soviet-ltalian trade and
economic relations. The Soviet
Union has vast resources of prac-
tically all minerals and a highly
developed industrial potential. It
is interested in the products of
the following ltalian industries:
automotive: mechanical engineer-
ing; metallurgical: chemical and
petrochemical: textile; food and
llavour; also. consumer goods.

in the last decade 09714980)
Soviet-ltalian trade turnover in-
creased sixfold.

ln l972 ltaly ranked seventh in
the Soviet Union's trade with ad-
vanced capitalist countries. In
l980 it moved up to the fourth
place (after the PRC, Finland and
France).

The built of Soviet exports to
ltaly consists of mineral raw ma-
terials and metals. In I980 the
share of oil and oil products. and
of gas in total Soviet exports to
ltaly was equal to 57. 5 and 24 per
cent respectively:

Deliveries of machines, equip-
ment and transport facilities in-
creased from 2.8 million rubles in
I97! to 2|.2 million rubles in
l980. The Soviet Union exports
to italy: metal-cutting tools,
forges and presses, power gen-
erating and electrical equip-
ment. material-lifting equip-
ment. looms, black-and-white
kinescopes, tractors. motor ve-
hicles. bearings. instruments and
devices. However. their share in
the total Soviet exports to ltaly
is insigniﬁcant.

Several joint Soviet-italian
companies are active on Italian
markets. These are as follows:
Stanitaliana. established in Milan.
l97]. sales of lath . presses and
forges; Ruslegnio, established in

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: ClA—RDP82-00850R000500080009-9
Route, I974. sales oI timber.
pnlp-and-papcr produﬂs; Nafta
(itailyi, established in Rome, I976.
oil and oil products; Enital. es-
tablished in Milan. I977, mainly
Soviet-made machines and equip
ment; and Tocnicon. in Genoa.
engineering- services and licences.
Sumt- oi them are also engaged
in import operations.

Imports oI machinery and
equipment irom italy rose from
”6.4 million rubles in I971 to
408.4 million rubles in 1980. The
Soviet Union imports mainly the
luiluwing items: complete sets of
equipment for the automobile.
metallurgical. food, textile, chem-
it'nl. construction materials and
mlwr industries: also. metal-
t-utting Iathes: forges and pres-
M‘s: cranes and loaders; indus~
ninl Iistures. measuring devices,
drips and marine equipment; in-
t reusing amounts of piping.

[guise-scale, long-term agree
merits and contracts between So-
uel Im‘eign trade organizations
and Italian ﬁrms and their ef-
Itt‘it'ltl fulﬁlment are now tradi-
uunul aspects of the two coun-
t. ies' business relations.

Since [974 ltaly has been
reach-inn.- Soviet natural gas under
Ilu- 1°69 agreement with BNI
prm-iditn: Ior more than roo.ooo
million cum. of gas to be sup-
pluti within the next twenty
years Under Iltt' same agree-
Illt‘lil lllt.‘ Soviet Union has been
receiving from Italy large-
thumt-ter pipes. materials and
muipment for the gas industry.
in I975 another contract was
HE‘IIL'd with ENI for an extra dc-
l-wrv of 20.000 million cum of
Soviet gas in ”78-2”.

Negotiations are drawing to a
time on the participation of

several West European countries
in the construction of a gas pipe-
line to the USSR western border
and on extra deliveries of So-
viet natural gas to Western
Europe. including ltaly. A long-
term contract for the delivery of
oil to the AGIP ﬁrm (a member
of EN!) in 197849.80 has been
fulﬁlled. Uranium for ltalian
atomic plants is being enriched
at Soviet enterprises under a
long-term contract with another
BN1 member: the A61? Nuclear
company, for Italian atomic pow.
er stations.

The General Agreement of May
8. 1974. between the USSR Minis-
try of Foreign Trade and EN!
provides for cooperation in the
compensation-based construction
of six chemical enterprises in the
Soviet Union to produce car-
bamide and other chemicals.
Equipment for three carbamide-
producing plants has already been
delivered to the Soviet Union. To
pay for it the Soviet Union has
started deliveries of ammonia to
Italy.

The General Agreement of I974
between the USSR Ministry of
Foreign Trade and the Finsider
metallurgical association on long-
term (1975-1979) cooperation has
been fulﬁlled. Under this agree-
ment Italy shipped to the So-_
viet Union some two million tons
of large-diameter pipes: the So-
viet Union supplied Italy with
some four million tons of coal,
seven million tons of iron ore
and other raw materials for its
steel-making industry.

in July I980 a protocol was
signed in Rome to extend the
above agreement for a further five-
year period “9814985) envisaging
deliveries of Soviet primary ma-
terials for Italy's iron-and-steel
industry in exchange for various
metal products. including large-
tlinnteter pipes and steel plate.

Today the Finsider and Fin-
met-ennica associations are do
livering equipment for the Volga-
Don Atommash worlts.

In the late 19605 Pirelli sup
plied equipment for the Balaltovo
factory which makes tyres and
other rubber articles for the
Volga Motor Works. Later Pirelli
began delivering to the same fac‘
tury individual types of equip-
ment for manufacturing KamAZ
truck tyres. in I980 Plrelli com-
pleted its shipments of tyre-

making equipment for passenger
cars and trucks to the Soviet
Union.

The COMAU machine-tool as-
sociation (a FIAT subsidiary) is
completing its deliveries of equip-
ment for the Cheboltsary tractor
factory. Cantiere Navale Breda.
part of the state-owned EFlM
association has built at its ship
vatt‘ds in Venice three liquid am-
monia carriers for the Soviet
Union. The firm De Nora is sup-
plying our country with caustic
soda and chlorine-producing
equipment.

A eompumtively new and pro-
mising form of cooperation. i.e..
emnpensntion arrangement, has
been gaining ground since the
early "9705 in Soviet-ltalian
n‘lztlions. Among the ﬁrst Italian
firms to cooperate in compensa-
tion-based large-scale ventures
was Montcdison. The agreement
«I September 27, 1973. between
the Soviet foreign trade organiza-
tions Techmashimport. Sojuz-
eliimexport and Soyuspromex-
port. on the one hand. and Mon-
tcdison. on the other, provided
lur cooperation in building seven

plants in the Soviet Union in
the course of l0-l2 years to pro-
duce carbamide. acrylic acid
nitrile, freons and other chenr
icals. and for deliveries of Soviet-
made chemicals to Italy.

At present Tecnitnont is sup»
plying the Soviet Union with dis
persed dyes producing equipment
to be repaid in Soviet deliveries
of ammonia and methanol to
italy. The ﬁrm is also shipping
to our country equipment for a
plant to produce dyes for leather.

The 1973 agreement with Mon-
tedison was a success and the
sides decided to extend their 00-
opcration. On March I2, 1980, the
USSR Ministry of Foreign Trade
and the company signed a Gen-
eral Agreement on cooperation in
constructing chemical enterprises
in the Soviet Union and on
mutual deliveries of chemicals.

The well-known Italian ﬁrm.
Snia Viscosa, has supplied to
our country, under a compensa-
tion arrangement. equipment for
a plant to produce caprolactam
from toluene. Under another con-
tract it will go ahead with sup-
plies of equipment for a nitron
ﬁbre-producing factory.

Compensation t and
contracts with Italian ﬁrms so
far cover mainly chemicals manu-
factute and the gas industry. This
form of cooperation may be ex-
tended to the manufacturing in-
dustry. .

Soviet foreign trade organiza-
tions also do business with
medium and small-size ltalian
companies. For example, FATA.
Morando, Giustina. Betardi. Val-
fat and others. They sent equip-
ment to the Kama Truck Fac-
tory in the citv of Naberahnve
t'helnv; Telettra supplied equip-
ment lor the Baikal—Amur Rail-
was. and Seleniu—radars for air
tmlltt- control. In the early 19705
Ji and Ji delivered to the Soviet
Union the complete livestock
bleeding equipment for feeding
ettllh: and pigs and also equip-
ment lor producing balanced lod-
tler. Today the lirm delivers to
the Soviet Union special mixed
leeds and milk-regenerating equip-
Itthl lor livestock breeding com-
plexes. Moreover. medium-and
sttl:tll-\i7.t: Italian ﬁrms are often
invited to take part in large-scale
projects ol Soviet-Italian eco-
nomic eoopeintion as sub-con-
ttztt‘ltit's.

It should he noted that the op-
mi-tnnities available for broader
\miet-ltulian economic coopera-
tion are not always used to the
lull. Certain Iaetors which stand
III the wait- of normal progress in
nntnully prolilahle economic re-
lations are still at wurlt.

The “cold war'originated lists
til Nit-called strategic goods ban-
ml lor esport to the Soviet Union
and other socialist countries are
.~.til| in lotee in Italy. Customs
tttt‘ills apply to some 40 items in
the export list approved in l975
In Italy's Ministry of Foreign
Trade and that ol' Finances.
Specifically. these include certain
wires ol electronic equipment.
ntaeltitw-tools. aviation equip-
ment and navigation and radio

mnnnttnication facilities. aircralt
lnels- and lubricants. a number
ol chemicals. etc.

Quantitative restrictions oi So
not exports to Italy also con-
tittttt‘ to he a serious hindrance.

3» May 6, I976. the ltalian
Miinstiy of Foreign Trade to-
eether with the Ministry of

Finances issued a decree (elfec-
tive as of July 1, I976) which
governs the ﬂow of imports to
ltaly. The decree makes imports
contingent on the country of
origin. Countries are broken down
into codiﬁed geographical zones:
zone 'A' (Common Market coun-
tries. their overseas territories
and associated countries: also.
some developing countries in the
Caribbean and the Paciﬁc); zone
"B" (the Soviet Union and Euro-
pean socialist countries): and
zone ‘C' (Japan).

Attached to the decree is a list
of goods with over 200 tariffed
items which in fact means quan~
titative restrictions imposed by
Italy on imports. These restric~
tions apply in the main to goods
from the Soviet Union and other
socialist countries.

in March l975 Italy liberalized
imports of natural gas from the
Soviet Union. in July 1979 it ap
plied the same measure to im-
ports from the Soviet Union of
mazut. diesel fuel. gasoline. paraf-
ﬁn and a number of other oil
products.

Today quantitative restrictions
continue to be imposed on St»
viet exports to ltaly of the fol-
lowing goods: bearings. tractors.
motor vehicles. cast iron, fem)
alloys. steel strip in rolls. steel
pipes. sodium bichromate. win-
dow glass. etc.

At the l2th session of the Joint
Soviet-ltalian Commission the So-
viet side pointed out that the
operative quantitative restric-
tions on imports of certain So-
viet goods to ltaly formed a
hindrance to their expanded de~
liveries. and emphasized the need
for further liberalization of im-
ports (rent the Soviet Union.
Alter Italy introduced the
unitorm EEC customs tariffs the

duty levied on industrial prod-
ucts imported from the Soviet
Union and other socialist coun-
tries runs from 5 to 20 per cent.
not a favourable condition rela-
tive to the duty-free imports of
similar goods allowed in from the
(.‘ommon Market countries.

Of late Italy has very often
made use of protectionist plays
such as special monetary and
credit policies (restricted cur-
reney remittances and payments
ahmad: a special tax on transfer
of money abroad) which has ad-
versely ailected purchases of So-
viet goods, speciﬁcally, machines.
-.~quipment and manufactures. by
Italian Iirms.

Particular attention should be
given to deliveries of Soviet equip-
ment and machines to Italy.
Seve ".tl examples of good pro-
gress on the local market can be
cited. In I972 two YAK-40 planes
were sold for the ﬁrst time to
Italy. In [Wt-I973 seven Kameta
demt'uil ships were delivered to
IlaIv. Thev are l ' . used for
passenger e'-rriage, speciﬁcally.
tourists. near the coasts of Sicily
and t'apti. Also won recognition
Soviet-made UAZ cross-country
minihuses which the Italian team
used in auto-rally on African
roads. ()n the whole. however. it
needs saying that Soviet de-
liveries of machines and uip-
ment to Italy are far Irom ing
exlinnstch of the export poten-
tialities ut' the Soviet engineering
itulustty. and of the needs of the
Italian economy. The problem
was discussed at all meetings of
the Joint Commission. It was
sttessed that the existing situa-
tion was not consistent with the
mesettt-dav level and character of

economic cooperation between
such advanced industrial nations
as the Soviet Union and Italy.
Both sides expressed the opinion
that it was necessary to expedite
the studies already underway of
speciﬁc possibilities for expand-
ing the export of Soviet machines
and equipment to Italy.

The Soviet market is of interest
to Italy. Italian business sections
increasingly favour continued de-
tente. the broadening of traditio-
nal trade and economic relations
with the Soviet Union based on
mutual beneﬁt and good pros-
pects. Their viewpoint was clear-
ly outlined in G. Agnelli's (Presi-

dent of FIAT) article in Euro-
pco. in which he arrives at the
unambiguous conclusions that
resorting to economic sanctions
against the Soviet Union is a
great error. Moreover. it is a
threat to world peace, and, vice
versa, development of trade re-
lations can facilitate a return to
detente.’

The 26th CPSU Congress em-
phasized that the line of the So
viet Union for broader interna-
tional economic cooperation re
mained invariable as a principl-
ed course in international eco-
nomic relations reflecting the
purposefulness of the Soviet for
eign policy for the maintenance

of peace and the development of
detente and mutual understand-
ing among nations.

The Soviet state regards coop-
eration with industrial capitalist
countries as a factor stabilizing

 

' liumpeu. No. 25. 24 giugno, I980.
._ 76:3... :5. :8 main. CEO:
2:... _...._.< 8: no .2. Bean :5 32.
:_ n§5n§2c=|uc=zovr 82.0.
:5. E... 3:56.. 2:0: :3 con.
9...... 7< 75—. «33 822.9
sizes—é :32 9:55. 1272:.“
2:. 33:3. ca 922:.» gm 33.3
.75... 25.8320: 592 «33
:3. 2.2% .c 9:232. 05. 3:5.
.19. on: 39—8 on wave—.83
2.217....3 .c o 33:52. 10:.
:5: 2.32." 5 =5 30958.3.
:8... c: :8 9.33: 85.233
2:..— .725m-55 :8 £019.

.256 meso— cac: 330... 2:
:52. 9.2.5.8? new man: .m. 37H
FAC'NRS RESMSIBLE FDR CURRDJCY WVALUATICN LISTED
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 17 My 82 pp 56-59

[Text] You do not have to be me of the oldest in the place to remember when
you could get a dollar for a duro. Tin last civil wu‘ bqan with this ex-
change rate. Since then, theirs has proliferated and tin poor peseta which
inflation has left at less than half its value in 5 yews has given up gmmd
in its international value. Today you have to pay a dwo ad 100 pesetas for
each dolla'.

The drop in the peseta, althagh slowed in recent days, is a one-m street.
The present rate cannot be sustained for long. In recent weeks, there has
been umnercit’ul speculation on the peseta, aided by a plethoric strong dollar.
If tourism and the World Games do not remedy it, in a matter of 111th the
figure of 120 pesetas per dollz' might be reached.

"If we consider the lack of productivity in the Spanish economy, the host fair
exchange rate mild be rand 120 pesetas," indicated Brique Kaibel, chair-

man of the Foreign ‘h‘ade Omittee of tin can: (Spanish confederation of Busineu
Organisations]. Sources in the ship construction sector, one of the productive

activities most involved abroad. agree with this figure.

In his opinion, the a'tificial exchage rate fcr our currency cannot be sus-
tained much longer. "Not only is it desirable that it go dam but it is per-
t‘ectly predictable in view of the real situation of the Spaiish economy."

linr‘itpe Kaibel added: "If there were no type of control like in the (exited
States where you ca) fill a briefcase with dollars and leave freely, the pe-
seta would go dom to at least 150 per (101.18."

The widespread nature of opinions like this have led to speculatiai on the
peseta which is almost Waible to avoid. In tin first lo malths of 1982,
the Foreign currency reserves lost about $1.4 billia: alane. Cateretely. in
Wirch $800 million went out.

In December 1981, there was a decision to stop the stubborn fall in reserves,
valuing gold at Met prices although its sale is unthinkable. In this way,

the $11.878 billion that were accounted for in November rose to $15.33? bil-
11m a month later. In April, we we again at $13.730 billion.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U58 ONLY

At the ﬂank of apuhn, movements concerning the peseta are planned without any
concern. Bank sources indicated: "The balance of payments is one of the most
positive aspects of the Spanish econany. The deficit is much better than is
expected, experts have pleasantly surprised us, impcrts continue in modera-
tim, tourisn is going stupendously tell and expectations we even better. We
are not at all concerned."

According to these sources, the surmise in Ma-ch and the fall in reserves rave
their origin in the big drop in foreign credits recorded that month. Spanish
enterprises have gone faithfully to the internatimal markets in search of
financing but, in the first few months of 1982, they preferred to stay at lune
becmse credits are in liquidatim here due to high foreign interests rates
and, especially, the rid: of having to repay the dollar credits with pesetas
which are continually devalued. This business retreat was imnediately made

nnp for by the state which in: comitted itself to go out at its own risk in
search of the foreign capital that the enterprises consider too onerous. In-

ternational credit to the Kingdom of Spain totaling $650 million is part of
this new policy.

Hint rurts the present exchange rate of the peseta? Spanish expa'ters them-
selves, interested in the situation continuim to deteriorate, as the first
to contribute their little grain of sand. Tie traditional mechanism is to
retain payment for their exports alroad. If the peseta devaluates, the longer
they wait to repatriate the dong-s, the more pesetas they will receive in

cxchame .

This practice was faithfully reflected in 1978. When the enchange rate of

the peseta "normalized" after mentes mintana's devaluation, entrance of
capital totaled 130 billion pesetas. In 1981, in spite of the strag in-
crease in foreign trade, revenue any reazhed loo billim. In the opinion of
the experts, this demonstrates the strung retentim carried out by Spanish ex-
porters at this time. ﬁccording to some estimates, the anount awaiting the
collapse of the peseta in order to return to Spain is about 200 billion.

Enrique Kaibel stated: "I think this figure is low." He added: "It is ne-
cessary to keep in mind that Spanish exports approach 2 trillion pesetas
which would mean only 10 patent is pendixg return to Spain."

An authorised spokesman of the Bank of Spain was skeptical and stated that, if
true, he amid be in good shape. "I would be very satisfied if it were in our
hmnds to recover these 2 billion whenever we wanted."

He said: "If we had this figure pending return to Spain, it would mean that
we do not have any problem with the balance of payments. It would be only a
nrolnlem of speculation. If only this were true, I would sign right now."

Hut the peseta is not only affected by the speculatim of the exporters. The
imnorters, the most harmed by the devaluation of the peseta, also contrihite

their grain of send by anticipating their purcluses and paying as soon as
possible.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Political uncertainty also suppa'ts speculation. The deterioration of the
image of the DC!) [Democratic Center union) aid the possibility of its decom-
Iwition as a result of the comirg elections to the Andalusian Parlianent
also contribute to the fragility of the peseta at a time when it is being
dmmstrated with statistics that it can compete in all the markets.

Expcrl. in; "Boon"

This ability to coupete in spite of the groans of the expcrte's is a) inques-
tionublc reality. Exports in Fetruary surpassed those in Jamary by 100 per-
cent and those in February 1%1 by 57 percent. Luis Linde, tecl'nical secre-
any general of the Ministry of atonemy aid Connierce, indicated: "Foreign
trade is young about 13 percent a year in real terms, precisely at a tin:
or scant youth in wcrld trade. This growth is so strcrg that it is inpos-
:zible to maintain it."

I-‘nrique Kaibel, fcreign trade official in the CM, recognized tint it is still
possible to compete today with the done at 105 pesetas but he said that the
situation is unsustainable. "We have an inflatim rate of 7 cr 8 points more
than our competitors; the peseta will have to be devaluated. Also if we want
Lo liberalize the economy, he would have to begin by liberalizing the eoncharge
rate of the 9838123."

in the general conspiracy on the peseta—in which the interests of the export-
ers, the political situation, the internal economic deterioration, the
strength of the dollar and inflation play a part-the behavior of the Wench
l'rtnc also participates. The collapse of the Wench currency will have a
cmtagious effect m the peseta for two reasms: historically the peseta has
been subnissive to the wane; and the problems that afflict the fraic today
show what could happen with a socialist governemt in Spain.

In the midst of the storm, the goverment aid the Bank of Spain remain calm.
It Is a good indication although permps the situaticn has Just werwl'elmed
them. Not even the fact that Spain's foreign debt-425 billion—doubles the
reserves semis to upset them. They said at the Balk of Spain: "We do not
have nor will we rave any difficulty getting financing in the international
.n’rkct in the coming years. We are not the united States or Switzerland but
we are among the better situated countries. With the problem of the countries
in the East and Latin America, 0.8. bankers are completely satisfied to work
with us. We offer solvency and sifficient credibility that no one has my
fear about the capital that re lends us."

In a matter of weeks, the last wcrd will be said. Meanwhile, many thousands
ul' Spaniards try to obtain the necessary dollars fa" their vacatims and even
mm: for reserve while the enterprises with debts in dolla's see themselves
Irwin; to return almost 50 percent more pesetas than they had plained. At
LIL‘ rout of the evils of the peseta lies the sad reflectim of the many prob-
lems that afflict the Spanish economy.

mI'YlilnllT: 1982, information y Revistas, S.A.
‘I‘II'I
Cm: 3110/1“

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

LESS AIR FORCE FLYlNc--Lt Gen Marcel De Stet. chief of ataff of the Belgian Air
Fnrcv. declared recently that because, on the one hand. of a conaiderable re-
durlion in the operating credita allocated for the purpose for 1982 in relation
In tho noodeexpressed $102 million, or a reduction of 2.2 percent) laa pub-
lishvdl tor flying the planea of the Air Force, and on the other hand, an 8.5-
pvrcvnt increase in the coat of fuel, becauae of a rice in the 0.8. dollar-
Bvluiun franc exchange rate. he would be forced to reduce the air-activity lev-
vl "r the pilots of the FAB [Belgian Air Force] for the year 1982 as a whole
lrmn I73 to ISO houra. Referring to the replace-eat of the Air Force'a Hirage
S's. General De Suet declared that the two poaaible aucceaeora are atill the
r-Io and the Hirage 5 again. and that it would be deeirable for a deciaion to
hr node during the runner. [Text] [Paria AIR ET COSMOS in French 24 Apr 82

I' loll ICOPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982] 11267

usu: 1100/651

16

FUI‘OFFIJA1.UBE(MNLY
TWIDUSB SPACE TRAINING cm ‘10 can I“ 1983

Paris AIR 8‘! cosine in French 15 May 82 9 ll
{Article by aegis Noye: "lbulouse HAS Center 1b Be Operational in 1903']

EText] Construction work has been under way at woulouse since march on the
l-‘lAS l_lnternational Aeronautical and Space Training] Center. which is designed
to accept foreign trainees. After having interviewed Hr Pierre trancois on the
topic of sins activities (see am 31' 008“. No 902). All! 31' 00908 has this
week asked Mr Jacques Joury. director general of HAS. to provide our readers

with a birdseye-view of this Center.

Objectives

The fundasental reason for the creation of an PIAS Center is the need to up-
grade the levels of linguistic. as well as scientific and technological, know-
ledge of foreign students ceiling to France for training in aerospace careers.
whatever their prior level of training. past experience has shown that these
students need a period of resedial instruction of varying duration (1 to 12
months) to bring then up to required entrance levels for the courses they will
be pursuing in our schools and specialised training centers. having estab-
lished this basic prenise. the next consideration was that the Center lust
necessarily be located in an environment offering at one and the sane tine a
good educational structure and a solid industrial footing in the aerospace
nosain. The choice finally narrowed down to the city of mulouse. France's
second university city and theseat of a goodly number of aeronautical engin-
eering schools as well as any industrial establishments. The rm officials
very quickly found there was a dire shortage of student housing facilities in
the city. Actually. ‘noulOuse receives 50.000 students a year. of who. 6.000
are foreigners. but has. in its current structure. only 5.000 units of housing.
M which only one-fifth can be rented to foreigners... Furthermore. although
the city is well equipped vith excellent facilities for teaching of the trench
language, these facilities are nonetheless not altogether suited to the real
need“ of HAS students. who must have, in addition. a very thorough mastery of

l’ronch technical language.
FOI‘OFFNJAL.USE(MNLY

in view of these two findings. the eras undertook a study. beginning in July
1980. of the feasibility of building a center with its own facilities for not
only receiving and housing foreign students but also for providing them the
necessary linguistic and technical training.

1he fact is that the CNES :National Center for Space StudiesZ. having already
for its part run into the same problems in the Toulouse region with regard to
the foreign personnel participating in its international programs. provided
strong backing for this project.

An lnterministerial Committee decreed on 23 February 1982 the construction of
the Toulouse Center under the Southwest Regional Development Plan.

Mr Joury stressed the innovative nature of the eras Center. which. as far as he
knows. is the first in the world of this kind. he also pointed out the excel-
lent reception accorded this project by the public authorities.

An Investment of 55 Million Francs

11» construction and putting into operation of the Toulouse Center represents an
investment totaling 55 million Francs. This total is being finance by: The
ClFAS [French Aeronautical and Space Industries Group] (12.5 million francs. or
about 25 percent); the Ministry of National Education (10 million francs); the
Ministries of Defense and Transport (7.5 and 3 million francs, respectively);

tlm DATAR [Delegation in Charge of National Development and Regional Action]

(2 million francs); the C835 (1 million francs). To this must be added the very
strong support being provided by the local authorities: The Regional Council is
participating to the extent of 5 million francs and the General and Municipal
Councils of Toulouse have guaranteed bank loans up to a total of 10 million francs.
each of them having assumed half the responsibility for reimbursement. TIAS is
currently seeking supplementary financing to cover the remaining 6 million francs.
In commenting upon the size of the GIPAs'a participation. Hr Joury remarked that
this is the first time an industrial sector has invested so much in the domain

nl training.
Capacity for 200 Trainees

11w Toulouse Center is situated inside the Lespinet aerospace complex. in the
hmsudintc vicinity of the establishments of the CNBS, the ENAC [National School for
Civil Aviation]. the ERSAB [National College of Aeronautics and SpaceIISUP'ABRO
[College of Aeronautics]. the Paul Sabatier University. and the LAAS [Automation and
Systems Analysis Laboratoryd. The terrain on which it is being built mea urea
28,000 m2. of which l7.000 m2 were ceded to pins by the cuss and 11,000 by

the ENAC. The covered area measures 13.000 m2. the rest of the terrain being
occupied by an all-sports gymnasium facility and three tennis courts. a parking
lot. and greenery. The installations include: one classroom facilities build-

inq designed to handle 200 trainees and equipped with 20 classrooms. with

language laboratories and with lecture halls; four buildings of living quarters
design to house trainees and their families if necessary. that is. 120 single

18

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
rooms. so studios, 25 apartments for 3 to 4 persons, asking possible the hous-
ing of around 300 persons all told, a 250-seat auditorius equipped with simul-
luneous translation facilities: an adainistration building; a restaurant side
by side with the living quarters eagles; and a place of worship. while the
Center is principally designed to aces-sedate foreign students. it is worth
noting that certain of its installations can be used to fulfill other needs.
In particular. its auditorium can be used for seetings, sysposims, etc., dur-
in; 250 days of the year, with a view to saxinising its profitability. More-
over. while the students are required to vacate the Center upon comletion of
their 'resedial" training period, certain ones among then will always be given
the opportunity to return. particularly if they run into housing problems
later.

with respect to the training to be offered by the Center. the mas plans to
draw up a catalog of courses covering a broad enough range of training to sect
the specific needs of each group of students. The students will be given. is-
mediately upon arrival. .3 levels test, and their studies progras will be drawn
up on the basis of their individual test results. ‘l‘heir progress will be
checked periodically with a view to readjusting their progress if necessary.
The teaching staff will not be hired directly by Pins. but rather assigned by
the University of mulouse Le Hirall and by neighboring engineering schools in

accordance with the required specialties.

The 1bulouse Center is scheduled to open its doors on 1 October 1983 to welcose
its first trainees for the 1983/1984 university year. In conclusion. Hr Joury
pointed cut that everything possible has been done to ensure that the quality
of its students will be worthy of the French aerospace industry's expectations
and that it will provide an example that other industrial sectors will follow.

COPYRIGHT: A. i C. 1982 ' ‘

9399
(:50: 3100/6931

19

F0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

m u-mw 'mncs

THOMSON-CS? mmooucss NBC RADAR. wmvsn MALE MISSILE
Paris am 21‘ 0083108 in French 15 hay 82 pp 76-78
:Artiele by Pierre Langereux: "ihomson-cst‘s New Naval Weapons']

:1‘ext: 0n 7 May. the mn'CSP [General Radio Comany] exhibited to the press
its new weapons, built by its various divisions. for the naval forces. The
exhibit was held on the new premises of its“ Submarine Activities Division at
Sophia—Antipolis near Nice. ‘l‘his establishment. which was opened only 15 days
ago. with 300 employees, will supplement the one installed since 1963 at Cagnes/
aer which currently employs 1,000 persons. A second unit will be built at
Sophia-Antipolis very soon to house Thomson-csr's special acoustics techniques.

Market of Over 130 Radars for Maritime Patrol Planes

'I‘homson48!’ estimates at over 130 units the potential near-term market for its
new family of high-performance airborne radars designed for maritime patrol air-
craft and for AS“ [Antisubmarine Warfare] and surface warfare aircraft.

'Ihe three sud-x (9-10 683) radars that have now been developed in this family--
IOU/ms, VARN and AGRION lS--differ as to their use but are identical insofar as
concerns their detection of targets. They use the pulse-compression technique.
which permits the simultaneous transmission of a high-energy pulse to detect at
very long range and a very narrow pulse to eliminate the parasitic effect
or the waves (see m 31' cosms. No 195). Thus, Thomson-Cars maritime surveil-
lance radars have pulses lo tines shorter (nanosecond Cnsj) and instantaneOus
peak powers 35 times higher than conventional magnetron-type radars. Thomson-
CS? claims moreover the highest pulse-cowression ratio for this type of radar.

The performance characteristics of these new Thomson-C8! pulse-cospression
radars are remarkable. According to Thomson—€89, the VARAN has a high detection
probability at sea: A submarine periscope at 10 nm [nautical miles] (20 km), a
mall craft at 30 nm (55 km). a trawler at 45 nm (85 km), a patrol boat at 60 nn
(110 km). a merchant ship or frigate at 130 nm (250 km) in a force 3 or 4 sea.
'I'hese performance figures are 2 to 25 times higher than those of conventional
radars (where comparison is possible). Pulse cospression is actually the only
currently known technique for furnishing the high power and narrow pulse-width

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
needed to detect targets at sea in bad weather. Radars of this type have al-
ready been built in the United States (the Texas Instruments APS 116) and in
Great Britain (the Bil Searchwater). But meson-CS? has nodified the struc-
ture so as to be able to nount these radars in staall aircraft while saintain—
ing the same performance capabilities with respect to small targets (patrol
boats. subuarines, etc); this means lighter-weight and, above all, lore se-
cretive radars. 'i‘he VARAN. for example, at 113 kg, is 6 to 8 tines lighter
and 3 to 9 tine more secretive than its coupetitors (of the pulse-comression

type) -

The AMMONDA .

h
In addition to their basic detecting function. ‘i‘hoeson-CSP radars can also be
used to classify (resolving power a few eaters) by the mere addition of a
special signal-processing unit. this device. the ANACONDA [Airborne Doppler
Coherent Analyzer]. provides a real-tine, very highly defined ieage with res-
pect to both distance (inherently excellent) and bearing (with the Doppler
processing device via lateral sweeping with a synthetic antenna). But this
sum [Side-hooking Airborne Radar] function uses the sane lightweight antenna
(13 kg on the VARAN) as that of the radar, and not a special antenna as do some
coepetitors' radars. Moreover, as regards optical identification techniques
(infrared or din-light TV), sun has the advantage of being usable in daylight
as well as at night and in all kinds of weather (through clouds, fog, etc),
with constant resolution up to over 100 km. The radar can also be equipped
with an IF? leentify Friend-or-Poe interrogator, like the Uﬂ‘ [expansion
unknown] NRAI-IOA [expansion unknown . fitted to the m and 160MB radars.
'I’he VARAN-ANACORDA system is thus three radars in one (surveillance, sum and
Doppler).

More Than 130 Units

Thonson-CSF'S three airborne pulse-comression radars are currently in service
or under test. '

The IGUANE :On-soard Observation instrument for Naval Aircraft: is now fully
installed aboard the planes of the French naval air arn's Breguet Alisa Plo-
tilla based at Nines or on aircraft carriers. Twenty l’ive room radars were
ordered to equip the modernized Alizes and ﬂionson-CSP is planning on supplying
40 additional radars for the ANG'a [New Generation Atlantics], the first two
prototypes are already flying. The MG will have the unique distinction of
being equipped with an integrated tactical systee consisting of an mum radar
with 1?? interrogator, an IF? responder (“an”). an 3824 [Electric Scanning
Radiometer] system (ARM! l3), and an acoustic systen (sumac l expansion un-
known:;) , organized around a powerful cmsa [expansion unknown] ism/125x coe-
putcr.

The ARCANA [Course-Correcting" and nap-Making Equip-ant for Blind Navigation]
is a spinoff from the rooms. specially adapted to precision navigation of the

ms [Strategic Air Force] Mirage 4’s. Many mam units have been ordered.

21

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he VAMN :Airborne Antiship Surveillance Radar], a lightweight derivative of
the 160MB but with the same performance characteristics (with very-low-noise
amplification to compensate for the loss in gain) can be used on all aircraft
(planes and helicopters). It has already been adopted by the French Navy's
air arm for its Gardian maritime surveillance planes (which. unlike the 0.8.
Coast Guard's Guardians, use a single antenna). Of the 25 VARAN's planned for
the Gardian market, in France and abroad, 10 have already been ordered. A
VARMI-equipped Gardian has just returned from a highly successful exhibition
tour through India. the Middle East and Senegal (Dakar) where it demonstrated
beyond any doubt the capabilities of radar for surveillance over the ZOO-mile
range and as an aid to fishing (schools of tuna at 30 um). new will be
installed shortly on the Dauphin and Super Puma helicopters being built by
ABROSPM'IALB [National Industrial Aerospace Comany] for French Navy and for
export. VAMN can also be installed aboard the Nomad and the Transall.

The AGRION 15 [Naval Target, Observation, Search and Identification Equipment}
designed for close support of the Navy's forces. has about the same performance
characteristics as the foregoing type with respect to maritime surveillance.
nut in addition, it is designed to provide conplete guidance for ABROSPM‘IALE's
AS 15 N air-surface missile and to designate the forward-scatter target for
the putting into operation of this weapon system by helicopter-equipped ships,
the whole also forming an integrated antiship tactical systeh. me AGRION 15
will be put on the Dauphin AS 15 '1'1' missile-armed helicopters (range ls km)
that have been ordered by Saudi Arabia (Sawari contract). Twenty-four AGRION
15 radars have been ordered for the Dauphin helicopters being built for the
Saudi 2,000-ton frigates, and Thomson-CS? is planning on a market totaling ‘0
AGRION 15's with the new AS 15 '1'1‘ aissile orders currently being negotiated.
'M Dauphin helicopters equipped with AGRION 15's have already flown and the
first launching of an A8 15 Tr radar-guided missile is scheduled for the end of

1982 .
'l‘hc NAV‘I‘AC

'I'homwn is also offering a new integrated tactical system. derived from that of
the ANS; for medium—sized lanes and for navy helicopters. This system, the
NAV'I'M: bexpansion unknowns has been specially developed by 'momson-CSP jointly
with ABROSPATIALB for a version of the Super Puma designed for export. _'rhe
NAVTAC system consists of a W or AGRION 15 radar and of a DR 2000/DALIA

or a on 4000 electronic warfare system organized around a computer. and of a
tactical display console enabling the management of 200 I‘con(:acts" and the
presentation simultaneously of some 100 contacts in a two-color display. The
NAVTN.‘ can also receive the data transmitted by man-CSP’s compact new sys-
tom of acoustic buoys. the WARD [expansion unknown], as well as those trans-
mitted by a sonar and from the aircraft's navigation system for the putting

into operation of weapons.
Antisurface and Antimissile capabilities of the 'Naval CROPALE'

'rmmson-CSP's low-altitude surface-air weapon system. the Naval CROFI'ALB [ex-

pansion unknown: has recently been improved to give it now also an antisurface
capability against fast patrol boats and an antimissile capability against

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:va-—:;kirsner antiship missiles. This improved version of the Naval CROTALE,
leveloped to meet the requirements of Saudi Arabia (Sawari contract), will also
'1' used to equip the French Navy.

the Naval CROFI'ALE is a very-short-range. highly automated weapon system for the
interception of aircraft (planes and helicopters) by means of radar-guided or
:ptronicaily (TV or infrared) guided missiles. The Naval CMALB is optimised
to intercept at a distance of 600 to 8,500 meters from the targets of satura-
tion attacks by planes (equivalent radar area 1 m2) flying at Mach 1.2 between
50 and 3,000 m of altitude and under a 2 G load factor. For examle. three
planes attacking at Mach 0.9 will be destroyed: The first at 8.5 km, the second
at 4.2 km and the third at 1.4 km, or, respectively, at 28 sec. 42.5 sec and
'52 sec following designation of the target. Against non-maneuvering objectives
(planes in stabilized flight or helicopters in stationary flight). interception
can be effected at a distance of up to 12 km. But now, the Naval CMALE' can
intercept. at a distance of 6,000 m, subsonic or supersonic antiship missiles

(equivalent radar area 0.1 m2) flying at speeds up to Mach 2 and at an altitude
on: from A to 3.000 In! Some 45 firings of the Naval 6mm have already been

carried out with an average success rate of 75 percent. 7 of which (all success-
ful) since the beginning of 1982 by the French Navy.

As a result of these improvements, the weapon system has a destructive probabil-
ity of 80 percent against one missile and of 96 percent against two missiles
fired in salvo against the same target. The system's effectiveness is owing
mainly to its firepower'm missiles on ramp and ready for firing). its short
reaction time (6 sec). its high-performance missile (supersonic 35 G maneuvera-
bility), its precision of guidance (flyby distance 1 m). the power of its burst-
ing charge (15 kg in bursts concentrated within a lethal radius of 8 m), and its
proximity fuse (tailored to the geometry of interception). Its antimissile and
antisurface capability is mainly owi to a special guidance configuration using

a. SAT rTelecommunications Corporation SBID[£uz-opean Company for Installation and
lirumlcnsting] long-range infrared differentisl'deviation meter; a new Thomson—

(iSI? electromgnctic proximity fuse; and an improved firing computer (increased
ununmry and speed) embodying a new guidance principle.

'l'homson-CSP has already delivered the first eight Naval CROTALE launching units
ordered by the Navy in 1976 to equip the Saint-Handrier Naval Training Center
and seven ships consisting of three 1’ 67 'rourville-class frigates and four C 10
Georges Leygu'es-class corvettes. The last of these 8 units was delivered in
January 1982. The Navy also ordered in September 1981 five other launching
units to equip its new c 70 corvettes beginning at the start of 1984, and it is

planned to return to the prototype launching unit used by the testing ship '11s
d'OIcron." The Navy will thus have 14 Naval CROTALB launchers (basic version).

'l'hc improved version of Naval Charm will be out by the beginning of 1983 and
Thomson-CS? plans to carry out its first test launchings starting in June 1983.
against balloons and target-missiles (Chukar 2), at the C31. [Landes Testing
Center_.. This antimissile version is being built for Saudi Arabia. who will
receive its first launchers by the beginning of 1984 to equip its 2.000-ton

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEINNLY

(tighten. “mason-(:59, however, is negotiating with the official Pzench naval
services to re-equip the trench Navy with this antisissile version. The de-

cision is tentatively scheduled to be taken by the end of this year with res-
pect to the upgrading of the French Navy's Naval CMALB's beginning in early

[98‘ .

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C.

‘9399
C80: 3100/69.?

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m l.l‘l'l\RY ‘ PRMCH

(JMI'U‘I‘BR-ASSISTED DESIGN MED FOR TANK, HEAPOHS PLANNING

Rxperinental Application For Tanks

Paris AIR B‘l‘ COSMOS in French 26 Apr 82 p 310

lArticle by Pierre Langereux: "The D‘I‘A‘l‘ (Technical Directorate for Land Arna-
rwnt) Is To Carry Out Two-Dinensional DAD [conuter aided drafting] kperimen-
ration")

l'l‘uxtl One of the most inportant applications of DAO to weaponry is presently
beginning in the D‘I‘A‘l‘, which is starting a 1-year experimentation progran in
five of its six establishments. This is the first application of two-dinen-
siennl DAO in the design and manufacture of the conbat-tank elements made in

Frann- nt the industrial level.

This cXperimentation of broad scope, to which the NAT is going to devote l'r 12
to 16 nillion, including Fr 6.5 million in equipment will begin at the end of
April with the delivery of the DA0 tools selected for the operation. They in-
clude CII-HB Mini-6 conputers associated with Condor software developed by the
DRET [Directorate of Research and Technical Studies] in cooperation with the
If?“ [expansion unknown] and the MIA [national Data Processing and Anton-
tinn Research Institute] and marketed by the C181 [International Counter Serv-
ices Cotipany]. The progra-able graphic terminals (TOP) leased from the CISI
will he installed in five big MAT establishments: the Satory installation
(AMX-APX) for design of tank chassis; the Roanne Construction Shop (All!) for
mnui’acture of tank chassis; the Tarbes Shop (ATS) for design and guilding of
turrets; the Bourges Design and Manufacturing Installation (EMS) for design
at light weapons (cannon of 20, 25 and 30 II) and artillery (cannon of 100 and
I20 an): and the Tulles Weapons Factory (HAT) for manufacture of these weapons.

More particularly, the experimntationwill involve application of two-
dlnensional DAO* to mechanical pieces in the initial phase. and subsequently.

extension to the electrical and hydraulic circuits of vehicles and weapons.
The IYI‘AT thus plans to use 0A0 for establishing and correcting plans for
vlmxain (mechanism). turrets (location) and complete weapons at the prelimi-
nary-plan stage through complete developuent of the prototypes. The work will

*Sulwcqucntly, if this experinentation proves satisfactory, the mar could en-
vision introduction of a three-dimensional 0A0 system using the Euclid soft-
ware. which has the merit of being compatible with the Condor software. But
for tho nonent. the IMO-3D systems are still too expensive for industrial use
In establishments such as those of the MAT.

 

25
P08 OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

he concentrated on the chassis of the future BPC (Main Battle Machine) heavy
tank or of a derivative of the AMX-30 tank intended for export. as well as on
ndﬂplutlﬂn of the new "nrruw projectile" to the lOS-mn cannon of the aux-)0 RC
light tank and installation4ofa conduct-of-fire scope on the AMM-30-BZ tank.
It is also planned to study the development of a new 25-mm cannon for both
arnored vehicles and for airplanes and helicopters.

COPYRIGHT: A. & C. 1982

Uses At Military Inatellationa'

Pnriu AIR ET COSMOS in French 26 Apr 82 pp 34—35

IArticle: "CFAO (Computer-Assisted Design and Manufacture) Being Developed in
All the Establishments of the DCA (General Commission for Armament)"l

lToxtl The General Commission for Armament of the French Ministry of Defense
3v! up 3 years ago (1979) a technical-coordination group assigned to study and
detail the applications of the CAD [Computer—Aided Design], CAM [Computer-Aided

runufacture] and DAO [computer aided drafting] techniques to the weapons
industry.

'ﬂiis “automation in design and production of armaments" group working under the
aegis of the Department of Technical Research and Studies (DRBT) of the DCA is
directed by a senior armaments engineer of the Department of Naval Construction
and weapons (DCAN) of Brest.

But it is actually involved in applications of computer-aided design in the
various areas of armament used by the establishments concerned--aeronautical
construction (DTCA [Technical Directorate for Aeronautical Constructionl) and
naval construction (DTCM [Technical Directorate for Naval Construction], mis-
silos (DTH [Missile Technology Directorate]) and telecommunications (SCTI [Cen-
lrnl Service for Telecommunications and Data-Processing], etc--as well as in
training of the personnel specialised (DPAI [Directorate of Industrial Affairs
Prouramu for Armament!) in the use of these new techniques. In fact, the intro-
duriiun of CPAO into armament concerns nearly all the establishments of the
”CA.

Th0 Central Technical Establishment for Armament (BTCA), attached to the DRET,
is working in cooperation with the National Higher School of Advanced Tech-
niquvs (EMSTA) on a long-term project consisting in setting up an integrated
CAD instrument that will be made available to the establishments of the DGA.
This system uses in particular a CII Mitre-15 computer in liaison with the Uni-
vac lllD of the Center for Scientific Armament Computing (CCSA). It comprises
a shared-time console, a Tecktronix interactive console, an electrostatic
printer. and the Euclid software.

Thv Mechanics-Chemistry-Materials Center (CMCM) of the BTCA, responsible for

technical support of the establishments of the DCA in the areas of numerical
control or machine-tools and CAD-DAD, also uses the Euclid software for con-

26
FOI10FFHJAI.USBINMLY
F0! OMCIAI. USE ONLY

rupls such as the kinematics of deployment of crossing equipment (Gillois
bridge) and fitting-out of ships.

Thu Dolense-Anolysia Center (CAD) of the ETCA, which is responsible for tech-
nical-Operational studies in aid of decision-making about future armament,
mnkvs broad use of CAD for modeling of weapons systems (vulnerability of tanks
and helicopters. modeling of terrain, simulation of missile behavior, etc).

The DCA's industrial organisms--principally, the installations of the Land Arm-
aments Industry Group (CIAT) and those of the DTCN. which have done a lot of
work in the area of numerical control-~have changed over to CFAO in recent
yours. In particular, the DOA" of Brest has acquired the SICBN (Computer Sys-
tem for Naval Design and Studies) system developed by Naval and Industrial Con-
struction of the Mediterranean (CRIN) of Seyne-sur-Her. This software is used
in particular by the shipyards of Dunkerque, Saint-Nazaire and La Ciotat, as
well as in the Institute of Naval-Construction Research (IRON). In parallel. a
number or university organisms are doing CAD research. The Institute of Ap-
plied Data-Processing Research (IRIA). in liaison with the CPAO [expansion un-
known] of the BNSTA, has set up a CAD center at Palaiseau and has developed the
Euclid software that makes it possible to manipulate three-dimensional objects
nu an interactive basis. The Toulouse Design and Research Center (CERT) of
uNEkA [National Office for Aerospace Studies and Research] has brought its re-
xvurrh to bear on effective management of the data bases, producing the 638!!-
NAL system developed with the D881.

COPYRIGHT A. s C. 1982 -

”267
cs0: 3100/65!

27

FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY
'Flll(lﬂﬂ€1hl.lﬁli(l§lﬂ

«nu-mu! ' mums

MILITARY TRANSPORT ROUTES HELD IN UAR-READY STATUS
Paris ARHEES D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Hay 82 pp 10-11
lArticle by Col Guy Hardy: "Military Transport Routes in Peacetime")

llextl Before a breakout of hostilities, the setting-up of mechanized units,
and than, in combat, logistical support of the formations put in the field re-
quire sizable road-transport capacity. For this purpose, the Army has set up a
pcncutine transport organisation that is very close to wartime organisation.

In recent years, the development of mechanization of combat formations and the
increase in the calibera and rates of fire of the support weapons have engen-
dered growing transport-potential needs.

Within the framework of the reoganisation measures adopted in 1976-1977, the
command has defined an instantaneous carrying.capacity designed to safeguard
the potential of the bi; armored units during execution of the initial move-
aents and to aove, at the start of action, a sizable part of the supplies nec-
essnry for support of the forces during battle. ‘

In parallel with the directions taken in the area of operations transport, the
cost-effectiveness studies done by the EMA? [General Staff of the Army] have
brought out the fact that the means intended for execution of wartime missions
could be used to a great extent to meet the Army's peacetime needs.

1his explains the strong development of "peacetime nilitary road transport."
From the Small Package to the Battle Tank

Proper execution of transport in !rance and in the PRC made it necessary to
have a functional organization capable of ensuring centralization of the mis-
sions of general interest, to coordinate them, and decentralization in the exe-
cution and tracking of them.

'Thc structures that have been adopted are those of wartime. A specialized unit
of the support department of the EMA? does the planning of the missions of an

interregional character, the execution of which it assigns to the road-trans-
part com-ands, the regional directors of transport.

?8

IN)I‘OIIWC1Al.llSli(M‘lN
FOIlOITWCIAl.lEﬂE(NVLY

1Mvso missions, taken into account at this echelon and coordinated with the re-
gional transport. are carried out in favor of the services, including the com-
non services, by the road-transport formations1 in ministerial reserve or be-
longing to the big units. They present certain analogies with the wartime for-
mations, for they involve the same materiel, quite often the same depots, and
nearly always the same packaging, pallets or containers.

nosed initially on a grouping technique, this organization, of permanent type.
makes possible the execution of missions, ranging from a day to half a month,
by sections or individual vehicles. Prom experience. it has appeared desirable
to superimpose special subsystems on this basic system.

Moss transport of a periodic character, but planned, has thus been developed
from I978 on. On the tactical level, the advantage of moving tank regiments by
road for stays in camp or on the occasion of major exercises seemed obvious.
In the area of logistical transport likewise, road-transport formations
equipped with big rzrrier groups have acquired the capacity to handle in very
short times the loading of freight cargos going to support our overseas forces.

The following year, the EMA? completed the provisions taken at the national
echelon by means of an organization designed to handle "transport of small
parkages," being freight other than munitions and weighing less than 100 kilo-
grams.

1his subsystem is used for serving the subscriber establishments on the same
day each week without their having to submit special requests. It is based on
collection and distribution circuits for each military region, feeding into a
national sorting center manned once a week by the 121st Road-Transport Regiment
of Hontlh9ry.

The diversity of the materiel and the magnitude of the tonnages to be trans-
ported by these various systems make it possible to use practically all the
types of truck making up the "war" fleet. while the dispatching of tanks re-
quires specific equipment--the TRH 350 and the Nicolas semitrailer--transport
uf stores makes it possible to use all types of carrying equipment: medium3.
heavy“ or semitrailer units.5 The complementarity of the vehicles offers great
flexibility of use, making it possible to handle any eventual incompatibilities
:uming the various loads. the breakdowns to be made at delivery, or inversely,
lhv consolidations to be made fora given direction.

Military road transport is experiencing growing success, based essentially on
flexibility of use of facilities that provide door-to-door transport at a com-
petitive cost that generates economies in the Army's budgets. Since 1978, it
has made it possible to ship each year an average of 250,000 tons of materiel
and 15,000 to 40,000 packages, with 23 million kilometers traveled.

1hv arrangements made are cost-effective on the economic level, for they make
it possible both to amortize materiel and to accelerate the times needed for
putting certain spares or supplies in place while limiting the volume of the
stores. Furthermore, they guarantee deliveries to the establishments in case
of paralysis of the public or private sectors. The balance-sheet is therefore
a positive one in all regards.

29
ltnltﬂﬂﬂC1A1.USEiﬂﬁlY
F0!‘0'FKJAI.USE¢NVLY

This organization therefore gives the command relative freedom of action in
ponrotioo. It also is at the origin of an inprovenent in the operational ef-
Ivrtivoncss of the transport fornations, effectiveness that is perfectly pro-
portioned on the occasion of najor exercises. The peacetine nissions--whether
involving aovenent of arnored formations or activation of the supply chain--sre
closely related to those of wartime.

In making a bet on development of military road transport, the Ar-y took a
reasoned risk. but the reults achieved have been conclusive.

1hc output of the systen, whose structures are firnly in place and whose lech-
unis-s are thoroughly mastered, is now reaching a level that could he raised
only by an increase in the personnel strength to be assigned to the missions.
As it was conceived. it constitutes an efficient, effective instrunent. of a
certain usefulness for training the units and still perfectible. of couurse,
but immediately available for wartine. '

Thanks to the provisions adopted in 1977, the con-and has thus increased its
freedom of action in the field of transport. The value of this should be con-
sidered, for in peacetine as in wartiae, it constitutes one of the essential
factors in the success of naneuvers.

FOOTNOTES

I. Army-corps road-transport regiments, ministerial-reserve road-transport re-
ginents, transport squadrons of the scs's [expansion unknown], regional
road-transport squadrons. (The transport facilities of the services or the
cannon services are generally used within the franework of the needs pecu-
liar to each establishment.)

2. 0n the occasion of the Heuse 81 exercise of the lat CA [Ar-y Corps]
two tank reginents were transported by the 101st Tank-Carrier Squadron of
the 516th RT [Transport Reginentl at Toul.

3. CBC 8 KT or SM 8 and Titan Coder trailer of 3.5-ton capacity.
A. Unic P-270 and Lohr trailer of ll-ton capacity.
5. TR 280 and ZS-ton Trailor seaitrailer.

Col Guy Hardy, a graduate of Saint-Cyr (class of 1953), has
served in the various types of road-transport fornation in
Algeria, in France. and in the FPA [French Forces in Gernanyl,
DEN [expansion unknown]. he holds the DBMS [Diplona in Advanced
Military Studies]. and has held the post of chief of the trans-
port section of the support department of the EHAT. He is
presently deputy senior officer and chief of staff to the in-
spector general of road transport.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces arnees francaises "Arnees d'aujourd'hui"

Il267
CSO: 3100/712

F!Il(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.llﬂB(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NI LITARY

NEH SNECHA mm TO M PLANES mun ALTL‘IUDB

Var-is All 31‘ COSHOS in French 8 Hey 82 p 27

lArtic to: "The Lsrrac 06-020 Is Running on the Bench--This New Version, More
l'nwcrl'ul, Hill Give the Alpha Jet New Possibilities, Especially in hot Heather"!

l'rextl SNECHA [National Aircraft-Engine Design and Construction Co] has just
announced that the first running of the Larsac 040-20 turbojet took place in
Turboeeca at Bordes on 3 March, in conformity with the program set. The Lsrrac
Dice-20 is none other than the Larsac 06!, the development of which was an-
nounced on the occasion of the last Le Bourget exposition. This version with
increased thrust (1,660 kg on the ground in standard atmosphere, as against
L350 kg for the Larsac 0‘06) is intended for the Alpha Jet customers who use
this plane in a particular flight rone (low-altitude penetration) or in more
severe atmospheric conditions (hot-weather takeoff). It has good chances, of
course, of being adopted by the customers for the Alpha Jet NGEA (New Genera-
tion for Training and Attack), the characteristics of which were published in
our issue No 896 (cf AIR 31‘ 009108 of 13 March 1982). At low altitude and high
temperature (30 'C), the gain in thrust can he as high as 13 percent.

The guaranteed performance level has been reached as of the first runnings.
The specific parts of this new version (the blading of the compressor and of
the high-pressure turbine) had already been subjected to various partial tests,
on coeponent benches or on engines. The qualification test (50 hours of opera-

tion) and the approval test (150 hours) are progra-ed so as to adhere to the
objective of delivery of the first production-run engines starting in mid-1986.

being associated in the program. The two versions, of the same bulk and external

geometric configuration. are loo-percent interchangeable. at the level both of the
complete engine and of its modules, or even at the elementary-parts level. The

additional thrust is provided by several modifications of the stress. to provide
ity of the high-pressure body, and an increase in the

heat level. Iade possible by the application of new technologies in production
of the turbine vanes, the cooling conditions for which are inroved (cavity-

type vanes. directed solidification).

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1982

I [267
(250: 3100/709 31

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HOI4OFIHC1A1.USB(MULY

MILITARY FRANCE

BRIEFS

HIRAC! 1V cnasues-A twin-jet Mirage IV of the Strategic Air torce crashed into
the sea off Biscarosse in the late morning of Rednesday 21 April 1982, shortly
after taking off fro- the Casaux air base for a training nission. As we so to
press, the pilot and navigator had not been recovered, despite the search oper-
ation that was immediately started. An investigation is under way. [Text]

[Paris All IT COSMOS in French 2b Apr 82 p ‘7] [COPYRIGHT: A. G c. 1982] 11267

080: 3100/651

32

llll(ﬂﬂﬂClAl.llllllﬁlY
AEROSPASIALB CONDUCTS I‘D 0N CARBON COH?OSITBS FOR SPACE 08!
Pairs All! z‘l' COSMOS in French 8 May 82 p lol
[Article by P.1..: "Aerospatiale, Leader in Carbon Composites for Space Use"]

[Text] Aerospatial (ballistic and space syste-s division) has just presented
its carbon-fiber and epoxy-resin space conponents.

The centerpiece presently being built by Aerospatiale at its Hureaux establish-
nent is the SYLnA (Ariene Double-Launching Systen), for launchings of two sat-
ellites by the Buropean rocket. The SYLDA has the for: of an enornous “egg" of
2.8 s- diaeter and 3.9 to “J. a height, depending on the version, end its two
half-shells are constituted by a sandwich with an eluninun beehive coated on
both sides with s skin of carbon-fiber/resin conposite. The bars nass of the
SYLDA is 100 kg. The current version of the SYLDA is conceived for launching
satellites of 600 to 1,000 kg with Ariane 1, and the inprovad version is for
satellites of 000 to 1,600 kg with Ariane 3. Three SYLDA's have already been
delivered, including the first flight aodel, which will be used with the next
Ariana firing (L5), in September 1982, for the double launching of the Buropean
nanrcs [expansion unknown] 2 and Sirio 2 satellites. Nine other SYLnA's have
been ordered, and will be delivered betweennowend the third quarter of 1985.

Aerospatiale's aluinu-beehive/carbon-fiber sandwiches will also be used in
seven French, luropean and international satellite progr-s. These conposites
will thus go into the construction of some 20 satellites, including the onsat
satellite (structural panels) and its apogee notor (screen and interstege
skirt), two mtcs satellites (L-band antenna reflector, 2 n in dineter), five
Intelsat 5 satellites (structural panels andnstarting with the [-10 nodal--the
central tube), three Teleccn 1 satellites (antenna reflectors and solar panels),
two Arebsat satellites (structural panels, central tube and solar panels), two
T‘Dr-l and TV SAT satellites (structural panels, solar panels, antennas and
adapter), and two Spot satellites (structural panels, payload plate). In addi-
tion to these itens, there is also a range of truncated-cone adapters (of 25 to
80 kg) for single launchings of tcs [European Conunicationa Satellite], Tele-
con l and Intelsat 5 satellites, as well as the carbon-resin cases of the
Spot's flexible solar generator and the skirt of the apogee actor of trout.

In addition, Aerospatiale is carrying out a big research-and-develop-ent effort
in the area of conponenta for space use: in particular, building of prototypes

33

rosommuseonu
MWMONLY

of nonolithic-csrbon psrts--stiffened sntenns reflector (resr surfsce), vide-
diueter (2 I) crown, truncsted-cone sdspter of nodulsr'lsttice design ('dis-
neters 0.8-1.9 I). s cylindrical sleeve reinforced (inside or outside) snd ude
in s single operstion (by ther-oretrsctshle sold); but also with sstellite sn-
' tdnns reflectors (dineter 0.76 I. 1.5 kg) of stiffened urban-beehive or Kev-
lsr-beehivs covered with s csrbon skin (dis-stsrs from 0.5 to 0.8 n).

COPYIICII‘I: A. i C. 1982

11267
030: moo/709 m

”NIKON!”