FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10560
3 June 1982

Wesf Europe Report

(FOUG 35/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
MTE

JPIS publications contain informtion priaarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by RB. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornation was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
altion was surmarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. Times vithin items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the (LS. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT
(moo 35/82)

Coureu‘rs

THEATER M638
m1. REPUBLIC OF OW

'S‘I'ERN' Hits NATO, Warsaw Pact Comparisons of Force
("01: hrdelﬂitz; SW, 19 m 82) 00.000.0000o4000000

ma!
SPAIN

Recent Efforts To Reorgaalze ETA-n Described
(leo 16’ 19 Am 82) 0..O...00....OOQOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO.

30010110

ITALY

m Said To Be on Threshold of Collapse
(Marco Boraa; LA STAHPA, various dates) ...............

POLITICAL

FRAME
WT Uses Strikes, Violence, 'criticiam To Destabilize

Govement
(Arthur Con“; PARIS mm, 12 m 82) 0000000000000000

-a- [III-WB-lﬁ

FA” AM" o 0 I '00- A." 0'
ITALY '

SPAIN

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rift Between Lana, POI leadership Reported
(Paolo hanch13PANMA, 26 Apr 82) .................

Suarez Seen as Important Factor in Upcoming Elections
(mum SaraSqueta; mo 16, 19 Apr 82) eoeeoeoeeeeo

P503 in Asturias Slows ﬁllingness To Unite With PCB
(Isidore Nicieza; CAKBIO 16, 26 Apr 82) ..............

0303 To Test Its Political Provess in Andalucian Elections
(Gonzalo San Segundo; CAHBIO 16, 26 Apr 82) ..........

Poll aaovs P803 Par Ahead in Andalusia
(Jose ﬂannel Arija; CAHBIO l6, 5 Apr 82) .............

Democratic Action Party Founded in Madrid
(cmlo 16, 5 Apr 82) 0......tOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

HILITARI

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Briefs
Hench Inform British on Weapons

MOWUSEONLY
‘s'rm'nrrs muss»: mar mm or mm:

mm 31m in com 19 In 82 W65
[Ix-um by Von rag-aunts; mum he. an: mom m 1:37

blown; mun manna a: mun-y
um, bothmmmVu-uhotm common:

untommtuuommummot
tho”.

mmmm. mmmtummmu-onmmumuomcm
to the manna smut-y mun“. huh-A 0°.th thins: tom
mtmmucnotmmm. 'lonrbotmhuthorobonlo
“Wotmuuumomdmuwm-Wlmm.n
thilmtmthmmtmld-bmmhuNIFuhdoo-publmr
Man Count.” Wt! macaw-1n.

Byalnmooinoim,lmofnmmdouttoumm“¢m1d
bonnidormﬁunry“mmthcmummmturofm.

Sim"thopb110'msn¢t'tom,'un!omcmlJouyh

Inn-put“, Wtﬁtmmbm-hummMumwm

utmmmummuuwmutm-Mmmm
mt:mlmorm1fwwmmtmm.urorthou-
mtdthMchIm-m'mun. objoounlndm
mwmmmtumammmmmu. “nth-ad,"
it u only ”the sulﬁde unclean”: of in mud sat-- ma: “tough
thoumltyotﬂh."

Mummnuumaamptoem.nnwdunmmm
ufmmnotdlmmmtohﬂndmulyfn

not mm; wanted this inferiority.

Acoorttnctomm.thoVu-Iumtmmt4mnmn1d1minﬁu
210111th 2.6 31111me. nay-n Winn.” count
mm7a.mmdnmunum13.ooomuao.ooow
mdoammmdnm.MnquthMt1-1.uo
1'0:th Plot 3nd 2.975102%. undiaﬂpo.1.755 {attain-av
MIM1,212fcclm.hmt1m.thm. [ANSI unam-

maomiodly. ImmmwnrtotmuunManu-oo-
mﬂtuMmtthnhAﬂnﬂomm-WMIJ

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mtmtucccnuthiedoa-Ictmndepcbliccbaectimmuieedtc
mwtmmnm-wmhmmmmmm
MbMHMMmctmncn-xhtcmmu-

mummtmmammtmmhrmnmmm.
utmumubmmmuwcmmm
ummmmuuﬂﬁuﬂiwohmecmmt

“economtheecluticnlieeinﬂnlnllwintcttheaﬂottbemi.
m.tummu.umummemmdtmm.th
include mtmmwmhmuunruummum-
WMcmlthufunNMmmmmMcc-M
and/or mimic: it"didlmldcnlytc

ere equally excluded.

mtmiam1nimummmw,mmmumnm-m
mmticmelyinclndeee-Jlmteqminthepcrtotnukcc-
mm.mmmumu.s.mummmmmentm.

mmtuuurornmmmmmmwmumm
tact.theU.S.anmehuctctelof14,uccudinstothenlicble
"Joya neat Mada-1982]”! W o! the Mbeliccptc: can-ion lieted
inthe rum em. Veyct'e mu15. 90 cell thiennipuletincthe tech,
woulnctccureebevmbecmethemluicnottheccnhtmpeinﬂu
Mic on be Justified by pointing to neon- Juriedicticml liliteticnl to
Mcpc.ncrmwicemdpceecftheitlntic.mthectherhnd, iti-
wtiwlttcinginethstthemicmldmcmcfpem.i:m
mnmumnmmmmm.

Mmemlmutione—uhichmcomctinctcndemumu-
void of reality—with respect to air and ground forces. There in no dcnbt
ebcutthetm tint nmmmmlyzms cachet Wt at it- dic-
poeelinmrcpe.mtinm¢erm.thetitetc£tbe1,900ﬂdltu-buben
mammmmmNpom-mmmsummsntmotmm
cmrtommsirtcrceeinmcpe.lnduticn. nonthenhOOO
thmmU.S.Mcmierl pociticneddlmdtheSwiet
Union-Michmnctmdcrthenmmd ”cacti-.mriomM
13,000 mbtmiemlwmemormudcrmcmtrium
plmdﬂlctiuenedtorcumdnthedlimecc-end.mm
mnfcncimmmummwmumwmmm.
mmisbudlymmtoummtmmrwuldmmmir
mach,itnrbmchcu incentrelkntape.

(6

1110 Soviet Dorm. Ministry bee also Just me cap-nun autistic. public
mammmmprieinethnthennuelc‘

ummluimmtmmumthmmpm—mmrma
inaxrcpcbydnoltmsin need Wwem-eixthwithlm

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ahipanmdubtwr.nmnodmndmmm;cnly1nthouru
themeMsudtobomperiorbntthnuna-otbmoﬁutwthl
substantially blazer mt «militias 01' um um“. no Hana Put
mmmmmm.umwmwonu.tmut,mmhm
to an instalment 4 percent in the Moscow caustics—which manly sou
tamwﬂntmbonmbemdtommmtm.

mammmmtmchmbenmumtumtymltobe
vimdonlymtmlotmlugorannmshvhnotbonctromyu
that security 13 basedonpouciu dud maxim balance.

COPYRIGBr19826mr+JnhrAG8aOO

9478
cso: nos/485

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TERRORISM SPAIN

m EFFORTS 1‘0 momma ETA-II DESCRIBE)
Madrid CANDID 16 in Spanish 19 Apr 82 pp 29-30

[Text] The armed Basque independence organization ”Military [BIA-m] is pre-
paring to step up the terrorism which began at the beginning of the year end

which will probably recur in the weeks ahead, as learned by camera 16 from
reliable sources.

Taking advantage of the recent holy Week vacation. the terrorist organization
has proceeded to ratructure its nilitary apparatus and its logistic end in-
formative infrastructure, seriously damaged by the losses caused through polit-
ical action during recent mcnths.

The restructuring of the action conmandos began the middle of last March, a tine
when State Security Forces had uncovered a caspaign to recruit future terrorists
from anong basque youths in San Sebastian and Bilbao.

About this tine the ETA-m executive co-ittee sent about 50 letters inviting that
any more youths to join their ranks. They were to use their Holy week vacations
to travel to bayonne or Saint Jean de Luz in the south of France, where they would
be nestled by esters of the organization and taken to safe places for the
short course in terrorism.

This course, according to the information of CANDID 16, was given in a small
village situated sons 20 minutes froa Bayonne. with access only by means of a
dirt road full of holes. The new ETA recruits were taken to this place hooded,
and at no tine did they know where they were.

Neither could they recognize their "teachers," who likewise had their faces
covered, except for the persons in charge of contacting then and conducting
the. to these places.

After receiving the theoretical classes, the future members of the ETA-- armed
comndos were taken almost at dawn to the beaches of Les Landes, where they
carried out practical exercises within several abandoned bunkers constructed
during Horld Her II.

During the practical phase of the course each of the terrorist aspirants fired
two cleete magazines with a lit-shot Browning pistol made in Eelgium, a

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY

magazine with a Stein nachinegun. and threw a home-eds hand grenade especially
designed for conando training exercises.

Official sources have assured C0010 16 that between 25 and 30 persons may have
taken part in the training courses, which lasted between 3 and 7 days and gen-
erally occur during the period of vacations, with the goal that the future ETA-e
gmnen, who, as legal or sleeper co-andos in the future must coordinate their
work and normal activities with the armed struggle, do not raise suspicions
enong fellow workers in the enterprises or factories where they work.

The incorporation of the new action co-andos to their infrastructure gives new
life to ETA-s, which in recent nonths was very such weakened in regard to oper-
ative groups, thanks to effective police work.

Once the new conandos who have now returned to their places of origin receive
arms it is probable that a new terrorist offensive will begin, since the ETA-n
needs to regain the initiative that it recently lost.

In the first 3 nonths of this year the State Security Forces have broken up a
score of armed co-andos, have dissantled a large part of the ETA logistical
infrastructure in San Sebastian and Bilbao, and have arrested nore than a hundred
persons belonging to ETA-n.

In the face of that rigorous police offensive. the terrorist organisation, which
has lost the najority of its legal con-endos, had to react by sending to San
Sebastian and Bilbao the liberated groups, who normally reside in the south of
France, with the goal of preventing. because of a lack of activity, the Basque
people—who want to live in peace and tranquility-«iron turning increasingly
away fron ETA and end up rejecting terrorist activities.

One of those liberated co-andos, made up of eight persons, was the one that
killed two policemen and a woman and left two other police officials gravely
wounded in an operation 22 March in Sestao, called a "brutal massacre" even by
Basque newspapers.

The "Sestao massacre" indicates a desperate effort on the part of ETA-II to extend
the terrc rist offensive begun at the beginning of the year to the three Basque
provinces. Until then the terrorist canaign had had only relative success in
specific areas of Guipuacoa.

The said caspaign of terrorism, which began last 2 January with the death of a
taxi driver in San Sebastian. has claimed its latest victim in the ease city,

where last 30 March Dr Ramiro Garrasa was assassinated by the ETA with a shot

to the back of the neck after having been savagely tortured.

In those 3 sonths the ETA gun-en have killed 10 persons of varying ideologies and
different professions, and have seriously wounded five others.

Although this nudaer of dead and wounded represents an iaportant decline in
violence with respect to 1980 and 1979, a detailed analysis of the attempts
makes clear the resurgence of terrorist activity as the year passes. This

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

progressive resurgence, according to experts, is the beginning of a new well-
planned and structured armed offensive.

Hhereas last January and February there were only two deaths in each month, with
the caning of March there was a sudden increase in violence. There was an in-
crease in the number of terrorist actions and also in the number of dead and
wounded--nine in total.

As in the Iajority of terrorist acts by ETA-a, the first actions by the armed
consndos occurred in the province of Guipuzcoa, in areas very near the French
border, and then extended to the interior and the rest of the Basque provinces.

Due to the lack of legal con-endos, the Basque terrorist organization was not
able to take the terrorist struggle to Bilbao until 26 Hatch, and even then it
had to resort to liberated commandos, which moved from the south of France to
the interior, in order that the province of Vizcsya be "added" to the arsed
struggle.

Nevertheless, this year there has still been no serious outbreak of terrorisn
registered in Alava and Navarre. the two provinces closest to Madrid with the
least industrialization and least prevalence of the Basque language. This is
probably because the ETA-n infrastructure and support bases were practically
dismantled by the police 8 nonths ago.

Conpared with the relative tranquility of Alava and Navarre, Guipuzcoa has

again been the hardest hit by terrorism (seven killed and three wounded), and
within the province of Guipuzcoa the "triangle of death" see-s to be centered
in the area located between the localities of Zarauz. Tolosa and Fuenterrabia.

In that zone, with a large population density, with a good deal of industrial-
izati n and labor conflict because of a difficult strike, and a strong Basque
conponent within the population, ETA-n finds its primordial "culture medium."
According to official statistics. more than 65 percent of ETA nembers in
Guipuzcoa were born within the triangle Zarauz-Tolosa-Puenterrabia.

 

The relative nearness of the border, the impunity with which ETA terrorists love
on French soil and the ease of crossing the Pyrenees on foot, despite the efforts
of the army to sake the zone imperleable, favor the nobility of ETA connandos.

Another factor contributing to the rise in terrorisn in this zone is the scarcity
or lack of Forces of Public Order.

Localities such as Hernani. Paaajes, 0ndarroa or Renteria, some of which have
nearly b0,000 inhabitants, lack_quarters for the Civil Guard and police depart-

ments .

"The Civil Guard," says a Basque politician to CAHBIO 16. "was expelled by 'can-
non shots', and the only law now in effect in most of those towns, that have
nayors belonging to Herri Batasuna [Popular Unity]. is the law of ETA."

Last year sole of those nayors case to feel solidarity with the ETA caspaign
against the central office in Le-oniz, and they refused to pay the costs of

public lighting to Iberduero.

6
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONIN

"At the cane tile." indicates the sans source, "they used the funds of the
nunicipal government to rent busses and organise free trips to Soria and to "
Puerto de Santa Maria to visit the m prisoners serving their prison terns.

One of the government's objectives is to regain those towns throng; the Forces
of Public Order. The work is slow and has its difficulties. Initially the
officers of the higher Police Co-end refuse going in unarnsd, but neither can
they wear a pistol.

“then we have to do investigative work and we have to go alone so as not to
arouse suspicions." said a San Sebastian inspector to CANDID 1... "than it is
very bad for us. In sons of these towns and in the old section of San Sebastian
neighbors have stopped colleagues in the narcotics brigade and have searched
then for ares. They escaped with their lives, thanks to the fact that they were
unarned."

In order to carry out their nission. these policenen nust disguise the-selves"
fron Jehova's Witnesses to scrap iron buyers. But disguise is not always a
guarantee of safety in the triangle forned by Zarsus, ‘l'oloaa and Fuenterrabia.

Eight nonths ago ETA-n erroneously assassinated three PIN [Basque Nationalist
Party] esters in Tolosa when they left a bar where they had been selling
Basque books.

"Four days earlier,” the police told CAMBIO 16. "we had been in the town carrying
out some investigations disguised as book sellers. Therefore, there is no doubt

that those who assassinated the PNV nenbers were mentors of the m terrorist
organisation."

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Infornscion Y Revistas. S.A.

9 746
CSO: 3110/129

7
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIC ITALY

Bﬂl SAID ‘10 33 (I! TRRBSBOLD OP (DLHPSB

'rurin u SMA in Italian 7, 9, 13. 14 Apr 82
[Article by Marco Borsa]

[7 April p 14]

[Text] nilannit was the task of Enrico Gandolfi as newly-appointed cor—issioner
to tell Parliaaent about the financial and administrative situation or an
[National Hydrocarbons Agency] , the worst since its establishaent 29 years ago.
There are two key points to Gandolfi's report: The disastrous results of an
erroneous policy of petroleum supply and those of an indiscrisinate policy of
industrial bailing out operations.

Gandolfi explained that an had bought too much petrolem at high prices in
1979 and 1980 and today, because of the collapse in the international sarket
and the devaluation of the lira (purchases were nade in dollars and sales in
lire) suffers a loss of about 850 billion lire, the highest in its history.
Other estiaates raise this loss to more than 1 trillion lire. The disaster is
attributed to the unforeseeable trend in OPE: prices, but inside the agency
there is talk of an error uade by the Grandi administration. The president
was urged by at least three sources to take tinely neasures to liquidate stocks
of petroleu- when this was still possible at a modest financial sacrifice, but
nothing was done. Rather, when supplies were abundant, Grandi authorised the
purchase of a large aaount of Libyan petroleum tron Occidental [Petroleum
Cospany] at high prices (and he pushed for a contract with Venezuela). (The
Occidental deal involved 1 million tons and question is pending in Parlianent
submitted by the Christian Democrat Public Flori, as well as legal proceedings
by the none prosecutor's office).

Grandi was publicly accused of ineptitude by Vice President Leonardo Di Donna,
who nevertheless was careful not to go so far as threatening resignation at a
tile when his own link with the fate of the state agency was to his advantage.

The responsibilities of the Eli! adninistrators do not involve only petroleum.
They also extend to bailing out operations. Gandolfi explained, “As is known,
following the appointment of comaissioners of the Liquigas group and the law of
28 November 1980 regarding the SIR [Industrial Consortium] group. EN! was
authorised to take on the job of rescuing that activity. There was a very

8
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difficult worldwide situation in the petrochemical industry in which even 311's
own company in that sector. MIC [National Agency for the Hydrogenation of Fuel]
reported very large losses (115 billion in 1980 and about 435 billion in 1981).
Overall, considering also the activities turned over to EN: by the ex-Honti
group, the financial comitment asstnned by an was more than 2.3 trillion lire
on the one hand and the salvaging of about 10,500 jobs on the other.“

The ANIC situation, the worst in regard to gross receipts that is known in the
admittedly disastrous story of the Italian chemical industry, to the Monti
acquisition, is being added the purchase of the Hontedison Chemical Company at

prices still to be established, but with certainly negative consequences for
the buyer.

Both Vice President Leonardo Di Donna and President Alberto Grandi agreed on
this policy of indiscriminate expansion of their petrochemical activities. We
are talking about anything but an imposition of a social nature; we are making
an economic statement." declared Di Donna to Ii. SOLE—24 ORE last March in

regard to the Monti operation and the transfer of Liquichimica to ENI. He
added. “We believe we can rescue some companies by buying them at a maximum
price. and we have made such an offer. It was accepted and we will show who was
right." As far as Grandi is concerned, he was actually the comissioner of

the Monti group inediately before he became president of BM.

Except for a group of young Christian Democratic deputies who asked for expla-
nations in Parliament without obtaining them, no one objected to the bail out
of a private industrialist who was sinking because of the error made in 1973
when he bought the Italian BP [British Petroleum]. taking it away from BNI. as
he himself likes to stress.

In order to cushion the impact of the negative estimates, Gandolfi also
reminded Parliament that the SIR bail out made it possible to establish Enoxy,
the mixed ENI-Occidental Cmpany Grandi wanted, that Di Donna opposed, but that
was supported by the Minister of State Participations Gianni De Hichelis, who

had a great affection for the slogan of internationalization of the public
sector.

Bnoxy was born out of the exchange of coal mines for petrochemical plants. It
was entirely financed by the Italian partner who in practice absorbed all debts
for the first 3 years. at the end of which the Americans can terminate their
interest in the company without any penalty. The company stated badly for two
reasons: Coal was tenporarily pushed out of the market by the decrease in the
price of petroleum; the administration which had predicted a loss of no more
than 50 billion lire in 1982, already in the first months of this year reports
an annualized deficit of almost 150 billion lire.

The consequence of the situation described by Gandolfi is that thc 3N1 debts
last year rose from an estimated 12.3 trillion lire to an actual 15 trillion
lire. These deficits increased in the early months of this year and there is
now talk of 18 trillion lire, further demonstrating, if that were necessary,
that the large companies do not suffer losses because they have deficits, but
that they have deficits because they have losses.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USEIONLY

A deficit of 18 trillion lire on gross receipts of 30 trillion lire is still
bearable if there is an adequate strategy of reutilization. However, that
certainly is not what is set forth in the 5-year plan presented by Grandi in
January this year. It provides for investments totaling 25 trillion lire at
the rate of 5 trillion lire per year. With self-financing that does not exceed
2 trillion lire, with losses as the result of bailing out operations on the
order of at least 500 billion lire per year, with a liquidity need of 20 lire
per hundred invested, the plan would result in the financial explosion of the
agency. In 1986 its debts would total at least 30 trillion lire (optimistically
considering 1 trillion lire per year contributed by the state) with gross

receipts that certainly are not destined to dmble, considering the trend in
world petroleun prices.

But it nay not be necessary to wait until 1986 to see But collapse. Unlike
another state agency, mm. [National Electric Power Agency], which can fail to
pay its suppliers when it has no noney, BN1 must pay for petroleum if it does
not want to disappear free the market forever. 'Nenty-nine years after its
establishment, BNI could be forced to give up its institutional role of
national energy agency as promoter of the nation's econonic and industrial
developnent. Despite 3 decades of effort. which has permitted the agency today
to have 42 million tons of petroleum against the 3 trillion at the beginning,
and to become one of the world's principal companies in mthane, drilling
equipment, transportation, and hydrocarbons processing.

[9 Apr 82 p 14]

[Text] menty years ago, in the suuner of 1962, comma DELLA 83!“ published
an investigation that later became famous and that attacked Enrico Mattei's
administration of ENI (a few months before his death in an airplane accident).
Indro Hontanelli, writer of the article, contrasted the crystal clarity of IRI
[Industrial Reconstruction Institute] with the obscure accounts of the state-
run petroleum agency.

Hontanelli wrote, “Unlike IRI which at the top of all its budgets quotes the
law that established it with the pertinent statute so that anyone could check
whether and how it carried out the tasks assigned to it, as any public insti-
tution is obliged to do if it handles public money. as: never made any
reference to its required tasks. Since that time an has made considerable
progress in the process of becoming like IRI. but in a certainly different
direction fro. that then hoped for by the CORRIBRB journalist. Because an
was admittedly different from IRI but in the sense that rather than being a
conglomerate with no strategies, administered like a bureaucracy, often at the
service of political-business intrigues which under the veil of public property
hid large private interests, it was a true business institution with precise
objectives, strategies that net needs. appropriate technical development and
considerable operational capabilities.

10
was OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is how Hontanelli described the Mattei administration: "hGlP's contri-
bution to Hattei was a network of gasoline stations that covered about 15 per-
cent of the market. with his exceptional capacity for organization, Hattei
itmsediately began to reorganize and broaden this network. He invented the six-
legged dog, the flag and the coat of arms of a great petroleum power: he
multiplied the number of service stations which are considerably better cared
for than others; he built motels which represent real models in this field; and
despite the fact that the national need for petroleum rapidly rose from 450,000
tons in 1940 to 3 million tons this year, he now covers a good 25 percent."

It was a dynamic company that from its development irradiated benefits to the
entire national economy as Mattel himself recalled to the CORRIERB in a long
letter containing corrections to the article. Not only because an guaranteed
methane to the growing national industry, but because it contributed, for
example, to the decrease in price which accompanied the economic boom of the
1920's: Gasoline dropped from 142 to 96 lire per liter, fertilisers by 20 per-
cent and liquid gas in tanks (widely used in the home) by 25 percent.

That dynamism came to an end within a few years of Mattei's death. Egidio
Bgidi, who became director of A61? after a long career within that organization
which started with its establishment (he was from Hatelica like Mattei), he
resigned in the mid-1970's from the group with a letter to then President
Pietro Sette which began thus: 'Dear Sette, 1 must resign after 28 years of
service. There are many reasons...but all can be traced to the serious
situation of disorientation in which the entire group finds itself. I have the
impression that the only problems that interest an are alchemy and internal
juggling while the real problems--those affecting energy and men--are not
dealt with.“

EN! already had become like IRI. Its headquarters. the holding company with
offices at Rome where about 1,400 employees work, of whom 200 are executives,
was only the locale for political-business mediation, a research office, the
terrain of political and managerial rivalry battles. The petroleum market,
the problems of administration, the development of the company had become
secondary concerns.

Actually, the transformation began inediately after Mattei's death with the
administration headed by Eugenio Cefis. The inheritance left by Mattei was
positive from many points of view, but it had a weakness cannon, after all, to
all the large Italian businesses of that time. all was undercapitalized and
had financed its own development by borrowing on the open market. After the
30 billion lire in the initial operating grant, he government made no more
contributions to the company's capital which in 1962 is calculated to have had
debts totaling more than 300 billion lire, almost equal to its gross receipts.

Cefis, whose political background was much better than his business know-how,
concentrated on obtaining massive government financing (700-billion-lire grant
over 10 years) in exchange for a drastic change in the compmy's strategies.
The search for petroleum abroad was stopped, because it was too costly. The
policy of bailing out private textile companies close to bankruptcy was
intensified.

11
[’0‘ OFFICIAL USBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The policy of price reductions was abandoned. The company's financial activities
were intensified with the emergence of Giorgio Corsi.

Cefis, however, did not entirely give up traditimal activiths. i . mg his
administration the weight and importance of the equipment and engineering
companies (sum-peasant [National Gas Pipeline Company—naming]. sum
[expansion unknown]. Nuovo Pignone) . In the final years of his job. he made
two important contracts for the purchase of Dutch and Soviet gas.

However, Cefis' logic was not that of economic administration; development of
the country and of the nation. Rather, in order to justify are low profita-
bility he said, I'Nhen we see the danger of a profit we immdiately take cor-
rective measures.“ This could never have been very difficult for him because
during his long history as a businessman, Cefis very rarely ever ran the
'danger" of making a profit.

This phase culminated in the project to get ahead of nontedison with the
pretext that the private chemical company had developed at Priolo an ambitious
petrochemical plant that could become the nucleus for a second national
petroleum company. It was the beginning of the chemical war that was to cost
an! hundreds of billions of lire.

When Cefis left all in 1971 to go to Montedison, the petroleum company had
already adopted the format of a political energy company. The new head,
Raffaele Girotti, in 1973 made Angelo Moratti buy an interest in comm
DELLA SE!“ for the sole purpose of depriving Cefis of that opportunity-{dis
had become his bitterest enemy. Compared with the chemical-publishing battles,
the sensational increase in oil prices (September-December 1973)--which was to
have such a profound and lasting effect on the petroleum economy and the world
economy in general--seemed to be a marginal event. The only sign of the pro-
found changes that were developing was the withdrawal of the large petroleum
companies from the Italian market (Shell and BP withdrew) which obliged BN1 to
take over pumps and refineries from the Shell Company in competition with
private petroleum companies.

The reaction to the energy crisis that transferred ownership of the wells was
slow in coming. This move made petroleum much more costly, more difficult to
obtain from producing countries, and much less subject to control of the large
companies. Or rather. there was a rather timely reaction from AGIP, upon
which fell the responsibility for supply. but it made itself felt with diffi-
culty among the leaders of the group in Rouse where Raffaele Girotti, who was
defeated together with Cefis, left the field to Pietro Sette, a lawyer and
able bureaucrat, who for the first time introduced the methodsand procedures of
a ministry into the agency's administration. The aim was to make no decision
for fear that any decision could disturb the precarious internal and external
equilibriums of the agency. This freeze grew out of the awareness that an no
longer had either the power or the authority to unilaterally make decisions
without concern for political approval. Giorgio Hazsanti, who succeeded Sette.
illuded himself that he could revive the an initiative but with his first big
move in the petroleum field, the contract with Saudi Arabia, he was tripped up
in tangential incidents and was upset.

12
M OFFICIALWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I13 Apr 82 p 13]

[Text] Milan--'Grandi's appoint-en? is closely tied to that of Di Donna because
it was part of a political agreement between the government's two major parties.
He is a president chosen by lot: he will always be a weak president, subject to
the most varied kinds of political pressure, lacking the necessary authority
and influence to oppose thea.‘ This com-ent by an anonymous EN! executive was
even too prophetic at the time Grandi took office. This happened after the
return of Comaissioner agidio agidi, recalled for a few weeks to 2N1, but who
left because he opposed the vice presidency of Di Donna for political reasons,
and of Luigi Amassari, director general. He also opposed the assumption of new
connitaents in the chenical industry promptly Iade by Grandi.

Alberto Grandi resigned from the government for questionable reasons concerning
the differences within the agency rather than on the basis of the much more
convincing reasons such as the administrative situation. At this point, the
upper echelons of BN1 reached the lowest point of the parabola that started
with the absolute authority of Enrico Hattei inside and outside BN1, to the
absolute lack of authority of the last of his successors.

The story of the link between the agency, the parties and the government is
certainly not recent. Enrico Hattei was repeatedly and basically accused of
having given considerable money to the Dc [Christian Democratic Party], having
given money even to the extrene Right, having exercised influence on the govern-
ment by naming his own men to the post of Minister of State Participations,

such as Giorgio Bo, and he influenced the ocuntry's foreign policy by dealing
directly with Iran and the Soviet Union on important petroleum contracts.

Unassailable personally (Montanelli himself recalled his honesty and the fact
that he did not collect his pay but limited himself to living on an expense
account), the founder of EN! used all the open-nindedness he was capable of in
order to bend the government and the political world to the company's plans in
the conviction--shared by government officials of the caliber of Ezio Vanoni--
that they were in the interests of the nation.

Bugenio Cefis progressively changed this BNI-DC relationship by making EN!
increasingly an instrument of the DC rather than the DC an instrument of ENI.
With the crisis that struck the party with a relative majority during the
early 1970's, and which culminated with the election of Benigno Zaccagnini to
the secretariat as a sign if renewal, ENI, too, found itself politically unpro-
tected.

Here is how an agency executive sums up the story: "EN! had had as its
exclusive point of reference the Christian Democratic Party, excluding from

the agency the other parties in the majority. This caused the beginning of an
internal struggle conducted by the Left. As a result of the attack, the party
with a relative majority was above all concerned that serious investigation
would reveal the incestuous relationship which for 20 years had tied it to BN1."
This report was ably buried in that galaxy of foreign financial dealings nade
at the time of the Corsi administration.

13
FOIt0lll¢1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The political struggle spread to the topmost leadership groups. In December
1979 the agency executives threatened to denounce the government for acts of
omission if within a certain date procedures were not started for the appoint-
ment of personnel to open positions as required by statute...Those leaders

said. 'If the council had been named together with the president all the parties
would have been able to receive timely information about the modalities of the
Saudi Arabia contract (about which a violent storm of polemics had continued

for months) and of payment for intermediation with the possibility of eventually
intervening before, rather than after things were already done, with the result
that the agency's prestige was involved in the internal political feuds."

In the scandal of contingent funds used to pay for Saudi Arabian petroleum, the
parties for the first time went so far as to prejudice the supply policy of EN!
and of the country. The objective of the persons unleashing the scandal cer-
tainly was not that of knowing the truth.

Nevertheless, not even Mazzanti knows it because unlike Mattel who knew who
was paying and why, he did not concern himself with keeping the situation
under tight control.

A credible version of what took place was supplied in autumn 1979 by the
MIDDLE EAST NEWSLETTER, published in London, which is close to the Arabs. The
newsletter maintained that half of the funds totaling $115 million was actually
sent to the Saudi Arabians who had supported the operation while regarding the
other half "it emerged rather clearly that it did not go to the Italians after
all but to Parviz Mina and (according to press reports never denied) to the
Palestinians of the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization]. In exchange for
the money and the promise of an imminent diplomatic recognition (this was
actually scheduled for December 1979 following a trip to Italy by PLO Foreign
Minister Paruk Quaddumi) the Palestinians. according to M.B.N., had promised

to withdraw from Italy the arsenals of weapons they occasionally made available
to the ter ror ists .

This task was entrusted, among others, to Daniele Pifano. who was caught at
Ortona with two missile launchers. This reconstruction was partially con-
firmed by a letter from the Palestinian leader Habbash to the Italian court
trying Pifano. in which the Palestinian leader maintained that the operation
had been negotiated with the Italian Government. From that time parliament
continued to investigate but with no results.

The damage to ENI was very, very serous. Expelled from Saudi Arabia where
petroleum could be found cheaply, the agency had to cast about for new contracts
which pushed it into overloading itself with crude coming from more expensive
wells.

The parties, the government, the trade unions, which by now had come to
dominate the life of the agency, however, were not particularly concerned.
Between the Mazzanti and the Grandi administrations, there was a definitive
strengthening of the chain of purchases in the chemical field (SIR and
Liquichimica) and in the refining process (Monti group) which had inaugurated
the Minister of State Participations siro Lombardini, forcing EMI to take over
the Montedison fiber plant at Ottana, which surely was one of the negligible
causes of the more than 500 billion lire lost by ANIC in 2 years.

1‘
FOIiOFFIJAl.USI(lVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The metamorphosis was complete. Under the political and trade-union pressures
often encouraged from within the agency by executives who wanted to consolidate
their jobs or to get promotions, nu became the national salvage agency which
ranged from petrochemicals to textiles up to the ex-m [Agency for the
Management of Mineral and Metalurgical Companies] mines, to the pharmaceutical
industry. and to the manufacture of fibers. There was, as always in these cases,
a sortie into the publishing world. Vice President Di Donna promoted, as a
personal venture, the birth of a new political-economic daily, n. GDOBO, 25
years after BN1 purchased H. atom.

[14 Apr 82 p 12]

[Text] Milan-~Giorgio Mazzanti confesses honestly that when he was an president
he barely was able to understand petroleum and methane problems. As far as the
chemical side was concerned he was able at most to glance briefly at the problem,
but for the rest. the ex-BGAM textile and mining operations, he could not even
dedicate a minute to them. One of the results of the practical ungovernability
of the agency. which had now become mastodontic, was that the Nuclear AGIP,
created to seize the uranium to be utilised in nuclear plants, was accumulating
unnecessary stockpiles at a rate of 600 billion [unit not specified] per year
while no one dared make a decision concerning them.

BNI's future president must make many decisions on things of this kind but first
of all he must decide what strategy to adopt concerning the mining policy,
selecting between two alternatives that have been in furious conflict for 3
years within and outside the agency. The questions were whether to diversify
the sources of energy and geographical areas, concentrating on investment in
developed nations. like the United States; or, to revive a sort of neo-Mattei
policy based on cooperation with developing nations in the Middle East and
elsewhere. should methane in future years come from the Soviet Union, as
asserted by Industry Minister Giovanni Marcora or from Algeria, and eventually
from Libya, as the neo-Mattei people urged?

Alberto Grandi has counted heavily on the card of diversification. Purchase

of coal from the United States: development of petroleum research in the United
States, where Grandi went so far as to plan the opening of a chain of gasoline
stations between New York and Chicago; purchase of petroleum from Venezuela,
from Mexico or from nations like Saudi Arabia, the most trustworthy ally of

the United States. The move toward diversification has a serious political and
marketing basis. Unlike the Mattei period. when an could count on the bene-
ficial effectsof the passage from the cold war to detente and decolonisation,
the future president of the agency must confront a reverse process, from detente
to a tension which makes many areas of supply politically insecure.

The diversification, however. can be ruinous from the economic point of view
because of the difficulty of penetrating distant, difficult markets, of
investing in developed nations in the face of strong competition from largely
consolidated interests. Occidental's coal was perhaps a good buy with petroleum
at $34 per barrel. but it is no longer so with the price at $28 which causes
all the large world energy companies to temporarily halt investments in more
expensive wells and in alternative sources.

15
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The policy of supply based exclusively on exchange of technology against raw
materials with developing nations presents, alongside reliable economic and
strategic advantages, political risks and development difficulties. In the
Congo, in Iraq and Iran, where EN! had considerable interests, the political
developments have wiped out years of research and efforts. Angola is another
nation exposed to sudden political changes, in the same way that concessions in
North Vietnam or in China appear to be risky. In other nations like Nigeria,
Libya, or Algeria, an can find itself exposed to pressures to pay high prices
so as to ensure income necessary to the development of econoeies used to the
gigantic flows of petrodollars in years past.

when in spring 1981 an organised at Rome an isportant conference among oil-
exporting Arab nations (OAPEC) and the Mediterranean consuming nations. Saudi
Arabia snubbed the meeting by not sending a high-level representative. This was
not only an aftermath of the 1979 scandal but was also a signal that this kind
of effort was no longer followed with much interest by the world's largest
petroleum exporter. The time was past when Petrosin sold directly to nu and
Giorgio Mazzanti attacked, in his report to the Italian Parliament. the
International Energy Agency supported by the United States to fight the pro-
ducers' cartel. Since that time the Italian political world regularly unloads
upon the agency the international pressures that it receives to have an move
in one direction or the other. Industry Minister Giovanni Maroora favors the
Soviet gas line and is less supportive of the Algerian line. Social Democratic
Secretary Luigi bongo, is openly hostile to the Soviet gas line while his
thoughts about the Algerian line are unknown. Numerous ministers in recent
years, including Treasury Minister Beniaaino Andreatta, have from tine to time
tried to make contracts with Venezuela and Mexico rather than with Kuwait.
Saudi Arabia or Egypt.

Mattei, and later Cefis, exercised absolute control over the agency's activities
piling up the responsibilities of BII president and of all the other major
operational companies so as to achieve an efficient decision process.

Today, the SM president does not maintain a direct and close link with the
operational companies to the detriment of efficiency and responsiveness. In
recent weeks. an rejected the SNAM requests for e 30 percent increase in the
price of methane. It was even verified that the AGIP sales office, whose task
is to sell gasoline, developed an independent organization in a holding arrange-
ment with Angelo Pileri at its head. as though it were not dependent on the
supply sector.

State Participations Agency Minister Gianni De Michelis announced that before
appointing a new president he intends to reform the organisatim and bylaws of
the agency giving his ministry the function of executive leadership and control
of BN1. The proposal imediately raised criticisms by ac Secretary Flaminio
Piccoli opposing interference of the ministry in the independence of admin-
istrative agencies.

ENI's fate is curious. Twenty years ago the progressives were asking that
Mattei be left alone and the conservatives wanted hill to be under greater control
by the government. Today it is the contrary. Whatever the political reasoning

16
M OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
POI OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

in this field, those affecting the companies should lead to a profound reexami-
nation of the situation based on three orders of considerations: l--An agency
that has achieved the present dimensions of star is no longer governable by any-
one and therefore it would be useful to think of divesting it of some activities
so that an could return to its original concern with petroleum, methane and
equipment in those fields; 2--Ihoever he might be, the next president should
have the necessary authority to restore credit within and outside of an.
leading it back to a propulsive role in the energy field; 3--'rhe political
power requires the clear formulation of agency lines of development which

have strong implications in foreign as well as domestic policy.

Controls can and must be made by holding the agency continually accountable for
its programs and results achieved, with traditional instruments such as cer-
tification of budgets or parliamentary hearings, and not the Cart of Audit which
has been searching for bugs in budgets of 2 years ago mich have become

totally overtaken by events. and wish no one has any interest in judging.

How Grandi Defends Himself

HilanuOn 26 “arch Alberto Grandi sent a 29-page memorandum to the government
defending the achievements of his administration.

It begins with the consideration that EN! constantly lost money in recent years
in the supply sector (120 billion in 1975, 303 in 1976, 280 in 1977, 190 in 1978
and 466 in 1979) even though the more moderate losses were compensated by
receipts from mining sales (methane and petroleum belonging to ml) valued at
about 1.7 trillion lire. It concluded that the disastrous results of 1981 are
merely the temporary worsening of a basic trend.

However, the document says that contributing to those results was the particular
structure of the Italian petroleum market (high demand for fuel oil), delay in
adjustment of prices of petroleum as well as methane derivatives, the unfavorable
trend in the exchange rate, the obligation to supply the Italian market which
fell upon BN1.

Concerning commitments assumed in the chemical field, Grandi limits himself to
emphasizing the advantage of the rationalization and the internationalisation
of the agreement with Occidental, recalling for the remainder that the losses
of 500 billion lire are due to, in addition to the economic cycle. "events
outside the agency in the implementation of measures prescribed and even
imposed.“

He says not a word about the purchase of the Monti refineries. Concerning
the overall financial situation. Grandi does not fail to link himself to the
Cefis tradition of asking the government for more money. He wrote, "It must
be pointed out that the flow of funds from grants is entirely inadequate to
the sire of the comitment entrusted to the group."

17
FOR m1. USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Grandi recalled that the prograns of partial conversion to private control and
of the stock narket listing of sue co-panies could yield an inco. to the
group of 700 billion lire of outside capital. He concludes. by emining the
problem of the foreign financial sources of the group under accusation following
financial verification of the Banco Andino by Tradinvest. a sort of EM foreign
bank. The program of rationalization in this field was supposed to have been
agreed upon with the president of the trade-union unit and the Court of Audit.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bditrice LA STAHPA, 8. p. A.

6034
C80: 3104/179

18
roe OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

CGT USES STRIKES, VIOLENCE, CRITICISM T0 DESTABILIZE GOVERNMENT
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 12 Mar 82 pp 52-53

[Article by Arthur Conte:'*rhe Secret Objective of COT... To Create a Pre-
Revolutionary Atmosphere in France"!

[Text] There can no longer be any doubt: the OCT has
launched a campagne of violence, now underground, now
spectacular, which can have only one objective: to
destabilize the socialist government. So, once again,
the French communists are engaged in a wide-ranging
maneuver, in an extensive battle.

Multiple expressions of violence throughout the country, provocation of inci-
dents which can easily be exploited, threats in all directions. unrest caused
systematically in nany plants and enterprises, all these can no longer be pre-
sented as "grassroots tension." He can be sure that all this has been ordained.
The magnitude and frequency of the incidents have become such that we must
assume that these have been ordered by some political staff. Curiously enough,
the CGT shows some predilection for shaking more heavily public utility under-
takings. large administrations and nationalized enterprises--a strange way, to
say the least, to provide a "positive" illustration of the nationalisation ex-
periment and of its extension.

Here, at Hutchinson, Hontargis, at Chalette-sur-Loing, tough strike-pickets are
brutally preventing non-strikers from going to work; in Marseilles. at Rivoire
and Carre, 145 well-organised strikers. armed with iron bars, clubs and dogs,

are barring the way to 117 non-strikers, cadres, supervisors. clerks and ssrkers,
who are vainly trying to obtain an intervention from the authorities to have
their right to work respected.

There, very serious conflicts are taking place at Peugeot-Sochaux. at the Gas-
cogne paper factory. and at Leleu, Lyons. while at Cipelec-Cisors a powerful

CGT commando crashed its trucks through the factory gates and removed a 600-kg
furnace, a tank and storehouse documents, the better to ensure that non-strikers
cannot work. And LIBERATION can bluntly announce that the operation lasted

two and a half hour and that "three gendarmes stationed in front of the factory,
their backs turned to the railroad station, received from the Andelys subpre-
feet the order not to intervene."

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Over 100 Enterprises Are Now Being Occupied

Elsewhere. a co-ando attacks the General Council of the department of Calvsdos
during a session and assaults its chairman. Hichel d'Ornano; or comandos go
on missions to "intimidate" the editorial staffs of LB mime, LIBERATION and
Pr-3 Paris, with total disregard for the freedom of the press. claiming that
said editorial staffs have not given fair coverage—i.e. coverage that the GUI
says is fair-to the Clichy tragedy when. to quote the headline of [.8 me:
"An Algerian worker is accidentally killed during a confrontation between
strikers and non-strikers." Over 100 enterprises are now being occupied, most
of them by powerfully organized and equipped co-andos who bar the way to all
workers who are vainly attempting to exert their right to work. Especially
worrying incidents have been reported at the Poclain factory in Tracy-le-Hont,
at the Ultra-Sonique factory in Clermont-Perrand. at Berger-Levrault in Nancy.
at the Kodak factory in Vincennes. at the Hotta factory in Argentan. and at
the Pulsap factory in Annecy.

All these cannot be spontaneous occurrences. nor can they be the result of pro-
vocations by the "class enemy."

Therefore, we must ask ourselves what are the motivations behind such a cam-
paign, which can only be expected to intensify and get worse.

For all that, the fact that the Communist Party itself, as such. stands aside
from this operation and that, from Georges Harchais to Charles Fiterman, it
observes a rather unusual discretion and multiplies its oaths of loyalty to
the president, is no reason to correct our analysis. On the one hand. because
of its equivocations with respect to the Polish tragedy, because of the ob-
vious lack of confidence in it on the part of the. voters, because of the dif-
ficulty experienced by Georges Harchais is asserting his authority, the party,
at least for the time being, does not have enough elbow room to risk a cam-
paign of aggression which couldbring too strong a reaction frcm the govern-
ment. 0n the other hand, it needs all the time and freedom of movesent it can
get to exploit the many advantages it can derive from the participation of
four conunist ministers to the government. Let us say once more to all the
innocents who harbor the illusion that the comnist ministers might soon take
the initiative of a rupture with the socialists: a comaunist minister never
resigns; such a resignation has never occurred in history; a cosmnister min-
ister can be made to resign (for instance by prime minister Paul Ramadier in
1947); as for believing that he could resign of his own free will, we might

as well imagine that leeches have wings; today's cosmunist Excellencies will
not act any differently tomorrow. Therefore, it is easy to understand why

the cotnunists wish to dmonstrate as much reserve as possible.

The CGT Has l-‘ull Freedom to Criticize Anything the PCP Is Doing

Besides, European history shows that the Communist Party will frequently leave
to com-mist unions the important tasks it cannot accomplish itself, these
tasks being of course strictly political. Therefore. there is also no reason to
wonder why. quite naturally,‘ the COT is now taking over where the PCP left:
at least, the C61 has not signed any loyalty agreement with the government;

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it has full freedom to discuss or criticize anything the government is doing;
a fortiori. it has full freedom to make powerful interventions in public life
under the guise of supporting class demands and the sll-too-famous "will to
change."

But, precisely. for the moment, what definite.more or less far-reaching objec-
tives can the CGT hope to achieve with the vast and violent campaign it is now
leading, the importance of which can escape no one?

it escapes nobody that by violating or disrupting the life of enterprises, by
attempting to intimidate as much as it can the less resistant heads of enter-
prises, the CGT is definitely not contributing to the intensive production
effort wished and repeatedly asked for by Pierre Hauroy and Jacques Delors.

It is also obvious that by looking for a confrontation with the tougher heads
of enterprises, and by trying to push them to extreme acts of defiance or
reprisal, the CGT is placing such an emphasis on the class struggle, and con-
tributing so such to isolating the employers frtm the rest of the country
that it creates a situation of conflict which does little to answer the wish
of the minister of Finance and Econony.

A Climate of Unrest Which Contributes to a Cleavage Into Two French Nations

In doing that, the CGT may be not only undertaking to discourage the employers
as a whole at the very moment when the government--becoming aware of the se-
rious errors it sade at the start of its tenure-is attempting to regain some
credibility on their side and a more effective contribution to the "solidarity
effort," but it also looks sometimes as if the CGT, pretending all of a sud-
den to be a state within the state, wished to intimidate the government itself
and were trying to subject it to an enormous and unrelenting pressure.ln his
stride, Henri Krasucki has even been known to take the tone of a prime minis-
ter when talking on television.

Another unavoidable observation: this is the most effective means to divide
our country for good into two irreducible blocks. There is nothing like
violence to achieve just that. Already, from all sides one can perceive a
hatred which had disappeared in France after World War II. We all had
almost entirely dispelled class hatred. And in this respect, the climate of
unrest which the CGT is attempting to impose on us can only contribute power-
fully to an irreparable cleavage into two French nations, one collectivized
tr the extreme, the other desperatly attached to the defense of all individual
liberties. Not only does this create an atmosphere which we might call pre-
revolutionary, propitious to increasingly serious and mean incidents, but it
also destroys the last bridges which might still remain at the center.

The colmunists fully well know that on a given day, at a given moment, under
given circumstances which cannot as yet be anticipated, the president of the
Republic could legitimately wish and have to call upon another type of major~
ity: the Constitution is flexible erough to enable him to do so should he
ever wish or have to. He is experienced and clever enough to be prepared to
govern differently from today. for instance with the support of a socialist-

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centrist majority. Logically, this is by no means impossible. Besides, many
wise men in the former majority, who know how to resist movements of indigna-
tion and who are well aware of the dangers of a possible cleavage of the coun-
try into two fiercely opposed blocks, are rejecting uncomprimising acts of de-
fiance and remain open to dialogue. We must tirelessly repeat that the one and
only way to avoid the risk of a civil war or an irremediable confrontation
passes through the center of our checkerboard. What men of good will must be
bent_on avoiding is an implacable and blind confrontation.

Now, it is obvious that. through the frenzied blows dealt by its militants and
sympathizers, the CGT is working toward confrontation and conflict.

Finally. in last analysis, if the COT communists were out to conmromise the
success of the government they claim to serve, they could not do better. To
succeed, the government essentially needs trust and calm. Through its many
mistakes and inconsistencies (some of which hardly believable). it is on its
way to losing the trust of the French people. The CGT is sabotaging its peace.
Therefore, we cannot but conclude that, decidedly, the CGT is already coldly
and systematically working to actually ersure that tnis very socialist govern-
ment which it claims to support will fail.

How could even communists wonder at such accusations being made against the
CGT? Cmnmunists have never, absolutely never, given their unrestricted sup-
port to an elected socialist government.

We do say: never. In one way or another, more or less spectacularly, they have
always actively and systematically contributed to the failure of such govern-
mcnts. They are consistent with themselves and with their history when, once
again today, they wish nothing more than to see the present experiment fail.

Socialism is the truly eternal enemy of communism. Seeing how the COT is now
openly maneuverinr. it remains impossible to imagine that today's communists
could have undergone a historical recsnversion.

What Will Be Hitterrand's Reaction to This Undertaking?

The question is then to know up to what point Francois Hitterrand will toler-
ate or be able to tolerate such an obvious undertaking. where is he at?

Does he still believe as ardently in the "breaking strategy" which he announced
after his election and can he then take into his service the operations of the
COT? Or else will he decide to consider these maneuvers as mere misdemeanors,
excesses of zeal which should be ignored rather than dramatized? Or will he
eventually consider the problem in its truer light? will he allow the social
climate to deteriorate without reacting. and risk the worse, or will he become
aware soon enough of the true dangers which are pressing him? How long will

he be able to leave his people in a state of indecision and equivocation with
respect to such a perillous matter? These are major questions. Unfortunately,
all we can do is ask them.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 par Cogedipresse S.A.

9294
080: 3100/584

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITI CAL ITALY

RIPT serum LAMA, POI LEADERSHIP REPORTED
Milan PAIORAMA in Italian 26 Apr 82 pp Sis-55
[Article by Paolo Franchi: "Enrico, Let Me Hork'ﬂ

[Text] Too soft on the socialists, too anxious to keep
unionism united at all costs, too respectful of the govern-
ment: These are the acmations levelled against Luciano has
by the PCI sumit. But the can. leader fimly goes his own

vav

On Sunday, 3 April, when Enrico Berlinguer announced that in the event of a
referendum on liquidations, the comunists should vote to abrogate the law,
Luciano lama bridled at the fact that once again the PCI secretary had taken
a decision on his own, without consulting the unions.

This decision struck him as all the more reprehensible since in June 1977,

the agreement on liquidations between the unions and Oonfindustria had been
enacted into law in a climate of national solidarity, in fact with the decisive
support of the PCI. Now Berlinguer was putting the lid on the issue by
threatening to burden the unions, already in difficulties, with protests from
their dissatisfied menbers.

But other unwelcome surprises lay in store for Luciano Lama. In the central
comittee one week later, Berlinguer mde aatters worse. Before a board pre-
pared to get tough with the unions and the victories they have achieved, the
communist secretary warned his listeners that it would bring "woes to yield
without a fight." And what about the patient search for unity? To Berlinguer,
that search often meant simply drawing a veil over concessions: unity, indeed,
"cannot consist of mediation and negotiations purely as ends in thesselves."

Under accusation—although he is never specifically named--aga.in over the past
few weeks, Luciano Lama has continued to battle in behalf of union autonomy and

for a unitarian program which, in his View, must be supported not only by the
workers' organizations but also by the parties.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The negotiations between the goverment and union chiefs on econonic policy
have been his roughest test. while favoring general strike tactics, Lama is
absolutely unmovable on one issue: strikes should not appear, even remotely,
to be a labor maneuver aiming to overthrow the government, thus opening the
way to anticipated elections.

"I will do everything I can to avoid bringixu down the government," he prom-
ised Sandro Pertini Just before the president of the Republic departed for
the United States.

True to his vow, shortly afterward the COIL leader rose to defend Giorgio
Benvenuto in public. On 26 March, when the UH. secretary was violently con-
tested [in a rally] on Piazza San Giovanni, Lama determined to honor a emit-
ment he had made with AVM'I'I in an interview expressing his solidarity with
his colleague and denouncing sectarianism and violence, but mainly reminding
others that if they really wanted the alternative, they must stop lunging
savagely at the left; instead, they should react to the massacre perpetrated
by the goverment.

"why say such things to the newspaper that speaks for Bettino Oran? This
time, Luciano has really lost his head," was the irate cement made by some
Berlinguer loyalists. Nevertheless, three days later, Lama bowed to the
applause of the socialists meeting in‘ Rimini to launch their program: ”A
personal triumph. He aroused as much enthusiasm as Lombardi."

"Open to the socialists? Of course. hit that doesn't mean that he's backing
the socialists to the bitter end," say CGIL unionists. "The fact is that Lama
is heir to the Italian reformist communism of Vittorio and Amendola, to a
tradition with strong roots in the past."

It was indeed in this school that Lama learned to be extremely clear with
everyone in expressing his thoughts, even with his old friends. Commenting
on the tone of the socialist assemblage in Rimini, he openly stated his
worries about a party so burdened with problems: "The PSI is like a rope
stretched too tight. There is the danger that by unleashing so nuch energy,
it might begin to look for anticipated elections." At the metalworkers'
convention in Montecatini the following week, he kept a poisoned arrow in
reserve for the same Benvenuto he had defended in the columns of AVAIITI.

"I, too, have been the butt of fierce opposition," he said, "but I have never
thought of getting out from under by playing the victim.”

Communist and unitarian labor unionists by background and vocation,

Luciano Lama is more convinced than ever that the COIL could make a decisive
contribution by moving to the Left. There is only one road to take, he says:
to believe in a unionism which is responsible but also politically strong,
like what the delegates to the 1978 nati onal conference in EUR designated.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Now that the conflict has turned more explicit, the price of so many openings
and so nuch moderation amounts to a critical alienation between the unions and
the masses ," protest the leaders in POI headquarters, and point to the workers'
meetings attended only by a minority, to the factories closing down, and the
tens of thousands of hours of unemployment pay in consequence, even among
CGIL's ebbing neabership. lo one in the unions contests these facts, "But to
think that we can merge from this situation by rediscovering the old Soviet
revolutionary ideals through sheer magic is a pious illusion." The harshness
of these attacks only consolidates Lama's following, including such leaders

as Bruno Trentin, whose histories, preparation and culture differ from Lama's.

Sane communist big shots have pondered the idea of eliminating the Lama probles
by removing him from the COIL smit and transferring him to a party Job or a
seat in Parliament. But, his collaborators insist, Luciano lama has no inten-
tion of leaving his post; to the contrary, he will continue to occupy his
office on the Corso d'Italia for a long time to come. while the PCI becomes
more and sore isolated and the difficulties besetting the coterie of communist
leaders worsen, he seems ever more fated to represent the other face of the
party-«and possibly a less quarrelsome Left.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Bditore S.p.A. Hilano

9653
no: 310h/196

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOLITICAL SPAIN

sum: 8331 AS IMPORTANT FACTOR IN UPCOIING WINS

Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 19 Apr 82 pp 37-39

Article by Antxon Sarasqueta: '8uarez. We Are Counting on You']

_‘i‘extJ In knowledgeable circles, in political gatherings, in the offices of the
government and of the opposition--in all of these--the figure of Adolfo Suarez
surges as one of the key factors in the general elections. which the nost de-
tailed and docunented analyses estimate will be around the second half of Novel-
her.

Meanwhile, the former prise sinister plays his cards close to his chest, saking
a puzzle of the current political situation and of his intentions with regard to
a target period that begins the day following the Andalusian elections, which
have been convoked for 23 Hay.

"rhe date of 25 Hay will go down as one one which the lost newspapers will be
sold,‘ was the prediction aade to cansro 16 by Rafael Calvo Ortega. for-er sinis-
ter in the Suarez cabinet and secretary general of the 060 [Denocratic Center
Union] until the 'landing" by prime minister Rafael Calvo Sotelo. There can be
no doubt that Rafael Calvo, who saintains his active closeness to Suarez, was
referring implicitly. with this warning. to the date on which the duke could an-
nounce an event as dranatic as his return to the political front and, moreover,
his departure fron the DC!) and tho creation of a new political party.

But as of today, Suarez has not yet taken any definitive decision, having rejec-
ted a priori two possibilities, nasely, a preelectoral. 'natural-najority'
coalition of the 060 with Praga and the nationalists. or his departure fro. the
party. 'slaming the door" in a huff and nothing else. according to the most
creditworthy versions gathered by this magazine among his closest associates.

The first-floor tenant at nusber d of Madrid's Calle de Antonio Maura is testing
strengths, building bridges. enlarging his contacts with his environsent in

intisate lunches and office neetings. Calvo Sotelo, Antonio de Senilloea. Perez
Hiyares. Pio Cabanillas. Landelino Lavilla, Raul Horodo. nartin Villa... One of
these luncheon guests. who had maintained a very critical attitude toward Suarez
the prime minister. told this ugazine, only hours after lunching alone with his.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that the foroer head of the governsent "is tying up loose ends and watching
trends. he has a very clear view of the political situation and of the direction

in which he must head.‘

In Suarez's opinion, the first objective of all valid alternatives must be to
neutralize the extremes. understanding these to be Narnia- and the authoritarian
Right. In hie view. the notion of a political quadrilateral with two majority
parties and two sinority ones AP [Popular Alliance] and PCB Spanish Oc-unist
PartyJ) . is still a valid one.

With this as a point of departure. Suarez will play his own game, first from with-
in the 0CD and only as a last resort from without. Be and his people have vir-
tually no confidence in the rapprochenent initiated a few weeks ago by Honcloa
and the party “apparatus” to safeguard his political and electoral net worth, al-
though the fact is that the retreat fro. the caQaign of harrassment of the
Catalonian Centrists. who are headed by Anton Canellas. was undertaken at Suares's

urging.

Nevertheless, everything now centers on the true power Prise Minister Calvo Sotelo
is prepared to cede to Suarez or the latter is prepared to recover. And this in-
volves several decisive factors regarding the future of the players and of the
Center and the Right as organizations. For Suarez. for exasple. it is vital that
the organization of the electoral couittee be worked out. that it become opera-
tional well in advance, and that he be able to exercise a partial control over

it that will however be sufficiently ale to guarantee not less than to deputies
on whom he can rely.

Suarez is detersined to recover control of a substantial part of his party's
policy planning. At the same time. one of the principal aims in the thinking of
P503 LSpanish Socialist Workers Party] policy leadership, in the event it wins
the elections, is to form a coalition govern-ant with Suarez and the most pro-
gressive sectors of the 06!).

On the other hand. the stands taken by Suarez with respect the rightist leader-
ship, political as well as financial, are aimed at showing that the sole possio
bility of defeating the 9803 in the casing elections lies not in a far-rightist
policy orientation but rather in a progressive and modern rightist platform

which he himself could head from his political stronghold and through the party.

The underlying concept continues to be valid: The million or million and a half
votes that is straddling the fence between Centrists and Socialists are those
that will in the end tip the scale to victory in the elections. These are votes
that could again go to Suarez. as in past elections. This is why the 9808's
entire policy of moderation is aimed at capturing that constituency, while main-
taining a strategy of detachment from the DC!) and the government in favor of
more rightist positions.

Whether inside the DC!) or Outside it. Suarez is determined to be the real “ful-
crum.‘ with the power to tilt the scales toward the Right or the Left. Every-
thing will depend on the political cost involved in each of the operations, once

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the outcome of the general elections is known. And Suarez and his political
advisers have going for them the fact that the lowest-cost alternative for cap-
turing the majority would be that of pacts or alliances with Democratic Coali-
tion and the Nationalists should the letter be necessary.

The most recent indications in this regard are that no problems of a personal
nature would stand in the way of a post-election understanding between Suares and
Praga if the election results were to warrant it. On the other hand, a revival
of political contact between Suarez and Alfonso Osorio would definitely be more
complicated, to judge by the degree of political and personal confrontation

they have both invoked.

But where is the leadership of the Right? For what is at stake for the Right,
first in the Andalusian elections and then in the general ones. is its very con-
figuration, both as regards its structures and its leadership. something that
the Left has already established and consolidated.

From his power center, Calvo Sotelo will try to consolidate his leadership in the
Andalusian tilt versus the Suarez, Lavilla and Fraga options. This will take-sons
very favorable election results to accomplish and even the 'surprise' outcoee he
himself has alluded to repeatedly in the course of his campaign swings through
the South. It will also take the successful sale of his image by his technio
cians to the Spanish electorate. something that has not yet come about.

Indeed, the operation of an internal alternative, although it may be "dormant'I
following the the '23 February trial' and the Andalusian elections, could again
be brought to the fore by a few influential 0CD I'barons."

This operation would consist of maintaining Calvo Sotelo in the prise minister-
ship until the very general elections, while letting the perception of a possible
Lavilla-Suarez 'ticket' emerge during the campaign, the first as head of the
government and the duke as the dominant power in the party.

Despite the fact that Lavilla headed the faction of ”critics" which challenged
Suarez and became the decisive element in his downfall. a sincere rapprochement
between the two political leaders has developed in recent months. To the extent
that, Suarez was prepared to back the president of the Cortes for the position
of head of the party to prevent the Calvo Sotelo 'landing' in a maneuver in which
other influential leaders and ministers in the 0CD and the government also took
part. Lavilla said "no“ to this, without however denying that his right moment
might be more or less near.

Although Calvo Sotelo was able, with his offensive designed to 'recover' Suarez.
to halt the movements of certain prominent centrist 'barons' within the party
heading taward an alternative option by way of the office of his predecessor,

it is abundantly foreseeable that pressures will again mount within the UCD to
head in that sale direction following the Andalusian elections.

28
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the scat recent luncheon Calvo Sotelo and Suares had together. the first
asked his predecessor again to take an active part in the Andalusian election
campaign. Contrary to the version leaked by the centrist 'apparatus'. suggested
in part by Calvo Sotelo's statements hinting at Suares's presence in the Anda-
lusian campaign. the duke has reiterated in private that he has no intention of
going to the South. and has so told the prime sinister. according to opposing
sources.

It is not too difficult to imagine-knowing the basis and the form of Suares°s
plans and views. and those of the nembers of his 'tntourage'-that there is real
interest in letting the Andalusian case be a personal and public test of Calvo
Sotelo. This strategy has been borne out by the long camign the prime minister
has planned, knowing as he does that his political future and the survival of the
Right as the number one option are at stake in Andalusia.

Pros without, the socialists are holding to their strategy of coming into power.
sharing it with a progressively oriented Right-an operation that requires the
splitting of the 060.

Desagoguery to one side. the P808 is aware of the resistance its alternative

encounters asong the factitious powers: So such so. that the development of the
transition has been br'Ought about under the heading of 'change" rather than that

of a 'break." For. when Salvador de Hadariaga characterized Spain as "the Euro-

pean anomaly.” he was only underscoring the power in our country of a very hard-

ened and retrograde conservatism. totally opposed to the progressiveness

and modernization experienced by the Western denocracies, and that have built the frene—

work of the most advanced societies.

indeed. an 'anosaly' graphically and dramatically displayed in a coup rooted in
an ultrarightist philosophy against a rightist-oriented governsent in a Western
system.

That the splitting off of Former Minister Francisco Fernandez Ordonez and his
people was fueled by the P803 leadership. and that Manuel Fraga and his AP back-
ers were the sponsors of the rightist deserters. is no longer any secret. It
was a saneuver on the part of the socialists to erode the UCD. in response to a
Calvo Sotelo who has consistently denied the 9803 a position of power through

a repeatedly requested coalition governsent.

‘i'he socialists' next step. in the event their preditions of an election victory
saterialize. will be to lead that coalition. for which they are counting on
Suarez and on the Center-Left bloc of the 000. as well as a working agreement
with the nationalists.

Although a socialist victory would of course result in a wider sargin of maneuver
for the Left as a whole. the P802. for practical. realistic and politically
opportunistic reasons. prefers to wield power through alliances. with the Right
positioned along a progressive course.

would Suarez accept?

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As one of the several alternatives available to hin. Suarez does not reject that
of a pact with the 9803, subject however to first knowing the outcome of the
elections and to finding that there is not a viable najority in the rightist
b1”.

A Modern Right

The for-er prise minister and his political associates are aware of the high cost
involved, in the nediua and long terns, in a coalition with the socialists.
splitting the Right. Suarez is highly pragmatic in his thinking and knows pre-
cisely where he is positioned politically today: Not in the heft but rather in
what he considers a sodern and progressive Right. according to his seat recent
definitions.

On the other hand. although political events in this country take place at a
vertiginous pace that actually erases even the most recent from historical senory.
it should he remred that the socialists have heretofore found in Suarez one
of their principal adversaries, to the point where their offensive against his
person. designed to bring about his fall. was during 1979 and 1980 their highest
prioritied objective in their drive for power. Suarez. in the two previous can-
paigns, has maintained the hardest of attitudes against the 9808, and the former
prine minister was given to recalling that one of his strategies was to prevent
Felipe Gonzalez fro. setting foot in the noncloa. feeling that this would favor
the socialists.

Now as well. his preference leans toward a Center as vehicle for bringing the
Right together into a front against the P503, provided Suarez can recover his
leadership role in the party. The nearness of the elections mls that post-
transition structuring of the Right. whose principal figures are subosrged in
prolonged caution.

In the case of the Suarez rising from the ashes. it seems appropriate to borrow
a saying that the socialist leader Enrique Hugica likes to voice: ”This shows
that there is no political death other than suicide.“

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Infornacion Y Revistas, 8.5.

9399
C50: 3110/128

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

PSOE IN ASTURIAS snows "ILLINMSS ‘no UNITE um! PCB
Madrid MIG 16 in Spanish 26 Apr 32 pp 55, 56
[Article by Isidoro Niciera: "Governaent With 'Pbrceps'"]

[Text] One hundred and twenty days after the Statute of Antone-y of Asturias was
published in the Official Bulletin of the State the meebers of the General Junta
elected the first president of the autononous govern-ant, in the person of Social-
ist Rafael Fernandez.

There had been 6 months filled with legal proceedings, negotiating neetings and
tension among the four parties with representation in Parliament (P302 [Spanish
Socialist workers Party). 0CD [Democratic Center Union], PCB [Spanish Communist
Party! and AP [Popular Alliance]). The confrontations between the divided,
majority. left and the hounding, minority right transcended the area of the
autonomous community of Asturias; and from the election canpaign in Andalucia
and the ranks of the UCD in particular, the specter of the "popular front" took
shape in the new autonomous Asturias.

The autonomous con-unity of Asturias is the fourth one to go into effect in the
Spanish State, and the first one that has been negotiated through Article 143 of
the Constitution; but it has beenthe first to generate a conflict when it was

time to establish the organs of power, as a result of the balance of votes between
the Democratic Center Union and the Socialist Party in the General Junta or auto-

noaous Parlianent.

Origins of the Conflict

The origins of this conflict date after the publication of the Statute of Autonomy
in the Official Bulletin of the State and its going into effect, which put an end
to a preautononous government based on consensus. Upon the conclusion of this
preautononous period. the political plan of the Socialists. as a majority party

in number of votes. devised a governnent of concentration which "would guarantee
the stability of the region until the spring of 1983," a date when it nay be
anticipated that the first elections for the regional Parliament will be held.

This concentration plan was accepted from the outset by the Conmunist Party and

by Popular Alliance, but it was flatly rejected by UCD "for the sake of a neces-
sary clearing of the political spectrum." In view of this situation. the Astu-

rian Socialist Federation decided to naintain its proposal, while at the same

31
time offering to assume the responsibilities of the government alone. thereby
rejecting any possible agreement with the Communist Party. The Comnists.

however. only agreed to back that government with a Socialist presidency if they
were part of it.

Amid this rankling of positions. the election of the president of the regional
Parliament. consisting of 58 deputies. took place. The Socialists and Communists
combined. with their total of 31 votes. could have put a representative of the
left in the presidency of the Asturian Parliament. but each party ran its own
candidate. while UCD also opted for the presidency. with the backing of its 26
votes. confronted with the intention to abstain expressed by AP.

In the eighth balloting. after several ties of 26 votes between the P503 candi-
date (Marcelo Palacios) and the UCD candidate (Agustin Antuna. up until then
chairman of the Chamber of Deputies), the three AP representatives changed their
abstention and voted for the Centrist candidate. who thereby received the 27 votes
required to gain the presidency of the General Junta of the Principality or the
autonomous Parliament in which. strangely enough, the left is in the majority.

The next step toward the implementation of Asturian autonomy was the election of
the president of the Council of Government. or autonomous government.

In view of the division among the leftist parties. UCD and AP concluded a govern-
ment pact whereby the Alliance members were to receive two Council positions in
exchange for lending their support to the Centrist candidate and secretary general
of the Asturian UCD. Garcia Pumarino.

Despite their lack of agreement. the Socialists and Communists were confident that
the Centrist candidate would not gain the absolute majority in the first balloting.
nor the simple majority in the second one. as they saw it; in other words. that
the candidate would have to receive more positive than negative votes.

On 29 March. the tense situation exploded. The Socialists. disagreeing with the
interpretation of the simple majority. refused to enter the semi-circle and forced
a delay in the investiture session. The Communists. for their part, continued
refusing to lend support to a government of which they would not be a part.

The hounding from the right and the intransigence of the PCB forced the Asturian
Socialists to arrive. unwillingly. at an agreement with the Communists. keeping
for them the portfolio that they had occupied during the preautonomous government.
with consensus among all the parliamentary political forces.

Three days before the postponed investiture session took place. the Regional
Committee of the Asturian Socialist Federation met and approved (31 votes in
favor, 15 against and 9 abstentions) a new offer for the PGA [Communist Party

of Asturias]. which was offered the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and
Communications. provided the Communists backed the Socialists and upheld the

program.

The decision of the Socialist Regional Commdttee caused a serious conflict with
this party's leadership. not only in Asturias but in Andalucia and the rest of
Spain as well. The opposition leader. Felipe Gonzales. expressed regret over

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

the agreement and the P808 federal executive body considered the decision "disso-
eluted from its political proposals"; although it took the opportunity to claim
that "it was brought about by the hounding from UCD and the right" and noted that
there could by no means be talk of a new "popular front" as it was being labeled,
with electoral intentions and a gaze fixed on Andalusia by the right in general,
and Ben in particular.

Problems in PSOE

The secretary general of the Asturian Socialist Federation, for his part, coun-
tered the criticism of his party and the charges from the right: “P802 is aware
of the political price that this decision has entailed for the party, but we
felt that there were no other solutions. because a minority right wing govern-
ment would greatly debilitate the autonomous process. This stance, which is at
odds with our political plan, according to the federal executive body, means
putting regional interests before those of the party itself or before the elec-
toral interests which have priority among the other political forces."

Despite these explanations or justifications, 24 hours later, the UCD's secreta-
ry of organization, Pedro Lopez Jimenez. inquired in Seville whether PSOE would
govern with the Communists in Andalucia as well. The fact is that both Maria
Izquierdo and Jose Maria Haravall, of the P803 federal executive body, had been
in Oviedo attempting to prevent the offer to the Communists from being made.
Meanwhile, and amid the criticism, the Communist Party was also contributing its
own, describing the Socialist offer as "mean and stingy," although a few haurs
before the voting they announced that they would accept it, "so as not to leave
the regional government in the hands of the Democratic Center Union."

Finally, on 15 April. 6 months after Asturias rose to the rank of an autonomous
community via the Official Bulletin of the State, the veteran Socialist Rafael
Fernandez won the presidency of the Asturian autonomous government with 31 votes
from the left (24 Socialist and 7 Communist) and negative votes from UCD and AP.

With the election of Rafael Fernandez. the first autonomous government of the
left in democratic Spain was established. Moments before the voting. the "in
pectore" president reaffirmed his desire to carry out a policy of concentration,
although "the circumstances prevented that government of concentration from
becoming a reality." And he added: "I want to be a president of all Asturians."

This first government of Rafael Fernandez has in the council of the presidency
an independent: Bernardo Fernandez Perez, and the Socialists: Faustino Gonza-
lez. as councillor of finance and economy; Juan Ramon Zapico. in territorial
administration; Arturo Gutierrez de Te an. in territory regulation and housing;
Antonio Hasip, in education and culture; Jose Luis Rodriguez Vigil, in health
and social security; Manuel Fernandez Pello, in industry, comerce and tourism;
and Emilio Baron, in labor relations and social assistance. The Communist
Victor Manuel Zapico occupies the council post of public works, transportation
and communications, while a second independent, Jesus Arango Fernandez, is in
charge of agriculture and livestock.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Revistss, S.A.

2909
C80: 3110/13k

33
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

C303 TO TEST ITS POLITICAL PROHESS IN ANDALUCIAN ELECTIONS
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 26 Apr 82 pp 66-71

[Article by Gonzalo San Segundo. with Juan de Dios Hellado (Halaga). Santiago
Romero (La Coruna) and Albert Arbos (Barcelona): "C303, the Fifth Party")

[Text] This country's business owners have leaped into the political arena again.
They want to prevent a Socialist victory in the forthcoming elections for the
Andalucian Parliament and in the general elections of 1983. if they are not moved
ahead. The victory of the Socialist Parties in Greece and France has acted as a
revulsive factor. The members of the C802 [Spanish Confederation of Business
Organizations] who will back UCD [Democratic Center Union] and AP [Popular Alli-
ance] want to sit in Parliament; and they have announced that they will wage a
"hand to hand battle."

The business owners made the first political try in the elections to the Catalonian
Parliament in March 1980. A hundred million pesetassndan intense social and
publicity campaign carried out by National Hork Promotion. the Catalonian business
owners' entity. contributed largely to the victory of Convergence and Union. the
coalition which gave support to Jordi Pujol.

A year and a half later. in October 1981. the OBOE was taking the reins of the
election campaign for the Calician Parliament. Jose Pablo Bodriguez-Hantillan.
head of the La Coruna Businessmen's Confederation and other Galician business
leaders were the C803 members who made the overwhelming victory of AP possible.
The Galician businessmen spent over 100 million pesetas on this campaign.

The results of the Calician campaign have encouraged this country's top-ranking
business owners to revive their efforts for political participation with a view
toward the forthcoming elections for the Andalucian Parliament. which will take
place on 23 May. And the political parties. aware of the importance of the
businessmen's vote, are dissolving into compliments. signs of affection and
flirtation with the Andalucisn business owners.

For the present. the businessmen are not allowing themselves to be tempted by the
siren songs. Antonio Carrillo. secretary general of the Andalucian Businessmen's
Confederation. told CAHBIO 16: "Many swains are currently courting us."

But they are not all compliments. The businessmen have unburied the hatchet of
political war and are launching forth severely against their political enemies.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Socialists. The head of the CEA [Andalucian businessmen's Confederation].
Manuel turtin Almendros, wrote in \‘hl Andalucian press: "The very concept of
freedom of individuals and the model. of society that Andalusia must decide for
itself are at stake."

The freedom of individuals and the model of society for this country are clearly
defined in the Constitution of 1978. Therefore. Alfonso Guerra. the 9303'.
second-ranking strong man. on one occasion let loose his venomous tongue and
accused the Andalucian business leaders of being "close to the coup plot."

There has already been one victim in this battle: Manuel Clavero Arevalo and his
party, Andalucian Unity, have decided not to run in the elections'on 23 May,
because the businessman have refused them the financing which they needed.
Clavero stated: "If we had joined a coalition with Frags. we would have 500
million pesetas now." The importance which the Spanish business-owning class has
attached to the Andalucian elections is reflected in the observers that the
Valencisn Businessmen's Confederation and certain other regions will send to
Andalusia to follow the electoral process closely. This traveling system has
already been followed by the Andalusian businessmen in Gslicia and by the Gali-
cians in Catalonia.

The Andalucian businessman intends to gamble heavily in these elections. The one
with the say is the CBA. which includes 80 percent of Andalusian businessmen and
which is headed by the Malagsn, Manuel Martin Almendros, a conservative.

But it is in Madrid. at the general headquarters of the OBOE on Diego de Leon
Street. that they are preparing the artillery. Jose Maria Cuevss. secretary
general of the great management entity. is the brains of the Andalucian operation.
even though he denies it or detracts simificance from the fact.

The Cuevas group has obvious Martinvillist connotations. He himself is considered
an adherent of the current political vice-president of the government, as is
Martin Almendros.

The Andalucian businessmen need at least 600 million pesetas for their campaign;
and their leader is encountering serious difficulties in collecting that money
among the members. Business-owning sources queried by CAMBIO 16. taking an opti-
mistic position, estimate the money collected to date at slightly over 100 million
pesetss. This collection problem is being partially solved in Madrid. The C308
has come to the aid of its Andalucian words by sending money from its budget.

But the underlying reason that would explain why the Andalusian businessmen have
not undertaken to finance the election campaign promoted by the CEO! is rather
political, according to the rumors gleaned by this magazine. A large portion of
Andalusian businessmen have proven unwilling to give unconditional backing to
060 and AP, because they foresee a Socialist victory. and this is shown in the
polls taken by the management entity. And they do not want the P802 to give
then the bill later for their contribution to the right.

The issue of 1101) has raised blisters among the Andalucian businessmen. A meeting
of the Granada Centrists with the businessmen, and a subsequent press consent in

35
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

which a certain type of backing for the government party was presumed, evoked
waves of indignation in CEA circles. A spokesman for the Andalucian management
entity told CAHBIO 16 that, individually, they could back whomever they wanted,
"but never in a corporative manner." Nevertheless, many businessmen would be

willing to support UCD if that party were to redirect its proposals toward more
conservative positions.

The backing for Popular Alliance is more subject to question. The Andalucian
businessmen do not think that the Galician results will be possible to transplant
to Andalucia. The AP's entrenchnent in this region is light years removed from
the number of militants and the strength that it has in the Cslician region.

Nor does Manuel Praga'a party have a native Andelucian leader.

Despite the fact that the policy dictated by Carlos Perrer Salat, Jose Antonio
Segursdo and Jose Maria Cuevas (the CEOB’s three most visible heads) is to deny
basic sustenance to PSOB, a hegemonic political force in the region, there is a
sizable group of Andalucian businessmen who are willing to lend their support

to Rafael Escuredo. current head of the Junta of Andalusia. In this connection,
mention has been made of the vice president of CEA, the Sevillan Juan Salas, a
classmate of Eacuredo's with whom he is in the habit of meeting and who has been
the object of some criticism from business owners for his "Socialist whims."

Amid this confusion among the rank and file of Andalusian businessmen, Martin
Almendros. their leader, is very clearcut: "He shall be belligerent in an insti-
tutional campaign, as we were in the Andalucian referendum," he told this magazine.
And the CEA secretary general has countered rumors indicating some possible support
that has not materialized, brewing within the C208 Executive Cosmittee. Antonio
Carrillo states: "There is nothing of the sort, and unfortunately it gives the
impression that we businessmen are engaged in politics, whereas our main objective
is aimed at becoming organized as businessmen."

If no political party is going to be given actual support by CEA, the game of
personal preferences does enter into the plans of the Andalusian businessman,

who will have to decide between Luis Urunuela (Andalucian Socialist Party). Luis
Merino Bayons (UCD), Rafael Bacuredo (PSOE), Felipe Alcaraz (PCA [Communist Party
of Andalucial) and the candidate named by Popular Alliance.

But the forthcoming elections for the Andalusian Parliament. like those of Catalo-
nia and Galicia, will only be a test for the Spanish business owners with a view
toward the general elections. Three million businessmen, the vast majority of
whom are small and medium-scale, have this country's future in their hands. For
the first tine in their history. they are aware of their decisive role, and this
is also known to the political parties which have shown that they agree that the

businessman should participate in politics.

The Spanish Constitution of 1978 offers each of them an excuse or a reason for
supporting their economic proposals. The Democratic Center Union and the business
owners cling to Article 38, which acknowledges freedom of enterprise within the
framework of the market economy. And the Socialists and Communists are grouped
around Article 131, which says that the State may plan the general economic
activity in order to meet the collective needs.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the general confrontation in view, the batteries are beginning to be deployed.
The C808 is releasing businessmen to join the management entity's political team.
Their mission is to organize cousittees in the various businessmen's organizations

for the purpose of collecting information in the different provinces aimed at
the creation of a data bank for the general elections.

The majority of these informational committees are being formed by independent
businessmen. In other instances, the committees are the result of consensus,

and they include individuals who are affiliated with, or sympathizers of UCD, AP
or Antonio Garrigues' Liberal Clubs.

Hitterrand's victory in France and his subsequent policy of nationalization, as
well as the internal crisis in the government party (for which Ferrer Salat
predicted in September "an inevitable and imminent electoral defeat amid the
revulsion of the electorate") have caused revulsion in the political entrails
of Spanish business owners.

The dialectical artillery deployed by Jose Luis Ceron Ayuso. chairman of the
CEOE’s Economic Commission, in late March at the let Century Club, is a good
example of what the businessmen are willing to do in order to prevent PSOE from
winning the next elections. On that occasion, Ceron stated: "He must proceed to
a hand to hand battle wherein the destruction of the adversary is as important as
the accreditation of our own image." And he added: "Elections are won only by
destroying the adversary's image. and not with political programs." Ceron, a
former Francoist minister, called for a UCD-AP coalition, which appears to have
support from the CEOE: "It would be unfortunate to fight ruthlessly for the same
electorate."

This coalition has been varied by Jose Antonio Segurado, vice-president of the
CEOE and president of CEIH, the Madrid management entity: "We do not uphold that
coalition. but rather intelligent agreements between the center and the right,
with flexible solutions in each district."

Segurado himself, in a lecture delivered at the let Century Club this past Janu-
ary. declared: "We shall be neutral toward those options, which are not Socialist
or Communist, that may be offered to the electorate, provided they uphold our
model of society with a clearcut. definite program." And he added: "For this
purpose, the best people must be incorporated into politics, so as to be able to
compete with the best ones of the Socialist option."

Socialist Contacts

In that incorporation. the CEOE leaders themselves may be intending to reserve a
vacant place for themselves or, if need be, to leave it for other individuals of

the second rank.

PSOE does not want this country's businessmen to be taken by surprise. Therefore,
its secretary general. Felipe Gonzalez, has held meetings with the presidents of
the leading banks (except for Banesto [Spanish Credit Bank] and Santander), with
business owning groups such as Rumasa , and businessmen's organizations, such as
the Businessmen's Club. and the bank management entity itself, A33.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These contacts have been aimed primarily at calming the nerves of businessmen,

insofar as possible, regarding a Socialist victory in the forthcoming general
elections. But the business leaders are remaining steadfast in their position
of not backing PSOE.

For example, Santiago Foncillas. president of the Business-en's Club, stated on
National Radio on 30 March: "In the election campaign, there is no doubt of where
our votes will go: to UCD and AP, because they are the parties which, like our-
selves. defend free enterprise and the market economy."

The reelected president of the Businessmen's Club modified his statement comment-
ing: "If there should be a PSOB victory in the elections, the majority, if not all
of us businessmen will continue to work with the same enthusiasm and the same
illusions as we have up until now." The heads of the great management entity

have expressed themselves in similar terms regarding a potential Socialist victory.

The businessmen are also being encouraged to vote for UCD by the government. The
message directed toward businessmen last January at a meeting of A90 by the
president of the government was clear and transparent. Calvo Sotelo remarked:

"The best way of engaging in a campaign for the forthcoming elections is to invest."
And he added: "It would be a mistake to assume a wait and see attitude until the
elections." The economic vice-president of the government and minister of economy
and commerce. Juan Antonio Garcia Dies, looked after his own interests at the "Ritz
breakfasts," stating that Spanish business owners and big capital should not run
counter to UCD.

But the comments of Calvo Sotelo and his minister, Garcia Diez, were to be toned
down 2 months later in Logrono, by Luis Olarra, one of the leaders of the Basque
businessmen. After discrediting the PCB [Spanish Communist Party], the arguments-
tive businessman declared: “The issue of P802 is more confused; we don't know
exactly what its course of action will be, but there is an abyss between that and
discrediting it." He added: "It is obvious that investments are not being curtailed
because of fear of a possible Socialist victory; since UCD won 3 years ago and no
confidence has occurred. I doubt that this political group, at least the one which
is now governing us, can do much do extricate us from the situation."

The CEOE secretary general, Jose Maria Cuevas, intensified Olarra's comments. He
said: "The government's credibility is slight among business owners"; and, with
regard to the elections for the Andalucian Parliament, he made the modification
that. "There is no pact for cooperation with either UCD or AP," adding: "About
350 functions will be held by the businessmen; they will attempt to have people
vote and, of course, it must be expected that there will be an attempt to have
those votes go to UCD or AP."

This country's business leaders see it clearly: voting for center and right
options that will uphold free enterprise and the market economy. Their rank and
file are somewhat confused. Hany businessmen think that PSOB too upholds these
principles that are set forth in the Constitution. There is no question that
Andalucia will be the ordeal of fire which Spanish businessmen will have to
endure before undertaking a more serious and concrete commitment toward the
general elections.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

2909

C80: 3110/134

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

POLL SHOWS PSOB PAR AHEAD IN ANDALUSIA
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 5 Apr 82 pp 32. 33
[Article by Jose Manuel Arija]

[Text] The socialists appear to be the big winners in the upcoming regional
elections to the Andalusian parliament. At least this is what is indicated
by all the polls to which this magazine has had access to date. Runner-up
will be the UCD [Democratic Center Union], far behind the P50! [Spanish So-
cialist Workers Party], but still very much ahead of the rest: Andalusists.
Alianzists and Communists. running about equally, although none of them will
get more than 10 percent of the votes.

In any case. two important things are confirmed by the opinion polls: first,
that no party will obtain an absolute majority to govern alone; and second,
that the majority of the Andalusian people will vote for the Left.

According to the Emopublica poll, men are more inclined than women to vote
for the parties of the left-PSOE, PC! [Spanish Communist Party] and PSA
[Socialist Party of Andalusia]. The 060 will receive a higher percentage of
votes from retirees and women and, conversely. from the unemployed, students
and wage-earners who have less confidence in the centrists.

It is significant to note the firm desire of the Andalusian unemployed to
encourage a change in government for their region, doubtless with the firm
hope of improving their situation. Socialists and communists have their
highest index of support among these people.

The Popular Alliance Party has its greatest electoral support among the busi-
ness cosnmnity, and the Andalusists of the PSA also find their largest quotas
among small independent businessmen and students. Professor Clavero's party.
Andalusian Unity, does not appear to have any electoral possibilities. nor
does Blas Pinar's extremist organization. In both cases. only 1 percent of
the people indicated their willingness to vote for them.

According to the Gallup poll, militant Andalusian has Only a limited follow-
ing among the people, with only 28 percent of those surveyed supporting it.
On the other hand, 71 percent feel. for the most part, "just as much Andalu-
sian as Spanish." or more Spanish than Andalusian.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For most of those interviewed in the poll of Andalusian businessmen, however,
this feeling is no obstacle to considering autonomy a positive step. Speci-
fically, according to the Gallup Institute. 50 percent of the people approve
of Rafael Escuredo's administration as president of the Junta, compared to

8 percent opposed.

The really worrisome problem for the political party that wins the regional
parliamentary elections will be that of unemployment. Support for autonomy,
and in large part for the socialists. who are leading in the electoral polls.
is being conceded with the thought that it will help solve the unemployment
problem and create jobs.

For some, this victory weapon could quickly turn into deception and failure
if the winners of the election do not manage to find urgent solutions to this
particular problem. which 96 percent of the Andalusians (in the businessmen's
poll) consider to be the number one issue.

However. the Andalusians will not be thinking only about unemployment when
they go to the polls. They have also formed an overall idea of what a left-
ist, centrist or rightist government means and what it can do for them. If,
in accordance with the actual predictions of the electoral surveys. we trans-
late "left" as socialist. "center" as the party currently in power and "right"
as the Alliance party, we would have a definition of how the Andalusian peo-
ple see the parties and what they expect of their autonomous government.

The Gallup Institute asked the interviewees the following question: "Let us
suppose there is a rightist, leftist or centrist Andalusian government.

which words on this card I am showing you best describe each of these govern-
ments?"

The Left obtained the highest marks in the following categories and in the
order of importance given them: creation of jobs, Andalusian culture, auton-
omy, peace, the future, efficiency and security.

The center was outstanding in the following categories: more taxes, indeci-
sion. strikes and demagogy; and a possible rightist government would be char-
acterized by: domination by traditional upper classes, order and emigration.
In the "firmness" category, Right and Left were tied, and Center and Right
were tied under "corruption."

In addition to the political intention of each voter. the association of
ideas made by the Andalusian between the qualities and defects of each party
because of its ideological position can play a determining role at voting
time.

Now it will depend on the persuasive ability of the different leaders to con-
Vince a doubtful electorate whether some parties will increase their percent-
ages or fall behind. The long campaign which has already begun, with 2 months

remaining before the elections, may serve for that 25 percent of the Andalu-
sians who still "don't know, no answer," to take positions and maintain or

‘0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

change the ratio among the various political forces of that region. "hat is
clear at this stage to all observers is that what happens next 23 May, the

date of the elections, will affect not only Andalusia, but the entire country.
Technical Tally of Polls:

P011 undertaken by the Businessmen's Federation of Andalusia. 3,854 interviews
in Decenber 1981.

anpublica Poll. 1.000 interviews in February 1982.

Gallup, 3.663 interviews in March 1982.

EIJIIIEEE' 29Ué.L I.:ff::::$l)“
~9c71(>;vm 4.30%sz

IJ ~ JR?
mmlunauuanaeas a
"nut...“ “13° " I” gm II an“

"""" a: 2 IIIIIHIII]
---------- _._ . Dunn

   
      

   

El

  

1. For Which Party Hould You Vote?
2. Sex
3. Profession
4. Type of Comunity
5. Men
6. Honen
7. Rage Earners
8. Unemployed
9. Retired
10. Independents
11. Students
12. Housewives
13. Under 2,000 residents
15. 2,000-10.000 residents
15. 10,000-50,000 residents
16. Over 50,000 residents
17. New Force
18. Others
19. Don't know; no answer; would not vote; left blank.

41
FIIICHHHCJAL USEZCﬂﬁlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

How Would You Evaluate Andalusian Autonomy?

Key:
1. Positive 8.
2. "by? 9.
3. More jobs 10.
6. It would solve problems 11.
S. Agrarian and economic 12.
development
6. Self-government 13.
7. No answer 16.

III

 

Don't know
Indifferent
More taxes
Separation

Hould have to pay note (with two

governments)
Negative
Don't know

0f the Following Horde, which Would Beat Describe an Andalusian
Rightist, Leftist or Centrist Government? (Percent)

Bord Left
Strikes 13
Emigration 6
Creation of jobs 62
Indecision 7
Pirmness lb
Andalusian culture 27
Autonomy 27
More Taxes 16
Domination by upper classes 2
Corruption 4
Security 17

[Table continued on following page]

#2

m

16
13
11
21

8

7
10
22
17

9
12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Right

12
17
15
10
16

8

5
21
28

9
15
Key :

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Future 19
Denagogy 5
Peace 21
Order 15
Sf f iciency 17

IV. P6: "hon Would You Vote

 

Result of Andalusian General Elections (1 March 1979)

POLLS
bpresarios Andalusia (December 1981)
Empublica (February 1982)
Gallup (March 1982)

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13
13
13
The Andalusian Peels:

1. Spanish

2. Here Spanish than
Andalusian

3. Spanish as well as
Andalusian

b. More Andalusian than
Spanish

5. Andalusian

6. No Answer

"hen It Is rise to Vote Is
the Candidate's Political
Personality or the Party
Which Be Represents More
laportant:

1. The candidate
2. No answer

3. The political party

Approval or Disapproval of
Escuredo's Administration as
President of the Junta of
Andalusia:

1. No answer
2. Disapproval
3. Approval
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

DDDCRATIC ACTION PARTY POUNDS!) IN MADRID
Madrid CAHDIO 16 in Spanish 5 Apr 82 p 31
[Article by J.A.]

[Text] With the official formation of the Democratic Action Party, Francisco
Fernandez Ordonez last Sunday took the first big step in a profound overhaul-
ing process which presuably will affect the entire spectrua of Right and
Left. with the general elections getting closer any day.

Alnost 600 adherents, neeting over the long weekend at the Hotel Burobuilding
in Madrid, founded the first party to breach the political void caused by the
last elections.

The situation of PAD's [Desocratic Action Party] social delocratic plan. in-
fluenced by the inpossibility of obtaining sufficient financing and its dif-
ficulties in taking over the refornist political space, is forcing its leaders
to continue to hope for a general clarification of the political void, with
one eye on Suarez and the other on the P802 [Spanish Socialist Uorkers Party].

This role was esphasized by a paragraph in the ideological docnent. which
states clearly that ”the PAD can only orchestrate alliances with those forces
which agree on a plan to transfors Spanish society in a progressive way."

In addition, the contradiction between sons of Fernandez Ordonez's statelents
i-edistely after the closing of the coagress, in which he denied the exis-
tence of negotiations with any political force. and the announcement by Ila-on
Tasaaes of the creation of a "progressive" platforn, cowosed of the PAD.
Suarez. Horodo. Puerts and hinself, placed the Deaocratic Action Party's con-
stituent congress in the aidst of a boiling preelectorsl controversy.

Uhite Glove Congress

Responding to this situation were the few strains of a congress led by the
party apparatus with ease and without dirtying its gloves. and in which the
voting resulted almost without exception in 600 votes in favor to about 20
against.

If one had to choose a color. green would sun up perfectly the activities of
the congress whose adherents net in Madrid last weekend.

65
FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY
FINICMNHC]AI.USE¢DNLN

Light green on the shirts of the airline hostesses and the "Yes" posters of

the delegates; a more intense green in the double leaf of the party logo and
in the word "hope." repeated to satiety by the speakers. and finally. green

for the inexperience of some melbers. the majority of whom were making their
political debuts.

In the words of an Asturias delegate: "Here we are, people of about 60 years
of age. who have never been politically active; we make between 1 and 3 mil-
lion pesetas annually. and we are disillusioned with the 0CD [Democratic
Center Union]; but we would not find anything to our liking in the PSOE."

Support for the Government

Looking at it this way. it is logical that one of the delegates asked to have

included in the day's activities a time for the delegates to become acquainted
with each other and to exchange views. something which would have been unusual

in a congress of any other party.

The most tense moments of the 3-day meeting had as their protagonists Javier
Moscoso, who failed in his efforts to share the vice presidency of the party
with Gonzalez Sears, and a paragraph in the program resolution specifying the
party's continued support for Calvo Sotelo in national matters.

Both situations revealed some differences in criterion about the various pos-
sibilities for electoral cooperation.

In this sense. Javier Moscoso asserted in his speech at the closing session:
"There is no room in this party for liberals who mostly want to be American."

Conversely. neither the ideological proposals nor the economic program seemed
to differ seriously from similar ones. beyond some secondary changes.

The resolutions approved define the PAD as a "regenerationist" political con-
cept which seeks to modernize Spanish society based on the defense of a market
economy. opposition to nationalization, reform of the public sector. a special
interest in education and the legalization of abortion under certain circum-

stances.

Likewise. the only slate presented for election. headed by Fernandez Ordonez
and Gonzalez Seara and including the 17 parliamentarians who split a months
ago from the Democratic Center Union. received an overwhelmingly favorable

vote.

In his final speech Francisco Fernandez Ordonez attacked "the right" viru-
lently and described his party's position with regard to political reform as
follows: "Either Spanish democracy is an ambition for change. or it is noth-

ing."
The new party is well served.

8735
080: 3110/123

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OMCIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY IWIOML MAI!

BRIEFS

FRENCH INFORM BRITISH 0N WEAPONS-“Did the 'Prench Connection' send the
'Sheffield' to the botton?" read page one headline of the 9 May SUNDAY TIMES.
The London weekly was asking a grave accusation: that the French Goveth
did not give the British all the necessary information concerning the
Argentines' ability to use the Super-Btendard fighter bo-ber and its Exocet
nissile. The nissile's direct hit deeply shocked the English. L'EXPRBSS is
able to reveal the following facts: Defense Minister Charles Hernu. in
cooperation with his British colleague John Nott. gave the Barrier pilots
the opportunity to train face to face with French Hirages in simlated air
combat above the North Sea. Paris. on the other hand. gave London a precise
and detailed list of French arns deliveries to Buenos Air-es. and in effect
assured the British that the Argentines were not in a position to use the
oncet. According to a French expert, the Argentines apparently received
help free a third party. [Text] [Paris L'mss in French 14-20 May 82

p 91] (COPYRIGHT: 1982 s.a. Groupe Express]

CSO: 3100/658 3m)

MWWMY