FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10080
28 October 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 55/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(F000 55/81)

CONTENTS

POLITICAL

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

FDP's Verheugen Denies Coalition Breakup Imminent
(STERN, 3 Sep 81) .......................................

FRANCE

Pre-Election Poll Analysis: Attitudes, Events, Candidates
(Olivier Duhamel, Jean-Luc Parodi; POUVOIRS, No 18, 1981)

ITALY
Andreotti, Formigoni on DC, Catholic Movements
(Giulio Andreotti, Roberto Pornigoni Interview; PANORAMA,
l6 Sep 81) ..............................................
PSI'a Mancini Criticizes Craxi'a Policies
(Giacomo Mancini Interview; EUROPEO, 28 Sep 81) .........
SPAIN
NATO Entry, Allegedly Supported by Vast Majority, Advocated
(Editorial, Juan Tomas de Salas; CAMBIO l6, 7 Sep 81) ...
Defense Minister Defends NATO Entry
(Alberto Oliart Interview; CAMBIO 16, 14 Sep 81) ........
ECONOMIC
ITALY

Ares Study of Underground Labor Force
(Bruna Bellonzi; IL MONDO, 18 Sep 81) ...................

-a- [III-WE-lSI

[SAID “W” a I l ICE an! V
FORlOFiNCJAI.USE10NLN

Participation in Construction of USSR's Gas Pipeline
(Enrico Nassi; IL HDNDO, 25 Sep 81) .......................

Sugar Production Affected by EEC Ruling
(Cesare Peruzzi; IL HDNDO, 28 Sep 81) .....................

MILITARY

FRANCE

Mediterranean Coast Radar Network's Duties Described
(Robert Holtes; ARHBES D'AUJOURD'HUI, Sep 81) .............

GENERAL

FRANCE
Briefs

New Intelligence Director
SDECE Recruiting Plans

ITALY

Secret Meetings Between PCI, Intelligence Services
(Antonio Carlucci, Corrado Incerti; PANORAHA, 1h 8ep 81) ..

Profiles of New PSI Secretaries Hartelli, Spini
(Enrico Nassi; IL HDNDO. 25 Sep 81) .......................

Profile of Emerging Local PRI Leader Corona
(Paolo Passsrini; IL HDNDO, 25 Sep 81) ....................

- b -

I")! OIHNCJAI.IEHECMVLY
FDP'S VERHEUGEN DENIES COALITION BREAK"? IHHINENT
Hamburg STERN in German 3 Sep pp 128-30
(Article: "The CDU Is Hired in a Bog of lntellectural Sloth"]

[Text] FDP secretary Guenter Verheugen tells in an interview with STERN why the
Social-Liberal coalition will continue to govern in Bonn despite disagreement on the
1982 budget and other differences of opinion.

STERN: Herr Verheugen. the tug of war over the 1982 budget has poisoned the
coalition atmosphere. Is the SPD/FDP alliance breaking up?

Verheugen: I am of a totally different opinion on that point. Never before in the
history of the Federal Republic have so many economies been affected at one time as
in this round of budget cuts. Nonetlzless I would have to say with some self-
criticism that the coaliation has not been able to present this as a success.
Instead, it has managed to talk to death an achievement that it Izd brought about
by joint effort.

STERN: During the budget conferences between the Free and the Social Democrats,
basic differences of opinion emerged clearly. Are the coalition parties about to

split apart?

Verheugen: I am convinced thattheproblema that lie ahead of us cannot be solved
by any better coalition than the Social-Liberal one.

STERN: Which problems are you thinking of?

Verheugen: For example. the problem of creating a new vision of the future for our
younger generation.

STERN: But the common groundsofinterest are growing fewer.

Verheugen: Well, of course these common grounds will be eroded when you put
together an administration program and then achieve it step by step. But it's up
to us to continue to replenish these common grounds. And I see in the new economy
package. for example. a new round of mutual interests.

STERN: Isn‘t more than just a few random mutual interests on policy matters
necessary to maintain a coalition?

1 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Verheugen: It's my opinion that thetwo great tasks of the Social-Liberal
coalition--a policy of peace abroad and reform at home--have not yet been concluded.

STERN: But precisely that peace policy. which until now had been the strongest bond
between the PD? and the SPD. seems at this moment not to have a very high priority
with your party chairman. Foreign Minister Genscher; even in social and economic
policy the FD? appears to be growing closer to the union.

Verheugen: We can hardly grow closer to a vacuum. The CD0 is mired in s bog of
intellectual sloth and has been for years now. This party no longer has the
capacity to take a position on such difficult questions as budget or peace policy.
Their motto is: don't rock the boat and do hope that by some miracle the keys to
power will suddenly fall into their hands.

STERN: Perhaps this is what will happen.
Verhcugen: That can and will never happen.

STERN: Then how do you explain to us what you and the FD? leadership have been
doing over the past few weeks? Opinion surveys were circulated according to which
a change to coalition with the Union was seen as a possibility without endangering
its existence. The coalition was strained to the breaking point by PD? demands.
Has all this just tactics?

Verheugen: The operations of the FD? have been misunderstood by many people as
maneuvers directed againsttheSPD. In fact it was we who demanded and pushed
through the necessary change of course toward greater economy. That was to create
the fiscal basis for any further joint action. As far as this affected the voters.
it was directed instead at the Union. because in that way we became the standard
bearers of hope for the liberal fraction of the C90 voters. The breach that had
been made into the CDU voter potential at the Bundestag elections of 1980 is what we
wanted to make permanent. what is at stake for the PD? is whether it reverts to a
woebegoneparliamentaryexistence of whether it remains a strong liberal force.

STERN: The shifting«)fthe FDP has been explained in some quarters as rising from
the fear of the Green and Alternative groups' becoming a fourth parliamentary force
in the federation and in the states. and that the party is trying to link up with
the Union before it's too late.

Verheugen: I am convinced that a fourth party cannot be averted by such petty
tactical maneuvering as a change in coalition. The real response to the Green and
Alternative groups lies not in coalition juggling or blackboard exercises but
rather in political substance. Which means that we have to pursue policies which
will capture the confidence of these voters in the seriousness of our efforts for a

better environment and the struggle for peace and disarmament.

STERN: Do you mean thatyouhave already written off the Green vote and surrendered
it to the SPD's efforts at its integration?

Verheugen: The FDP would probably have very little luck if it tried to do two
things at once; on the one hand, to compete with the SPD for those marginal voters
who tend to the Green group and. on the other hand. to compete with the CDU for

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
those marginal voters who have settled in the middle. Of course we will continue

trying to appeal to those voters sympathetic to the Green cause who are not drawn
to the left wing of the SPD. But for the sake of the Social-Liberal coalition. it
would make more sense if the PDP were to succeed in making permanent the breach it
has driven into the voting potential of the major opposition party. That does not
mean thatwehave taken the bait of the Union's program.

STERN: Would you go along with the Chancellor in saying to the Union. we don't
need you? ~-

Verheugen: The SPD and the EDP. naturally . mat take account of an unseen third
party at the coalition table during their discussions. Because the CD” and the

CSU hold a majority in the Bundesrat, we must always ask ourselves what is possible
and what is not...

STERN: ...and at the back door to negotiate with this "unseen third party"?

Verheugen: The SPD and thebe have agreed that neither party will negotiate with
the opposition behind the back of the other. He must confront the Union majority
in the Bundesrat with a united and firm will and not let one of us be played off
against the other.

STERN: The saying goes that after a long marriage the partners grow to look more
like each other every year.

Verheugen: It is important to me that in our coalition the partners keep their
identities for all to see. The SPD has been attempting to do that for years and.

I must say. more consistently than we have. And they are able to do it because they
have a party chairman who is able to maneuver rather comfortably outside the

constraints of his party.
STERN: That probably irritates you?

Verheugen: I wouldn't say that. The SPD chairman has very often articulated Social
Democrat policy quite beyond the everyday policy carried out by the coalition.

STERN: Is that a veiled reproach?

Verheugen: We have never thrown that up as a reproach to him. But by the same
token. no one should reproach us for defining our principles outside the bounds of

administrative policy. This is how parties remain distinguishable from each other
for their voters. what is decisive for the coalition will always be the willingness
to come to a compromise.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Gruner + Jahr & Co.

9878
C50: 3103/440

3
FOR OFIWCJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
PRE-ELECTION POLL ANALYSIS: ATTITUDES, EVENTS, CANDIDATES
Paris POUVOIRS in French No 18, 1981 pp 159-176

[Article by Olivier Duhamel and Jean-Luc Parodi: "Chronicle of Public 0pinion--the
Evolution of Voting Intentions, a Contribution to Analysis of the 1981 Presidential
Election"!

[Text] The analyses of Francois Hitterrand's election to the presidency of the re-
public are only beginning. The election campaign must doubtlessly be included among
the explanatory factors. since, 6 months before the second round, Valery ciscard
d'Estaing was credited with 60 percent of the intended votes on the assumption of a
duel with his future Socialist opponent (see Footnote lb below). Examination of the
pre-election polls therefore makes it possible to evaluate the shifts that occurred
among the French voters and to attempt to understand them better. The mass of in-
formation in this area is considerable. During the 7-year period, nearly 80 voting-
intention polls were published, in addition to which there are many political indi-
cators (expressions of victory hopes, predictions, images of the leaders, policy
balance-sheets, candidates' capacities for solving the problems, etc) that could
supplement analysis of the changes that came about.

Four innovations characterized this campaign, from the point of view of the public-
opinion polls. First of all, its duration, since without even taking into account
the various "hypothetical presidential elections" of the first half of the 7-year
term, it was in Autumn 1979--that is. a year and a half before the election--that
the series of pre-election surveys began.l This long duration is unprecedented un-
der the Fifth Republic, since in 1965, pre-election polls were still a novelty, and
in 1969, as well as 1974, the unforeseen character of the presidential elections had
kept down the number of surveys. This is what explains the appearance, alongside
the big polling institutes-~1FOP [French Public Opinion Institute}, SOFRES [French
Opinion Poling Company}. Harris-France--of some less big ones-~Public SA, lndice
Opinion--that were sometimes to attract the attention of the Polls Commission.2 The
Polls Commission is the third innovation of the campaign, and its action merits a
study to itself, though this is ruled out by the sire of the present chronicle.
Finally, what was done for the first time in France by L. Harris-France for L'EX-
PRESS, the panel survey (repeated survey of the same sample), published under the
title "L'EXPRESS's Samples,"3 made it possible to follow very closely the voters'
shifts and the reasons for their changes.“

A previous chronicle devoted to all the "hypothetical presidential elections" of the

first 5 years of the 7-year term5 brought out the predominance of the central candi-
dates in the first rounds and the slight Giscardian lead in the second rounds, while

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the same time revealing a greater fluidity of voting choices. In order to under-
stand the final outcome of the election of IO Hay 1981, it is thus helpful to deter-
mine the major phases of the evolution noted since that time. to examine the rup-
tures that occurred at a key moment (beginning of 1981). to go into the mobilization
of the electorates by the peripheral candidates (Chirac, Harchais) and its limits,
and finally, to decipher the second round, which was determined above all by the
first.

1. The General Evolution of Voting Intentions for the First Round: from ciacard'a
Hegemony to Hitterrand'a Breakthrough

Three stages in this l.S-year campaign can be distinguished (Graph 1).

 
   

’.,$l on a ad I
32 .— -:'.: '8... 2! ”it we‘ll: 23".:
”It
so
‘0 a
a n
V. Glacavd ”
wEnaM' :7 '
36 at
\K
x damn
30 I m ( I )
a
\\\ andt_
20.!
25 ”’ gun
a:
Fnlmnauand
20
:o
‘48.
G.Marehala ”
a
15 “:1“.
a u o
ape-3" \. I, ’0’.
‘0 J.Chltac 1K ’9"
O
(2) \.\. ‘I.
Ecologist” ILannda) ‘73::
o---o----o---o...°.~‘/;; 7.3“
’a' m‘ \
s 5! ro-\0---o.
moms A, ‘° gm.
. ‘g-M
’ 3 Ann
1

Graph l--£volution of voting intentions (IFOP) during the 18 months preceding the
presidential election
Key:
1. Results for metropolitan France
2. Ecologists
l--Up to December 1980, Ciscard had more than 35 percent of intended votes, and Hit-
terrand less than 20 percent. The president dominated the first secretary of the
Socialist Party, who was always ahead of the peripheral-party candidates: Geullista
and Communists topped out at around 15 percent. Michel Debre ran almost equal with
Jacques Chirac.

2--Between December 1980 and February 1981, everything turned topsy-turvy: ciscard
d'Estaing fell sharply, Hitterrand went up spectacularly, Chirac collapsed, Debre
sank, and only Harchais stagnated.

3--Between February and April 1981, the new power relationships stabilized, though
there was a mobilisation of the Gaullist electorate by Jacques Chirac. The move-
ments are more complicated to grasp because of the disparity between the voting in-
tentions expressed by poll and the results. However, that may be, no upheaval oc-
curred in the last 2 months except for Cbirac's catching up to Marchais. The key to
the first round--that is, to the election--seems clearly to be at the beginning of
the year.

11. The Turning-Point of the Campaign, the Crisis of the Beginning of 1981

The reversals affected several indicators and expressed the double trend that was to
make the Socialist victory possible: the nonrejection of Hitterrand, despite the
fact that he enjoyed little popularity at the beginning of the campaign, and the re-
jection of Giscard d'Estaing, even though he was well-positioned at the outset.

The essential phenomenon occurred as early as February 1981. Let us be specific.
The Giscardian hegemony had been weakened earlier, by a normal phenomenon that had
already occurred in 1965 for General de Gaulle. As the election approached, [the
presidential validity dimmedl, the incumbent president was affected by the competi-
tion, became one candidate among others, and tended to fall back on his partisan
electorate. Actually, the phenomenon had been quite a bit stronger in 1965, but it
did not affect the general's success, because his starting level was particularly
high. If one makes a few adjustments6 in order to accentuate the parallel, the two
voting-intention curves show three periods-or better, a sizable drop preceded and
followed by a relative stability.

In the first round in 1965, de Gaulle obtained a result intermediate between his
presidential electorate and his parliamentary electorate. Giscard d'Estaing found

himself in the same position in 1981.

Starting from a lower position, though (from the near-equilibriun of the left and
the right), he could not help but fail. In both cases there was an incapacity to
preserve a "legitimist" electorate--that is, one disposed to vote for the president
at a given moment--and the obtaining of a first-round result midway between a legit-
imist electorate and a partisan electorate.

It remains that the Gaullist dropoff resulted from the discovery of the competition
with the election campaign of 1955, whereas the entire Ciscardian 7-year term was
subject to the rhythm of the dual (split) bipolarization. It was therefore normal
for its starting-point to be lower, and indispensable to halt the fall in 1981.
lnversely, the gradual disintegration became rejection, precisely when Jacques
Chirac's campaign began. If this February rupture had to be dated precisely, it

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Graph 2--The evolution of voting intentions (SOPRES): percentage in relation to
all persons questioned--The Giscardian nonmobilization

Key:
1. Undecided
‘IOO .‘II‘
”5
“asst Haa- Mass at. "‘ ‘ I h “
70 s: ‘0
so “~.¢’ as ....-::\\\
as
so \ 3° ._.
C
‘0 des"~.!” as as .u
so 3°
Graph 3--de Caulle's dropoff in 1965 Graph 6--Giscard's dropoff in l981

 

could be pinpointed at the end of the first week of February: just after the an-
nouncenent of Jacques Chirac's candidacy (2 February) at the time of the RPR Con-
gress that confirmed it (7 February).7

Not everything began in February. An initial phase wound up, among the Socialists,
on 8 November with the effacement oi Michel Rocard in favor of Francois Hitterrand.
The conclusion of this long quarrel was exceptionally fast and easily digested.
After a long stagnation, Mitterrand began his climb from the end of 1980. Thus,
just the fact of Michel Rocard's leaving the competition won him 9 points in the
indicator of first-round hope: (IPOP, November: 8 percent; IPOP, Decenber: 17 per-
cent). He knew how to let it work as if by itself, with a "tranquil force"9 and a
strategy of absence or. at least, of discretion, so as to polarize in his direction
the rejection of the "outgoing candidate": refusal to participate in the big tele-
vision broadcasts before nid-Harch, and his trip to China in February 1981, pre-
cisely when he reached his apogee.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65 9: g‘
\
Conﬂsnss
5° tosses
(2)
45 u
‘0 Satisislsa “'
[FOP
(3)
3, huenﬂonsds
vote ‘9' tom
SOFRES
(A)
no
Soon-m elusive
SOFRIS
2, (5)

Key. Graph S--The stages of the Giscardian fall
1. 2nd-round voting intentions-~SOFRES
2. Confidence--SOPRES
3. Satisfied-~1FOP
A. lat-round voting inetentions-SOFRES
5. Victory hopes--SOPR£S

—______—_.—____——————-_——————_

Valery Ciscard d'Estaing's drop between Autumn 1980 and Spring 1981 did not occur
uniformly. It was steeper in the most Giscardian social categories--except for the
fact that it affected men and women equally. Otherwise, the Giscardian "minorities"
remained so (except for young people and workers). whereas the Giscardian "majori-
ties" weakened (except for the elderly and the inactive).

These changes did not come about to the benefit of a single candidate. They were
not equitably distributed among those candidates in whose favor the voting inten-
tions went up (Hitterrand and Chirac). except for middle-level managerial personnel
and white-collar workers and those in the 25-34 age group. For the rest, the wage-
earners went over massively to the Socialist candidate, and the independent produc-
ers. to Jacques Chirac.

Ill. Chirac. Marchais: the Unequal Mobilization of Their Potential Electorate

The Communist setback is the only characteristic of the first round-—and the most
important one--that deviates considerably from the published voting intentions; the
last ptE-election polls forecast only a two-point (SOFRES-Harris) or a three-point
(IFOP) setback. 3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table lr-The Outgoing President's 1st Round: between the Legitimist Electorate and
the Parliamentary Electorate

 

Parliamentary Legitinist lat-Round
Electorate Electorate Llesult
Charles de Gaulle 1965

18 November 1962 end-October 1965 5 Deccwer 1965

UNR «9 R1 [*1 Voting intentions: de Gaulle 1:
361 661 M1
Valery Giacard d'Eataing 1981
12 March 1978 January 19801 26 April 1981
U0? Voting intentions: VGB X:
21.52 (001 281

l. ll-‘OP/LE POINT. Another possible reference: voting intentions just after the
legislative election of March 1978: V03, 42! (soms. 20-30 March 1978. "France
de Gauche, Vote e Droite" [France of the Left, Voting on the Right], FNSP Ne-
tional Political Sciences Federation] Press, 1981, p 261).

[*1 UNR: Union for the New Republic
RI: Independent Republicans

 

Table 2--'l'he Sociological Diversification of the Giacardian Fall (in 1)

 

- 26 April
(SOFRES) Oct 10-13 Kpril vote
1980 1981 (post-election) Gap
1 2 3 1/3
Total 36 28 28 - 8
Categories of most faithful .
18-24 years of age 23 23 23 --
Farmers, farm workers, workers 23 210 18 - 5
35-49 years of age 32 25 27 - 5
50-64 years of age 36 27 28 - 8
Unfaithful categories
Small nerchants, artisans 46 32 35 - 9
Middle-level managerial, white-collar 26 22 17 - 9
25-34 years of age 27 20 16 -ll
65 and older 60 66 #8 ~12
Upper managerial, industrialists,
liberal professions, big merchants 38 27 26 -llo

Inactive , retired 56 lol 35 -l9
Table 3-rThe Categoriesixluhich Jacques Chirac Gained Votes during the Campaign (2)

- In the categories not mentioned, there was no significant movement (change of
1 point or less) -

 

 

(SOFRES) l 2 3 1/3
25-35 years of age 12 12 18 + 6
35-49 " " " la 18 20 + 6
50-66 " " " ll 26 26 +13
Socio-occupational class

Middle management. white-collar 12 15 18 + 6
Inactive 9 19 16 + 7
Farmers 23 b0 36 *13
Small merchants 13 26 29 +16
Industrialists. upper management 12 20 36 +26

 

Table 4--The Categories in Which Francois Hitterrand Gained Votes during the Can-
paign (I)

- In the categories not mentioned. there was no significant movement (change of
3 points or less) -

 

 

(sornss) l 2 3 1/3

25-34 years of age 19 3h 27 ' t 9

65 and older 13 1h 28 +15
Socio-occupational class

Middle management, white-collar 25 27 29 + 4

Workers 25 26 33 + 8

Inactive 14 18 25 all

There is an explanation for this disparity. The custonary underestimation of the
Communist vote in the pre-election polls leads the public-opinion institutes to make
some corrections.lo

But this corrective mechanism is by definition somewhat "conservative," reproducing
power relationships from previous elections. Up to the present, this conservative
effect of the corrections has improved the quality of the pre-election polls, for
the French electorate--and especially the Communist electorate--is very stable. But
when a movement of broad scope appears, the corrections can contribute to underesti-
mation of it. In this sense,theCommunist setback could have appeared as a "fail-
ure" of the polls. But explanation of it and the "success" of the other indications
permit the use of the pre-election polls to threw light on the evolution of the
Communist electorate in the 1981 presidential election. Examination of the victory
hopes (Graph 6) shows the downward trend of Georges Harchais (3 points, on the aver-
age. in the final 6 months) and the upward trend of Hitterrand. Moreover, it was
possible for the Communist voters' propensity to vote for the latter to be rein-
forced by belief in the "Chirac effect."

10

FOR OFFICIAI.lEHE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
   
  

”I!
12:: Miss- Muk HI- tlaavs Olms- "sll. It...
as
hump“ f “ - us
Innsnund
30
25 2-1.8
20 M
II
I)
IS ‘
M u"
Sounshs (l)
Georg. Marchsis
'0

Graph 6-—Intentions and hopes (SOPRES): the indicator hopes complementing the

Key: voting intentions

l. Hopes 2. Voting intentions
.__________________________.___________________________________________.“_____.

The "Chirac effect": the expression blossomed in the last week of the first-round
campaign. It signified that Jacques Chirac was experiencing a continual ascent.
which, according to his warmest supporters, was to get him into the second round.

In this first sense. the Chirac effect is easy to register--within its proper lim-
its. Chirac succeeded, during the first 6 months of 1981, in mobilizing [an] elec-
torate. In 1980 it peaked at around 10 percent (and even earlier, in 1976-1979, was
between 10 and 15 percent); but it progressed regularly until 26 April. At no time
could any survey suggest that he would get into the second round, even if it was

possible for that campaign argument to be used to the advantage of the two central
blocs.

It remains to ask about the other "Chirac effect"--the most important one in effect
on the final result. Analysis of the polls does not make it possible to settle
everything, but it does force one observation: /Jacques Chirac mobilized voters who
refused to vote for V. Giscard d’Bstaingl. here, an instrument for measurement over
a 1-year period is available. From October 1979 to October 1980, the uncertainty of
the candidacies led the polling institutes to question the voters on several hypo-
theses in the same survey--some with a Chirac candidacy, the others without. The
six IFOP surveys agreed: the total score for the right was always maximal with Chi-
rac, and the total score for the left was maximal without him. The hypotheses with
and without Michel Debre even made it possible to establish this law: that the in-
tended-vote total in favor of the right is higher in proportion to the number of
candidates of the right.12 But were these voters picked up in the first round or
won over to the right? Could they have been? Chirac indisputably won over voters

11

IN)R (HHHCIAL lﬂﬂltﬂﬂly
who refused to vote for Giscard. But did he attenuate or accentuate this rejection?
Has he forced to axpress it in order to rally this electorate? Might he have mobi-
lized them further in favor of Giscard in the second round? This is a political
question that calls for political answers, but it is one on which some light is
thrown by study”of the vote shifts between the two rounds.

IV. Second Round: the Three Variables of Francois Hitterrand's Success

The second rounds of a presidential election depend on the relationship of forces in
the first round, the shifts of votes by those who voted for the eliminated candi-
dates, and mobilization of the undecided voters. The evolution of the Giscard-

Hitterrand duels in the course of the campaign results from the combined interaction
of these three elements.

From 1974 to 1979, the hypothetical second rounds showed, as we have seen, a slight
Giscardian dominance (except at end-1976/beginning-l977) and gaps between victor and
vanquished that never exceeded six points. At the end of 1979, though, and through-
out 1980, these differences were accentuated, up to a 22-point gap in the IFOP sur-
very of March 1980. Everything indicated that the competition on the left between
the two possible Socialist candidates, Michel Rocard and Francois Hitterrand, was
dividing or disturbing their potential electorate and was indirectly benefiting
Ciscard d'Estaing13, whose dominance was further strengthened by the number of unde-
cided. In this sense, it was less that the right was strong than that the left was
poorly mobilised.

ms mo ”7‘

.M It” Ilsa ans- 3-21 at“. ..t "h In. W“ D'-

(L)*.ﬂ::°“ M .M a“. m ‘0“ :h 1* m - ”

ass mono.“ «
“ voices semi».

  

u a a: s:
so

,1

:o

as u "

Graph 7--Evolution of second-round voting intentions (IPOP): the Hitterrand
mobilization
Key:
1. Percentage of total surveyed

12

[WIRIOFFICIAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ending of the competition and the Giscardian winter of 1980-1981 were to bring
about a gradual rebsiancing resulting both in a better mobilization on the left and
a vote-shift crisis on the right. Systematic comparison of first-round and second-
round voting intentions (SOFRES), recalculated in relation to the total number of
persons surveyed (thereby making it possible to take the undecided, and therefore
the mobilization phenomena, into account), enables us to find again the breakaway
produced by the mobilization of February.

 
      
         

ms mo W
”lulu-non basal-s: “album-I21.”
80

Francois Mlﬂouond
7° (as tour) ( l)

‘0 n ‘I ‘1
60 57 57 '7
50
to .o“\‘
9“ I. ~

.I...‘Q..~.-'" . o‘.~Y"’O Q“~.“

3° Nssspnmumcsnrsss ‘gk
(2) N,‘

20 e“

V. Glsosrd d'Estslng \‘

(2' low) ( 1 ) _ ‘s

w
I—.
_._.’.—'
7 ’W ‘ 3 I I
0
Graph 8--Evolution of vote-shift intentions of Georges Harchais's voters: return

to the unitary dynamic (IFOP)

1. 2nd round 2. Undecided
._________________________________________________________________________

Key:

From September to January, the percentage of second-round responses was, as usual, a
little higher than that of the first round: Mitterrand was still getting more votes
in the second round than the total of votes for candidates of the left in the first
round, and the same was the case on the right for Giscard d’Estaing, with both of
them winning over first-round ecologist and undecided voters. The phenomenon re-
versed in February: the response rate, which grew spectacularly for first-round in-
tentions, did not change for the second round, and the voters who declared them-
selves only Eor the second round were not sufficient to counterbalance the hesitant
voters for those eliminated in the first round. It was also in February that the

"victory hOpes" in favor of Hitterrand exceeded those in favor of Giscard d'Bstaing
for the first time.

In this regard one notes, though, as election day approached, a return to the bipo-
lar logic as expressed by the vote-shift improvement in both camps.

But this spectacular return among usrchais's voters from 56 percent (in December
1980) to 84 percent in April l98l--up to that time they had only oscillated between
voting for Hitterrand and being undecided-~was far less sharp than with Chirac's

l3

FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE(MULY
voters, who went from 56 percent in January 1981 to 71 percent in April, but with
nearly as many of them prepared to go over to the left in the second round.

‘00!
‘Emmﬁuﬂuhmmsﬂm

V. Olsesvd d'Estsins n

   

 
   

so
(2910“!)
um» ”
79 7°
70 I “
a a
.0 a
so u
to
so No so ,mnt pas
( 2 ) I‘. ..A\ 2’
a I..-..-o-oo*oo.olooso‘l.'
w
en“... Mmensnd
o me now! (1)

Graph 9--Evolution of vote-shift intentions among Chirac's voters (IFOP): the rise
of a Chirac opposition

1. 2nd round 2. Undecided

Key:

 

Francois Mitterrand's reascent to the point where the second-round voting intentions
reversed to his advantage on the eve of the electionl“ thus appears to be the result
of the three factors mentioned above: gradual mobilization of the Socialist elector-
ate, the slight overall advance by the left in the first round, and the regularly
improving shifts from the Communist electorate and the shift nearly maintained once
it was won over from Chirac's electorate.

Six principal points emerge from this analysis--which, we should keep in mind, has
involved only voting intentions and has scarcely taken the internal structures into
account at all:

--The polls, an irreplaceable and imperfect instrument: in the last analysis, the
pre-elections polls did evaluate the hierarchy of the candidates correctly, with the
equilibrium within the right perceived clearly and the lesser candidates properly
gauged, but with the Harchsis-Hitterrand relationship measured inexactly. A better
indicator of the direction of movements than of their intensity, they proved superi-
or to all the talk based on other indexes (letters to the candidates, participation
in meetings, etc): what dimensions would the "Chirac effect“ (or the Harchais ef-
fect) have taken an without them?

--A three-stage election campaign: the apparent Giscardian preponderance of 1980.
which a refined retrospective analysis shows to have been more the indirect and tem-
porary consequence of the Rocard-Mitterrand confrontation; then the deéciscardization
of the beginning of 1981; and finally the campaign proper, with its unequal mobiliz-
ation of the potential electorates.

lb

FOR‘OFHK]A1.USE¢DNLY
INJR OFFICIAI.USII(NNLY

--The Communists' long-standing weakness as regards presidential voting intentions:
a complete review of Communist voting intentions since 1974 shows an oscillation
that varies between 12 percent and 20 percent but that is always lower, in its best
results, than the Communist score for legislative elections. This regular inferior-
ity gives a certain force to the thesis that the specificity of the presidential
election would be rather unfavorable to the PCP.

--The Chirac campaign, as a simple expression or aggravation of the rejection of the
incumbent president: the first-round Chirac voters who abandoned the right in the
second round either by staying away or by voting for Hitterrand indisputably had a
strong effect on the final outcome. Did the opposition theme of the Chirac campaign
push them toward that shift? Would they have voted for Hitterrand from the first
round if chirsc had not been a candidate or if he had shown himself to be more in
conformity with the majority tradition? The question deserves to be raised; quanti-
tative analysis is not sufficient for answering it.

--The sanctioning of a policy more than the choosing of a man: to the end, the per-
sonal image of Giscard d'Estaing remained, in most of its dimensions (attractive-
ness, competence, etc), Superior to that of Hitterrand. Giscard d'Estaing, a good
candidate showing a poor balance-sheet, was to have to yield to Hitterrand, who was
not prevented by his less favorable but well-managed image from incarnating moderate
change.15 This outcome is a challenge to the oft-asserted propositions about the
personalization of the presidential election.

--In which the event exceeds its immediate causes: in many respects, the presiden-
tial decision of 10 Hay thus appears to be the result of shifting of the splits,
with the Giscard/anti-Giscard opposition winning out over the left-right confronta-
tion. It would seem to have been less a victory for Hitterrand than the defeat of
Giscard d'Estaing. But what is true of the uncmmmitted voters who decided the elec-
tion is no less true for the far more numerous voters who permitted it, and the vic-
tory-satisfaction index—-the h'5hest for a long timal6--as well as the demonstra-
tions that accompanied the announcement of the outcome show clearly enough that the
event of 10 May immediately took on another significance. Giscard's defeat became
the victory of the left, which has not finished restructuring French political life.

FOOTNOTES

1. The first of the IFOP/LE POINT pre-election polls was published in December
1979; the Public SA/PARlS-HATCB series began in October; and the SOPRES/FIGARO
and Harris/L'EXPRESS series did not begin until later (September 1980).

2. He shall use here only the polls done by the big institutes or those whose re-
sults we have been able to check personally. The IFOP published a total of 11
voting-intention surveys before 10 Hay 1981; SOFRES, 8; L. Harris-France, 6;
Public SA, 23; and Indice Opinion, 5.

3. Since the Polls Commission criticized the idea of publication of the voting in-
tentions of this panel because of the size of the sample, the weekly’s readers
were deprived of the most interesting part of that survey.

6. See in particular Roland Cayrol, "Those Floating Voters," L'EXPRBSS, 18 April
1981.
'15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

F0!‘DFFKJA1.USE(MVLY

See that chronicle, "Waiting for 1981: the Hypothetical Presidential Elections
(197b-l979)," POUVOIRS, No 12, 1st Quarter 1980, pp 180-189.

Elimination of differences relating to time: the phenomenon is noted in 5 weeks
in 1965, and in 6 months in 1980-1981. Attenuation of the differences relating
to the scope of the phenomenon: by doubling the scale of the votes cast for
VGE, one obtains two quite symmetrical curves.

The IFOP survey carried out from 17 January to 7 February (January in the
tables and graphs published here) does not record this rupture. It is, how-
ever, grasped by the SOFRES survey of 6-12 February and the Harris survey of
9-14 February.

Cf Jean-Luc Parodi and Pascal Perrineau, "F. Hitterrand and H. Rocard: 2 Years
of Competition in the Arena of Public Opinion," POUVOIRS, No 12, 2nd Quarter
1980, pp 189 ft, and Olivier Duhamel, "The Socialist Party,“ ENCYCLOPEDIA UNI-
VERSALIS, UNIVERSALIA, 1980, pp 26 ff, and 1981, p 226 ff.

The slogan of his second series of posters, widely picked up by his partisans
and opponents to symbolize his campaign.

The mechanism is as follows. The samples are made up of sociological groups
(by age, sex, place of residence, socio-occupstional category). At the same
time as las published] the persons questions are asked to cast their vote in a
ballot box, they reply to a whole series of questions, including one about
their vote in the preceding elections, and another on their partisan prefer-
ence. The breakdown of a survey reveals political biases as between the sample
and what is known about the electorate (for example, 10 percent declared they
had voted Communist in 1978, whereas the figure was 20 percent). The results
should therefore be corrected on the basis of these biases; in the absence of
such correction, the polls would be false--and would have been very false in
the past.

Paradoxically, the rise of Chirac was used by Giscard d' Estaing and by Hitter-
rand' s partisans to appeal for a "useful vote" and not to run the risk of pre-
venting s left-vs-right second round.

Table 5--A Chirac Effect: Retention of an Electorate Which, without His
Candidacy, Would Vote for a Candidate of the Left (IPOP)

Oct-Nov 1979 January 1980 April 1980
Without With Without With Without With
Chirac Chirac Chirac Chirac Chirac Chirac

 

Total of voting intentions.
for the right 51 45 52 46 52

Sizes-she JS£S= I.III-I...CDC-"ISL-I-In—III-2§Im.ﬁimnzi-IIII32...-
J 1980 A t 1980 No emb 1980
W1th::: W1th Witﬁgut With W1‘tlhou:r H1tﬁ

Chirac Chirac Chirac Chirac Chirac Chirac

 

Total of voting intentions:
for the right 47 52 50 S3 50 51.5
for the left 35 33 33 31 36 34

 

One notes, though, that Chirac's gain diminished as the election approached.

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
13.

14.

15.

F!"l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂVLY

See, in this regard, the analysis by Jean Charlot, PS, "The Duel Has Troubled
the Voter," LE POINT, 17 November 1980: "Of every 100 Socialist voters in the
1978 legislative elections, about 40 came back under the party's discipline in
Novenher 1980 and were ready to vote impartially for either Hitterrand or Ro-
card. But 12 agreed to vote only for Hitterrand, while 10 would vote only for
Rocard; 11 no longer knew which to vote for, and 27 left the Socialist family--
either to the right or to the left or to abstention, but in any case, outside
it.... aocard's voters, who were anti-Hitterrand in the first round, presented
the risk of cruelly failing the PS first secretary in the second round: only

25 percent would plan to vote for Hitterrand, 36 percent said they would vote
for Giscard, and 61 percent "did not know."

Table 6--Evolution of Second-Round Voting Intentions

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 1 1 s 1 LB? 1
11/1979 1/1980 4/1980 4/1980 6/1980 8/1980
V05 57 60 61 57 6o 55 61
PM 43 4o 39 43 4o 45 39
NSPP [*1 (28) (30) (33) (19) (32) (20) (25)
s L"? 1 s 188 s I
10/1980 10/1980 10/1980 11/1980 12/1980 12/1980
v08 57 53 60 59 58 56 54
FM 43 41(sic140 41 42 44 46
8588 (25) (20) (30) (24) (21) (20) (32)
5 LR? 1 5 LE? 1 s
1/1981 1/1981 1/1981 2/1981 2/1981 3/1981 3/1981
VGE 51 51 53 48 so 51 so
PM 49 49 47 52 50 43lsicl so
nspp (23) (22) (29) (21) (20) (20) (21)
LHF s 1 L“? 1
3/1981 3/1981 4/1941 4/1981 4/1981 __
V65 52 50 48.5 50 48.4
88 48 50 51.5 so 51.5
NSPP (18) (19) (16) (17) (16)

 

I - IFOP; s ' SOPRES; LHP - Louis Harris-France.

[*1 [undecided]

 

As is evidenced by the spectacular but late-coming rise in his stock, in the
SOFRES barometer, from 32 percent in November (20-26) and 35 percent in Decen-
ber (22—30) to 40 percent in January (23-29), 44 percent in February (20-26).
and 55 percent in March (20-24). See Jean-Luc Parodi and Olivier Duhanel,
"Profile of the Year (September l980-August 1981), POUVOIRS, No 19, hth Quarter
1981 (to be published).

'17

F0310FFHJA1.USE(NVLY
I13lIOI1NCJA1.Ih§E2(ﬂVLY

16. Rather satisfied with result, 53 percent; rather dissatisfied, 30 percent
(SOFRES post-election survey, LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR, 1 June 1981). In 1978,
rather satisfied, 51 percent; rather dissatisfied, 35 percent. In 1974, rather
satisfied. 46 percent; rather dissatisfied, #0 percent.

COPYRICRT: Presses Universitaires de France, 1981

11267
CSO: 3100/958

' l8

INDRIOIWHCJAI.IEHB(NWLY
ANDREOH‘I, POMIGONI W m. CATHOLIC mama's
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 1‘ Sop 81 pp 40-‘6

[Interviews with Giulio Andreotti, DC [Christian Democratic Party] leader, and
Roberto Formigoni, Popular Movement leader, by Claudio Sabelli Pioretti and Chiara
Valentini: ”God Help Us“: dates and places of interviews not given]

[Text] For its renovation, the DC has opened its doors to the
new dissenters of Christian mold. But will the Christian
stormers change the DC or the DC the Christian stormers? Giulio
Andreotti and Roberto Pornigoni express their views.

Guitars, sleeping bags, enthusiasm and new ideas. At Rimini for the great coming
together of CL [Communion and Liberation] and its political arm, Popular Movement,
100,000 Catholics celebrated the birth of a new association of the Christian mold.
Almost at the sane time, at Trento, the old Christian democratic leaders were once
again running through the tineworn rites of their Priendship Festival: The same
old faces, the same old corridor intrigues, the same old back-stabbings between
factional leaders. A couple of hundred or so members, looking as if they were
doing their duty, listened listlessly to debates that were unattended by the mass
public.

Two quasi-inconnmnicable worlds suddenly found a point of contact on the morning

of Sunday 30 August , when a succint communique from the DC leadership, meeting
at Trento, announced, without any particular emphasis, what was in reality

a resounding decision. The DC called upon five outsiders, ”bringing with then
social and cultural experiences foreign to the Dc," to be part of a ls-member
connittee charged with preparing the party reconstituent assembly. Foremost
among those invited was none other than the undisputed leader of Rimini's youth,
Roberto Formigoni, 32, head of the Popular Movement. And just as suddenly, the
debate was joined: Many Catholics began to look upon the DC, although with notable
distrust, as a distinct possibility not foreign to their own world. The more
attentive Christian democrats, for their part, sensed the possibility that finally
the climate may have changed and that for young Italians the crucifix could become
what Nao's little red book meant to then 10 years ago. A golden opportunity for
those who, engaged in the difficult operation of restoring the house of the Dc,
have suddenly sensed the existence of possible new approaches. Conella showed up

19

lﬂﬂllﬂﬂWCJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a behavioral code for the good Christian duocrat. Other leaders pulled
letters of accusation, memorandum and plans frat desk drawers. The thorniest
issue seemed to be the one being brought forward, discreetly and cautiously, by
Giulio Andreotti: The crushing defeat of the last congress. Together with some
ten university members, Andreotti has drawn up a proposal of his own. Christian
democrats and Catholics are therefore now about to meet. Giulio Andreotti and
Roberto Formigoni are the two figures through whom PARORAHA has sought to dis-
cover what may take place.

Andreotti: Let Them Come To Us
DC Leader Angles Several Baits and Warnings

[Question] Are you convinced, Honorable Andreotti, that the DC can be renovated,
that it can be reconstituted?

[Answer] I am strongly opposed to the use of those terms “renovation” and 'recon-
stitution.‘ They seem to me highly presusptuous and misdirected with reference to
a party that certainly is not just starting out from scratch. Above all, what the
DC needs is updating. It must be brought into alignment with our basic principles
which are again being looked up to by many people. Suffice it to cite those of
economic pluralism and private initiative, which have been rediscovered today even
by Berlinguer.

[Question] In response to the ferment of the new Catholic groups, your party has
chosen an approach that they did not expect. You have actually opened the party's
doors to them, requesting, at least on paper, their cooperation...

[Answer] In some sectors—in the schools, in the universities and in the fac-
tories—cooperation between the CL and the DC has existed for very many years. On
the other hand, they are highly attentive youths, very wide-awake, but they do not
stand for anything new. with their organised spontaneousness, they occupy, though
in a different way, the slot in the political spectrum that during the 1950's was
filled by a rigid organization like Catholic Action.

[Question] But the co-optation of an outsider like Formigoni into a structure
that the party must absolutely "reenvision' seems to go mwhat beyond that.

[Answer] There was a rationale in the collaterality of yesteryear and there is
one today, in a different situation. with Cl. and with the Popular Movement we
have basic objectives in cons-on. Until now, we have fought some negative battles
together, such as divorce, such as abortion. Today it is important that we fight
positive battles, not only with them but also together with other Catholic groups.
The CI. is not the only one in existence.

[Question] with regard to your party, however, Formigoni and his friends are
saying grave things: For example, that the Dc has lost its legitimacy as a repre-
sentative of the Catholics...

[Answer] Some of their criticims are actually well founded. But it is the
entire Catholic body that must undergo a self-critique, not just the DC. For

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
example. on the divorce and abortion issues? The percentage of the vote in Par-
liament was higher than that of the referendum. And why should the DC alone
meditate? Let us all meditate. ‘

[Question] They are even accusing your party of not being Christians.

[Answer] we will know in the next world who has behaved like a Christian and
who has not. If, however, that is but an invitation to walk a tighter r090. then

it is welcome.

[Question] Some are saying it is they who in reality are the true heirs of the
spirit of Don Sturzo'e old Popular Party.

[Answer] It is an easy thing for these youths, who do not have an exclusively
political objective. to breathe a purely idealistic air. The CL's approach is
that of a widespread state of mind, that of seeking a haven in a crisis which is
more of the nation's society than of the DC. The fact is that I too see in their
enthusiasm the spirit of the old Popular Party militants.

[Question] Does it remind you of your youth?

[Answer] Yes. I see my own self in these youths like Pormigoni. Their labors
resemble ours in the FUC! [expansion unknown], between 1931 and 19“. when I
became a delegate of the youth groups. There was a great deal of ferment that
flowed from the novelty of being in politics. There was also much humility. No
one considered himself demeaned if after having written a handbill he then had to
go post it himself. But then the industrialization of the party started. Some
of our electoral campaigns that have been put entirely in the hands of advertising
agencies have profoundly shamed me.

[Question] Certainly the DC youths of today are something else. At the age of
30. the most recent youthful secretary. Marco Follini, has already changed his
persuasion four times, going from the Moro-ists to Cervone to the CUB [Local Uni-
tary Committee] to Bisaglia. A real political professional. As a youth. were
you more a Formigoni than a Pollini?

[Answer] I was a little of both. Follini is a pure, full-time, professional
politician. Formigoni, on the other hand. knows that in the societal structure
there is an element of politics, but he takes a broader view of it. I was a bit
like Fellini and a bit like Formigoni. I was addicted to work, but always with
one foot on the ground.

[Question] And among you at that time. who was the Formigoni?
[Answer] Dossetti, of course. But Dossetti was not, as is often thought. solely
a theoretician. He also busied himself with practical problems. I recall his

long dissertation, in one of our first meetings of the leadership. on the Parmesan
cheese crisis in Emilia. It seemed to me an excessively practical issue.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] And Panfani?

[Answer] He was an organizer... even when he was among us youths he occupied him-
self above all with concrete matters... practical questions...

[Question] Hence?
[Answer] Well, yes... he was a Pollini.

[Question] In what sort of climate did you live in those days, what issues did
you debate ammgst yourselves?

[Answer] The first legislature was the most interesting and culturally gripping
period. We addressed the major issues, the agrarian reform. the Southern Italy
policy, the tax reform. I recall highly stimulating discussions in Piazza del
Gesu. The most illustrious university people, intellectuals and men of culture
would cane there. Rossellini would also come there: he was working on drawing up
legislation on entertainment. They were highly fertile years. Then the diffi-
culties began to increase and many things began to lose their glitter.

[Question] To what things in particular do you refer?

[Answer] One who does not bear a concrete responsibility can devote himself to
the big theoretical analyses. A governing party, on the other hand. is con-
strained by its official capacity to devote its efforts to accomplishment within
the realm of possibility. And this does not give it much intellectual sparkle.
Berlinguer has also said as much: National solidarity has lostyfor the PCI [Ital-
ian Communist Party] its contact with the people. This to an even greater extent
has happened to the Dc in 30 years of governing. Today. with a non-Christian
democrat as prime minister. this research effort has become possible for us.

[Question] A non—Christian democrat who. unlike his predecessors, is not greeted
with hissing and booing when he circulates among the people.

[Answer] In my many years in politics, I can recall only two hostile demonstra-
tions. Among those hit by the Priuli earthquake and on the occasion in 1972 wgen I
went to present a gold medal to the Red mayoralty of Sesto San Giovanni. And I
have the strong suspicion that the people were booing sore their representatives
who were receiving the medal man he who was presenting it to them.

[Question] But you are speaking of Giulio Andreotti. what about the other Chris-
tian democrats?

[Answer] 1 am very happy that President Spadolini is not being booed. However,
he belongs to a small party; he is not bearing the burden of a major party's
force and at the same time its weakness.

[Question] Do you still believe. honorable Andreotti, in your famous saying that
power wears down the one who does not have it?

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answer] That depends. A well-executed opposition can recharge one's batteries.
We still have a mentality, however, so deeply rooted in being the governing party
that even where we are the opposition party, such as in many Regions, we are in-
capable of taking a hard initiative.

[Question] Excuse me, but by this do you mean to say that after 35 years the DC
must now learn the new technique of being the opposition?

[Answer] Physiologically speaking, I believe it would be the healthiest thing for
us to do.

[Question] In sum, the Honorable Andreotti has become a convert to rotation of
power.

[Answer] Today, the situation is more positive in this respect than it was at one
time. Formerly, there were two contrapoeed worlds, in total disagreement on some
fundamental issues, such as the Atlantic Pact and economic pluralism. Conditions
then were not such that one of the two worlds could afford to back away and take
a quiet rest while the other continued working. Today, it seem to me that we are
well along the road to that point.

[Question] Let us get back to the Catholic youth that wants to improve your
party. They are critical of the chaos of its factions, the feuds, the scandals...

[Answer] No party's structure succeeds in achieving perfection. Nevertheless,
the objective of eliminating the factionalism appears to as highly fitting.

[Question] That is easier said...

[Answer] No. It is an attainable objective. The sections, which at one time were
extremely vigorous, must be revived. The internal elective system must be
changed: The proportionality system, which has turned out to be a divisive ele-
ment, must be replaced by the majoritarian system, permitting voting on different
lists of candidates as well-what is called panachage.

[Question] Would that be enough?

[Answer] The number of members in the National Council must also be reduced; it
has become impossible now to carry on a debate in it. And also the number of
those in the party's top management. These ideas and others will be a part of the
proposal I am taking to the national party's national congress.

[Question] And the others?

[Answer] I will mention two of them to you in advance having to do with the DC's
economic policyx Revival of the cooperatives and modification of the Wage struc-
ture. The family allowances for children and for nonworking wives must be in-
creased. They are ridiculously low today. Thought must also be given in the
near future to some form of salary for housewives.

23

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Some say your party's opening to the new movements also has a secret
objective. namely, that of staving off the forming of a second Catholic party.

[Answer] A second Catholic party? “hat position in the political spectrum 'ould
it occupy? I do not believe there is a sufficient body of Catholics to support
two parties. Remember, the number of people who attend Mass is smaller than that
of those who vote Dc. Besides, what would two Christian-based parties do? They
would forget the other parties and would devote all their energies to fighting
each other. Like what has happened to the socialists after each split.

[Question] Let us engage in a bit of political fantasy. Let us say that at the
next congress Pormigoni is elected secretary of the DC. What would happen?

[Answer] He too would finally have to come to terms with a far more complex
reality than that open , fluid one he has dealt with up to now.

[Question] In sum, the DC would also change Pormigoni-n

E'nswer] I am not saying that alone. The DC would also change; it would resume a
certain current of thought that had emerged when Benigno Zaccagnini was secretary.
And Formigoni would not be weighed down, as was Zaccagnini, by past experiences.

[Question] That is a very optimistic outlook. Perhaps it overlooks the fact
that Formigoni and his friends hold opposite views to those of your party with re-
gard to many fundamental issues, starting with the missiles and the neutron bomb.

[Answer] Peace, however, has always been at the top of our concerns. No one
loved peace more than be Gasperi. I remember once when a minister in his govern-
ment, speaking to a group of young Catholics in the Basilica di Massenzio, ex-
tolled before them the virtues of military defense. Di Gasperi gave him a sound
going over. More recently, we too have backed in every way Carter's SALT 2 agree-
ment. It is not our fault that the American Congress did not ratify it.

[Question] It would be quite different, however, if Formigoni's youths were to
take to the streets and demonstrate against atomic weapons together with the
comunists.

[Answer] I find it entirely normal that a Catholic movement should be entirely
taken up with peace. It is the governing party that has other concerns. I
remember one time when British Prime Minister Hilson came to visit the Moro
government. Pietro Nenni, who was at that time the vice president, had let him-
self be drawn into sane very harsh public criticism of Western military policy.
Wilson took him aside and said to him? “When one is not in agreement with a friend
or with an ally, one does not take to the streets shouting. One very quietly
whispers his disagreement in the other's ear."

2’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Formigoni: What If We Here To Form Another Party?

Leader of 'New Catholics' Also Has Some Warnings To Offer

[Question] Pormigoni, you are not even registered as a member of the Dc, yet you
are a member of a group that must actually prepare a recovery of the party. Are
you happy?

[Answer] It was an important move and a strange one for a party like the DC~a
courageous action that can be significant for the body of Catholics in our coun-
try. But it must courageous all the way. I have no intention of being just a
wallflower.

[Question] Then you are not really all that happy...

[Answer] Unless substantial decisional powers with respect to the party structure
are given to the assembly, it will all have been a joke. Besides, I am already
being moved to doubt by sane of the faces I see on the committee. Men of the
party's apparatus like Donat Cattin, Galloni and Hassotta are fine, as far as I
can see, because for some time now they have advocated a renovation of the party.
But what does a Pollini have to do with all of this?

[Question] Have you gone into this with same exact plan of your cm in mind?

[Answer] I as not addressing this problem with a reorganizational plan in mind.
I have some firm ideas, however, and I intend to press them. Why was Pornigoni
called in? Because he represents a certain new breed of young Catholics, which,
like so many other Catholic movements has seen its distance from the Dc and its
disappointment with the DC grow over the past several years. We are people who
believe in peace, in justice, in a pluralism that is not mere compronise. We are
people who carry on political action at the grass roots of society in the name
of ideal principles. We expect the DC also to revert to polotical action in the

name of the same ideals.
[Question] In your opinion, is this going to be an easy thing?

[Answer] The first thing to be done is to totally reconstitute the admissions
apparatus so as to block the ballot bosses. Then the internal voting rules must
be changed, instituting panachage. Under the list system, the Dc party bosses
have enormous power. We want to smash the party factionalisn to bits. Further-
more an ironbound list of incompatibilities must be drawn up between public office
responsibilities and party responsibilities.

[Question] But how will you, who are so idealistic in your views, be able to
work elbow to elbow with old, experienced elave-to-routine politicians? How will
you find a column language?

[Answer] There are some fundamental values that unite us. But then in practice,

we speak two different languages. The problem, however, is theirs, not mine.
Many among us do not know either Piccoli or Porlani, but on the other hand they

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

do succeed in talking to the people. Let us get one thing clear: The DC is for
us only one of our many problems. I, for example, have not joined the party, and
this is not out of an affectation. Fully 85 percent of my time is devoted to my

people, our schools, our cooperatives, our radio broadcasts. The be comes after
all of this.

[Question] Is there someone in the Dc on when your movement feels it can rely?

[Answer] Certainly: On its grass-roots membership, on its sectional secretaries,
on its municipal councillors, particularly if they do not belong to factions led
by the charismatic party bosses.

[Question] The Andreotti and Panfani types of faction?

[Answer] Don't ask me to name names. Of course, factions that can be brought
around to changes in ways of thinking are those that are the least difficult to
talk with.

[Question] What are the points on which you are not disposed to give in?

[Answer] The Dc must become the political household of all Catholics and not con-
tinue being the private estate of a leader group. Today, this household is
occupied by a restricted number of persons. We want to get them out so as to make
room for all those presently being compelled to stand in the courtyard-v-the labor
leaders, the students, the mass media operators.

[Question] And supposing you do not come to an understanding, what will you do
with that vast force displayed at Rimini? Will you form a second Catholic party?

[Answer] The second Catholic party is now ready to case into being, made up of all
those Catholics who work at the grass roots of society and have seen the gap bet-

ween them and the be growing. If the Dc does not change, the birth of the new
Christian party is in the nature of things.

[Question] To end up as did the various ic's [Continuous Struggle], or the
Marxist-Leninists?

[Answer] Oh no! We have learned the lesson of the splinter parties of 1968 very
well. The Italian societal structure does not thrive on avant-garde adventurism
but rather on action at its grass roots. If we form a party, it will be different
from all the others. The time now is for political action by movements. Only

the PR [Radical Party] has tried something similar, but failed very quickly.

[Question] A confessionalist party...

[Answer] No. We are not thinking of a oonfessionalist party. Our relations
extend out to the leftist youth, laio movements, and even to numbers of the PC1--
a policy that has won for us, in the high schools, a higher percentage of votes
than the DC received on a citizenwide scale.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] Your movement frequently accuses the 0c of not behaving even as
Christians? why will you not name names?

[Answer] The answer is simple: It seems to me that the manner in which the matter
of the Christian democrats involved in the 92 scandal was not a very crystalline
one. There should have been an impartial but rapid proceeding through to and
including expulsion.

[Question] Let us engage with you as well in a bit of political fantasy. _ Let us
say that Pomigoni has been selected to designate the secretary of the Dc. when
will you choose? De Gasperi?

[Answer] De Casperi was fine in his tine. Today, mthing different is needed.
[Question] Smeone like Aldo Moro?

[Answer] Of all of then, Moro was the least renoved tron our ideas.

[Question] But evidently he is not to your entire liking. Then what about a set
of identificatory qualifications?

[Answer] A secretary who lives a grass-roots life even shunning the party's
liturgical moments. A secretary who has risen through the ranks and not through
the corridors of the Palazzo. A secretary able to make himself understood in the
streets and in the workplace.

[Question] In sum, the identificatory qualifications of Roberto Poruigoni...

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Nondadori editors 8.p.A. Milena

9399
C50: 3104/5

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F03¢WTKJALI£HEONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

PSI'S MANCINI CRITICIZES CRAXI'S POLICIES
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 28 Sep 81 pp 7-9

[Article/interview with Giacomo Mancini, ex-secretary of the Italian
Socialist Party, by Pasquale Nonno, place and date not given]

Weren't we supposed to challenge the DC? The former
PSI secretary accuses Craxi of restoration, and cri-
ticizes his positions on the P2 scandal, on judges,
on local governments, on foreign policy...

what is the PSI today?

"It is a party that feels it had struck out along a brand-new road, and
which, before announcing that the goal has vanished, wants to stop and
think things over. I think that's a good thing. They are doing some
thinking in the party, even though what talking they do is done in
undertones."

Giacomo Mancini, former secretary of the PSI and today a member of the
leadership council, is a little reluctant to raise his own voice in
outspoken criticism of Bettino Craxi: ("Everybody has his time," he
says, "and I have had mine.“)

[Question] Is that touch of reluctance perhaps due to the fact that
it can still be said that it was you who wanted Craxi as party secre-
tary back in 1976?

[Answer] In 1976 things went the way they had to go. Craxi has shown
a talent for reviving the PSIlnypolishing its image as a force for re-
newal. There should have been further developments along that line.
But instead the developments have turned toward a restoration policy.
And all party discussion has been thwarted.

[Question] Do you feel nostalgia for the old factions?

[Answer] No, and yet there has to be a place and a chance for discus-
sions. Dissent is good for the Socialist Party, and even for the se-
cretary's role. We criticize the Communist Party because it has a
Leninist-style centralized structure; we criticize Berlinguer because
he does everything himself, and runs the whole show. But for some time

28
FOR¢M¥ﬂJALl£ﬂIONLY
we have done a whole lot worse. Because inside the PCI, even though
very cautiously, at least there is a Napolitano who speaks out. In
the Socialist Party these days we don't even have that. Craxi tends
to co-opt everybody. To homogenize everybody. And despite formal
statements of principle he leaves no room for initiative, not even for
the Party's peripheral bodies.

[Question] Are you talking about the business of the local governments?

[Answer] Of course I am. Where is it written that, since we have a
five-party coalition in the cabinet, we must try to have one every-
where? This is extraneous to all our lines, alien to all our tradi-
tions. Even in the unification charter, when we tried merging with
the Social Democrats, Pietro Nenni himself wrote in a paragraph pro-
viding that the left-wing local governing juntas would be protected.

I remember that Nenni referred specifically to the Party's roots among
the people, to which I don't think Craxi attaches much importance.

[Question] There has been some very heavy pressure from the DC.

[Answer] There was pressure back in 1970, too. In the regional elec-
tions it was fairly clear that we would get conditions for putting
leftist juntas together not only in Emilia, but in Tuscany and Umbria
as well. The DC brought tremendous pressure to bear through its secre-
tary, Arnaldo Forlani. Amintore Fanfani talked about an iron-clad
center-left alliance. At the time I was PSI secretary, and I flatly
refused. We got leftist local governments both in Umbria and in Tus-
cany, and all the heavy Christian Democrat threats simply fizzled out.

[Question] In Rome, though, Craxi kept his promise to make a deal with
the Communists.

[Answer] Not anywhere else, though. We got off to a bad start in Si-
cily. We had said that we intended to challenge the Christian Democrats'
power there, but instead we wound up attacking the PCI: we put a so-
cialist (Salvatore Lauricella) in as president of the regional assem-
bly, instead of a communist. It's simply unbelievable. In Cosenza,

my home town, there was a leftist city council, and the PSI chalked up

a big win in the elections. Instead of confirming the junta, Craxi

sent a commissioner to the Socialist Federation to force a deal with

the Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats. And then the change
of course in Liguria, I think, is nothing less than a scandal.

[Question] Doesn't it seem to you that the PCI's slamming the door
makes agreements difficult? At the UNITA festival in Turin they even
booed Claudio Signorile, who is a spokesman for the Socialist left.

[Answer] I don't believe that heckling was the PCI's doing. And then
of course you have to understand that in Turin -- not sometime in the

last century, but only 3 years ago -- the Socialist left and the whole
PSI was talking alternative. Now all we talk about is the five-party

:ahinet. There really ought to be some explanation of this switch.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not even the Palermo congress voted for so radical a change of course.
What are we supposed to do? Make them hold congresses?

[Questionj Let's get back to the local juntas.

[Answer] If, instead of waiting (it's 3 months now since the election)
we had immediately confirmed the local governments that had won the
election, nobody could have been able to accuse us of anything and we
would have got the DC between a rock and a hard place.

[Question] The one you would really have made trouble for is Flaminio
Piccoli.

[Answer] Piccoli would have had to resign as DC secretary. But instead
we were the ones who saved his skin. He ought to erect a monument to
Craxi.

LQuestionJ About Genoa: maybe the decision to form a regional govern-
ment with the DC came because there are some prominent socialists in-
volved in the P2 scandal, who would not have found room with the com-
munists.

[Answer] Maybe so. It looks as though Teardo is actually going to be
president of the junta. But we could have told these comrades to be
nice and patient for a while, because maybe their hands are not quite
so clean as might be.

[Question] Maybe the PSI's aren't either.

[Answer] Certainly the Socialist Party's shiny new youthful image is
somehow out of tune with the attitude taken over the P2 scandal. It
looks as though the only one in the Socialist Party who is to be made
to pay is Vanni Nistico, who used to run the party's press office.
That's a little bit skimpy. But on this count I must say that Giovanni
Spadolini is disappointing. "is government was formed to clean things
up, but instead. . . Nothing has happened at the Interior ministry,
nothing at the Foreign ministry, and in the upper reaches at State
Participations everybody is still safely in office.

EQuestion] But the PSI itself is showing signs of standing up for the
men caught in the P2 scandal. Federico Mancini, the socialist candi-
date for the Constitutional Court, actually refused to print an arti-
cle in the monthly PAGINA by Ernesto Galli della Loggia, attacking the
"P-2-ists." Aren't you, a professional bondsman, in agreement?

[Answer] Federico Mancini is wrong. Going bond has nothing to do with
this business. Candidates for high public office are chosen according
to political criteria. When there is no political confidence (and I
cannot see how that could be the case for the P-2 people), then these
persons are removed from office. They are not fired or demoted, but
assigned to less important, less delicate functions.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Question] That particular socialist attitude, though, has generated
a lot of good feeling in the sectors that counto

[Answer] 0f cburse. Only this morning I met a Christian Democrat...

[Question] Who?

[Answer] A Christian Democrat who was also involved in the P2 business.
He said to me: ,"Did you see what guts that Craxi's got?“ And I said:
"Yes, but when he acts that way he is talking to specific sectors of
the State apparatus, to the top brass in the military, to the highest
levels in the ministries who are all fascinated by a strong man, but
these are not the sectors in which the socialist are most interested.

I believe, myself, that the PSI ought to be mainly concerned with talk-
in; to the abstaining party, which is a lot stronger than Craxi's.
Also, if it doesn't Berlinguer will have a tremendous potential for a
comeback in the new reaches of society where the people can't seem to
find the right chance to express themselves. Craxi's proposal of tak-
ing turns was the idea of a new situation which included a major change
in relations among the parties and in governments. Now, though, it has
become the continuation of an old policy, if not an actual restoration.
And so the communist pole is not weakened and the PSI tarts itself up
as moderate. There are a lot of signals pointing in that direction.

[Question] For instance?

[Answer] The business of the lower-court judges. It is true that the
Communists tend to manipulate judges who are Party members. But our
response must not be to join hands with old sectors of the magistracy
that have notoriously done the DCIs bidding. Most important, there is
the risk of being subjected to -~ well, not blackmail.-- but certainly
the dossiers count, and that has happened.

[Question] But doesn't it seem to you that Craxi is looking for legi-
timacy in the moderate sense, and even using his planned trip to America
to that end?

[Answer] I'm not saying that Craxi is going to Washington for an inves-
titure ceremony, but that is the impression abroad, because there is a
tradition of that sort of thing. If you ask me, Craxi should have gone
to Moscow, rather than to Washington. We have to try to get modifica-
tions in the Soviet attitude. And Craxi just might have been the very

man to do it.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 Rizzoli Bditore

6182
cso: 3104/16

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NATO ENTRY. ALLEGEDLY SUPPORTED BY VAST MAJORITY, ADVOCATED
Madrid CANBIO 16 in Spanish 7 Sep 81 p 3

[Editorial by Juan Tonas de Salas: "NATO, Right Away"]

[Text] Surprise: most of the national leaders of the P803 [Spanish Socialist
Horkers Party] are in favor of Spain's joining NATO. But not now. From
clandestinity and from the Peoples Socialist Party of Tierno Galvan, they inherited
a vague neutralism which has penetrated easily into the rank-and-file socialists, '
ill-informed on the country's international political problems, and the party
leaders still have not had time to reflect and bring up this debate within the
party in order to arrive at the only possible conclusion: NATO is infinitely
better than the bilateral treaty with the United States. NATO yes, but not now.

Or what amounts to the sane thing. ”NATO, not right away," which is the anbiguous
message which on posters, the leaders of the P80! are filling the geography of
spain in their campaign against NATO.

Except for the Maltese of Tierno Galvan, the socialist leaders and the great
majority of the party do not advocat an unreal neutralise for Spain, which would
require a break with the United States. On the contrary, they are advocates of
the maintenance of the Franco status quo as the basis for renovating the bilateral
treaty with the United States and of postponing entry into NATO until they have
tine to study the problen and convince their nenbers that the only foreign
policy solution, for a free and secure Spain which all of us long for, consists
of entering on an equal footing in the defense of the Nest. leaving behind the
senicolonial situation in which we find ourselves today. That is what the
leaders of the P803 need, tine. Or rather, that the government of the 000
[Democratic Center Union] do the dirty work for them, join NATO and thus resolve
the problem for the P803. You join, then we shall see.

If inevitably, the P803 agrees to Spain's joining NATO. who really opposes this
decision of the government? Inevitably and always: the die-hard ultra right,
which prefers the Libyan or Bolivian solution to any other. and the die-hard
Coanunists. No one else. what is indeed certain is that a large body of
opinion. very poorly informed on international natters due to the enforced
isolation suffered by two generations of Spaniards, does not understand the
concept of NATO and can be convinced that NATO equals hell. But, if this
conviction is arrived at. the socialists will lose as much as the government
party, and as much as the entire country. Neutralisn is inpossible. to asintain

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

the status quo with the United States is humiliating and the only viable solu-
tion. grand and honorable, is entry with full rights in the pact for the defense
of Western democracies.

Under those conditions. the Third World-oriented groups of the UCD who wish to
gain merits on the scales of the progressive sectors, threatening to boycott the
decision of the government to join NATO, will be of little use to the Socialist
Party. There are those who overlook the progressive sectors to such a degree
that one has nothing else to do but look in their past for the more or less
shameful clues which now propell them to a progressive hysteria lacking moderation
or limits. The socialisc leadership sees itself obliged to oppose the entry of
Spain into NATO"now";and it seizes the opportunity. tactically, to wear down the
government faced with elections which are drawing nearer all the time. Enough.
let no one deceive himself, the Socialists are as much in favor of NATO as the
government and much more so than the Third world neo-Peronists who still

flutter around Suarez circles of the government party.

The best solution, for the PSOE, for the government, and for the country, is to

end as soon as possible the gaseous presence of this country in the world. entering
NATO this very autumn. The armed forces will benefit immediately from it. the
Spanish armament industry will progress, all of us will cease, little by little.

to agonize over our navels. in order to concern ourselves with the problems

which affect us on the planet we inhabit. NATO, yes, right away, a Maltese is

your father. a satellite for your grandfather, and Qadhdhafi is a Libyan, one is
more than enough.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

9678
C50: 3110/7

33

IV .lﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

POLITICAL SPAIN

DEFENSE MINISTER DEFENDS NATO MY
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 16 Sep 81 pp 210,25

[Interview with Alberto Oliart, Spanish defense sinister, in his office at the
Ministry of Defense in Madrid; date and name of interviewer not given]

[Text] lie works surrounded by the military in the big cen-
tral office of the Ministry of Defeneewforlerly of the
Arny--on Alcala street in Madrid. He took office on

25 February 1981, 2 days before the coup, which he admits
was "difficult." If everything goes according to his plans
and those of his government, headed by Calvo Sotelo, he will
take his seat, within a few Ionths, as Spain's representative
in aeetings of the defense ninisters of the North Atlantic

Treaty Organization.

Minister Alberto Oliart believes that this will not be diffi-
cult, that by next spring--in April, more or lcssnthe time
will have arrived for Spain to occupy its rightful seat in
NATO. This is how he explained his thinking in an interview

with CAMBIO 16 .

[Question] What advantages does NATO offer for Spain's defense?

[Answer] In the first place, the advantage of being in the same defense systen
as most of the western democracies. In the second place, it is not that NATO
is offering it; it is that Spain, in ny opinion, has the right, because of its

very essence as a European country, to be a power among the European democracies,
something which for one reason or another we have not been able to achieve clearly

in these last 150 years since the war for independence. In this sense I believe
it is necessary to bring Spain's European dimension to the height to which it

must rise.

In the third place, there is the advantage of its being the best of the choices

presented in defense policy and in foreign policy. Neutrality is an option which
does not depend only upon one's own will, but rather it can be conceded to one.
And then fourth. I believe that Spain's entry into NATO is the logical consequence
of the very foreign and defense policy that Spain started in 1953 when it signed
the first agreement with the United States. These bilateral pacts have served
their function, but a function in whichnlet us not deceive ourselves. In NATO
we will be on the same level as countries like Italy, the Federal Republic of

Germany, England or Belgium.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Would the defense of Spanish territories such as the Canaries, Ceuta
and Melilla be guaranteed within NATO?

[Answer] The Canaries. of course. The definition of Ceuta and Helilla will
enter into the negotiation of the treaty, I imagine. In any case, Ceuta and
Melilla are included in the treaty as part of Spanish territory, although
clarification of their entry remains to be seen.

[Question] Does the Spanish Government have the will to see that the defense of
Ceuts and Melilla are specifically included within the NATO treaty?

[Answer] I would say that there is something much more important than that. and
that is the will of the Spanish Goverment to defend Ceuta and Nelilla as an in-
tegral part of Spanish territory, in any case.

[Question] V111 the entry into the Atlantic Alliance replace Spain's bilateral
agreements with the United States?

[Answer] No; the fact is that those agreements will enter a much broader frame-
work if we enter NATO. The logical thing has been to proceed with their extension,
because we have petitions in the treaty which will change radically if we enter
NATO and which would be granted us if we became a nember of the Alliance. A new
treaty with the United Statesmust be negotiated, seeking technical and military
assistance. which would be the same type of treaty the United States has with
other NATO countries. whether through this organization or directly.

[Question] Once Spain joins NATO, will there also be American military bases on
Spanish soil?

[Answer] It is not a certainty that if Spain should join NATO those bases would
continue to be purely for American use; they could become NATO bases; everything
would depend on the negotiations concerning this matter. The United States, as
a member of NATO, could use them if we reach that agreement. One must bear in
mind that they are joint Spanish-v.5. bases. We can place them at the service
of NATO or, in other words, say, "This is our Spanish contribution to NATO."

[Question] Would there be nuclear weapons or missiles in Spain if our country
became a part of NATO?

[Answer] The answer is a resounding "no" to the question of missiles. After all,
missiles have no practical application in Spain. Missiles. because of their medi-
um range, could only, if they were placed in Spain, reach the forces of NATO it-
self, and not those of the Warsaw Pact.

Another very different thing is that there might be nuclear weapons in Spain.
Spain has not yet signed the treaty for nonproliferation of nuclear weapons.

That is a freedom which Spain has as a nation and as a state. The Spanish Gov-
ernment is interested in maintaining its freedom. Spain cannot renounce any wea-
pons which are in its interest for the preservation of its sovereignty and
independence .

[Question] Is Spain not going to stipulate on its entry into NATO that nuclear
weapons may not be installed on Spanish soil?

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] No. This is being discussed in the cases of England and France. I do
not believe it is necessary to discuss it in Spain's case.

[Question] Are there--or have there been-~foreign pressures for Spain to enter
NATO?

[Answer] No, but we have been invited to join since 1977. It is almost incom-
prehensible that a country which has been in an indirect alliance--which was
created at a given moment because the Spanish political regime at that time did
not permit full entry--would refuse to take its place. An expert in Atlantic
Alliance matters told me a few days ago that in l9b9—-when NATO was established--
a chair was set in place for Spain to occupy one day. That is. there has always
been the conviction that Spain would join.

[Question] "hat would be the economic cost of Spain's entry into NATO?

[Answer] The study of what it would cost to prepare the Armed Forces to enter
NATO is the study of our own budget potential. One of the foremost character-
istics of the alliance is that each country brings in its own attributes. We
will be able to use our resources in the most rational and adequate manner possi-
ble to the defense organization. But we have no reason to do more. As to the
budget study for defrsying the common costs of NATO-~the Spanish contribution to
the fixed expenses of the alliance structure—-the figure varies between 3.5 and
8.5 billion pesetas per year, depending on the degree of integration negotiated.

[Question] Would Spain's entry into NATO help to resolve the Gibraltar question?

[Answer] One must distinguish between the territory of Gibraltar and the base.
The base is a military base under the British NAIO command, and as such it is in
the service of NATO, although it does not belong to NATO. What we are going to
maintain permanently, after our entry into the alliance, is the Spanish NATO
command in the Strait of Gibraltar.

With regard to the territory. it appears that the recent report of the British
Parliament opens up the possibility of fruitful negotiation for Spain on the
future of Gibraltar.

[Question] What do you think of the arguments of the P80! [Spanish Socialist
Workers Party] opposing Spain's entry into NATO?

[Answer] It does not seem to me that any of their arguments have absolute con-
sistency; they can all be contradicted for almost the same reasons they can be
affirmed.

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8735
C50: 3110/11

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MONOMIC ITALY

AREA STUDY OF UNDERGROUND LABOR PORCE
Milan IL 1108130 in Italian 18 Sep 81 p 25
[Article by Bruna Bellonzi: "Tax Evasion: Here Is the Chart of Underground Labor"]

[Text] Barely 60 days of careful checking was required to discover tax evasions
totaling 92 billion lire. From 2 Key to 30 June the central service of the Labor
Ministry's inspection department carried out a special investigation that yielded

a rich prize (see Table): 10,000 small businesses were checked (industrial,
handicrafts, coamercial); 13,000 orders were served on businessmen; almost as many
cases were referred to the courts; 92 billion lire were recovered, 20 billion of
which represented total tax evasion, that is, in reported payroll taxes, representing
a sum that would never have been paid to the eqty INPS [National Social Security
Institute] coffers.

Hhat methods were used in evading taxes? Chest workers, overtime and aboveominimum
noncontractual under-the-table paynents, employer-eaployee relationships aasked as
consultation (given to retired persons with high professional qualifications and,
therefore, enjoying large pensions), minors and foreigners (mainly colored) employed
at wages below contractural minim, apprentices paid as such but used as adult
workers, women working at cottage industries with actual piecawork contracts and
without social security coverage.

Franco Aristodemo, head of the central service that organized and coordinated the
operation, described it as "a panorama of subterfuge, of outrageous acts, of cunning
and collusion which spotlight three events: The area of the so-called black or
underground labor market is much more extensive and organized than we could have
believed; collusion exists between the interests of the plant and those of the worker
because of the slowness of fiscal drag, which has a very strong influence on the
aaounts of marginal income. All this damages the government because tax evasion
almost always accompanies fiscal evasion, and therefore men and means are needed to
fight evasion and infractions of the law. To bring up the question of cost does not
make sense because the activity of repression, in addition to results that can be
assessed on a moral plane and therefore within the province of government, also offers

appreciable results on the economic level" (see graph).

The exceptional results of this sunner hunt (last year, recovery of unpaid taxes
over a period of 12 months totaled 267 billion lire, 67 billion of which represented
total unpaid teases) were made possible by two circumstances: The tine selected for

37
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the investigation and the kind of investigation. Among plants checked many were
involved in tourism and in vacation business. Hhile these are handled during the
rest of the year by family-run businesses, they need extra personnel during the sum-

mer months. In the second place, the targets were businesses and activities where
suspicions had existed.

Excluded from the investigation were state participation enterprises or very large
businesses where trade union control makes infractions rarer and more difficult,

Sicily (due to a lack of regional coordination), and the earthquake-damaged areas.
But where are the most flagrant tax evaders and who are they? 'mey are, above all,
in service-oriented industries, the construction industry, clothing manufacturing,

but also in the metal-mechanical, electro-mechanical and agricultural processing
sectors.

Leading the regions on the basis of nuﬂaer of workers involved and infractions ascer-
tained compared with total employment in the same plant is Calabria, with 118 percent
(which means there were several infractions per worker), then mlise, Sardinia, Puglia,
Lazio, Trentino-Alto Adige, the Friuli, Veneto, and Piedmont. In Tuscany and Emilia-
Romagna, despite the high number of inspections carried out (respectively 2,252 and
1,491), the percentage of workers involved was sharply lower: respectively 32 percent
and 16 percent. In Emilia infractions by workers were lowest on a percentage basis.
Valle d'Aosta and Lombardy followed.

Involved in infractions (or charged with them) are retired persons on pensions, youths,
minors, women. foreign workers. A considerable number of the latter had neither work
not residence permit. workers covered by aid programs should be discussed separately.
The ministry does not supply data, but reports made by regional inspectors, and the
data produced by the investigation, show there is more than a hint that among workers
not listed on the payroll (therefore, for whom tax evasion was total) a significant

nuuber were participating in aid programs through plants involved in financial
difficulty.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.(1') Impetus nude

2 .

I cénuima'mwn. (2) p , 33‘
I d: :ui par "madly“; - ._

5)
5
E
2
‘3
‘s
S

1978 1977 1978 1979 mo

(62’muwa aim-Mm
(mm. Wop-“unﬂ-
mamamuﬂma
“ammo-mm“
dim. mammans
“lulu-u ”sum

 

It Pays to Collect Unpaid Taxes
Taxes recovered

Amount representing tax evasion
Cost of administration

In billions of lire
Share of costs of administration for the entire inspection service (head office

and field executives, inspectors and administrative personnel both in the main
office and in the field) compared with total amounts recovered from tax evaders
progressively decreased from 1976 to date, dropping from 12 percent in 1976 to

8.3 percent in 1980.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1) GI! owned; glove 0 gag-Ml

vmoam)

WAUJ.) 21
mo an
'mweuu (12) as

man 2..“
W213) 133

m

auras

6117

2.33!
14.2”
370
7.2“
2.075

2%
“transects: ~

to:

an em

on saw

no . mm

to an

an em um

m m cm rm no:
WA (14) an nu me us:

«out: (15) "a u:- um um um
’ swwummumwwmmm

sass

 

Key'
1. Tax evaders: location and number
2. Regions

3. Businesses investigated

lo. Workers employed in businesses investigated

5. Workers comitting violations (absolute numbers)

6. Percent

7. ~Amount of unpaid taxes (in millions of lire)

8. Late tax payments (in millions of lire)

9. Piedmont

10. Lombardy

ll. Trentino-Alto Adige

12. Friuli-Venezia Giulia

l3. 'Duscany

14. Sardinia

15. Totals

16. Percentage of workers involved in infractions of the total number of workers
employed in businesses investigated

(NOTE: Periods used in all nusbers in table should be changed to comm]

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1981

6036
CSO: 3106/ 7

1.0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONQ‘IIC 1mm

PARTICIPATIN IN CONSTRUCTION OF USSR'S GAS PIPELINE
Milan IL HONDO in Italian 25 Sep 81 pp 24-25
[Article by Enrico Nassi: "Siberian Pipeline. Superpipe Comes to Italy."]

[Text] The Italian government has decided to buy from 4 to 8 billion cubic meters

of Siberian gas per year beginning in the spring of 1985 over a period of 25 years.
In addition, Italy together with other European Community nations, also committed
itself, with credit at favorable interest rates and supply of high technology plant,
to participate in construction of the pipeline that snakes from eastern Siberia
across the Urals, to Paris and Rome. It is to be 4,500 kilometers long and it
consists of 2 lines each with 24 pumping stations. It will cost $14 billion. Mini-
mum annual flow will be 50 billion cubic meters: Pour-fifths to western Europe, the
remainder to Moscow's allies in Comacon. A spokesman said, "If necessary, that is

in case of a crisis in the supply of petroleum, the Soviets are willing to step up
production.” In short, it is a good deal despite the political risk of excessive
dependency on USSR energy. Until the last moment, this factor weighed heavily in the
Italian decision. A foreign office spokesman said, "In fact, the government's agree-
ment was arrived at after long and difficult meetings." The decision was transmitted
to the Soviets shortly before Moscow's deadline, which was on midnight Tuesday 15
September after a sudden break in negotiations between the Italian and Soviet dela-
gations, the latter headed by Nicolai Oasipov and Victor lvanov, hard and able
negotiators, "who were delegated to commit the prestige of the USSR with their
signature."

to shift the supplies for ENI [National Hydrocarbons Agency] to increase French
and German supplies; and to divert to the British and Japanese, contracts totaling
$3 billion, which had been primarily earmarked for Nuovo Pignone, Italsider [Steel
Company] and Fiat. The delegation assigned to negotiate the agreement had left
Moscow on the 7th, convinced it could complete its mission by the 10th with a
great reception at Villa Abamalek, the Soviet Embassy on Via Aurelia Antics. The
optimism was based upon assurances Foreign Minister Emilio Colombo gave to Andrei
Cromyko, his Soviet colleague, during a visit to Moscow this winter.

However, some negative signals left Rome: the doubts of Benin-inn Andreatta, for
example. The treasury minister had two concerns: one technical-political; the other
a matter of money. From the analysis of large international organizations (The

kl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such as Poland. Romania and Hungary. Unlimited growth will reverse the dependency
relationships, making the West a prisoner of its own credits. The other consideration
(that of funds) is based on the fact that financing supply contracts worth $3 billion
will cost the state 10 percent (8 percent if private firms, following the example

of German firms, absorb 2 percent). In any case, it is more than is received by the
Soviets in interest (7.8 percent). That is not all. The Atlantic party, with
authoritative leaders of the DC [Christian Democratic Party] of the P501 [Italian
Social Democratic Party], of the PRI [Italian Republican Party], of high officals

of the treasury (like Vittorio Barettieri), or of the foreign office (ambassadors
such as Rinaldo Petrignani, who is in Washington, and Maurizio Bucci. director gen-
eral of economic affairs) contributed to Andreetta's doubts. The position of the
Atlantic parties stresses the American position on Soviet hegemony. It is this:

The strategic objective of the West must be negotiations with Moscow to be conducted
on positions of strength: Therefore, every mouthful of oxygen is counterproductive.
This led to the pressure to accept only Siberian gas ("even if it can do without.

following agreements with Algeria"), without becoming committed on the level of cre-
dits and supplies.

However. the personal prestige of the foreign minister was on the line. At Moscow,
he had committed himself without reservations. In his counter~argument, the party

of detente used this as a lever whose thesis in brief was this: The agreement, using
as a model those signed by Holland, Belgium, Germany, and France, should be signed
not only because it is advantageous and reduces energy dependency on those nations
(Iran and Libya. for example.) which today are centers of alarming crises, but be-
cause not doing it would compromise Italy's credibility. It was said, "If they break

off negotiations with the USSR. who would again believe the word of an Italian min-
later of state?"

On the eve of the delegation's arrival, the situation was therefore one of stalmate.
Nevertheless, it was open to mediation. The foreign trade minister, the Socialist
Nicola Capria, tried it with a certain success, so much so that in his first meeting
with Ossipov he could function with the certainty of someone who was willing to close
the deal: therefore, he was reassuring. Yet, in simultaneous actions with what

was happening in other European capitals, American Ambassador Harwell Rasb said in

a report from intelligence sources on the USSR economic situation, and that these
were such as to dissuade the Hestfromrenewing or extending agreements covering

new lines of credit and supplies with high technological value. This alarmed the
party of detente and gave a father thrust to the Atlantic party. But, above all,

it upset the industrial interests involved. Contacts became frenetic even because
signals came from Washington that conflicted with those of Rash. Here was one example
for all: A giant firm like Catepillar at the end of August signed a large contract
for supplies in the energy plant sector with the Soviet Union. There is more: The
president of Exxon, relying on authoritative sources, told the president of ENI that
"Ronald Reagan's vetoes are not imperative for the Americans: Therefore, they are
much less so for the Europeans." Again: As much as they were inclined to under-
estimate the negative signals, the Soviets had in any case preestablished certain

42

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lines of defense. The Moscow technicians for the pipeline want Nuovo Pignone's tech-
nology. They said, "If we can't get it from Italy, we will try to get if from Japan

which produces pumping stations by virtue of a license granted by the Florentine
company." The contract is worth $1,100 million.

The official seeting of 10 September with the Soviet delegation therefore took place
in a climate of confusion and uncertainty. Probably in order to gain time in expec-
tation of a clarification, Ambassador Bucci tried to reverse the methodology of the
negotiations: Contrary to what the Soviets proposed, he asked (as president of the
Italian delegation) that the price of gas be discussed first and then credits and
supplies. The result: The negotiations were halted; the Soviets considered them
closed end their trip to Rome useless. At this point, however, the foreign trade
minister reestablished contacts and convinced the Soviets to halt their course. The
Soviets accepted the invitation setting a deadline for the 15th, which for them was
the final deadline to conclude plans for purchases. Sufficient to solve all the
problems of clarification was a meeting in the office of the prime minister on the
basis of a compromise drafted by Capria who later was to report on the negotiations
to the government and to parliament. The government's approval was then spelled

out in detail by the technicians and finally transmitted to the Soviets, with an
offer to share in construction worth $500 million. This represented a considerable

reduction from the $3 billion in orders proposed by the Soviets, but it almost cer-
tainly will be increased.

COPYRIGHT: 1L HONDO 1981

6036
C80: 3105/7

b3

FOR(NHH(JAL.US£(NVLY
FOR‘OFFHJALIKHZONLY

ECONOMIC ITALY

SUGAR PRODUCTION AFFECTED BY BBC RULING
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 28 Sep 31 pp 7-9
[Report and interview by Cesare Peruzzi: "A Very Bitter Bounty"]

[Text] Italy's sugar producers will come up 200 billion lire
short in the till this year. How come? well, there
are the inflexible EEC regulations, the decline of ‘
prices on the world market, and above all global over-
production.

That's a 200 billion-lire shortage. It showed up a few weeks ago

on the books of Italy's sugar refineries and sugarbeet growers. Within
the next few months this maelstrom could swallow up a thick slice of
the nation's sugarbeet crop (there is talk of cutbacks ranging to
70,000 hectares out of a current total of 310,000 hectares_under_eulti-
vation, which lately has meant prosperity for growers and refiners;
moreover, at least 15 of the nation's 48 sugar refineries may very well
shut down forhgood. Giuseppe Bartolomei, still bloody from his wine
wars with France, has yet another thorny problem to solve. whatever
brought on this sudden and totally unexpected slump in our sugar sec-
tor's earnings? And what will its longterm impact be on the refiners
and growers who are even now negotiating a price agreement for this
year‘s harvest?

The first symptoms of trouble ahead were visible as early as last spring,
while the sector was still savoring the giddy heights of top profits,
with better than 1.5 trillion lire in sales. Prices on sugar markets

all over the world, which had been steadily climbing for a long time

(and thus bringing heady numbers of billions into the accounts of Euro-
pean and Italian producers) began to sink. The decline has been steady
ever since: only last week the price of sugar hit an all—time low on
the London exchange: 171 pounds sterling per ton. All over the world
there is a sudden surplus of sugar. Predictions for 1981 alone set pro-
duction at 93 million tons, with consumption running at no better than
91 million tons. The main source of the glut is Europe, which does not
subscribe to the international price agreement (among various world pro-
ducers), and this year Europe will have a surplus of at least 50 million
quintals to dump on markets outside Europe so as not to hurt BBC producers.
The upshot is ongoing price for sugar worldwide that is 50 percent lower

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
~ .

than the going price in Europe. Exporting has become tantamount to
suicide for all European producers, particularly for the Italians.
Sugar consumption in Italy is 17 million quintals per year, but the
European Community has guaranteed market prices of Italy's output only
to cover 13.2-mi11ion quintals, and promised to find markets for it
within the EEC up to 15.5 million quintals (with a 30-percent penalty
for this latter quota). Every grain of sugar produced over and above
these 15.5 million quintals must perforce be sold outside the Commun-
ity. Since Italy's sugar production this year will be 20 million
quintals, at least 4.5 million will have to be sold at distress prices
on the markets of the Third World and America. Never has such bounty
been so bitter. Furthermore, despite the fact that.the Brussels agri-
culture commission had issued contrary advisories, this year all the
EEC countries sharply increased their sugarbeet production: 17 per-
Cent in France, 01 percent in Greece, 9.6 percent in Belgium, 9.4 per-
cent in Germany, and 9 percent in Italy. "we are the only ones in Eu-
rope who had already finished planting when the new Community regula-
tion came out," the Italian sugarbeet growers complain, "and so we
couldn't do anything about it. But the others could have. And why
didn't the EEC increase Italy's sugar quota enough to make us at least
self-sufficient? The truth of the matter is that, once again, we are
forced to pay for something that is not our fault..."

When all the sums have been done, exactly 200 billion lire will be mis-
sing from the Italian producers' tills, and 60 percent of the shortage
will have to be borne by the growers and 40 percent by the refiners.
What will that mean? For the growers there are no alternatives: at
least 70,000 hectares will have to be converted to other crops. For
the other 160,000 farm operations in the sector the outlook is any-
thing but rosy, in view of the fact that this was the very year, after
long, lean years of warmups, that sugarbeet growing in Italy had achie-
ved better than good income and yield levels: 65 quintals of sugar
per hectare, matching Germany's, as against 69 for France. A step
backward, in short. And a lot will hinge on the price agreement for
this year's crOp.

Not even the refiners have much to rejoice over. Specifically, the
Maraldi group, which still supplies 13.3 percent of the market and ope-
rates its flagship company, Romana Zuccheri, in receivership. The
Ravenna group, after the scare of Romana Zuccheri's declaration of bank-
ruptcy, was just beginning to get its head above water with the good
yields of the latest harvests, and had actually begun looking for a
buyer who could bring in some liquidity (rumor had it that it was talk-
ing to Libya). Another blow of that magnitude could bring down not
only Romana, but AFIR and A18 as well, since both of them already have
financial problems.

For the refinery group held by Leonardo Montesi, too (it controls 30.7
percent of the domestic market),this is not the best of times: after

years of lethargy, venerable (72-year-old) Montesi had just decided to

sell off some or all of his appetizing company, Italiana Zuccheri (175
billion lire worth of business, a billion in profits) and had already
neered into serious negotiations for it.

#5
{UR OH-ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The only outfit that seems to be enjoying sound sleep these nights is
Eridania, a member of the Ferruzzi group (see following interview).
The only unknown quantity for Eridania is the shareholders' response
to the imminent capital increase;

Growers and refiners agree on one score: the price of sugar is going
to have to go up by at least 150 lire a kilo. The growers, though, are
not stopping there: they are asking Brussels, just this once, to free
all sugar produced and consumed in Italy of all taxes and levies, so

as to get back a few of those lost billions (at least 60). The ball
right now is in Agriculture Minister Bartolomei's court.

'Eridania Is Sweeter,‘ Says Gardini

What will the impact on Italy of plummeting sugar prices worldwide be?
Is there any chance of a joint strategy plotted by the refiners, the
growers, and the government? IL MONDO put that question to Raoul Gar-
dini, president of Bridania and vice-president of Beghin-Say, the giant
of French sugar. Gardini, who, through the Agricola holding company
(of which he is also president),controls an absolute majority package
of Eridania stock and, through FINAG and AIPA holds a relative majo-
rity interest in Beghin-Say, is certainly the most powerful sugar
magnate in Europe today.

Question: The Italian sugar industry is in deep trouble, mainly be-
cause of the collapse of prices on foreign markets: What do they say
about the outlook at Eridania?

Answer: The present situation in the Italian sugar industry is only
partially involved with the worldwide decline in market prices; this
decline has brought a sharp falling-off in exports under our C quota
which, this year, with total production estimated at around 20 million
quintals, amounts to more than 4 million quintals; but the major cau-
ses of Italy's troubles lie elsewhere.

Question: Where?

Answer: First of all, in overly severe Community regulation, which
does not assign us an adequate amount of quota A sugar at guaranteed
prices. The fact is that with a quota of 15 million quintals rather
than 13.2 (altogether inadequate to supply our domestic market) the
sector could save better than 70 billion lire in penalties right now.
The second problem lies in the very serious delay in applying Community
standards on prices on the part of the Italian government. Just by
way of example, this year government decisions which took effect on 6
April and 1 July 1981 were actually implemented on 1 August, which
meant a loss to the sector of at least 25 billion lire. And finally
you have the government's insistence on trying to peg sugar prices
without reference to Community price machinery, to the results of cost
analyses generated by the Interministerial Price Committee itself, not
to mention what is going on in the other BBC countries. The result is
that Italy has to live with politically fixed prices which have nothing

46
FOR!0FFKJAL.USE10NLY
to do with actual production costs. If the system isn't changed, even
the soundest companies in the business will go under.

Question: 50 the outlook is pretty bleak, then?

Answer: It's no easy thing to make a prediction, but one can safely
say that there is still time to set the administration right. The sec-
tor is substantially healthy, seriously involved technically and tech-
nologically in the vanguard and therefore, if it is not done in by
punitive pricing and policies, it will certainly be able to push on
with the restructuring process undertaken some time ago, and to achieve
its goal of an Italian product that will be competitive with that of
the other BBC countries.

Question: Negotiations are under way now for renewal of the overall
contract with the sugarbeet growers: what do the refiners want?

Answer: We have to clear up the mystery surrounding the overall con-
tract, which is rapidly approaching mythical proportions. This agree-
ment consists substantially of two components: one economic and the
other regulatory. The economic portion (the price of beets, surplus
costs, the beetgrowers' fund, etc.)is clearly the more important and
is also the one of keenest interest to most growers; well, that part
of it is obviously not the business of the refiners, but rather of the
government. The regulatory portion (regulations for delivery and samp-
ling of the beets, arrangements for payment, etc.) is of only secon-
dary importance by comparison with the econoaic portion and would give
rise to no major problems if it were not given such emphasis by some
of the grower organizations. In conclusion, it should be the govern-
ment, rather than the refiners, that deals with negotiating the over-
all agreement. The refining companies, for their part, can resolve
the regulatory issues, always providing they are put in an economic
position to do so.

Question: Which will the crisis building on the horizon affect more
severely: the refiners or the growers? Is any joint strategic ap-
proach possible?

\nswcr: I don't feel there is any need for emphasizing the crisis as-
acct, inasmuch as the current situation in the sector can and must be
settled. It is certainly better, as the behavior of all the other
European countries over the past few years has demonstrated, to have
to deal with excess production problems rather than with shortages.
Besides, bumper crop years always come along in agriculture, but that
is no reason to penalize the growers for the efforts they have put into
increasing productivity: that would merely discourage them and give
rise to a defeatist attitude that would be hard to counter once it
spread. And if it turns out that, in order to solve our economic prob-
lem, we have to ask the consumer to pay more, you have to bear in mind
the fact that of recent years that same consumer, in addition to pay-
ing increases far lower than he has paid for all basic commodities,
has saved hundreds of billions (at least 300 billion in 1980 alone) by

47
‘0'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reason of the fact that he can get what he needs either from the Ital-

ian and Community market or on the world market which, as the statistics
.of years past show us, sells cheap when there are not very many buy-
ers, but goes up and may well continue to rise to unbelievable levels

once European harvests make it necessary -- or might make it necessary
-- for consumers to resort to imported sugar. In conclusion, by gener-
ating a shrinkage in future investments in sugarbeet growing or refin-
ing, the consequent shutdown of a large number of refineries and low
sugar production, we shall certainly wind up having to pay other coun-
tries -- be they Community countries or outsiders, the prices we refuse
to pay our own growers and producers right now.

Question: Are you saying that it would be feasible to put together a
common strategy with the growers?

Answer: It would indeed be possible, provided we quit mixing politics
with economics, action with propaganda, and practical objectives with
demagoguery; it would be feasible only if both sides~-- but particu-
larly the refiners' organizations -- can be convinced that improvement
for either side must be followed by improvement for the whole sector,
rather than by efforts to undermine the other half.

Question: The growers allege that Italian processors failed to man-
age the sugar agreement for the Community, that they neglected the
sugar-quota fight to concentrate on other financial aspects (pegging-
prices to the then-current exchange rate). If Italy's quota today
comes to a scant 13.2 million quintals it is mainly the industry people
who are to blame....

Answer: The accusation, which comes to us not from the growers but from
certain restricted quarters among the processors' organizations, none
of whom admittedly can stake the slightest claim to objectivity, is ~-
to say the least, both absurd and selfish. It is absurd because the
industry people, who are not masochists in any sense of the word, have
' consistently moved to protect their own legitimate interests, and have
never had a moment's doubt that those interests might be better served
by a larger quota. It is selfish because it is common knowledge, and
should anyone be unaware of it, it can be demonstrated that the refin-
ers have prodigally squandered their efforts and resources everywhere
they could think of in order to get higher quotas.

Question: What are Eridania's.plansfor the future?

Answer: Eridania has only one specific objective: to push ahead with
restructuring so as to cut production costs and maintain high return

on investments for its shareholders, its workers, and for the growers
and the nation's economy as well. Part of our motivation here is to
reCOUP the hundreds of billions of lire invested during the Seventies
to bring our structures up to the point where they could meet community
standards and comply with the regulations forced upon us. Our plan
can be brought to fruition only if it manages to get g0vernment support
and full collaboration from everybody who, directly or indirectly, has
ties to the company. In any case, this is a goal which we can hardly

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fail to meet, because even the other European combines, which already
enjoy favorable treatment for one reason or another, are increasingly
joining forces and are ready by now to move in and replace Italian
producers on the market.

Should that come to pass, the Italian market would be totally dependeent

-- or as near so as no matter -- on imports, with all the adverse impact
on our economy such a situation would perforce entail.

Evidanil

INDUCE I OINNAIO I") - I00

sinusi?

1981

2" 13/2 11/3 10/. ISIS llll "/7 "I. III.

 

The Picture for Eridania (Price performance in 1981)

Legend: Base month January 1981 - 100
Ordinates: quotations
Abscissa: dates for monthly quotations 2 January to 11 Sep-
tember 1981
Broken linc: MIB index
Thin solid line: Food and farm commodities
Thick solid line: Eridania

COPYRIGHT: IL MONDO 1981

6182
C50: 3104/16

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

MEDITERRANEAN COAST RADAR mn's DUTIES DESCRIBED
Paris ARMEES D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Sep 81 pp 22—23

[Article by (Air Force) Lt Col Robert Holtesz" "A Radar Station Maintains
Surveillance Over the Mediterranean"]

[Text] The Air Force's radar stations form a vigilant network
around French airspace.

But our observers no longer nan battlenents today. and the
author shares with us in this article a few moments of their
incessant efforts. on which, to a large extent, the
effectiveness of our air defense depends.

"An unidentified blip 80 km south of Toulon heading north."
"Toulon?"

”They know nothing about the plane at that location."
"Aix?"

"Nothing ei ther."

Sitting in front of his radar screen, the chief air defense controller brought this
exchange with his identification officer to a close. The latter had just notified
him of the detection of an unidentified aircraft. Neither the c.c. Mar. [Naval
Coordination Center] which coordinates the navy's air operations in the

*An officer of the base defense units, Lt Col Robert Holtes graduated from the
Air Force Academy in 1960. A radar station controller in Nice and than
instructor and director of studies at the Air Defense Controllers Instruction
Center in Dijon. Lt Col Robert lbltes was in con-and of a control squadron
at Hont-de-Harsan. Assigned to Taverny and than to Mont Agel, he trained with
the 39th graduating class of the ESGA [Advanced Air Combat School.]

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mediterranean nor the CCR [Regional Control Center] of Aix which controls all
civilian aircraft in southeastern France were able to provide information on this
unidentified plane heading toward the French coast free the Mediterranean.

Hith a sweep of his eye. the lead controller checked the altitude of the blip and
then pressed a telephone key, putting him in touch with the controller of the
Lyons zone, his immediate supervisor in the operational air defense network. The
conversation between them was brief:

"This is the lead controller in Nice. He have an unidentified blip south of
Toulon. We have no information about the aircraft involved."

"O.l(. I am placing a Mirage P-l at Orange on maximum alert (within 2 minutes).
Have it take off if the blip is not identified."

This scene took place in the operations room of the Center of Detection and
Control's radar station in Nice. This facility stands on the plateau of Mont
Agel. At 1,150 meters it overlooks the Principality of Monaco.

Established in 1958, this station is part of the permanent air defense detection
network which covers the entire French territory and its approaches. Because of
its location, this facility is responsible for keeping watch over French air-
space along the entire Mediterranean coast.

Entirely renovated and automated in 1977, the station is one of the moat mdern
in Europe.

While the air defense controller of the Lyons region got in touch with the Orange
base and ordered the placing on maxim alert of the Mirage P-l fighter aircraft
(in this alert status the pilot is strapped in his plane which stands at the
edge of the runway ready to take off), the lead controller in Nice gave his
orders with the help of an amplifier which broadcast his words through loud-
speakers in the operations room, the recreation room, the technical room, and

all the facilities of the station:

"An unidentified blip. Takeoff free the Orange operational facility for the
purpose of interception and identification. The alert team is to report to the

operations room.*

The heart of the Detection and Control Center consists of an IBM series 370
computer which handles all programs relating to pursuit, transmission, inter-
ception, display, and recording of the blips. This computer provides in
particular the synthesis of data relating to aircraft (position, direction,
altitude. speed, and so on) detected by the station's own radar units as well
as by adjacent radar units, military and civilian, to which they are connected.

The synthesis of these data, categorized, compared, and cumulated, continuously
represents the air situation within the station's zone of responsibility.

*The alert team consists of an air defense controller and his assistant.

51

E ONLY
Each aircraft in flight is displayed on the radar screens of the operators in
a simulated fan, made up of symbols, letters, and numerals with all the data
pertaining to it.

The data, which keep changing constantly, such as the position of aircraft and
possibly their direction, speed, or altitude, are constantly and instantaneously
updated.

When the unidentified aircraft approached to within a critical distance, the
head of the guidance section of the Detection and Control Center got in touch
with the operations room of the Orange base:

"This is the chief of the Nice guidance unit. Get ready for immediate takeoff
from the operational facility, direction 150 degrees, climb to an altitude of
36,000 feet, retain contact with Rice on frequency A."

This order was immediately transmitted to the pilot on alert waiting in his
aircraft at the edge of the runway. Less than 2 minutes later his plane took
off. began its climb at full throttle heading for 150 degrees, and a few seconds
later the pilot contacted the Nice air defense unit by radio using the coded
frequency indicated to him in the takeoff order.

"Nice, this is Charoot 31 climbing and heading for 150 degrees."

"Charoot 31, this is Nice, radar contact, direction 140 degrees left, keep on
climbing to 36,000 feet. Unidentified aircraft at 160 degrees fron your
position, altitude 42,000 feet, speed Mach 0.9. You will check it out at a
distance."

"0.K., heading toward 1100 degrees left. I on continuing to climb. Roger as
regards checking out the aircraft at a distance."

Every movement is analyzed by the station's operators and categorized by an
"identification officer," as a function of the criteria specified in advance
and according to the degree of threat represented by each in a range of
categories running from "friendly aircraft" to "enemy aircraft." The reactions
and respOnses of the air defense network regarding detected aircraft obviously
depend on the category into which the latter have been placed.

Movements having special interest are transmitted automatically by digital links
to neighboring stations, as well as to the Air Defense Operations Center in
Taverny near Paris. The latter thus monitors continually, on the basis of data
originating from all statioas, the specific air situation over the whole of French
territory and its approaches.

Measures adopted in regard to such aircraft nay range from discreet surveillance
to interdiction of territorial overflight or the obligation to land at a
designated French airstrip (for inspection) and, if necessary, destruction.

without moving his eyes from the two blips getting closer to each other on his
radar screen, the air defense centraller frequently consulted the results of

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

the interception computations effected several times every second by the
computer and displayed for him on a screen of his cousole. Be rattled off his
instructions calmly and according to a strict sequence which reflected leng
training.

The guidance of interceptors toward their targets is done by the controllers,
assisted in their task by the interception program of the computer. which can
calculate several interception strategies simultaneously made at each of the
station's guidance facilities.

The projected trajectories of the target aircraft and the pursuing fighter
aircraft are displayed on the screens, as is the point where the interception
will be reached.

These missions are effected daily over the see under stringent security conditions
with reference to other traffic, while greatly limiting their objectionable
effects on the ground.

Host of the interception missions are controlled through difficult simulated
radio and radar conditions to supplement the operational training of pilots and
controllers.

"Nice. this is Charoot 31. I have made radar contact with the target which is
directly ahead and 2,000 feet up."

"Roger. that is your target. Check it out from a distance."

"0.x. I am getting closer. I can visually observe a Mirage 3-c aircraft. What
are your instructions?"

"Stand by. Remain in a position to keep that aircraft under surveillance at a
distance.”

The guidance section chief who followed the interception maneuver on his console
had already notified the air defense controller of the Lyons region through the
direct connecting line.

'ﬁhis is the Nice guidance chief. The unidentified aircraft is a Mirage 3-C."

"Affirmative. By way of exercise. carry out an inspection routine with a landing
on the Orange airstrip."

The exercise that we had just witnessed makes it possible to test the
effectiveness of the identification of aircraft entering French airspace and to
train the various air defense units in the transmission of data and reports,
decision-making, and the execution of air defense measures.

This is a complete. frequent exercise whose start is naturally unannounced and
determined by the general staff of air defense. The routes and altitudes of
penetration into French airspace are altered every time.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On that day as is their custom. the Nice air defense controllers were watching over
the Mediterranean and their attention did not waver.

They know that their station is a link in France's air defense chain and that a
chain is as strong as its weakest link.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Revue des forces araees francaises "Arnees d'Aujnurd'hui"

2662
CSO: 3100/ 1 2

510

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL FRANCE

BRIEFS

NEH INTELLIGENCE DIRBCTOR-aenri Haguer, deputy director of public safety at the
Paris prefecture of police. will replace Maurice Paoli as director of the

R6 [General Intelligence Directorate] in the sale prefecture. [Text] [Paris
VALEURS ACTUELLBS in French 12 Oct 81 p 31]

SDEcE RECRUITING PLANS--The French intelligence service [SDBCB] will be author-
ized to recruit 25 civilian employees in 1982 so as to set up an "office of general
research. analysis and evaluation" directly subordinate to Pierre Marion, the new
director of the $0288. The function of this office will be the publication of
daily reports to be delivered every morning to the offices of top government
leaders. The reports will involve a new style. [Text] [Paris VALEURS ACTUELLBS
in French 12 Oct 81 p 31]

CSO: 3100/62

55
FOR OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL ITALY

SECRET MEETINGS amen PCI, rmurcm SBRVXCBS
Milan PANORIM in Italian 14 Sep 81 pp 49-52
[Article by Antonio Carlucci and Corrado Incerti: 'La Bruna Served the Whiskey']

[Text] From a memoir by the former officer of the $10 [Defense
Intelligence Service], who is now in prison as a result of the
P2 affair, there emerges a story of highly secret meetings bet-
ween the communists and oounterespionage agents. Here is what
they talked about.

0n Via del Boccaccio, a noisy street in the historic center of Rome. a few steps
from Piazza Barberini, on the fourth floor of an old building, number 22, there
is a small apartment: A large living room, two bedrooms, a kitchenette and bath.
0n the door there is a plate bearing a wanan's nase. The apartment houses neither
a family nor the employees of a cospany. It is one of the secret offices of the
810's Section D, the counterespionage branch of the Intelligence Services.

Those rooms have one purpose only: To conceal from indiscreet eyes the most highly
secret of meetings. One day in April 1915, in the living roan, seated facing each
other across a large table are two leen of widely different backgrounds: Giandelio
Maletti. a general, head of military oounterespionage, involved in the inquiry

into the Piazza Fontena massacre because of the protectiveness of the SID toward
the Fascists, and Deputy Arrigo Boldrini, conuniet, with a glorious past as
commander of the 28th Garibaldi Brigade of partisans. Outside the door, guarding
the secretness of the meeting, stands a third man, Antonio La Bruna, captain in the
the SID, Haletti's right—hand man, at the focal point of all the criminal investi-
gations on corruption in the Intelligence Services.

La Bruna enters the room in which the meeting between Maletti and Boldrini is
being held just once: To place on the table two glasses of whiskey and withdraw.
'1 do not know what went on at that meeting. I was at Via Boccaccio only to
ensure the secrecy of the meeting. Those were Haletti's orders," the captain sta-
teo to Rome's assistant public prosecutor of the Republic, Domenico Sica. Later,
a: same La Bruna put it all down in black and white in a memoir that for 3 months
:'.‘?.: has been in the official record of the Rose investigation of Licio Gelli's

P2.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What did Maletti and Boldrini say to each other? But above all, why were the two
seated at the same table in a secret office of the SID? This meeting between the
Intelligence Services officer and the conunist leader certainly was not the only
one. Many others took place, before and after. And other inortant persons on
both sides of the talks were also involved. Indeed, those contacts with the
Intelligence Services represented one of the keys to the diange in relations
between a PCI [Italian Columnist Party], which for 2 years by then had been work-
ing toward the historic compromise, and a military hierarchy that had until then
been unable to stand the sight of the comnists.

PANORAHA has pieced together the story of those meetings: Why they came about,
where they were held, who took part, what was discussed.

The first clamorous indication of the change in POI-Armed forces came
out of a meeting organized by the columnists in Rome in February 1914. The new
line was: The Armed Forces can no longer be a separate body from the state, to
"prevent the opening of gaps in the barrier against subversive maneuvers and
reactionary attempts." Italy's presence in NATO was no longer at issue; military
policy must no longer be an exclusive province of the upper hierarchical levels:
the democratic system must enter the barracks at all levels.

The newly charted course was signed by the PCI's two top military experts: Besides
Boldrini, Ugo Pecchioli. head of the party's State Pronlems section.

The top military officials were shocked by the new tack. But they did not
make a move. It was part of the Intelligence Services, instead, already compro-
mised by the most reactionary sectors of the separate bodies, which immediately
sensed in it the chance to change its facial makeup to take on a more leftist
look. But the inteer struggle (the clash between Gen Vito Iii'celi, then head of
the SID, and General Haletti) blocked every immediate initiative. Only after
Maletti remained master of the battlefield did the Services move. The more so
since among the men of Section D the net impression was that the PCI might very
soon enter the ambit of government (they already knew that Giulio Andreotti was
moving in favor of this plan).

In the spring of 1975, it became vital therefore for the SID to start talks with
the communists: The Section had ordered the taking of a secret poll by way of the
Carabinieri stations throughout Italy, bearing on the iminent administrative
elections. The results of this poll were resounding: It showed the PCI winning
34-35 percent of the votes. An unprececented jump. ualetti brought his own
people together and told them the time to make a move had come: That poll on the
elections could be the perfect key for opening the door to Botteghe Oscure.

But who should be the one to try for a first meeting? There was a man: Giorgio
Angeli, an officer in the Carabinieri, in the Intelligence Services since 1965.
Having weathered the SIPAR [Armed Forces Intelligence Service] storm, Angeli had
gone on to head two highly sensitive offices: The section that sifted out intel-
ligence on the PCI and on the camwnists of Eastern Europe, and the Military
Police Section, whose mission it was to prevent infiltration of the Armed Forces.
Angeli had the standing to contact Boldrini. Among other things, his fiancee (to-
day his wife) was from Ravenna, the cosmunist leader's home town.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Angeli became the ambassador and the first talk was quickly set up: For the first
week in April 1975. Maletti sent his most trusted collaborator, Antonio Viezzer,
a colonel of Carabinieri, secretary of Section D, who had always been in the
Intelligence Services, out on reconnaissance; Viezzer met with Boldrini at Via
Boccaccio. There. a second meeting was set up. At Ravenna, Maletti, viezzer and
Angeli, accompanied by several officers whose job it was to ensure secrecy, met in
the home of Angeli's fiancee, having arrived in the Romagnese city by train.

From then, meetings were held regularly: They took place in Rome, not only in the
apartment on Via Boccaccio, but also in a house on Via della Vite, a few steps
from the Parliament Building (it was a false office-front office that had been
fitted out by the Rome Counterespionage Section and inherited by Haletti's men).
Toward the end of April, Maletti was joined by'Pecchioli. Enrico Berlinguer was
regularly informed of everything that went on: This was stated several times at
meetings by the two political representatives.

Maletti played almost immediately his election poll card. When the communists
examined it they showed disbelief: According to their own calculations, they did
not expect to win over 30 percent of the vote. The fact is that the Intelligence
Services poll turned out to be exact: In June 1975, the PCI jumped to 34
percent--a fact that favored the continuation of the meetings. The ice now having
been broken, Boldrini and Pecchioli threw out on the table two very important
issues: The need of an immediate reform of the Intelligence Services that would
shield the nation from a repetition of a coup-d'etat plot, and the ending of all
discrimination by the Italian military establishment and that of Western Europe
against men and ideas of the Left, particularly those of the PCI. And in time
(meetings and discussions were long drawn out), increasingly concrete results
emerged. A tangible indication of opening was a trip that Boldrini and Pecchioli
made personally to the United States (the first communists to be officially in-
vited) to visit the aerospace installations and to expound their party's posi-
tions. The PCI's influence in the field of military policy gained ever-growing
weight: Their viewpoint was determinative in the creation of new Intelligence
Services more subject to the political power. It was even determinative in the
appointment of the top military, and even the top Intelligence Services, offi-
cials. A mechanism was also devised whereby the PCI would submit its viewpoint on
a list of candidates favored by the military. And the executive would take it
into account.

Haletti also gained ground. By way of those meetings, his office quickly became
:ne obligatory channel for contacts between the PCI and the top officials of the
Armed Forces: It behooved both by now to maintain good relations. Among the mili-
tary, it became a race to meet with the communists. Foremost among them was the
then commander of the Carabinieri, Enrico Hino, who was aiming for renewal of his
appointment. And following close behind him was Gen Giuseppe Santovito, who was
later named to head the SISHI [Intelligence Service for Military Security] the new
military intelligence service. And there were still others.

«It the operation Maletti had conceived did not work out as a safe landing for his
group. In March 1976, the general and La Bruna ended up in prison by way of the
Piazza Fontana inquiry. This was followed by further problems. And then, for

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

everyone, there was the P: inquiry. Maletti, Viesser, La Druna, Santovito and
other military top brass were all on Gelli's lists. Only one man weathered all the
storms unscathed: Giorgio Angeli. who today holds a key position, the First Divi-
sion of the SISMI, heir to the former Section D of the SID.

Boldrini: Everything in the Open

During World War II, he was a legendary partisan chief operating under the name
of Bulow. For the past 33 years, as a PCI parliamentarian, he has been a member
of the Defense Committee. In 1974 he was the architect of the new communist tack
with respect to the Armed Forces. Arrigo Doldrini is also known as the PCI's
"minister of Defense.“ PANARAHA asked him to talk about the events of 1974 and
about relations with the Intelligence Services.

[Question] How did the change come about?

[Answer] There was a need to respond to years of immobility by the left-of-center
governments with respect to military policy. Elements favoring reform were already
present in the Armed Forces. It was urgent to isolate the most reactionary

groups.

[Question] How did the military respond?

[Answer] The results speak for themselves: Today. Parliament has a control func-
tion over military policy.

[Question] After the change, did you meet with officials of the Intelligence
Services?

[Answer] Yes.

[QuestiOn] who took the initiative?

[Answer] Some elements of the Services. They were aware that a reform was
needed. They took the same initiative with other members of the Defense Commit-
tee.

[Question] But specifically who requested the meeting with you?

[Answer] I do not remember. Too much time has gone by.

[Question] Why did some of these talks take place in secret offices of the SID?
[Answer] That is not true. They did not take place in secret places.
[Question] Until when did these meetings continue to take place?

[Answer] I had meetings until the reform of the Services in the spring of 1978.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Arnaldo Mondadori Editors S.p.A. Hilano

9399
C30: 3104/5

S9
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FORG)FFHJA1.USE(MVLY

GENERAL ITALY

PROFILES 0F NEH PSI SECRETARIES HARTELLI, SPINI

Milan IL HONDO in Italian 25 Ssp 81 pp 22-23

[Article by Enrico Nassi: "Precocious, Intellectual and Different")

[Text] Before the beginning of summer he had asked for an organi-
zational chart covering internal party jobs. Then, because his
closest collaborators (including Ministers Bins Formica and Gianni
De Hichelis) could not agree and even offered different proposals
that could not be reconciled, he made the decision himself. And,

as if that were not enough, he announced his choice to the news-
papers even before he announced them to the party executive. Thus
Bettino Craxi, PSI [Italian Socialist Party] secretary, solved the
problem of naming party assistant secretaries. He named two because
the party bylaws approved at Palermo called for the appointment of
one or more assistant secretaries. Those named, Claudio Martelli
and Valdo Spini, were the last to know after rumors had already made
their way inside and outside the party. Who are they? What training
do they have? What ideas do they have? How do they live? What

do they read? IL HONDO made a "politoscope" for each.

[Claudio hartelli] Background-~The third of three children, Claudio Hartelli was
born at Gessste, in Milan Province, on 24 September 1963. His father was a white-
collar worker and his mother an elementary schoolteacher. The family soon moved to
Milan to a house in the suburbs near Piazsale Ioreto. There was little money and
life was very hard. (Hartelli said, "My mother taught in a provincial school. She
arose at 6 an and got home at 6 pa. She worked herself to death so that we could

have a little bit of education.")

In fact, the very young Claudio was enrolled at the Giosue Carducci Classical High
School where he got his first political experience in student associations.

His family's financial condition improved. ("Along with the first symptoms of the
economic boom even we were touched by the miracle.") Hartelli enrolled in the
university, studying philosophy, and he married almost immediately. But the marriage
lasted only a year and a half. "The infatuation was over. He separated as friends."

Training-~It was his older brother (Antonio, now director of the Confindustria Econ-
omic Research Office) who took the high school student Claudio to the P31 [Italian

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Republican Party] meetings. There, for some time, he was involved in politics on the
national level in the youth movement. Marriage forced Hartelli to take an office job.
when his marriage ended, Hartelli, who in the meantime had been working on a thesis
on the idea of tolerance, quit his Job at the PR1 and lived on incomefromtelporary

ment to my studies...Ihe university was one of the things that worked splendidly for
me. I studied a lot, even beyond the requirements.") The turning point came in 1966.
Martelli joined the socialist party, taking a group of students with him. ("It seemed
to me that the new PSI could understand the need for a democratic, lay and modern
left.") His life was changed by a meeting with Bettino Craxi. ("I asked him if he

thought I had what it took to make a start as a professional politician. without
wasting words he said yes.")

Principles-Hartelli likes the word liberal and those who know him describe his
political identity as follows: "He is a liberal socialist with an idea of the left
that strains to live up to the general principles of democratic freedms, above all
with great attention to relations between the individual and society." It was not
by chance that in 1977 he was the inspiration for the famous biennial of dissent.
And Hartelli was one of the most tenacious spokesmen of the so-called humanitarian
line during the kidnapping of Aldo Moro, first, and that of Giovanni D'Urso, later.
In any case, his fixed idea centers on mass media. Not by chance, as soon as he was
elected secretary, Craxi entrusted him with the information sector. Hartelli, who
as a deputy and member of the education and fine arts committee, presented draft
reform legislation to revitalize the cinema, music and theater. The title of his
essay, which aroused considerable discussion, is "Information and Power." He also
published "Socialists in Confrontation," and "Socialist Renewal."

Choices--when in 1971 Craxi suggested that Hartelli dedicate himself entirely to
politics, perhaps he did not think his advice would be followed with such determin-
ation. In 1974, Martelli was already the secretary of the Milan PSI and in 1977,
group leader in the Milan City Council. Considered a moderate hawk, it was he who
fought for the creation of the first leftist council at Milan. After 5 years of
university teaching, he quit his job in 1975. A year later, the recently-appointed
Craxi invited him rather peremptorily to follow him to Rome. when he arrived in the
capital, Martelli immediately became a very well-known important person and was
accused of trying to play the role of protagonist at any price. Later he confessed:
"The important thing is that the external image of political life, the applause,

the consensus, be instruments and not an end. I understood this after a short time.
At the beginning I may have been momentarily intoxicated. But after I was burned a
few times I learned."

Personality--Hartelli says, "As a politician, I prefer to be intractable rather than
falsely available, soft and condescending." Hartelli's personality was the subject
of considerable discussion inside and outside the part , even because he was dis-
orderly and did not keep appointments. His friends describe him as "patient and
practical;" his enemies as, "detached and cold." Hartelli does not yet have an actual
staff even though it is to be expected that he would have one soon. So far he has
worked by engaging in discussion with his friends who are not necessarily his col-
laborators: Massimo Longo, member of the SIPRA [advertising agency for stocks] Board
of Directors; Vittorio Giacci, head of the party's theater section; Carlo Pontana,

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.—
1
l

member of the administrative board of Fonit Cetra; and Pasquale Guadagnolo, head of
the PSI Press Office. Hartelli loves the movies, and he prefers American action
films, even though he pays attention to some great directors such as Ingmar Bergman
and Federico Fellini. lie likes to travel: This year, with his second wife Annaroea
Pedoi and his son'Giacomo (age 5), he spent the sinner traveling through California
in a cslper.

[Valdo Spini] Backgromd--Born in Florence on 20 January 1966, Valdo Spini, as some
jokingly say of him, is a true son of peace since he was conceived in the spring of
191.5. His father Giorgio, history professor at the University of Florence, is the
author of the history book studied by almost all Italian high school students. me
name Valdo openly declares the Protestant origin of the family. But few know that
only the mother of the present Assistant Secretary of the PSI is really Haldensian.
Valdo's father is a Methodist, even though this no longer means very mch since the
two churches are about to reunite.

Young Spini enrolled in the Dante classical high school. from which, following a
reading of €111in Napoleoni’s "Economic Thought in the 20th Century," he trans-
ferred to the economics and comerce department Where I discovered that there was
little economy and much conerce." He received his degree with a thesis on criticism
of the theory of enterprise and he became an assistant university professor in polit-
ical science (he now awaits a permanent post), where he taught the history of economic
doctrine.

Training--His first political experience goes back to his high school days when Spini
joined the New Resistance group, organized by Alberto Scardone, who later became
Enrico Berlinguer's head of the press office. Since his father, Giorgio, a member

of the Action Party, was a friend of Tristano Codignola, Valdo became a friend of
Codignola's son, Federico, during his experience in New Resistance. When Spini
became a member of the Socialist Party in 1961 (when he was favorably ispressed by
the revitalization of the Youth Federation), he established direct relations also with
Pederico's father, who in Florence represented the Riccardo Loatardi Left from
minority positions.

AL the university, Valdo comitted himself to the 061 [Italian Student Union]. He
became the president of the Florence 061. and in 1967 became national president.
However, he soon resigned because he intuitively recognized that student organizations
were on the decline. Alwaysa follower of Inabardi, Spini became known for his non-
sectarian positions. He said, "I have never been one of those socialists who is
happy to be distinguished from European socialism."

Principles--Spini often showed a "passion for politics not purely technical,’ but
guided by the idea that values can be affirmed through participation.

A disciplinarian like many Protestants, Spini often engaged in discussions with the
Haldsnsian group that worked at Quaderni Rossi [Red Notebooks]. As he himself re-
lates. he was often accused of right-leaning reformism.

Jr; political vision. as well as his student training. created in him a passion for

cadre training. He dedicated himself to this work until a short time ago (the last
s-"minar. on the Lucania earthquake. was in February 1981).

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He published several essays, either alone or in collaboration with others: "The

PSI Cadres;" "The Tuscan CLN [Committee of National Liberation] and the Reconstruction,"
(now competing for the Prato prize); "Florence: The Urban Program and Politics,"

(the latter in collaboration with Mirella Zoppi, who was to become his wife).

He is about to publish an essay on {Law} 675, the law for industrial reconversion.

Choices-~1n 1976 the Center-Left collapsed at Florence and a leftist council was
formed. The 1975 elections carried Spini to the city council, where, for the six
socialist representatives, there were five positions available for the post of council
advisor. Valdo chose to become head of the group. In 1972 (Genoa Congress) he became
alternate member of the central colmdttee. He became a full member in 1976. At the
Turin Congress in 1978, Spini fought for the success of the socialist plan developed
by his friends of the Left. He became committed to it also in view of European
elections and, with seminars set up at a rapid pace ("following the methods of active
teaching"), he sought to prepare the party structure for the European campaign. He
was elected to the executive in autumn 1980 and took the place of Aldo Aniasi, who

in the meantime had become a member of the cabinet.

He considers that one of his most important choices was to refuse to abandon the
socialist party at the time of the unification with the social democrats. ("It was
an important experience because I learned to accept a minority condition.")

Personality--Reserved and studious, Spini never liked to show off. For this reason.
too. his recent appointment surprised everyone who does not know about the work

he did for the party. Married. with a 6-year old daughter, Lucille, Spini dedicates
equal shares of his time to his love of the sea and the mountains. Eyen though he is
not a sporting enthusiast, he likes to swim and to walk. His preferred lesiure-time
activity ("but unfortunately there is too little lesiure time"), is the cinema and
particularly the new American cinema, "because of its commitment to describing social
changes." Among the books he has read most are those on history and politics. He
was very entertained when he read the book by therto Eco, "The Name of the Rose."
His friends are largely inherited from his political work, but often he visits
friends of his wife who teaches art in the gardens of the architectural faculty at
Florence.

Even though he is willing to fight from minority positions, he does not like violent
ruptures and he was undoubtedly the exponent of the Left who most disliked the
rupture of the alliance with Craxi after the Turin Congress.

COPYRIGHT: ll. HONDO 1981

6034
C80: 3104/7

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL ITALY

PROFILE OF EMERGING LOCAL PR1 LEADER CORONA
Milan IL HONDO in Italian 25 Sep 81 pp 27-29
[Article by Paolo Passarini: "The Little Sardinien Doctor")

[Text] A physician. a Mason and rich, Corona has tripled PR1
support on the island. Be is not interested in parliament:
"I have too much to do at Cagliari...”

Well, my dear Araandino, ivy doesn't grow in Sardinia, but in compensation at your
place..." Ugo Laralfa was in the habit of making that humorous remark after dinner
or supper at Armandino Corona's house. He would emerge from the small house in Via
dei Punici, in the high section of Cagliari, and turning back. with his back to the
small private pool, he would stop and look at the thick nantle of climbing vines
that barely left enough room to see out of the little Villa's windows. Armandino
would smile. a little timidly and a little craftily, while he accompanied the great
leader of his party to his hotel. He would look at that strange and friendly man,
who for him was both a myth and a friend (a friend he always addressed with the

formal "lei"), and he probably thought: "Patience, patience, and ivy will also grow
in Sardinia. "

And that is what happened. Corona is no longer alone in the regional council. The
most recent Sardinian election verdict flanked hia with two more republican council-
lors. The 30,000 votes that the PR1 [Italian Republican Party] gathered in the
island total 3 percent, equal to the national percentage. If LaHalfa were alive he
cculd no longer have his little joke because in recent years Corona's power increased
more than that of the PRI in Sardinia. And his power is not merely local. In order
to understand it, it is enough to glance at the composition of the office of the
national secretariat of the party that Giovanni Spadolini organized after his rise

to Palazzo Chigi. In addition to Spadolini, who has kept the job of secretary, other
members are Bruno Visentini, party president; Oddo Biaaini. ex-secretary; the two
group leaders in the Chamber and the Senate, Oscar Hanoi and Libero Gualtieri and,
finally Corona, who thus has assumed the role of guarantor of the rank and file of
the entire party toward its leaders.

That is no small thing, but it is explainable if one considers the fact that. for
any years. Corona worked in the party also as president of the Ethics Conmittee.
The PR1 is a small party, but rather turbulent. where serious problems often explode.

64

FOR 0F11C1A1.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Corona. like the physician he is, would go to the scene and administer first aid.

He worked with delicacy and sensitivity, qualities that everyone recognizes in him
and which are very necessary in dealing with individualists who are often irritable,
as the republicans are. A case in point is the secession guided toward liberal shores
by Pietro Bucalossi ("What a coincidence: another doctor," Corona notes in telling

the story) on the eve of political elections in 1979. Corona at that tin received

a double mandate: to contain losses and above all, to tone down the external echoes
of the affair. Bucalossi greeted the party in the ataosphere of a "gentleman's
agreenent," even though he gritted his teeth, and everyone was grateful to the
Cagllari doctor.

For the record, Armando Corona was born about 30 kilo-eters from Cagliari at Villa
Putzu, on 3 April 1921. His anarchist father worked as an esployea in the tax
office; his Catholic mother took care of the large faaily, 12 children, of whom only
5 survive today ("At that time even influenza resulted in death." Corona recalls).
'lhere was considerable poverty in the family. Despite this, Armandino (everyone
began to call him that because he was smaller than anyone else on the volleyball
[pallone] team on which he played left wing.) succeeded in getting an education and
shortly after the war he became a physician. His idol. even during his university
years. was Emilio Lussu. Corona's father had a signed photo of Lussu. Arnandino
began to work in the Sardinian Action Party and in the meantime he took steps to
obtain an assignment as municipal doctor which finally arrived. First he was
assigned to Senis, between Nuoro and Oristano and then at Ales, the town where
Antonio Cramci was born. He left Ales in 1963 because he was naned provicial coun-
cillor at Cagliari.

However, a basic disagreement began to develop between Corona and the pro-Sardinian
forces who increasingly stressed a separatist tendency. In 1966 the split came and
Corona's menbership in La Halfa's party coincided with the birth of the PR1 in
Sardinia. Corona has represented the party in the regional council since 1969.

At that point there began the political rise of the little doctor, who in 1977 became
vice president of the council and soon after president of the regional asseﬂaly in
the very important phase of autonomist unity, the form taken in the Sardinian

region by democratic solidarity. Until his resignation (submitted in the spring of
1979 when the grand majority began to creak), he functioned as a point of equilibrium
in the Sardinian political structure.

in his most recent speech in the regional council last June, Corona said: "The
opposition of the large political forces abolishes any area of maneuver for the small
parties and suppresses its imagination, originality and creativity. By simple in-
stinct of self-preservation, it pushes them into withdrawing to any kind of a refuge
under the protection of the big parties." And he added that autonomist unity "becomes
indispensable and necessary above all in the areas that are socially and economically
weaker as is our Sardinia." While the region is governed by a leftist council with
the external support of the republicans, Corona pushes for the aintenance of the
relationship with the Christian Democratic opposition. To a considerable extent,

that is what the council does and therefore Corona maintains his position as the
linchpin among the parties of the island. It is not by chance that there are whispers
that, following one of the frequent crises, he could be the new president of the
council.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0 -
To those who ask‘ﬂim how he became so powerful, Corona calmly replies, "Hy power is
a moral power." And that not be true judging by the fact that everyone turns to him
to fill the role of arbitrator. In addition to being a great political mediator,
the head of the ethics comittee of his party, ex-president of a regional assedaly,

Corona also has the job of president of the Masonic Central Court. In other words,
he is the man who is guiding the internal trial of Licio Gelli.

But noral power does not necessarily exclude ntsrial power and rather, in some cases,
it can be its handmaiden. And, as far as Corona is concerned, the basis of his
success can be found in the decade from 1960 to 1970. It was primarily physicians
and professionals who, with Corona, built the Republican Party in 1966 and 1965.

(buying and selling land, engaging in construction projects together with his sister,
who is the ear-regional leader of the PCI), Corona is well to do. And his little
three-floor home where he lives ("One floor per child, we are all together, I am an
old patriarch"), he even owns the apartment where the PRI has its headquarters
("Naturally they don't pay rent"). And he claims he supports the party with more
than 25 to 30 million lire a year in contributions.

his relationship with doctors and professionals in general is very good. A faithful
friend, Salvatore Ghirra, PR1 secretary at Cagliari, is also the administrator of
the consortium of private clinics, a considerable power if it is considered that in
Sardinia public health has an almost unimportant role.

After all it was his doctor friends who around 1960 led the municipal doctor of Ales
to the Masonic lodges of the eastern coast. may said, "Here in Sardinia 10 gentle—
men together can do a great deal." To him this seemed the natural continuation of
the ideals of justice and freedom. In addition, he found quite a few exv-partisans
among the freemasons. In the meantime, his relations with Serdinian professionals
became increasingly more fraternal, so to speak, in addition to becoming more ex-
tensive up to his present position of power over the health structure. But despite
the power in the field of health, the Masons, relationswith construction contractors,
it is very difficult to find someone who could indicate precisely some shady area in
Corona's activities. Even among the columnists, many openly maintained that the
man makes money, but correctly and paying his taxes.

In the meantime, the ramifications of moral power increase. Armando Corona was the
man who was the most active in bringing the publisher Carlo Caracciolo to the island,
at first supporting the revitalization of NUOVA 5mm. (part of which, it is

said, he owns) and then the electronic transmission to Cagliari of LA REPUBLICA
("Caracciolo could represent a civilized and cultured voice of the continent on the
island; he can unite Sardinia"). And again it is Corona, for the love of the red and
blue [soccer team], who is becoming involved in solving the problem of the Cagliari
property which now, after Nino Rovelli's defeat, belongs to the state. The presidency
of Gigi Riva's former team was offered to Corona, but he refused saying: "As Franco
Evangelisti showed. sport and politics do not mix."

But how does it happen that a personage of that kind has not yet arrived'in parlia.
ment? It answers, "It is anticipated that elections will be held earlier than

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expected in May 1982. Obviously, I have been asked to be a candidate. But I said
no, I still have too much to do here." Perhaps, as may in Sardinia say of him,

Amndino Corona is indeed a very easy nan.
COPYRIGHT: IL Homo 1981

6034
cso: 3104/ 7 m

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY