FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS L/10524

8 May 1982

E95? Europe Report

POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 7/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

F0. OWCIAL USE ONLY
.ms publications contain infatuation primrily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlines, editorial reports, and arterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iteu, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
ntion was sun-arized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or na-es preceded by a ques-
tion Iark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tints within itas are as
given by source.

“nae contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goveruent.

COPYRIGl‘l' MUS AND REGULATION GOVERNING WHIP 0P
HTZRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSMATION
OF THIS PURICATION 38 RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L;
13 my

EAST EURG’E REPORT
POLITICAL, SocroLoexau. Ann Human Armas

(7000 7/32)
Commas

ALBANIA

Paris Journal Reports on Religion in Albania
(nichel Sidhon; MB mm, 13 Jul 82) .............

GERMAN MATIC RBPUBIJC

Diary} Suicide of 830 mum's Daughter Discussed
(Dieter m; m, 18 m 82) ooooooooooooooooo-ooeovo

Escape Atteupt by Nephew of Intelligence Chief Becomted
(Joerg m women, Meter Bub; am, 7 Apr 82).......

-a- [III-“~63!
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

PARIS JOURNAL REPORTS ON RELIGION II ALBANIA
Paris Jam AFRIQUB in French 13 Jan 82 pp 53-58
[Article by llichel Sidhon: ”the Gentry which Drove mt Isle-"l

[Text] Albania is never talked tout. Or almst never.
It took the suicide of s prise sinister—Heh-st Shehu,
on Friday, 18 necesher—to lake people recall that
Enver ﬂoxha's country did exist. Mr, Albania is
of interest to us. Because there God and ﬁlls-ad

have disappeared before the socialist ethic. and all

the msques. all the places of worship have been
closed. How did the eta-mists usage to steep out
Isles? Hichel Sidne- investigsted a: location.

I wanted to visit Albania, the only country which claim to be atheist and
declares it has conquered lslan. Albania, the last pure and hard lbuist-
heninist, fir-1y Stalinist comtry. does not allow individual tourists
within its territory, and only grants visas to groups. I took :1 wife,

Anniclt, and our baby, ﬂillias. to lake a pod inression.

Albania has succeeded in a "tour de force" never before seen. Since the
15th century, this had been the only country in Europe with a Muslin
majority. After invading the territory, the Ottomans converted the popula-
tion to Isla- vith amazing rapidity. low? By clailing only half as mch in
taxes from declared Muslin. Five centuries later, just before the co-Inist
takeover in 19“, two-thirds of the Albanians vere still praying to Allah.

Only 10 percent were Catholic. and 20 percent Orthodox. ‘l'odsy, the Albanian
(to-mist Party [as published] and its revered leader lnver onha. last of
the great postwar political dinosaurs, sffira that Isl- has been note or
less eradicated in the country. except for sont older incorrigible citizens.

Propaganda? Perhaps not. llo 'sanizdat" is circulated, no religious opposi-

tion is holding out in Albania. In other Eastern European countries the
stubborn faithful can at least p to church. In Albania. all the nosques,

all the places of sorship have been closed. It had to be done. the shah of
Iran, who did not hesitate to throv the mllehs in jail, lost his crown.
The Soviet Ihion is at a loss before its Azerbaydshan muslin.

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

How did the Albanian co-unists nanage to stag out Isis-2 You won't get a
to believe that religion disappeared without a fight, that Islan didn't wage
a holy war. The great religion have survived centuries of persecution; l
Inst persist.

But it is not easy. He are staying at the beach, sons distance fron the
capital. Tirana. Yesterday we went on a short tour of Titan. that an
austere city for a southern capital. Everyone goes ho. to bed at 10

o'clock at night. he "ecolos" should go on tour to Tirana. llo cars except
the long black Mercedes of the great leaders. be Albanians travel on foot

and bicycle. by bus and truck. All the stores display the sane basic con-
nodities. one kind of bread, five kinds of canned products. standardized

clothing; but they are well-stocked. Socialist Albania keeps its pronises:
It feeds its people while rensining fiercely independent. no country in

the world gives it assistance since it becane angry with the USSR and China,
which it considered "revisionist.”

On all the street corners, in every field, rise snll nushroorshaped block-
houses; these are the shelters where the citizens are to take refuge in case
of war with Yugoslavia. Sonone close to lover bxha explained the strategic

iaportance of these concrete mshroo- to a: The people will rush to then
to fire on the eneny thrnugh the loopholes while the Albanian Air Force will

nercilessly strafe the invaded land.

Today. I saw hope: After our visit to the Korea engineering plant, we were
finally to visit the linseun of Atheist: in Shkoder. The curator looks like
Voltaire: deep-set and evil eyes. We passed through the door of the first
roo- under the inevitable quotation from Karl liar: standing out against a
pale blue background: "Religion is the opiun of the people.” The Huseun of
Atheisn isn't such to look at. The first roo- displays several unrated
photographs of old nosques accoapanied by nunrous captions in Albanian.
Only two posters stand out in this scholarly exhibit: two portraits of
young wonen who have been blinded, one by a crucifix, the other by a ninaret.
Voltaire clears his throat and begins his explanations: ”Take lirwin's
phrase: 'Religion is the daughter of ignorance.‘ is was right. ”and
clains that the earth is flat and is supported by a vegan; the wonan is on
the head of an ox, the or on a fish. The fish on the sea. And the sea on
infinity." The curator mines the nost of it. The whole group bursts out
laughing. He continues in the sane cocking tone. "acre are prints of the
great nassacres carried out by Christians: the Saint Bartholonew sassacre,
the Inquisition. Here is a drawing of Galileo in prison. There. Voltaire's
words: 'In each century. religion has cost huanity a nillion lives.”

In the second roan, there are several caricatures of priests. In a large
display case is a striking wax mnequin draped in red with a serious face,
his side ripped open: "Here is Saint Prosper, a Spanish nrtyr priest
assassinated by the ﬂoors. The Church was saying that his body renained
intact. Catholics were paying to a) see it in the Shkoder cathedral. men

we closed the church. look what we found: a nannequin stuffed with straw.
ah hah!" With exaggerated gestures. the curator reainds us of a sass of

Catholic disgraces: Albania: curates collaborated with the Italian Fascists.

”OWNEONLY
mommuszouur

the Pope blessed masolini and Cardinal Spell-III the herican soldiers in
Vietnaa, the Poles are tearing the-elves apart. A true socialist comtry
nust eliainate the Church. What an actor! lle flies into a rap against the

hypocritical priests who defrock theuelves and play the guitar to better
attract the youth.

”In 1937, there were 166 churches and aosques in the m: district. just
36 schools and just 1 hospital. Today there are 357 schools and 408 health
centers.

"That's all very well, but there not be sly reaindars of Tales. Old people
who pray in secret. peasants who observe le-dan...”

”The ideological struggle continues. lie Inst watch the forcr priests to
see that they do not organize clandestine ceremnies, and the old people

to see that they do not pass on superstitions to their grandchildren.
Poreip groups flood us with brochures by the sea and the lakes. The best

activists thenselves aust rennin vigilant. Conrade Enver hoaha says that
you mt cleanse your conscience every morning."

Ah hah! I have opened the door. I press on: "Are these vestiges punished?
Uhat do you do if you discover a circmcised child?"

"Those responsible risk 2 to 3 years in prison."
"now my nosques are left?"

”All religious edifices in good condition have been converted into public
buildings. The Shkoder cathedral is a sports arena; the Praciscan church,
a novie theater. Sane have been preserved for their architectural value.
Others have been rated."

I want to spot the ninute vestiges of religion. I persuade latalie, the only
fun girl in the group, that she wants to go with us on an expedition through
the streets of Sakoder to look for old aosques. He go into the streets of
the old city which, as in Southern Italy, wind aaong low tile-roofed houses.

How do you identify a .3qu fron a distance? All the ninareta were torn

down long ago. we are going in circles before we con across a dilapidated
building with oval windows. lie approach the opening; the inside is destroyed.
full of rubble. A couple of old Albanians pass by. liatelie calls to then
and pretenth to bow down. Then she points to the building. The two passersby
grinace, say ”Pshsw, pshaw, Tea, yes," while shaking their heads and then take
off at full speed. Interesting. This ruin nust be a means men. He
approach a youg wonan to confir- it. She strides away. A third person
stops. a 60-year-old guy, with plenty of no. lie ates us a sin to follow
his. Perhaps he is taking us to so. secret ceremony? live ainvutes later.

I an singing a different tune. The guy has taken us to the cops. le

jabbers with the policemn on duty for 30 seconds. his tine. I see the

seas casing. The police-n barks out three sentences and points to us. The
passerby takes ae by the are and we leave spin. Ila doesn't let go of ne

“MUSEMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

until we are at the hotel. That evening. I an a little dejected. In: can I
find out whether Islas is still practiced today, if I cannot take me step
without the group? And then, I still do not understand how the Albania!
Comist Party nanaged to liquidate the religions. I decide to persevere;
if I keep asking questions. soneone will end up giving in.

”Enver Horne, Enver lloxha!" Three hundred 10-year-old young pioneers chat
the uses of their honored leader to welcons us to the beach at Durres. These
young comist scouts such to the bugle. One blast! They rush to the
water. Another blast! They get out. A but of Enter lions occupies the
place of honor like ‘sn altar in the caq's big asaedly hall. A little
farther down. anomer group of French tourists settles itself on the beach;
their young guide has a cup of coffee at the hotel while waiting for the and
of their swin. As he doesn't have Dritta's saintly appearance. I approach

his with a smile. I begin by citing a 1949 speech in which ﬁve: onha gave
assurance that he would never destroy the neones.

that has happened since this statsaent‘! "Everything changed in 1967."

explained the young guide, "with a new state-ant on religion fron ﬁner
ﬂoxhe."

I finally sanage to reconstruct the njor stages of this scuffle. After the
commist takeover in 1964, Rover Bozha and the Albanian Oo-Inist Party did
not attack directly. They put the hodjas and curstes on salary ad pre-

served the nosques and churches to avoid reaction by the people. hit, at
the sane tine, Buyer l-loxha had all the religious schools closed. It was a

delayed blow: No new priests were ordained. religious educatim disappeared.
It sufficed to wait until the old priests died; no one would be able to

replace then. or course, the priests cowhined. but they fond little
public support because officially the religions were tolerated and the clergy

paid.

Day after day, the press and radio harped on the parasites who lived off of
public funds and did not work. But that dith't carry it through. ‘nten. in
1967, a change in strategy. Dialectic nterialiss has had enough of super-
stition. Enver noxhs revives the struggle against religion. Bands of

youths invade the nosques, close then or occupy then. hat becones of the
priests? ‘lhe young guide remins vague. he renednrs the curate in his

neighborhood: Today he is a warehouse watch-an. To hear his tell it. the
aovennt did not arouse great resistance. As for the indo-itable faithful.
apparently they did not reset. I badger the guide to give us sons era-plea.

"It happened in Durres. An old huslin was praying at hone each evening. One
day the Youth Union kids went to his hone blowing bugles."

I i-agine that this type of scene nust have taken place are or less every-
where: The young col-anists ridiculed the believers ad the devout until
they renounced public practice. The young guide also tells us the twisted

story of a hodja .who was shot for being an accowlice in a burglary. There
were executions, then. Others were sent to penitentiaries or the lines. But

this period remined obscure until 1976 when Albania revived with a new

”WIMONLY
FOR OfﬂCIAI. USE ONLY

constitution. The 1976 Constitution pernanently prohibited any religious
propaganda.

Re are far iron the transition period when the state cue to term with the

obedient priests, the ones who agreed to declare: "God bless and bring
together all the peoples of the earth around the single party of peace led
by the glorious Soviet lbion and Stalin's spirit."

The socialist ethic slid into bed with religion first, before strangling it.
Take the places of worship. The Shhoder cathedral has heron a sports arena.
I saw yomg Albanians there training for basketball under a big banner pro-
claining "Glory to Hervdn-leninisn.” I gather wy infor-tion: Religion
has given way to sports, health and culture. The msques or churches have
becone schools. clinics, libraries, nurseries or mm.

New statues, new sacred texts: Stalin and hver Boxha have driven out God
and Hulls-ad. Lay cerenouies: political education in the place of reading
the Koran. The war for production instead of the holy war. what about the

crusades, retreats and pilgrinages? One mth's work on railroad construc-
tion for students, weekends in the country for the townspeople to help in

the harvests for the towns, and 3 weeks of annual nilitary training for
everyone. And heretics? The revisioniste, of course. And then. the revo-

lutionary family ethic praised in the Albanian Borhers Party's policy review.
Large families mat be broken down into one or two households. The youth

organizations should develop narriages of love inspired by true derivations:
proper attitude with regard to work. to state ownership. Marriages between

townspeople and villagers. Malia and non-Hun- that be encouraged.
Cohabitation is punished by 1 year in prison. Candidates for divorce are

dissuaded. Contraceptives and abortions are prohibited. In short, the new
ethics takes care of everything.

how did the forner believers react to the on ethics? I have trouble mder-
standing. What goes on in their ninds when faced with a cold and calcu-
lating naterialisn? Hy acting with Histo Treslra, fomr Albanian abuse-
dor to Paris, hardly reassures us. When I speak to his of the new ethics,
he backs off: ”He need it. Our country is isolated and it needs all its

strength. So as not to depend on foreigners, the constitution prohibits
outside loans."
"But you are accepting a considerable technological delay?"

"Enver lioxha has said: 'He will eat grass if necessary, but we will train--
tain our independence. "'

"You forbid cohabitation. Is it imral to you?"
"we do not want 14-year-old girls naming away tron hone."
"th the work caaps?"

"It seeas God has said: 'You will earn your bread with the sweat of your
brow.’ There I agree with bin."

NIOF'I'ICIALISEONIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhat a cynic this histo Treska is! Portmately, the next day I met Sherif.

Sherif co-ats a sacrilege. He has decided to observe Ianedan in our hotel
in Durres. lie refuses to eat with everyone in the restaurant and takes his

dinner upstairs under the dubfounded gaze of the staff. Sherif is a “er
of an Algerian scientific dclegation. Upon arriving in Tirana, he was con-
vinced that Albania was still a lbslin country. his colleagues brought his
up to date. furious, Sherif decided to put his foot down and to follow the
Koran to the letter during his stay. Uhich met his guide.

"I don't understand," he cowlains. "Sherif is a scientist and he observes
Raaadan." Smk in a sofa in the hotel lounge, another Algerian, Oachid,

sailes as he watches Sherif do his nuaber: "he's enggsrating. Raaedan is
not obligatory when you are traveling. lslan is a very flexible religion."

"You can to say that Islan can adapt, even in a con-mist country?"

“Of course," repeats lachid. "A person could very well be a mali- and
becone head of s co-Inist departnnt without anyone noticing."

"But , how?"

"A Malia must respect five nejor laws in his life. But he has the ridlt to
adapt then if the situation so requires. Prayers. for enqle. They can
all be said together in the evening, even Injured in bed without a mtion.
Aim? They are only required of the rich. The profession of faith? It is
enough to say: 'I recognize the existence of Allah, the one God. mks-ad
is his prophet.‘ The pilgrinsge to Mecca? It all depends on the resources
of the faithful one. If he doesn't have a penny, he can avoid it. laudan?
No one can dispense with it, but it can be observed discreetly. unless you
lunch at a plant cafeteria.”

I an inpressed. Islaa can therefore survive all repression with no apparent
sign. lbchid assures ne that it can. In detail: the wearing of the veil

is just a custon. The prayer rug urely eliainates disco-fort to the knees.
Fingers replace a rosary with no problen. The Friday holiday? lo problea,
it can be reduced to an hour of prayer. Ahstaining fro. alcohol. and circul-
cision? Just recs-ended. Ablutions take the place of confession and they

can even be perforned without water; with a stone, for example. As there
is no baptisn and two witnesses suffice for nrriage, the mosque and hodja

can be done without. And, contrary to Christians, ﬁnalise can publicly
renounce their faith. as long as they do not renounce it at the botton of
their hearts.

“And pork?"

"Ah, there the prohibition is strict. Except when there is nothing else to
eat." with a touch of condescension. Bachid explains to n that a Muslin
has the right to urry a wonn of another religion. he even has the right to
accoqany her to religious cerenonies. 0n the other hand, this is not

possible for a mslin woesn. ”The reason is aimle: we recognise other
religions. but other religions do not recognise us."
summon“

"No other obligation or restriction?”

”None. You see, Isla- is very tolernt. It is a silent strength.” This has
been denonstrated. In Albania, as elsewhere, you can very well be an outoand-
out malin without anyone noticing. As long as you don't violate Ramadan,
pork or the narriage of a thalin wonan to a non-linens. I comider for a
mnent the vagaries of religious history. Isla- tahes over and you have
Dwneyni's Iran, his fanatical nullshs, the veiled won. the executions.
Islan is forbidden. and I discover a sisple religion tut anyone can observe
without iqosing his rituals on others.

Rachid's revelations set ne on a new track. Are thousands of lanolin coo-
tinuing to practice Isla- in Albania without the co-Inists noticing? How
do I find out?

I gather pounds of newspapers in which "enduring traces” of religion are
disparaged. Miscellaneous acts abound. Sons grandparents privately confer

a second religious nane such as All or Abned on the children instead of
sticking I the authorised official nanes such as Light. Cascade. Spring,

or those of lllyrisn origin such as Skandsr. lhe nost culling disguise
religious rites. Instead of a cross. they brandish laurel branches. They

celebrate religious holidays as if they were birthdays. Other zealots sake
rosaries out of olive pits.

At each sign of religious practice, the "people's organisations" of the

towns involved are cheved out by the party press. Ihat are they waiting

r :o develop intelligent atheist propaganda? To explain that pork fat is
essential to strong workers and that the la-dan fasting exhausts your
health? ”Persuasive efforts" Inst be node with parents vho try to oppose

nerriages between fomr linslin and fomr alriatian felines. It is
advisable to watch out for certain habits. Such as the use of expressions

such as "Please Allah that it any rain." 0': visiting ceneteries. Placing
flowers on graves is allowed, but not on the days custolnry to religion.

0n the last day of ay trip, Allah the Benevolent guides ny steps to the
Dunes beach. Suddenly. ny heart skips a beat. here, under an udrella,
lseail Kadare. the greatest Albanian writer, is relaxing with his fsnily.

lie refused to participate in Apostrophes (a literary prograa on trench tele-
vision) so a not to end up next to a: Anerican on the platforn. Nichol

Piccoli is asking a film based on one of his books, ”General of the Dead
Arny." ‘lhey are talking about bin for a Nobel Prize.

It nay seen bizarre to bin, but still I confide ny concern: Doesn't the

bitter struggle against religion deprive the people of a part of their
culture? Isnsil Kadare rebukes ne gently: "but no. Isla- was brought to
Albania by Turkish invaders. It is logical for us to get rid of it.”

"Do you believe that Marxian-Laninisn is going to replace Isles?“
"Not entirely. "hat replaces it is rather the traditional clan ethics,

canon law. one's word. But we not watch out. sons rules were cruel. such
as the vendetta or the right of a Inn to beat his wife.”

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Isnail Kadare obviously doesn't want to talk about religion anynore. So 1
attack on his territory: ”Albanian literature today is exclusively realist.
That's a pity. isn't it?"

"You are forgetting our traditional literature. It is rich in epic poetry.
Are you faniliar with the saga of Skanderberg, the hero of the anti-lurk
resistance?”

”You have no are inaginative writers."

"That is true. Since the liberation we do not publish any nore imaginative
literature. Re have other priorities."

Isnail stare does not seen to worry about it nth. He has no problen with
the regins. he travels in Rance effortlessly. his books sell well. Ila is
nothing like a dissident writer. besides. there are no dissidents in
Albania. Retaliation against those who criticize the party is dreadful.

The penal code is very severe. An attenpt to flee the country: 10 years

in prison. Religious or antisocialist propaganda: 3 to 10 years, or death.

Not denomcing an eneny of the people: 10 years. lefusal to work: 2 years.
to find out nore, I track down Albanian refuges. ‘Ihe few I find refuse to

speak. If the party finds out. their relatives in Albania would suffer the
consequences. The Vatican stays out of it. Sensible.

The loan of the Albanian nosque in Brussels? when the co-unists cans to

power, he was studying in Cairo and he has not been back to Albania since.
He therefore had not verified for hi-elf what he told a: Great dioxi-

tsries executed, inane forced to eat pork in prisons and, on the other had,
high officials who would have paid a foreign student to give their children

a religious education.

what about Aaneaty International, to when the Albanian Covenant refuses
to reply? It has little infornation: "Several cases of persons sentenced
to serve up to 6 years in prison for listening to foreign radio. A group
of Orthodox priests defrocked in pwlic .- 1d forcibly shaved. If one of
then had protested, he would have been sentenced to 8 years for 'agitstion
against the state.’ Three bishops disappeared after having condncted
religious cerenonies in private. Tens of thousench of political prisoners
in labor caaps such as the Spaci copper nines."

After weeks of research, I finally succeed in eating with a recent refuge
in a smll town in Switzerland. This fornar worker had fled to Italy

through Hontenegro and Yugoslavia. According to his, the battle against
lslan was fought in blood, through nassive executions and syste-tic inprison-
nent of priests: ”In the 60's. any youth who frequented a nosque or church
was called before a neeting of the Youth Union. He had to give an explana-
tion and undergo hours of ease criticise. If he returned to see a priest,

he was expelled iron the union and tagged 'undeeirable.‘ 'Undesirablea' in
Albania do not enjoy thenselvee. A technician i-adiately finds hiuelf a

sweeper. A barber friend circuncised a child. Penalty: 9 years in prison.
A worker who was listening to Vatican Radio: 5 years. Besides, in 1970 the

MMWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

governnent dienantled antennas which were capable of getting Italian tale-
vision to coi’at its influence on the minds of the young."

"The young began to wear bell botton trousers, to let their hair grow, to
like rock and pop music. how people fabricate indoor television antennas

which they disnantle when they have visitors so as not to be reported.”

This is strange: Italian television was broadcast in Tirana every evening
iron 8 to 8:30 pa. But perhaps only loyal party aenbers are allowed to
have antennas capable of receiving these broadcasts. Even in this case,

the Albanians jan anything religious or pornographic. Sonetim they are
wrong. They jan a sequence on a lawyer's nesting. nae lawyers' robes nade
then look like priests. They let a Vietnamese priest speak: Inossible for
an oriental to be a priest.

"Authorities do not hesitate to interrogate children in school to identify
practicing fa-ilies. The questions are sly: 'Hhat holidays do you cele-
brate as a fanily?‘ and, the day after a religious holiday, 'Hsat did you
have to eat lmt night?” It doesn't take lunch to be called before the
police. One story aaong others. One day, a peasant had to give his two
cattle to the cooperative. The next day he is called to the police station.

"So. you are criticizing the party?"
"Never in ny life!”

"No use denying it, the cattle told us everything."

You can be sentenced for a drean. This is what happened to a guy who told
his neighbor he had dreamed about troops landing in Albania. The neigabor
rushed to the police. The guy got 7 years. I no longer knew where I an,

between a dress and a nightmare, the courage of the believers and ray dis-
trust of Islam. I collapse into convulsive fits of laughter as though

possessed by the devil when I discover that Albania is the only country
which approved of the taking of the hostages in the Anerican Hassy in
Tehran.

Too Inch, it's too much. For months, Albanian newspapers have been praising
the Iranian revolution without untioning the ayatollahs, with phrases such

as "Toaorrow, on the pedestals cf the statues of the shah, there will be
statues of the proletariat and the peasants." Albania and Iran have even

exchanged delegations. The Albanians have stated that they are delighted
with Iran's anti-inerialist struggle. And the Iranian deputy prine ninister:
"I admire the purity of cultural life in Albania where you do not see caba-
rets, night clubs, extravagant clothes or other extravagant things anywhere."

They are all definitely too mch.
COPYRIGHT: ACTUBL-JEIIIB AFRIQUB. 1982.

9693
C80: 3100/ 665

POIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

cums 0mm: MIC

DIARY. 8010108 0! SD woman's W DISCUSSED
Iadaurg srm in Ger-an Vol 35 lo 12. 18 hr 82 pp 256. 258. 259

[Article by Dieter Bub: "an: Suicide in Socialisn-At Age 18 the Daughter
of an SD Pmctionary Departed This Life. Der Diary Is Now Being Published
in the Hest"-"Flucht in die Holken" (Escape Into the Clouds) by 8ybille
Huthesius. published by lischer-Verlag. no; 622 pages nu 68.00]

(Tout! when the book case out in the as it was out of print vithin a few
days. Eager readers are now looking for it through newspaper ads. The
bestseller is authentic-«he diary of a girl who at age 18 co-itted suicide
in socialist Gernany. "Plight Into the Clouds." the story of Pony. will also
appear in the PIC at the beginning of April. [See above]

As a child in a privileged family 12-year-old Pony has ballet lessons.
travels with her parents and older sister Kaja to 3mm. Bulgaria and the
Soviet Union. She lives in a Berlin suburb in a splendid villa dating fro-
the 1920's with a big garden. Diary entry about a Sunday acursion: "Re
have a new car. really neat. Also a Hartburg. but deluxe. Real stall wheels
at the bottoa. In the niddle a really swell wine red. The top is black and
can be opened. Goes up to 150. Really neat! Daddy really opens it up.”
The father. a counist since his youth. a respected nednr of the SD.
believes in the structure of socialise and enjoys the privileges inch the
party offers hin. The fanily can satisfy alnost every wish it and Pony have.
Like her father. the girl believes in the trim of socialisa, feels sorry
for the young people in the capitalist Heat and wants to help children in the
Third world. The 603 idyll is spoiled only by the father's occasional
extramarital affairs which are not even hidden fro. the children.

Pony's tragedy begins at age 16. After a vacation in Dulgaria with her
parents and her friend Peer. she senses the niseriea of everyday life. The
beloved boy starts a 6-year course of study in the very reacts llnenau. and
at school Pony has to era- for a grade average of 1.2. That is the only way
she will have a chance for a place to study psychology.

One day during a physics class she covers in the dark corner of the laboratory
with a fixed stare. The faaily doctor is helpless and advises psychiatric
trestasnt. The girl is taken to a aental hospital. released. readsitted. has
electric shock treat-ants. returns hone. suffers fron school stress. The

10
mmmmv
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060037-0

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nother says: ”A grade of '6’ is like a death sentence for her!” Meanwhile
Pony wants to go to acting school. but is rejected on the adussion eaanina-
tion. her self-confidence is destroyed and her love for Peer is now under
suspicion by her parents. The authoritarian father and the doctors claia to
have discovered the cause of Pony's suffering in her relation to the gentle
boy. They prevent a holiday together and a nesting in Budapest.

when the nether recognises the nietake and brings the two together in Berlin
it is too late. The distraught girl leaves her beloved and tries to run to
the Rest through the Brandenburg Gate in the pouring rain. She is arrested.
interrogated and put back under psychiatric care. In the "baker." a solitary
cell. the thought of suicide develops fro- her yearning for death. Pollowing
her return to nornsl life her parents get her a tone in Berlin and try to
obtain a training opening. One Sunday. the father want on a short recreation
leave and the nother to a synposiun on social policy. the 10-year-old turns on
the gas cock.

The diary depicts the life and suffering of a child in the socialist achieve-
nent society. Hhat counts are first class grades and school work. an: Pony
is lacking are love and security. At age 11 she confided to her diary:
"Daddy always says that we are to cone to his: if sonething is wrong. but what?
I find that horrible!” She desires tine with her parents and harneny:

"Daddy and my should kiss each other once! Love. love. I love. That is
why I was in three nedical prisons."

Pony's report, illustrated with her drawings. oil paintings and colleges.
also reveals the nisery of psychiatry in the can which for decades rejected
Freud as bourgeois and had no new findings of its own to offer. Neurotics
were cosnitted and sedated with drugs. but they were not treated with therapy.

In the reginsnted everyday life in the GDR. which tries to narrow the personal
developnent potential of children and young people to a nini-m. squeesed into
petty bourgeois socialist values. nany young people see suicide as the only
way out. Pony's fate is not a unique incident. GD! doctors unofficially speak
of a frightening increase in the under of suicides by young people.

Pony's nether. a costune designer with the state filn society [Ger-an Piln
Corporation], views her daughter's fate differently. She believes that puberty
neuroses pronoted the girl's narcissism and her increasingly nore vigorous
desire for unregulated self-realization. ”At this point we encounter frustra-
tions which socially are diverse. In the PRC it is anxiety which can lead to
aggressiveness or drugs. in our case it is prinarily the unquenehable yearning

for faraway places.“

The mother, who cowiled Pony'a diary, letters and poem into a book and
supplemented then with her own descriptions. said to 81133: ”M: the tine
we really ought not to have put our child with her psychic illness into the
clinic. that way we would have spared her the fear of the fate of the other
patients. Perhaps we could have helped her then."

' Perhaps.
COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 Co

12126
C80: 2300/ 233

n
summons
Newman“

cm WC REPUBLIC

WAWBYMOYWGMBCHHW
Hedwrg arm in Get-II Vol 35 No 15. 7 Apr 82 p 228

[Article by Joerg von nuehrn end Dieter Bub: "we: The Marrassing
Escape Attth by Oleg Holt—The liephev. of the Chief of State Security Has
Arrested in Bungery Hhile Planning to Follow Ilia Girlfrind to the Hest"]

[Text] The young nen took the train fron East Berlin to Budapest. In the

Hungarian capital he nounted a bicycle and started pedaling. vith tut and
sleeping bag. to the Yugoslsv border. Be hed just finished erecting his tut

at s cseping ground when the Inngarisn security policy arrived and arrested
him. That happened in July of last year.

For the govern-ant inforners who keep cenp grounds and roeds leading to
border areas under surveillance. there was no doubt: the 23-year-old citisen
of the GDR planned to defect. But then the case hecene sensitive. The
arrested nen'e nene was Oleg Wolf; he was the son of the Chairnn of the
Acsday of the Arte of the (DI. Konrad wolf. who died in early llarch. and the
nephev of Mischa Rolf. the deputy chief of the State Security Service.

The young co-snist's escape attupt was a unique occurrence in the history

of the 603. while several tines in the pest offspring of pro-inst one
functionaries had departed the socialist fetherlend. this had never before

involved the top leadership of the secret service.

Oleg Rolf was flown in a special aircraft to Berlin-Schooefeld and delivered
to the detention center of the state security service in Sorbntresse. This
jeil is reserved for aggravated cases of aid to escapees. escape sttawts
involving force of arns end for "proninent persons.” As a rule. escapees ere
condemed to jail sentences ranging fron l and 1/2 to o years after a

period of 3 nonths detention pending trial. Oleg Wolf ves spared tree this
fete after receiving a good talking to by his uncle and his father. Pour

nonths later he as set free.

After attending a 10-year secondary school. the Boner-old V.I.P. offspring
had coepleted treining as e nechenic. Thereafter he worked at Berlin's

Cherite hospital as a nedical technician and studied at night to pass his
gredueting aseination. lie vented to beco-e a physician.

MWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oleg wolf is a sedur of the Free Gama Youth (PM). but has not been
particularly active in it. H'hile he expressed criticise of conditions in the
can in talks with his friends. he was not a “er of the underground. Oleg
had wanted to study in France or Switzerland and eventually to work as a

physician in developed countries. he had a good relationship with his parents.
On occasion he net with Uncle Mischa. about who. he said that one could
discuss anything with his.

In 1980 Oleg ends the acquaintance of 17-year old Reiko Behrand. who aoved in
with his shortly thereafter. The girl had left her apprenticeship Just prior
to that tile. Being without enploy. leike was considered an "antisocial
element." her personal identification papers were confiscated. She had to
report to the police mce a week. She decided to escape. Oleg wanted to
stay behind. During the night of 25-26 April of last year ﬂeike clibed
over the well at Spandau at 0153 hours. "he: she was spotted. the border
guards in a watchtower owed fire on her. The shots hissed.

Once in Rest Berlin the girl realized that she was pregnant. After Heike’s
successful escape Oleg decided to follow her. After his unsuccessful escape
attempt in Hungary. essbers of the state security service suggested to Beike
Behrend that she return to last Berlin. ‘i'hey pronised her i-unity froe
prosecution and assistance in asking a new start in the can.

During the middle of October Beike Behrend returned to the can via the
Friedrichstraase rail station. She loved in with Oleg for the second tine
and becaes the nether of a boy in Deceder. But soon there were arm-ants.
Heike moved to an apartnsnt which had been procured for her by the state
security service.

Oleg is once sore working as a eedical technician at the Charite. But his
life has changed. his forner friends with who. he had visited night spots
and discotheques are avoiding his. “they fear that he say have bought his
freedom in return for cooperating with the state security service.

At his father's funeral Oleg was standing next to his uncle of the secret
service. On that occasion. Mischa Wolf had his picture taken along with his
fanily not only by GDP. television. but also by SM photographer herald
Schnitt. There is an explanation for such publicity: hischa Rolf. 59. is
in line to succeed 76-year-old Erich Hielke as hinister for State Security.
And as a sinister he would not be able to avoid public appearances anyway.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Gruner + Jahr AG 8 Co

9273
cs0: 2300/253 END

13
summon“