FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

JPRS L/10062
21 October 1981

West Europe Report

(FOUO 54/81]

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
(PGUO 54/81)

CONTENTS

EMOHIC
FRANCE

New look at Concorde Situation Seen Possible
(AIR 8 Cam, 5 Sep 81).l..0.IOOOOOOOO0.0IOOOOOOOCOCCIOOCOC~OOI

POLITICAL

BELGIUM

Poll on Popularity of leading Politicians
(POURQUOI PAS?. 17 sep 81).00....UCO......0.I...‘.......l.......

FRANCE

Post-Afghanistan: Security ‘lhreat, European Defense Policy
(Francois de Rose; TRAVAUX ET REOIERCHES IE L'IFRI, Fourth
matter 19m)0000000.0DOOOtO0.000.IO0.0.DIOOIOOOOOOOOIIIOOOIOOO.

Economic, Social Crisis: Greatest Security 'mreat
(Lionel Jospin; TRAVAUX ET RBGlBRCHBS I! L'IFRI, Fourth
Quarter 19m)00.000.OOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOIIIODIOOIOOOODIOOO

SALT II, In; Arms Control, Not Disarmament
(Xavier Defline; TRAVAUX ET REQIERGIES DB L'IFRI, Fourth

Quarter 19w)ocooo-ooooon.not...oso!ooooooooooooooooooooooslsoooo

SPAIN

Calvo-Sotelo, Suarez Bid for Control Undamining UCD's Glances
(Mtxm Sarasqueta; MIG lb, 1’. Sep 81).ooooooooooooooccoo-coo.

- d « [III - WE - 150 POUO]

FOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16

21

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

FRANCE

A5151“! Antiahip Missile Test-Fired First Time
(Alnawm, Ssep 81)....000000000.00...IOOCIOIOOOIOOOOOOOOO. 3S

Briefs
Illegal Soldiers' Oomitteeo 36

(ENEML

FRAME

National Research, Technology Colloquium Annomced
(Pierre Langereux; AIR 6 (IBM, 5 Sep 81)....................... 37

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC FRANCE

NEH LOOK AT CONCORDE SITUAIION SEEN POSSIBLE
Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 5 Sep 81 p 9
[Article: "Concorde on Agenda of President Mitterrand and Mrs Thatcher"]

[Text] Reporting on her visit to Latche where she was President Hitterrand's guest,
Nicole Kern wrote as follows about the Concorde [supersonic transport] in LB FICARD
of 28 August: "Francois Hitterrand acknowledged with much regret that its commercial
operation will have to be cancelled even though he considers it a remarkable
technical achievement."

In London on 10-11 September

This statement, which was not denied, prompted a great many comments on both sides of
the English Channel. The Office of the President of the Republic announced:

"No special study of Concorde commercial operations is being conducted at the present
time. Concorde service is governed by an international collaborative agreement
between Crest Britain and France and is periodically reviewed by representatives of
both governments." The same source also indicated that the Concorde situation would
probably be discussed during the coming French-British top-level meetings to be held
in London on 10-11 September, meetings whose agenda has not yet been officially
confirmed.

If this does happen, the Concorde situation, which is periodically discussed between
the French minister of transportation and the British secretary of state for industry.
would thus, move back up to the very highest political echelon, a level at which it
has not been since the earliest days of the Concorde program's difficult beginnings.

Since then, Air France and British Airways have brilliantly demonstrated the transport's
technical qualities and shown that there is a body of customers for the ultrarapid
service provided by this type of aircraft, the only one of its kind in regular
international commercial operation. Continuously rising fuel costs are, however,

having a severe impact on Concorde operations.

we have the feeling that neither British Airways nor Air France want to end their
supersonic service, and this despite certain restrictions imposed on the operating
capabilities of the seven Concorde transports owned by the two airlines. An official
British report even concludes that, on the other side of the channel, Concorde
operations are considered to be producing slightly positive financial results.

FOR OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

Hhcn Joel Le Theule was minister of transportation, we were allowed to look at the
position papers he was taking to a meeting on Concorde with his British colleague

not so long ago. We were able to note how extremely complicated that documentation
was. Consequently we believe we can firmly state that such papers are not discussible
in detail at a meeting of the highest political leaders.

Toward A New Ministerial Meeting

President Hitterrand and Prise Minister Thatcher are, therefore, likely to instruct
Charles Fiterman and his British counterpart to conduct a new review of Concorde
operations, a new review that was, in fact, already planned. At this stage, it would
be advisable for the French not to appear, for the first time, to be calling for the
cessation of Concorde service, because the British continue to maintain that we have
not discharged our full share of this project's costs and would, therefore, make no
pay dearly for such a request.

No Definite Prospects in the United States

Beyond any immediate financial and commercial reflections upon Concorde's future,
consideration must be given to looking ahead and trying to determine under what
possible conditions the Concorde could be linked with a new generation of supersonic
airliners. Jack L. Kerrebrock, administrator of the 0.5. Office of Aeronautical and
Space Technology, recently told AVIATION DAILY that there would be a new supersonic
transport someday but that it does not seem desirable, at this stage, to emphasize
such a program. NASA continues to work on the variable cycle engine so as to be in

a position to contribute to the development of this type of engine when the time comes.
Some funding is being provided for research on the most critical components of an
advanced supersonic transport, but this funding support is less than the amount which
had been included in the initial 1982 budget proposed by the Carter administration.

It follows from these remarks that the “.8. research and development effort is not
aimed at any foreseeable target date for actual production of a new supersonic
transport. Assurance of a direct link between the Concorde and the new-generation
supersonic transports now appears to be increasingly unlikely.

COPYRIGHT: A. h C. 1981

8041
CSO: 3100/2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL BELGIUM

POLL ON POPULARITY OF‘ LEADING POLITICIANS
Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 17 Sep 81 pp 7-9

[Report on exclusive survey. conducted by Marketing Unit: "The Political Barone-
ter: Mark Eyskens Takes Tunble: Hilfried hrtens Recaptures Lead; Guy Spitaels
Becomes Mister Hallonia; Irresistible Rise of Eric Van Romptry"]

[Text] The goal of the political monster "P.P.? - Marketing
Unit" is to determine the popularity of those who govern us.

The question asked of the respondents was: "For each of the fol-
lowing political personalities, please tell me whether you would
like to see him play an important role in the coming Ionths?"

The survey was conducted between i and I; September 1981 by
Marketing Unit. a company specializing in market study and public
opinion polls. with a sample of 1.121 Belgians. 18 years of age

and older, structured by sex. age. type of housing. and socio-
economic class.

The results were weighed according to the size of the country’s
regions.

Marketing Unit is a member of Febelnar. the professional associa-
tion of Public Opinion Institutes.

At a. time when Mark Eyskens is trying desperately to hang on to power. we see that
his rating has dropped considerably in the country as a whole.

Indeed. he has lost four points at the national level, thus moving to third place.
behind 'dil tried Martens who. in spite of his exile. has not lost any of his credit.

Mr ﬂax-tens undoubtedly remains an important ele-ent. which it would be absurd to
ignore for the future.

0n the other hand. Mark Eyskens moved down everywhere. and particularly in Brussels
where he lost it points. which obviously seems enormous.

Obviously, the prime minister is paying very dearly for his tricky policy and also
for the softness and lack of courage which have presided over the development of
his scandalous budget. At the time of our April 1981 survey, Hr Eyskens, the

bearer of all hopes. was rising at a lightning speed. Obviously. it was not long
before he disappointed everyone.

FOR OWW‘TM "GP an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. let us also note the relative stability of Leo 'l‘indemans. and this in
spite of his recent setbacks. specifically concerning the presidency of the Council
of Europe. Let us nevertheless point out that the ayatollah from Ddegen is begin-
ning to lose ground. even in the Flanders.

Having said this. the biggest surprise remains the irresistible rise of Guy
Spitaels who. over a 5 month period. has become a very important national figure.

As a matter of fact. while he advanced 5 points at the national level. he won 11‘
points in Hallonia. becoming the most popular politician from the southern part of

the country. Is he thus drawing the dividends of his often advanced attitude in
community matters?

Another significant phenomenon. but this time in the Flanders. was the irresistible
rise of Eric Van Rompuy. the president of the CV? [Social Christian Party - Flemish]
Youth. who. ever a 1 year period. went from 7 to 2.1; points and who won the 10th
place at the level of the national audience. even ahead of people like Schiltz.
De Croo. ("\abert. Col. Simonet. or Leburton. Hr Van Rompuy has obviously benefited

from admirable marketing. even if some people confuse hill with his brother Her-an.
the (non-conformist) director of the CV? Study Bureau.

Among the noticeable setbacks. we should mention Vanden Boeynants who. with 30 per-
cent. returned to the low score he had already received in June 1980. thuestion-
ably. his presidency of the PSC [Christian Social Party - French]. which is perhaps
considered as lacking in determination. no longer receives the credit he could have
hoped for. The operation of opposition to the Wane budget. which he has just
started. will probably allow him to regain his former position. But public opinion
obviously expects more radicalism from his.

Let us finally note that Mr Clinne. Guy Spitaels’ former challenger for the presi-
dency. has returned to a relative obscurity. having been literally crushed by the
surprising score of the president of the PS [Socialist Party - French].

0n the other hand. the ot er Belgian leaders remained "stationary." with the encep-
tion of Ru Lilalloon Rally leader Henri Hordant who. for the first time. does not
even appear among the top 20 in the national classification. having lost it points
in Hallonia. which is harsh.

The independents of Messrs Duvieusart and Gendebden on the one hand and his desire
to merge with the FD? [Democratic Front of Brussels French Speakersj on the other.
all of this crowned by the prevailing confusion within the party. have been most
harmful to him. For the rest. neither PSC leaders Haystadt and Desmarets. nor UDRT

[Union for Democracy and Respect for Labor] loader Hendrick managed to cross the
borders of credibility.

Mark Eyskens: Declining Support

To complete this survey. we wanted to test the credibility of Mr Wens by asking
the following question:

"Do you have confidence that the prime minister will be able to solve the problems
which are currently facing Belgium?"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The response was enlightening as only 7 percent of the Belgians have full confi-
dence in Gaston's son. and 30 percent are rather confident. which brings us to a
total of 3? percent. 0n the other hand. 19 percent are rather not confident and
22 percent have no confidence at all. which brings the distrust vote to 1&5 percent.
with 18 percent with no opinion.

Now, it should be noted that in November 1980. in response to the same question,
Hr Martens won 1&8 percent of the confidence votes as against 36 percent opposed,
which was really an excellent score.

Obviously, the majority of the Belgians no longer have such confiderce that Mark
Byskens will be able to solve our problems. even if 38 percent wish to see his con-
tinue to play a political role. probably a more subordinate one. Hatch out for the
slippery slope!

TABLE 1. Election Results.

1. Hili‘ried Martens (2) 1+2 8.9. *
2. Leo Tindenans (3) 38 - 2
3. Mark Eyskens (1 38 - h
1+. Hilly Claes (1+) 35 - 1+
5. Karel van Hiert (7) 33 S.Q.
6. Guy Spitaels (8) 33 r 5
7. Hilly De Clercq (5) 31 - 3
8. Vanden Boeynants 6 30 - it
9. Antoinette Speak 9 28 + 1
10. Erik van Rolpuy (2b «- 2b (in September '801

?
11. Guy Mathot (12) 22 $.61.
12. CO-Fl “otm'lb £1“ 22 f 1
13. Henri Simonet 11 22 S.Q.
14. Andre Cools (1o) 22 s.q.
15. Joe. Chabert E15; 21 5.61.
16. Hugo Schiltz 16 21 0- 2
17. mm. Leburton (13) 19 - 2
18. Jean Col (1?) 19 + 2
i9. Ernest Clinne (20) 1" - 1
20. Heman De Croo (19) 1a - 1

Key: The first figure: rating of satisfaction in September 1981.

The second figure: the progress or decline of each personality.
Next to each name, their rank in April 1981.
5.0,. : no change.

EM! nvvvnvnw "cc hmV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TAKE 2. HALLONIA.
September 1981 April 1981 Difference

1. Guy Spitaels 1&8 3» 1’ 1b
2. Antoinette Speak 45 1W + 1
3. Andre Goals 38 38 3.0,.
lb. Hilfrled Martens 38 ﬁ Ser
5. Jean Col 38 3h 1' 1+
6. Guy Hathot 37 37 8.0,.
7. Hilly Claes 36 36 S.Q.
8. Vanden Boey'nants 36 1&0 - lb
9. Mark Eyskens 35 37 - 2
10. C.-F‘. Nothomb 31-} 3Q S.Q.
11. Edmond Leburton 33 3? - b
12. mnest Glinne 30 3h - lb
13. Henri Sinonet 29 8 ‘P 1
11+. ﬁenri Hordant 29 33 — a
15. Phi1 ippe Msystadt 2? 28 - 1

Let us repeat: Guy Spitaels has become the indisputable socialist leader of
Hallonia. retiring the likes of Mathot. Glinne and Leburton. He obviously has a
definite support. within the PSC. even though he has experienced a setback. Vanden
Boeynants has kept his leading position. as against a stationary Nothonb and a
Maystadt who obvioudy did not take off. On the other hand. tiaidly but regularly.
PRL LParty of Liberty and Walloon Reform] leader Jean Col has won his slot. going
from 32 in November 1980 to 3k in April 1981. and to 38 today. This is rather sig-
nificant. On the other hand. RH leader Henri Hordant has begun a serious decline.
and this in contrast with Speak, who is still going up. This should strengthen
the PD? in its desire to present itself in Vsllonia under its own label.

mam; BRUSSELS.
September 1981 April 1981 Difference

1. Antoinette Speak 1&9 51 - 2
2. Vanden Boeynants 1+7 51 - lb
3. Guy Spitaels 37 37 8.0.
h. Fark Mskens 33 L56 - 1
5. Hilly Class 33 33 S.Q.
6. Hilﬂ‘ied Martens 33 39 - 6
7. Henri Simonet 33 36 - 3
8. Jean Col 33 33 S.Q.
9. Hilly De Clercq 33 38 - 5
10. C.-F‘. Nothomb 33 30 + 3
11. Leo Tindemans 2? 2? S.Q.
12. Karel van Miert 21 25 -
13. Edmond Leburton 21 not classified
1b. .105. Chabert 21 not classified
15. Andre Cools 21 25 - 1;

Unquestionably. Hrs Spas]: and Vanden Boeynsnts remain the two big leaders in
Brussels. even if sometimes they go down rather noticeably. 0n the other hand. it
is a Walloon. Hr Spitaels. who holds the lead on the socialist side. Henri

Simonet. for his part. continues to decline in Brussels. even if he advances in
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hallonia. and in the Flanders. whereas the liberal Jean (:01 desperately (for him)
staguates in Brussels. It is true that the Flemish liberal De Clercq is also ex-
periencing a free fall. but the most sensational and most significant thrashing
remains that of Mark Eyskens. who lost in points.

TAKE h. FLANUERS

 

September 1981 April 1981 Difference

1. Leo Tindenans h? 1&8 - 1
2. Mark Eyskens 1&6 1+6 S.Q.
3. Hi1 fried ﬂattens 1&6 M 1' 2
h. Karel van Hiert 1&6 1+? - 1
5. Hilly De Clerq 35 41 - 6
6. Eric van Rompuy 35 10 + 25
(Sep. 1980)
7. Hilly Claes 33 - 5
8. Hugo Schiltz 30 28 4» 2
9. Vandcn Boeynants 24 2? - 3
10. J03. Chabort 21+ 25 - 1
11. Herman De Croo 20 ‘42 - 2
12. Guy Spitaels 18 22 - I4
13. Henri Simonet 16 15 P 1
1h. Andre Cools 13 12 + 1
15. c.-r-'. Nothomb 11 10 p 1

Things are obviously turning sour for the leaders of the WV [Party of Liberty and
Progress]. Minus 6 for Hilly De Clercq, minus 2 for De Croo: that is beginning
to hurt. Things are not more cheerful on the side of the socialists: since Novem-
ber 1980, Karel van Miert has been engaged in a slow but steady decline, whereas
Hilly De Clercq went iron 1&1 in November 1980. to 38 in April 1981. to 33 today.
This represents a very serious loss of support. 0n the other hand. although
Tindemans and Mark Eyskens are still holding on. Hilfried ﬂattens has taken off
toward a new popularity. Having said this, the most surprising thing is unques-
tionably the fabulous upsurge of Eric van Roapuy. who has apparently become an es-
tablished fact in the Flemish political scenery by cheerfully eclipsing the likes
of De Croo. Chabert. Schiltz. and Class. and by even catching up with De Clercq.
Let us also note that the further Mr Spitaels advances in Hallonia. the more he
falls on the Flemish side. going from 21; in November 1980 to 22 in April 1981,
dropping to 18 today. This should undoubtedly comfort him in his Halloon crusade.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 FOURQIDI PAS?

81:63
cso: 3100/19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL mug];

POST-APGMNISTAN: SECURITY WHEAT, EURG’EAN DEFENSE POLICY
Paris TRAVAUX ET REOIBROiE IE L'IFRI in French Fourth Quarter 1980 Vol 1 pp 335-3103

[Article by Francois de Rose, French Ambassador and former permanent representative
of France to NATO. Section V, part I, of new series, 'l'lAVAUX ET RI-IOHZROlE IE
L'"IFRZ". Vol 1 is "The Security of Europe in the 80's”, various authors; published
mder the direction of Pierre lellouche by IFRI, (Institut Prancais dee Relations
Internationales) 415 pp]

[Text] For anyone who is not convinced by the explanations and the assurances of
Chairman Brezhnev, the events in Afghanistan should mark an important date in the
evolution of the relations between the Soviet Union and the rest of the world.

As I am neither a Kremlinalogist nor a specialist in Asian problems, I will not try
to determine the basic causes of this action by the last imperialist power of this
end of the century. I will only note that this action follows logically on opera-
tions which, from North Korea to Cuba and Angola, Mozambique. Ethiopia, South
Yemen, Vietnam, and Cambodia, testify to the continuity of a design. Considera-
tions of opportunism certainly played a role: a reply to the consolidation of the
diplomatic position of China, following the Sino-Japanese treaty and the normaliza-
tion of relations between Beijing and Washington; a favorable situation created by
the events in Iran, underlining the vulnerability of the "eat to an energy crisis
and the inability of the United States to free its diplomatic hostages; the aban-
donment of any hOpe of early ratification of the SALT II treaty; the political
drift of the Amin government in Afghanistan. All these facts and many others cer-
tainly were weighed in the balance by the masters of the Kremlin.

However, if many elements were at the origin of the invasion of a vital region of
the Asian continent by the Red Army, among which we cannot say which were the most
important, the result is that, from this platform, it can keep two irons in the
fire: keep things unstable and work against the territorial integrity of Pakistan,
a country friendly to China and which the Soviet news agency TASS already accuses
of being an obstacle to any political settlement of the crisis; or threaten the oil
fields, without whose production the Western economy will break down. As has been
Said on many occasions. the strategy of the Soviet leaders is a global and indirect

strategy.

it is global because, in the purely military definition of strategy, that is, the
preparation and use of force for political ends. they have combined action in the
political and ideological domains with the taking of control of positions which
give them in Africa and in the Indian Ocean more facilities than the Western powers
have .

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The only area where, up to the present, the USSR has not succeeded in making points
against the comtries of the free world is the economy. With a foreign trade a-
mounting to 3 percent of total world trade, the Soviet means for exerting pressure
on the West only bear or. certain specific supplies, useful no doubt (petroleum,
natural gas, titanium) but nevertheless too limited in scope or duration to give
the Soviet Union a powerful means of leverage. Moreover, Soviet exports are more
than largely compensated for by its own import needs.

The seizure of Afghanistan will not increase the resources available to Moscow.

However, it will provide the means to exercise a potential threat to the very basis
of the Western economy.

For the followers of the indirect strategy the progress achieved by the Soviets is
essential. The art of the strategist, like that of the chess player (a more stimu-
lating national game in intellectual terms than poker or bowling), consists in
gaining the maximum with the minimum of means and of risks. To do that one has to
have in all areas possible courses of action which will force one's opponent to draw
back, after an evaluation of the balance of forces. This is what happened to

Khrushchev at the time of the Cuban missile crisis and what bhe Soviets have
sworn to themselves will not happen again.

By the occupation of Afghanistan the USSR is henceforth in a position to exercise
in the economic sphere intolerable pressures on the countries with a liberal

economy. This is the complementary resource which the Soviets lacked in terms of
their global strategy.

Quite evidently, this does not mean that the Soviet Union will use this pressure to
strangle the West. This is all the less likely since Hashington has made it

known that an attack on the free flow of petroleum exports from the Persian Gulf
area would lead to war. However, unless one believes that the two superpowers are
heading toward a kind of "super suicide," things won't happen that way in a period
02 crisis. Events will evolve, in all likelihood, toward an evaluation of the
respective elements of power and of vulnerability. It is at this point that the

S. viet presence in Kabul. in Aden, and in Addis Ababa constitutes a potential threat
to the Westerners' very source of life. And if the analysis made by the men in the
Politburo brings them to believe that capitalism has entered the final crisis pre-
dicted by the sacred texts of Marxism, one cannot ignore the possibility that one
day they might be tempted to hasten the end of capitalism by an interruption in oil
deliveries, if their evaluation of the facts of the problem leads them to conclude
that the balance between risk and gain is favorable to th-.

Even independently of a possible conflict, it is clear that the possibility the

USSR would have, directly or indirectly, to put its hands on part of the petroletml
production of the Persian Gulf, would have considerable economic importance for the
Soviets. First of all, to meet their growing petroleum needs. Following that, to

obtain substantial foreign exchange earnings if the countries falling under its
control would continue to export to the Nest.

0n the political plane the consequences would be no less iaportant. If it should
happen that the USSR can no longer, with its own resources, meet the energy needs

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of its satellites, the latter would be forced to obtain their supplies on the world
market. Their resulting foreign payments problal would aggravate their present
debt to the external world. For Moscow there would be a loss of a powerful lever
of influence. Control of part of the production of the Near East would avoid this
danger.

These considerations could therefore be added to the reasons arising from Soviet
rivalry with the West to provoke a movement in the direction of the oil wells,
more particularly in the northern area of the Persian Gulf.

In any case, on the strictly operational level, given the hypothesis of a conflict
in Europe. the occupation of Afghanistan does not change much in terms of the prob-
lem of European defense. Since the completion of decolonisation and the appearance
of atomic weapons, the Western powers. in terms of their sespower, are no longer
in a position to apply the strategic concept which gave than victory in the past:
"giving up ground to gain time." (This is a concept which won out in the last world
war, thanks, moreover, to the decisive participation of the Soviet lhion, because
its size let it apply the same principle.)

However, the effectiveness of this doctrine rests on the possession of resources,
the control of the seas, and the time factor making it possible to bring the re-
sources to bear, while a blockade forces the enaly to depend on its own resources.
The control of resources has been lost, mastery of the seas would be challenged,
and it is out of the question that a war in Europe could last beyond a few weeks.
This means that war would be waged with what one would have at the beginning and
that its outcome would no more depend on supplies of petroleum from the Middle
East than it did in the past on the capacity of industry and shipyards in the
United States to produce 50,000 aircraft and 10,000 Liberty ships after 3 years of
war.

This confirms us in the view that the problem posed to us-and which the Afghanis-
tan affair shows us in all its "purity"--is that of a strategy for a state of no-
war. Now, it seems that there is a disturbing contrast between the approach to
the problem in Moscow and in the Hastern countries.

We have said that the USSR is applying an indirect global strategy, to which the
invasion of Afghanistan provides in part the economic dimension which was mis-
sing. l-Nerything is happening as if the whole of international and national life
were seen in Moscow in a context of confrontation (which does not mean conflict).
.‘lot only is the confrontst ion seen as inevitable and implacable but even desired,
or perhaps better described as the thread of history, the very substance of which
the present and the future are made.

It is not like that at all in the "eat. We have policies, and often grand poli-
cies, like the reconciliation between the former enemies of past wars, the con-
struction of Europe, aid to the Third World, transformation of a style of living.

These are so many examples of a vision of the world which looks to the future. He
also have defense policies for which we agree to make substantial sacrifices.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run us rn Isl ‘ .u u n.|

However, as far as foreign policy and defense policy are concerned, it does not
appear that our countries think of these problems in the context of a confrontation
or, in any case, of a rivalry with an opposing group of countries which is follow-
ing a strategy in the sense of a struggle to impose its political, economic, and
social system.

Not only would the strategy followed in recent were no longer be applicable, not
only is it the case that the Atlantic Alliance has no concept of victory in the
event of hostilities (it aims only at halting hostilities because of the danger

of an escalation to extreme levels of conflict), but nothing would be more foreign
to our vision of international relations than to consider them in the perspective

in effect on the other side of the Elbe River. Our only overall concept is oriented
on the hape that, over the long term, the differences in nature and objectives be-
tween the East and the Heat will wind up by blurring away on the single condition
of increasing trade and contacts.

Our vision of the confrontation is exclusively military. Regarding our economic,
cultural, scientific, and technological relations with the countries of the Warsaw
Pact. we only see them in a perspective and in the service of detente. It is clear
that we are not speaking the same language.

However, the events in Afghanistan have provoked reactions which lead one to think
that it should be possible to benefit from them on condition that we take this
view of two worlds in opposition to each other and not that we are preoccupied
with returning as quickly as possible to the intellectual comfort of a resumption
of detente. The feelings in the Muslim world, even in Iran under Ayatollah Khomey-
ni, the unease felt by Indira Ghandi herself, the concern of Europe and of China,

and the reawakening of the United States constitute a spectacular turnaround in
the situation.

In such circumstances the French government certainly is right in not wishing to
give to the countries which consider themselves non-aligned the impression that, if
they condemn Moscow, they would necessarily agree with western views of the situa-
tion. If, in the face of Fidel Castro's efforts. Marshal Tito succeeded once
again in saving the Third Horld, at the havens Conference, from an unconditional
allegiance to Moscow, if Afghanistan aroused reactions which we have just recalled,
it does not follow that the non-aligned should have the intention, for all of that,
of seeming to move closer to the westerners.

However, we can ask ourselves if it is appropriate to stiaulate our reserve forces
by the fear of a "resurgence of the power blocs." There is not and there never
has been a power bloc in the Rest, and France, more than any other country, is best
qualified to know this. when France wished to leave the integrated military organ-
ization [of NATO], when France asked the staffs and forces of its allies to leave
its territory, it ﬁnnediately obtained satisfaction. Even Greece was able to

do the same thing, and as far as Turkey is concerned, it demanded and obtained the
closure of the stations from which the United States observed the Soviet missile
tests at the Baikonur base in Central Asia. Despite this, a reference to the
policy of power blocs is part of our political phraseology. This is not only un-
just in terms of the comparison which it seems to make between the relations

of the free countries within the Atlantic alliance and the state of

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subordination which characterizes the relations between the satellite countries
and the USSR. It can constitute an obstacle which we impose on ourselves in the
evaluation of events concerning our security, if it is in the name of our inde-
pendence that we limit the exercise of our independence. It is not certain that
this is the best way of acting on the flow of events, in terms of the reactions of
an American administration which, after having believed for too long a time in

the virtue of a dialogue and in the good faith of the Soviets, risks going over to
the opposite extreme.

How have we not shown the independence of our judgments, in the face of the con-
verging points of view of the two superpowers, by refusing to approve of the SALT

II agreement which, moreover, marks a deterioration in the overall balance of
forces, in the detriment of the West!

Heanwhile, the Russians call on the policy of detente to attempt to prohibit the
emplacement of missiles necessary for Europe's defense. They state, without

being contradicted, that with 100 Pershing rockets having a range of 1,800 km the
Americans would have a first strike capability, as opposed to the 1398 inter-
continental missiles spread out through the immensity of Soviet territory! 0n

the day after the entry of the Red Army into Afghanistan, they had the effrontery
to say that the deployment of the Pershing missiles constituted "implicit aggres-
sion"! And the organization of Atlantic Alliance maneuvers in Norway was presented
by PRAVDA as a policy of hostility toward the USSR!

Certainly, the Afghanistan affair has not placed our security in danger, over the
short term, as the success of the Kremlin campaign against the Pershing missiles
would have been. However, the two operations, placed in their present context,
show the desire of the masters of Russia to extend their empire where they con-
sider it necessary at the same time as they attempt to prohibit the modernization
of Europe's defense systems.

There is another consequence of the Afghanistan affair which could have very pro-
found and perhaps healthy repercussions on European security. That is the emerging
awareness by the Westerners of the need to draw the appropriate consequences from
the fact of their vulnerability to events occurring in the four corners of the
world and the profound change that has taken place in the general circumstances
affecting their security.

Up to and including World War II Europe was the center of the world and dragged the
rest of the planet into its wars.

Since 1965 our continent has found itself in a very particular situation: no longer
the center of the East-West confrontation, it has known the state of no-war and a
feeling of security unknown until then. Certain countries, like ours, have been
shaken by the pangs of decolonisation. However, the state of peace in Europe has
been really perturbed only by the Wars between Israel and its neighbors, Vietnam,
Soviet penetration in Africa, etc., not to mention the disturbance of our economies
consequent on the repeated increases in the price of petroleum.

Now, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan has come to change this view of things.
Suddenly, we have realized that events taking place outside our geographic area

12

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OVI.\

would involve us in war. it is no longer we who threaten to drag the world into
our wars, it is the problems and tensions developing thousands of kilometers from
our borders which threaten to involve us in their warlike repercussions.

The first consequence that the European countries should draw from this is the
need for them to increase their capabilities for intervention beyond their own
continent. On this point France is far from being the country which is least
aware of the problem. Its fleet on the high seas unquestionably has the capa-
bilities of an ocean-going navy, and its rapid deployment forces are probably the
best available in Europe.

Two facts must remain constant in our minds: the withdrawal of the British
presence East of Suez when the London government, considering that it could not at
the same time maintain a presence in the Indian Ocean and in Europe, sacrificed the
overseas coundxment for the benefit of the British Army of the Rhine. The other
fact is the position in which Hashington found itself when, in order to put two
aircraft carriers in the vicinity of the Persian Gulf, it had to withdraw one from
the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean and one from the Seventh Fleet in the Pacific.
There are therefore insufficient forces to hold several fronts at the same time.

An increased rearmament effort, as a consequence of the overseas threat, is there-
fore necessary, independent of the programs adopted concerning security in Europe,
and. as far as we are concerned, the modernization of our nuclear and conventional
forces charged with the close-in defense of our territory is also necessary.

lbwever, once the security of the European countries is threatened, not only on the
continent but also overseas, it is necessary for them to be able to act in the
defense of their interests. This is a matter, overall, of noting that we will not
purchase our security by devoting between 2.5 and 4 percent of our gross national
product to defense. He also have to recognize that there is no miracle formula
which could compensate for the fact that the Soviets are now in a position to
threaten the oil fields and the Straits of Ormuz and that they have logistical
positions which would permit their ground and air forces to intervene there in a
few hours. Thus, the demands by certain countries of the region for a withdrawal
of the two superpowers or those tending to leave the Indian Ocean only to those
countries on its shores, are they pretenses whose eventual acceptance would leave
the field free to the sole influence of the USSR?

At the same time we understand the inadequacy of our structures and of our means

of partying the new dangers which threaten us. After we felt indignant at the
statement made by Henry Kissinger that Europe only had regional interests, we noted
thatif our interests go beyond the framework of our region, our means of action
hardly go beyond it. Depending almost entirely on the countries of the Persian
Gulf for our supplies of petroleum, we also depend on the presence of the American
Fleet to ensure the free movement of the oil tankers.

The Atlantic Alliance does not cover this region of the world which is vital for
all the nations of the alliance and for many other countries, in the first rank of
which is Japan. This geographic limitation which ensures that, beyond the Tropic
of Cancer the allied conmmnds have no further authority, may appear absurd. How-
ever, it is a fact, and there would be no political possibility of changing this
state of things and of extending to the whole of the Atlantic Ocean and the Indian
Ocean NATO's zone of responsibility.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem had been posed in 1958 by General De Gaulle in the famous memorandum
which he sent to President Eisenhower and to Prime Minister Macmillan of Great
Britain. "The Atlantic Alliance," he wrote, "was conceived and its application
was prepared for an eventual zone of action which no longer relates to the politi-
cal and strategic realities. The world being what it is, we can no longer con-
sider as adapted to its purposes an organization such as NATO, which is limited

to the security of the North Atlantic Ocean, as if what is happening, for example
in the Middle East or in Africa, did not immediately and directly involve
Europe...." And he proposed a little further on, "that at the world political and
strategic echelon an organization be established including the United States,
Great Britain, and France," which would have the task "of establishing and. if
necessary, of implementing strategic action plans, particularly involving use of
nuclear weapons."

We know that this memorandum was not followed up and that, from this date on the
process of estrangement of France from the integrated military organization began.
Let us note in passing that France did not yet have nuclear weapons and that pro-
posing a sharing of the decision to use American weapons was in conflict with
what the general was himself to recognize later on, that is. that this is a
responsibility which cannot be shared.

However, doesn't the rest of the reasoning have an astonishingly contemporary sound
with the invasion of Afghanistan and the threat to the petroleum sipply lines? Is
it necessary to wait, as in the case of the Shaba area of Africa, for a crisis to
be fully developed so that. in the event, France and the United States would agree
on the logistical support which the latter would provide to the former or to exam-
ine in advance the possibilities of intervention and support? Do we still recall
that at the time of the Yom Kippur War in 1973 only Portugal under Prime Minister
Caetano agreed to authorize the landing of American planes in the Azores, bringing
on an urgent basis the equipment Israel needed and that, without this help, only
one-tenth as many American supplies would have been received.

If the western governments recognize that the conquest of important geostrategic
positions by the Soviet Union constitutes economic and military threats, they
might usefully take up the idea presented in the 1958 memorandum.

Under what form and with what participation? Those are the points to be studied.
No doubt, this should be done in the least official. least structured manner
possible. Starting From the fact that the Westerners have to project elements of
forces to points far away from their zone or where the bulk of their forces are
located, it should be a matter of examining the possibilities which they would have
of according each other facilities for stocking, transport, and communications,
allowing the most rapid kind of intervention.

Naturally, there should be no question of establishing any kind of political organ-
ism requiring new commitments or of expanding to the whole planet the commitments

of Article V of the Washington Treaty [the North Atlantic Treaty of 1949]. Instead,
it would be a matter of preparing, in the military echlons and between the countries
which have the capabilities and responsibilities of implementing a policy which is
not exclusively regional in scope, the means for their governments to act beyond the
geographic limits presently covered by the Atlantic Alliance if one day they

14

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SI’? ONLY

consider it necessary. Let the Federal Republic of Germany and perhaps Italy

be added to the three countries of which General De Gaulle was thinking. This
would seem to be called for, the more so as in no case could there be any question
of using nuclear weapons. Let us say, to be specific, that if American, French,
British, and perhaps tomorrow German, Italian, and even Japanese naval forces are
permanently stationed at the approaches to the Persian Gulf, it would be desirable
that they are mutually aware of what their missions would be and what their re-
sources would be to provide protection to the movement of petroleum tankers when-
ever there is a threat to these movements. It would be desirable if certain of
the Western countries, which should not always involve the Americans, as we saw in
the case of the Sheba affair already mentioned, were to undertake rapid redeploy-
ment of forces, were the transport available, facilities for stopovers en route,
and stocking of supplies known in advance.

What the governments of the Western countries must decide is whether the invasion
of Afghanistan is only "unacceptable" from the moral and international law point
of view or whether it also constitutes a threat to the security of the peoples

for whom they are responsible. If it is the second hypothesis which they decide
on, the least that we can say is that we are not drawing the necessary conclusions
from it.

Several months after the invasion of Afghanistan, it remains difficult to under-
stand that our governments have not considered it useful to call immediately for a
meeting at the ministerial level of the North Atlantic Council. Even a meeting of
the foreign ministers of the United States, of the Federal Republic of Germany,

of Great Britain, and of France, in the form of a working dinner, has not taken
place, for reasons which remain all the more mysterious for most of us, since we
have since then received Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko in Paris and met Chairman
Brezhnev in Warsaw.

if we still need several crises like the invasion of Afghanistan in order to under-
stand the nature of the threat to which we are exposed and to change our reflexes,
there are still good times in prospect for the strategists of the Kremlin.
COPYRIGHT: Ifri, 1980.

5170
680: 3100/97?

15

FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL PMNG

ECONOMIC, SOCIAL CRISIS: GREATBT SECURITY 'BIREAT
Paris TRAVAUX ET RECHERCHES m L'IFRI in French Fourth Quarter 19% Vol 1 pp 345-349

[Article by Lionel Jospin, national secretary of the Socialist Party for international
relations. Section V, part 2 of new series, TRAVAUX ET RECHERCHE IE L"'IFRI".

Vol 1 is "The Security of Europe in the 80's", various authors; ptblished under the
direction of Pierre iellouche by mu, (Institut Prmcais des Relations Internationales)

415 pp]

[Text] The Iraq-[ran war, the events in Poland. the invasion of Afghanistan, the
deployment of 55—20 medium range rockets, the decision to station Pershing rockets
and cruise missiles in Europe—these are among the facts which, since the beginning
of the year, indicate at tins violently and in a disturbing way our entry into s
new phase of international relations. Destabilized in depth by the emergaice of
the Third World on the international scene, marked by an economic and political
crisis which is sparing very few industrialised countries, the old order based on
a balance of power blocs is splitting up, but without a new international order
emerging as yet. How will Europe was through the present test—that Europe where
the division of spheres of influence after World Her 11 was lurked with the
greatest clarity and on which the economic and political crisis weighs with par-
ticular force? Will there be progress or regression? Today some people ask them-
selves about the security of Europe, as they spoke about its future, not so long
ago. Is this a sign of legitimate disquiet or of a psychological and intellectual
withdrawal?

it seems to me that the primary threat hanging over Europe, its balance, and its
future is posed by the economic and social crisis which so many of the countries
of Eastern and Hestern Europe are experiencing and the obstacles within the
European Connunity. which has not known how to affirm its identity in the face of
the great powers, up to now.

The aggravation of the unemployment problem. without inflation being brought under
control, characterizes the economic situation in Western Europe. The adoption of
policies to deal with the recession—~with the notable exception of the Federal
Republic of Germany but whose explicit policy of accepting a budgetary deficit is
experiencing real difficulties--which are increasing social inequalities, and an
attitude of fatalism among the people has its repercussions in the political and
institutional field. The renaissance of reactionary and even racist ideologies,
the emergence of acts of terrorism are accompanied by a move to the right and by
questions regarding the role of political parties and of institutions which pro-
vide guarantees for democratic life.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

In the countries of Eastern Europe the feeling of stalemate in the bureaucratic
societies there, whlch are also encountering a weakening of their economic capa-
bilities already notably clogged by the low productivity of their productive
apparatus and disorder in the distribution system, can lead to social explosions as
a result of the refusal by their governments to accept a pluralistic system as an
expression of social diversity. The events in Poland show how unavoidable is the
process of evolution in these countries. However, they also show the risk of
instability which evolution brings with it. To deal with the claims and dissatis-
factions of the working classes and the respective peoples, a recourse to external
adventures has often been a good recipe. All this is to say that the resolution

of the internal problems of Europe and of each European country will be a major
element in ensuring the security of Europe in the 1980's. That is why one of the
main lines of orientation of the socialists is a refusal to accept the inevitability
of a continuation of the crisis. Of course, these problems cannot be resolved by in-
ternal measures alone. The external environment of Europe will be an influence in a
decisive way. It is therefore important to seek to control these external influences
and particularly to define Europe's place in a world economy in the course of change.

Among others, the solutions chosen to make possible a reduction in the energy de-
pendence of Europe, to expand its action in favor of the growth of the developing
countries, and to negotiate the establishment of rules for an international economic
order accepted by all will provide the design for the future of Europe.

The petroleum crisis is not the whole crisis, as it does not explain all of it.
However, it makes it possible to see many facets of the crisis. Among them, we for-
get too often the attempts to restructure the world economy through the large,
multinational firms. The crisis is also bringing out a new division on the inter-
national scene between the countries which produce or have petroleum (and among
them are industrialized and Third world countries) and consuming countries (and
those have different development levels).

dowever, rather than developing an overall policy based on the establishment of a
new source of energy, France and Europe prefer to attempt to use in their favor the
contradictions existing within OPEC, or profit from the possibilities opened up by
the appearance of new producers "outside OPEC," such as Mexico. And each country,
in trying to maintain its place or improve it, pays the political price of petro-
leum.

However, the increased efforts to save on energy, the broadened program of re-
search on new sources of energy, and the decrease in the decline of coal production
should, in France itself, reduce an excessive dependence on imported petroleum.
More broadly, the negotiation of middle range petroleum development agreements with
oil producing, developing countries and the adoption of joint planning programs,
expanded to include all of Europe, should permit the stabilization of petroleum
prices, whose erratic evolution is the most dangerous threat of all.

Farther afield, it is necessary to work actively on the development of the Third
World countries. For socialists, there cannot be uncontrolled development by

putting these countries in competition with each other. The struggle for a self-
centered model program. giving priority to investments useful to all of the people,

17

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

and in particular to agriculture, remains a necessity. This is the only way to en—
sure the real social progress of these countries and the development of social
rights and freedoms which today are too often scorned. The exploitation of an
under-paid and under-organized working force cannot provide a real base for devel-
opment, progress, and stability.

These objectives cannot be pursued unless the economic rules are established and
accepted by all countries engaged in international trade. The vagaries of the
international monetary system, the absence of a consensus on its functioning, the
difficulties which the United States has in resolving the internal problems of

its economy without affecting the stability of the dollar-all of these circus-
stances maintain a state of permanent disquiet. And if the European Monetary Sys-
tem can have an effective role to play, its proper functioning remains too close-
ly linked to deflationary policies to provide the basis for a new equilibrium.

If economic stability is a guarantee of our security, the threats to the security
of Europe are also linked to the new armaments race, to the enhanced fragility of
detente, to the demonstrations of force by the great powers and more particularly
by the USSR, and to the indecisiveness in the foreign policies of all of the
European countries.

The invasion of Afghanistan, coming after the deployment of the 88-20 missiles
aimed at Western Europe, certainly give rise to suspicions regarding the willing-
ness of the USSR to maintain an atmosphere of detente. The delays by the Senate
and the Congress of the United States to ratify the SALT II accord* and the
decision by NATO to emplace Pershing rockets also made these developments appear
to reflect a certain hesitation by the United States about the course of detente.
We are observing a crisis in detente signals, a reciprocal loss of confidence by
the two great powers, a source of misunderstandings which is filled with danger.
The growing misunderstanding-—but things are not irreversible-between the USSR and
the United States, and their desire to reaffirm their hegemony over the world to-
day, constitute the greatest threat of all.

Any policy of force presupposes that the country which commits itself to it is
calculating for itself the risks which its actions involve. The USSR must know
that the Europeans are not disposed to accept, especially in the name of a flouted
kind of detente, any demonstration of power which is dangerous for peace. It is
important to show our capacity to preserve our independence. The legitimacy of
the pose of the USSR as a defender of peace has been largely placed in question.
It would be absurd not to turn back to it the burden of proof regarding its de-
clarcd objectives. The USSR has often emphasized the ideological struggle, and

we have not hesitated to take our place on this ground. The impasses which have
developed within the Soviet bureaucratic system and the inability of the system to
guarantee individual and collective liberties still remain. A France which knows
how to commit itself and to bring Europe along to the establishment of a more just,
more egalitarian, freer, and more independent society may constitute a point of
reference which will go beyond the traditional East-West cleavages and which re-
fuses to consider the division of Europe accepted at Yalta as definitive.

_______________

*These delays make the discussion of SALT III a relative matter. For our part we
think that if France can participate in them, it must be considered as speaking in
its own name, its nuclear striking force being considered as an autonomous entity.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI‘. ONLY

As for now, we need to show our determination to develop our means of defense,
without letting ourselves be dragged into a kind of competitive system which
stimulates the armaments race. Thus, the socialists are proposing the building of
a sixth nuclear submarine and the carrying out of research on the neutron weapon

(but excluding series production of it).

The autonomous capacity of France to defend itself and to take the related deci—
sions must also be assured in relationship to the United States. The present pro-
cess of strengthening NATO (redeployment in Turkey, partial reintegration of
Greece, a decision on membership of the Spanish government) will have a major
effect on the northern shores of the Mediterranean. This cannot be a factor favor-
ing real detente, the more so since the criteria which are leading to this develop-
ment remain unknown. Elsewhere, the principles on which the Atlantic Alliance
rests, the nature of the reciprocal comic-eats are factors which remain uncertain.
The United States has not been able or has not wished to associate its allies with
its decisions (the case of the boycott of the Olympic Games and reprisals against
the USSR after the invasion of Afghanistan are known; the geographic sphere of
activity of the Atlantic Alliance is not fully known).

No doubt it is also time, as President Francois Mitterrand has said, to review the
nature of the reciprocal commitments of the Atlantic Alliance.

Certainly, the development of nuclear weapons and their miniaturization raises in-
a new way the problan of military alliances. Without going so far as to state,
with Herman Kahn and A. Weiner that "coalition and nuclear threats are two contra-
dictory concepts," because of the fact of the enormous risks run by too strict a
comitment toward an ally, we can legitimately consider that the idea of making
one's national. territory into a sanctuary can only be decided by each country.
Hence the unavoidable logic of the eventual development by each country of nuclear
weapons, if we do not succeed in putting an end to the arms race. For us also,
military security cannot really include true security. Only a resumption of dis—
armament negotiations can really ensure our security. The present situation de-
mands as a prior condition that the conditions for a return to the spirit of
detente must be present. The conference in Madrid--and that is why we hope for its
success--could be the occasion for this. In any case it will be a test of the in-
tentions of both sides. Possible objectives in Madrid would be avoiding having the
conference in Madrid bog down in preparing a balance sheet-anecessary and indeed
indispensable as that may be-—regarding the application of the Helsinki accords

and proposing further advances in the three "baskets" (which are inseparable for us)
in order to make it possible to resume the advance with the kind of confidence
necessary for detente. If the Madrid conference furthermore makes it possible to
go further toward a conference on the reduction of forces and tensions in Europe,
such as Francois Mitten-and proposed in December, l977—which presupposes that all
kinds of armaments be discussed—we would rejoice. However, this involves a fur-
ther step which presupposes that the other steps have also been taken.

The security of Europe will not be achieved by decree. It must be built up. In a
world where the dialogue between the superpowers is jammed up, where the emergence

of the Third World countries will lead them to assert themselves, including by
means of war. it is important that Europe, and each of the countries which compose

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it, should appear as an independent point of reference, of stability, of innova-
tion. It is a new dynamism which must be achieved. To do that it will be neces-
sary to give back confidence in Europe to France, to give back to the youth of our
country reasons to hope and to live for. If confidence in the leaders of our coun-
try, in its institutions, continues to deteriorate under the impact of scandals
and the loss of civic spirit, the ability to mobilize the French for a project
looking to the future will be extinguished. Looking to the future provides the
basis for a strong demographic position and for economic and social progress. For
the socialists, there cannot be a coherent foreign policy except in terms of its
relationship with domestic policy. There cannot be external security without a
resolution of the internal problems of each country, ensuring the stability and
progress of each society. This is the direction of our program.

COPYRIGHT: Ifri, 1980

5170
690: 3100/977

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘l-‘IFIM. [ESE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

SALT II, III; ARMS CONTROL, NOT DISARHAHENT

Paris TRAVAUX ET REGIERGIES II L'IPRI in French Fourth Quarter 19m Vol 1 pp 381-391

[Article by Xavier nefline, an officer in the French armed services. Section VI,

part I of new series, TRAVAUX ET REGERQIBS IE L'"IFRI". V01 1 is "The Security of
Europe in the 80's", various authors; published under the direction of Pierre Lellouche
by lFRI, (Institut Francais des Relations Internationales) 415 pp]

[Text] The refusal of France to participate in the SALT III negotiations is not
a position of principle taken on an a priori basis. This refusal is based on an
analysis of the preceding SALT negotiations, their objectives, their significance,
and their results. This position was also developed from an evaluation of the
advantages and risks which the extension of these negotiations to theater-level
weapons would involve for the security of Europe.

which Negotiation?

The negotiation to which we refer under the name of SALT III does not yet have a
very precise meaning, and its objectives remain somewhat blurred. If NATO has
tried to learn the outlines more exactly, it is far from having obtained Soviet
agreement on the bases which the organization proposes. What would this negotia-
tion be? A prolongation of SALT II or a negotiation on European strategy? A
response is not yet available.

A Prolongation of SALT II

Initially, SALT III was considered to be a prolongation and a logical step after
the preceding agreements. This new phase of the negotiation in effect was intended,
according to the terms of the declaration of principle attached to the SALT II
agreement, to continue bilateral discussions with a view to achieving the following
objectiues:

--conclude with significant and substantial reductions in the number of offensive,
strategic weapons;

-adopt qualitative limitations on the deployment of new types of weapons and on
the modernization of eristing weapons;

--find a solution to the questinns set out in the interim protocol attached to the
treaty.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON“

These negotiations were to be conducted by paying particular attention to the most
destabilizing, strategic weapons, with the purpose of reducing the risks of sur-
prise attack and by taking into consideration the factors which determine the
strategic situation. This last, very ambiguous formula reveals the reservations of
the Soviet Union, which most certainly intended to see finally taken into considera-
tion the demand which it had made from the beginning of the SALT conversations.

That is, taking into consideration all weapons capable of striking the territory

of one or the other of the parties. Frog 1:; point of View the following weapons
should become a part of the negotiation:

--the American weapons deployed in Europe whose radius of action is sufficient to
make it possible for them to strike the territory of the USSR (Forward Based
Systems)*:

--the nuclear forces of third countries, and particularly those of France and the
United Kingdom, allies of the United States.

Regarding these last two points, the minimum objective of the Soviet Union seemed
to be that, in the absence of an agreement establishing a ceiling for these systems,
Eastern Europe might benefit. in the calculation of its own ceilings, from a kind
of compensation equivalent to the threat which these systems represent. Of course,
and in terms of rigorous logic, the Soviet Union did not intend to see limitations
imposed on its own medium range systems, since the latter did not have the range
necessary to strike American territory.

0r Taking Into Account European Concerns

Things were shown in a completely new light, at least in the Western camp, following
the speech of Chancellor Schmidt at the Institute of Strategic Studies in London

on 28 October 1977. The latter viewed the parity provided for by the SALT II agree-
ments as involving a form of reciprocal neutralization by the two great powers at
the strategic level, affecting everything which did not put their own survival in
question. He drew attention to the growing danger which, correspondingly, the
imbalance in theater-level weapons constituted, the more so as the Soviets were in

the course of deploying weapons of a new type, the 58-20 missile and the Backfire
bomber.

It was with the objective of limiting the deployment of these new weapons that NATO
studied an action program composed of two stages closely dependent on each other.
The first stage consisted in strengthening and modernizing the middle range

arsenal of NATO, and the second stage was to use this modernization decision to
encourage the Soviets to negotiate seriously the limitation of their own weapons

at the theater level. This negotiation had initially been conceived by the
Federal Republic of Germany as pertaining to theater-level weapons. However, this
idea was rapidly abandoned in favor of an overall approach, fitting better into the
extension of the SALT conversations and avoiding making it appear that this was
like a search for a balance at the European strategic level.

 

*ﬂne 160 or so fighter-bombers of the F-111 type based in Great Britain and the
aircraft embarked on ships of the Sixth Fleet.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSI-Z ONLY

1n the mind of the NATO leaders this my phase of negotiations therefore was to re-
main strictly limited to the nuclear weapons of the United States and the Soviet
Union, and for this reason could only be conducted in a bilateral framework. How-
ever, the range of the negotiations was to be broadened, so that it would also

cover theater-level weapons, or at least in the initial phase the most destabilizing
weapons amng th--. The objective would be to end with a strategic balance more
stable due to its being broader, covering all its extensions at the theater level.
Thus, it would be a matter of acting in such a way that neither of the two super-
powers could subsequently benefit from any kind of advantage, either at the geo-
graphic level or at an intermediate level of escalation, which would allow it to
place in question the overall balance. This way of presenting things made it
possible to avoid the problem of the specific balance of the European theater. That
was an important point. In effect NATO denied seeking such a balance for itself,
because this would come down to recognizing the weakening of the American strategic
guarantee and the need to find a substitute for it in order to ensure the security
of western Europe. However, as the negotiation was to give priority to theater-
level, medium—range weapons considered the most destabiliz ing. it appeared inevit-
able that the limitations of which they would be the object would take the form of
a European sub-ceiling, with all the consequences which the beginning of a European
strategic balance would thus see appear.

Although this concerned a bilateral negotiation, the member countries of NATO con-
sidered that they should be indirectly associated with it, since finally it is
their own security which is involved. As a consequence they created a consulta-
tive structure which should permit them to define the principles on which the
conduct of the negotiation will be oriented and to follow the course of the con-
versations. Thus they consider that they will be able to present a united front
and strengthen the American hand regarding the Soviets.

The Soviet View of the Negotiation

The uneasiness shown in Western Europe and the proposal to open new negotiations
were all the better perceived in Moscow as they were accompanied by a program for
the modernization of theater-level weapons which irritated the Soviets. The res-
ponse given by Chairman Brezhnev in his speech in Berlin on 6 October 1979 indi-
cated that, "l'he Soviet Union is ready to reduce in terms of its present level the
number of medium range nuclear weapon launchers stationed in the Western regions
of the USSR, but only on condition that no further medium range nuclear weapon
launchers are stationed in western Europe."

In the mind of the Soviets, it could not only be a matter of a freeze of NATO wea-
pons but also must include the French and British strategic forces. Moreover,

the comunique of the Warsaw Pact countries published on 6 December 1979 clearly
called on the menber countries of the Atlantic Alliance to participate in a

European strategic conference on the limitation of theater-level weapons. Further,
in his speech on 6 October, 'irezhnev refuted the accusations made by NATO, according
to which the USSR was seeking to achieve superiority in Europe. As proof that its
strategy, on the contrary, was defensive, he stated that over the previous 10 years
the number of medium range missiles, the number of aircraft, and the total power

of the throw-weight had been somewhat reduced.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In fact the Soviet Union considers—and that comes out in the statements made
later by Foreign Minister Gromyko and Marshal Ustinov—that a balance already ex-
ists in Europe, if one takes into account the French and British forces, and which
was implicitly recognized by the SALT II agreements. That is why the Soviet
Union condemns the program for modernization of NATO weapons as constituting a
resumption of the armaments race and a reflection of the new aggressive attitude
of the Americans. According to the Soviet Union the Americans were reportedly
seeking to overturn the strategic situation in Europe in favor of NATO aad at the
same time. "to bring near the frontiers of the USSR new medium range systems in-
tended to fulfill strategic tasks," which in reality would constitute by-passing
the SALT II agreaents. The NATO countries were also accused of "transforming
Europe into a launching ramp for American strategic weapons aimed at the territory
of the USSR," and they were threatened with the counter-blow of Soviet reactions
if they persisted with their intentions.

The warning is clear: if the negotiation can be undertaken, it can only be on the
basis of the present situation, but not on the basis of the position of strength
which NATO is seeking to acquire as a preliminary.

After the lbdernization Decision of 12 Decelber 1979

However, NATO found itself obliged to ignore the Soviet warning and to show its de-
termination by giving concrete form to its proposals, lacking which it would have
lost not only its credibility but also the means to exert pressure on the USSR

and the advantages which it needed in order to hope to negotiate with success. The
decision reached on 12 December 1979 in Brussels to undertake a program for the
deployment in Europe of 108 Pershing II rockets and of 664 cruise missiles was
certainly essential to preserve the credibility of NATO. However, it no less
allowed the lack of deternination of several of its manhers to appear. In response
the Soviet reaction was rather brutal, since it consisted in pointing out to NATO
that, by its attitude, it had destroyed the bases for a negotiation but that the
negotiation could be considered again if the modernization decision was put off

or at least its application were deferred.

However, at first certain European countries continued to hope that the Soviet
Union would reconsider such a determined position and that it would end by over—
tures making it possible to begin discussions. However, a second obstacle emerged
with the intervention of the Red Army in Afghanistan, which profoundly upset

the conditions for an East-Nest dialogue. The hardening American position, which
led to deferring ratification of the SALT II agreements, reflected a profound dis—
enchantment with the policy of detente and the process of arms control. The
European countries. once their first reaction of protest was over, now sought
rather to preserve what could be saved of detente in Europe, but their wish to
fill in the gap which separated the Russians and the Americans was not enough to

lead the latter to take up again the theme of negotiations where they had been
halted and on the same bases.

The situation seems to havn begun to thaw, at least on the side of the Soviet Ihion
since the recent trip of Chancellor Schmidt to Moscow. Brezhnev in effect proposed,

without waiting for the ratification of the SALT II agreements, immediately begin-
ning negotiations between the Americans and the Soviets on medium range weapons.

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The specific contents of this offer of negotiations are not yet very clear, but we
can ask ourselves what are the basic motives which led the Soviets to so noticeable
a change in c_rection. Perhaps they intended to make trouble in the Western camp
by strengthening the position of those who would like to give priority to negotia-
tions on the modernization of theater-level weapons and thus to raise indirectly
once more the decision of 12 December 1979? Perhaps this was also a maneuver

aimed at separating the negotiation on theater-level weapons from the SALT process
and thus strengthening the perception of no linkage with the American central sys-
tems.

Why France Will Not Participate in the SALT III Negotiation

France has adopted an attitude of attentive reserve regarding the process of de-
velopment of the SALT III talks. France has no intention, and the president has
clearly stated this, of participating in any way in this new negotiation. It is
not so much because France does not feel itself concerned by the arrangements
which would be reached in the negotiation but rather because the objectives which
will be sought there are rather far removed from French objectives and because
France risks losing in part its independence and freedom of actionuwhich are
indispensable to its security.

A Language Which Is Not Ours

The SALT negotiations were originally considered to be an instrument making it

possible to transfer the confrontation between the United States and the Soviet
Union to a plane where this confrontation would give place to the notion of de-
tente or of peaceful coexistence, with the possibility of establishing Soviet-

American relations on quasi-contractual bases.

The two superpowers were preoccupied by the rivalry which opposed them and which
involved, if not the triumph of one or the other, at least the preservation of
their respective prestige in terms of the rest of the world. They therefore sought
to reach agreement on rules of good conduct, based on the respect for their respon-
sibilities as superpowers, which would permit both of them to preserve their status
and their interests, while limiting the effort necessary to reach that goaJ.

ﬁlls logic of the strong speaking to the strong, included in their respective
strategies, remained the key thread in their negotiations in SALT I and then SALT
II. They did not see, therefore, why this kind of logic would not be applied as
well in the future negotiations in SALT III. New France, whose strategy of the
weak country acting against the strong one and whose disposition remains strictly
defensive, could not participate in SALT III without speaking a totally different
language. It is doubtful that this language would have the slightest chance of
being heard, since our country would only amount to a negligible quantity in what
would be a game between the United States and the Soviet Union.

France has no interest in getting involved in a dialogue which has been established
to satisfy the interests of the two great powers first. If it did take part. it
would have to accept rules of the game not in its interest. It could only make
the most of it by serving as a guarantor of an effort which would be beyond its
reach.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arms Control and Not Disarmament

The SALT negotiations have had the single result up to the present of slowing down
the qualitative and quantitative competition between the United States and the
Soviet Union and perhaps to make the future less uncertain for then. However, the
SALT negotiations have certainly not made it possible to begin true nuclear dis-
armament; quite the contrary. In effect the reduction of about 250 strategic
weapons delivery systems which, according to the terms of the SALT II agreement.
the Soviet Union would have to agree to before 1 January 1981 cannot mask the

fact that the Soviets, while strictly respecting the terms of the agreement, could,
between now and 1985, easily increase the number of its nuclear warheads by nearly
50 percent. And it is necessary to emphasize that the number of nuclear warheads
is probably the most representative criterion of their overall nuclear potential.
Although in a lesser proportion, the same is true for the United States, and we
can take it for granted, considering the alarmist reactions which have been ex-
pressed on the other side of the Atlantic regarding the contents of the SALT II
accords, that these possibilities will be broadly exploited.

The process of arms control can certainly list to its credit the normalization of
relations between the superpowers for a time. It has given us the hope of making
the future easier to foresee, but it has demonstrated its limits in connection with
recent events which have made it clear that the Soviet Union never abandoned any
of its initial ambitions. Nevertheless, the parties involved in arms control be-
lieved that they could rely on the results obtained to consolidate the policy of
nuclear non-proliferation. For its part the Soviet Union believes it has every
reason to invite the other nuclear powers to agree to limit their own forces. How-
ever, there is a fundamental difference between the act of establishing a ceiling
for nuclear forces at a largely super-abundant level. as is the case presently for
the two superpowers, and establishing a ceiling which is just barely sufficient,

as would be the case with the other nuclear powers.

The United States and the Soviet union in reality have huge nuclear arsenals. all
out of proportion to their strict needs for security and which are justified prin-
cipally by the need to meet the challenge of their adversary and to concede nothing
to him in terms of military power. For France, on the other hand, which carries out
a strategy of dissuasion of the weak power opposed to the strong power, there can
be no question of accepting the least limitation on its strategic armaments, once
the latter are exactly of the right dimensions to ensure its security. Unlike the
two great powers, France does not have a surplus nuclear capability which is
negotiable. Neither is any constraint acceptable for the future, as long as the
threat which France must face continues to evolve and to put France under the obli-
gation of improving its strategic forces to maintain their credibility.

Finally, France has no moral obligation to enter this negotiation, since its
nuclear potential represents a very small percentage of the existing arsenals. 0n

the basis of this fact one cannot seriously pretend that the French nuclear
arsenal constitutes a threat of a destabilizing kind for any party.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Occupying a Sent: to Do What?

It is certain that France Will be under pressure, particularly from the Soviet
Union, to participate in these discussions, or that in its absence its nuclear
forces will be indirectly taken into account in the calculation of the ceilings
recognized for the two parties. In these conditions some people think that it
would be in France's interest to come to the conference table, because there is
no better way for France to be able to defend its interests appropriately.

in this way, our first demand should be to have a ceiling for nuclear weapons
recognized for us which would be sufficiently large, compared to our present
arsenal, to preserve the pOSsibility of carrying out our future programs. Can one
reasonably hope that the Soviets would agree to this demand, when at the same time
they would be under pressure to agree to reductions of their medium range weapons?
And even if these Soviet reductions were accompanied by an equivalent reduction

of American weapons, the Soviet Union could not agree that the other European
powers would keep full latitude to increase their own potential, the more so

since France and Great Britain, as members of the Atlantic Alliance, should
naturally, in the view of the Soviet Union, have their forces added to those of the
United States. The Soviet conception of security requires it to have forces
capable of guaranteeing it against a potential coalition of all of the countries not
belonging to the socialist camp. The Soviet Union does not seen ready to accept
constraints which do not satisfy this need.

The quantitative freeze of all medium range, theater-level weapons, of such nature
as to maintain this situation, seems to be the first objective which the Soviets
have set out for themselves before beginning the reduction phase. That point comes
out clearly in the Brezhnev statement of 6 October 1979. However, since such a
freeze is completely unacceptable for France, as well as any other form of con-
cession, moreover, it would appear to be totally sterile to take part in a
negotiation where we could only present demands to the other parties without being
able to concede anything in exchange.

Search for an Impossible Balance
Although its advocates deny it, the SALT III negotiation could only drift progres-
sively toward the search for a balance that would specifically,apply to the European

theater and which would be juxtaposed alongside a new parity for the central
American and Soviet systems.

We can remain skeptical regarding the prospects of ending with a satisfactory re-
sult for at least three reasons:

weapons with a shorter range. How would it be possible to determine the relative
importance of the different kinds of nuclear weapons and to take into account the
diversity of their missions?

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H)" OH“ 'IAI. USE ONLY

--the second comes from the need to take into account the fact that France and
Great Britain constitute autonomous decision-making centers and that it will no
doubt be difficult to set out the terms of a balance having four components.

--the third finally results from the fact that the effectiveness of nuclear weapons
does not relate so much to their intrinsic” characteristics as to the way in which
they are used. In this respect the asymmetry of existing strategies will remain a
fundamental element of the imbalance. This is because the Soviet Union, which holds
to a resolutely offensive and pre-emptive doctrine, will always have, even with
equal weapons, the possibility of acquiring an immediate advantage over its
adversary by taking the initiative.

Playing the Game of the Soviet Union

In the present political situation of Europe it is no doubt appropriate to seek to
negotiate security conditions proper to this theater, because this would mean
accepting the risk of making even clearer the asymmetry of the respective strategic
postures.

In facing up to Soviet power, which is dominant and physically present in Europe,
most of the western countries are totally dependent for their security on the
guarantees expressed by the United States, which belongs to another continent and
for whom the stakes will not have the same value as they do for the USSR, or even
for the allies of the United States.

The Soviet Union, which has a greater belief in the balance of forces between na-
tions than in the virtue of negotiations, nevertheless has understood how much
profit it could obtain from the conduct of the SALT negotiations, in the sense of
projecting the image of a nation which is strong. resolute, and implacable in a
negotiation. The position which the Soviet Union has acquired today, and which re—
lates first to a formidable accumulation of military power, makes it possible for
it to exert pressure on the member countries of NATO to undertake the SALT III
negotiations (or negotiations on European strategy) in the sense which her?‘ most
in conformity with Soviet interests.

The Soviets will seek to reduce progressively the dominant influence of the United
States in Western Europe and to seize upon every opportunity making it possible to
weaken the American strategic guarantee. In this regard the prospect of this new
negotiation for the Soviet Union is all the more attractive as the particular
sensitivity of the European members of NATO will let the Soviet Union play upon
their divisions and vulnerabilities in order to begin a direct dialogue with them,
on the periphery of the dialogue begun with the United States.

For its part France has no reason to lend itself to such a process if it amounts
to facilitating the game of the Soviet Union and permitting it, in time, to re-
solve the security problem in Europe to its satisfaction.

If France shows so clearly its refusal to participate in the SALT III talks, that

does not mean that France refuses to make its contribution to the nuclear disarma-
ment effort, which appears necessary for world security, today more than ever.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

However, it cannot be denied that the results achieved by the United States and
the Soviet Union, in their effort to limit armaments, are quite insufficient for
France to feel bound to engage itself in turn on the course of negotiations which
might lead it to mortgage its security for the future, but without having the two
superpowers accept the same risk for themselves.

It is necessary to note that, after more than 10 years of negotiations, the arma-
ments race, which one hoped was at the point of slowing down. on the contrary seems
to be beginning again on a spiral that is all the more dangerous as it escapes
rational analysis. The balances of forces, as they are perceived, analyzed, and
dissected today, too often reduce to an abstraction the destructive power of the
nuclear weapon and the considerable capacities accumulated on both sides which
guarantee to each a largely superfluous capacity to destroy the enemy under all cir-
cumstances, even after having suffered a first, pre-emptive strike. The reason-
ing built around artificial scenarios makes it possible to justify the need to in—
crease certain aspects of strategic capability by the deployment of new systems of
weapons. However, these reduce to an abstraction, in most cases, the marginal
character, even the unrealistic character, of the gains so achieved when one
reasons in strict terms of military capability.

The reality is that the formidable nuclear potential which the United States and
the USSR have makes any undertaking which could lead them to the edge of a direct
confrontation extremely perilous and probably unacceptable. When one begins with
the level of power achieved which is already huge, the question is no longer to
know which of the two countries is superior to the other. The true question is to
know which of the two will know how to exploit its military power more effectively
in the political arena. It is there that the true imbalance is found. For the Soviet
Soviet Union, firmly led by an undivided government, can concentrate all its forces
in the service of a prudent but determined strategy and exploit without hesitation
every opportunity offered to it. Meanwhile, it only has facing it a divided West,
whose leadership is no longer assured of a firm hand from the United States, which
is entangled in its doubts and contradictions.

The SALT negotiations perhaps are not responsible for this situation, although they
have contributed to maintaining the illusion that it was possible to bring the
Soviet Union to conform to the model of moderation proposed by the Americans. The
disillusionment resulting from the discovery of the reality of the Soviet Union
and the psychosis which pushes the "eat to seek its security in a new armament
effort no doubt are not a consequence of the policy of "arms control." Nonethe-
less, the fact remains that "arms control" has been found to be incapable of halt-
ing the pernicious process which leads to a reverse effect of what it sought, that
is, the resumption of an arms effort in place of disarmament.

The reality is that the confrontation which sets the United States and the Soviet
Union against each other, despite the appearances of peaceful coexistence, remains,
at least in the mind of the Soviets, a test of strength. In the Soviet view nego-

tiation for them is only a means of revealing the evolution of the balance of forces
to their advantage.

In such a scenario, where humanitarian preoccupations seem to be quite absent, one
can doubt that the opening of a new phase of negotiations, called SALT III, in the

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

present circumstances, can provide a significant contribution to the cause of dis-
annament. Moreover. the parties to the negotiation are thinking first of all of
strengthening their positions--the Russians, by the deployment of the 58-20 and the
Backfire bower, and the Americans, by the deployment of long range, theater-
level weapons—before sitting down at the negotiating table.

For things to go differently, pressure from the international commity would have
to be sufficiently strong and coherent to force the two great powers to go beyond
the rivalry which opposes each to the other and understand that their status as
great powers could suffer from general condensation and the rejection of their
influence over part of the world. However, that is a totally different perspective
whose basic assuptions have not yet been established.

COPYRIGIIT: Ifri , 1980

5170
C50: 3100/977

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

CALVO-SOTELO, SUAREZ BID FOR CONTROL UNDERHINING “CD'S CHANCES
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 1a Sep 8| pp 28, 29, 3|
[Article by Antxon Sarasqueta]

[Text] Host of the question marks surrounding the tensions that are jolting
the UCD [Democratic Center Union] and conditioning the course of the Calve-
Sotelo administration have to do with the disagreement between the head of
the Executive Branch and his predecessor, ruling party strongman Adolfo
Suarez.

The increasingly hard-line stand by Suarez and his men in recent weeks comes
at a time when a government crisis is anticipated because of the incorporation
of independents, hastened by the resignation of Justice Minister Francisco
Fernandez Ordonez.

This magazine has heard prominent Suarez backers contend that forming a
splinter group or breaking up the party would be preferable to having the
government lead the party towards positions that are far removed from what
they regard as "their" UCD. These men accuse Calvo-Sotelo of directing a
move to the right in UCD policy.

Suarez and his men are not ready to give up the organization franchise and
the green-flame "donuts" symbolizing the party, even though it might mean

splitting or breaking up the UCD. This is their heavy wager.

Suarez continues to control most of the party through its leadership bodies
and, therefore, holds the key to drawing up the electoral lists.

The [act that Suarez, at one of thc UCD leadership's recent meetings,
suggested the formation of an election committee (as the party's bylaws
stipulate) consisting almost entirely of his confidante, gives us an idea of
the position of strength that the former president holds.

The cwumittee will consist of five persons. In accordance with Suarez'a offer,
they would be the president and secretary general of the ruling party plus
three others selected by the Executive Comittee.

31

FOR OWTPTM. "SR ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This formula would make it practically impossible for Calvo-Sotelo to appear
on the electoral lists or would bind him hand and foot as prime minister to
the interests of the Suarez faction, which comes down to the same thing.

In this context, the possibility of leading independent figures joining the
new government (such as Antonio Garriguez walker), the authorization of
private television and membership in NATO are government projects that clearly

bear the stamp of Calvo-Sotelo and have highlighted Suarez's opposition to the
prime minister's policies.

Here is where the Executive Connﬁttee, under the influence of the Suarez
people, is doing some tough ideological screening of the government projects
that Cslvo-Sotelo has submitted. This has conditioned the administration's

efforts, to the point that it has takcn a step backwards in authorizing
private television.

As Suarez continues to pressure Calvo-Sotelo, men such as former ministers
Rafael Arias and Fernando Abril are the ones who are taking the hard-line
stands beside the former prime minister, even more hard-line than those

Suarez himself has voiced, as one of the ministers on the Calvo-Sotelo team
admitted to CAHBIO l6.

These attacks and pressures on Calvo-Sotelo contrast with the support that
the prime minister is receiving from other party factions, which, however,

are poorly represented in the 060's decision-making bodies and in the economic
and financial spheres.

Calvo-Sotelo is the only UCD figure today whom financial groups are willing to
back with the 4 billion pesetss that the party needs to run in the upcoming
general elections with a chance of winning.

In these economic and financial circles Calvo-Sotelo enjoys a high standing.
which has been enhanced in recent months by his performance as prime minister.
To judge by OpiniOh polls. the public also has a positive opinion of him

so far.

In pursuing his strategy of "modernizing" the UCD by making it a party of
representative fcctions and bringing in prestigious figures who are now
labeled independents (a sort of secret coalition), the prime minister has
the backing of Christian Democrats and Liberals within the party.

Nevertheless, the key man when the time comes to tip the scale in Suarez's
or Calvo-Sotelo's favor could be the current minister of territorial
administration. Rodolfo Martin Villa.

Martin Villa is Suarez‘s stabilizer in controlling the party‘s nationwide
structure and he exerts great influence over wideranging sectors of the

administration, both because of his track record and the team with which he
surrounds himself.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This means that Martin Villa could be a decisive man in the government for
Cavlo-Sotelo, although the fact is that at present he is not one of his
closest confidante.

When Fernandez Ordonez's resignation triggered a crisis, the prime minister
consulted only with ministers Pio Cabanillas and Jose Pedro Perez-Llorca in
his office, and this gave rise to mistrust and bad feelings in the minister
of territorial administration, who reacted by moving towards Suarez again.

After a period of confrontation with Suarez during the 000 provincial
elections before the summer vacation, Martin Villa once again hooked up with
his former prime minister last week.

The two UCD leaders met for lunch in the minister's office and analyzed
the party's situation for 3 hours. In the context of the current UCD in-
fighting, this should be interpreted as a warning to Calvo-Sotelo from the
minister of the autonomies.

However, Martin Villa, along with the Christian Democrats and without the
opposition of Social Democrat Fernandez Ordonez. supports one of the moves
in Calvo-Sotelo's strategy: bringing independents into the next administration.

In spite of Calvo-Sotelo's denial that a ministerial crisis is in the offing,
a maneuver designed to dampen tensions in light of upcoming parliamentary
debate on crucial issues for the administration such as the "colza case" and
NATO, government sources close to the prime minister agree that there will
be one shortly, probably after the Galicisn regional elections on 20 October.

Independents in Government

As far as cabinet changes are concerned (the replacement of Jesus Sancho Rof
as minister of labor. health and social security is considered a sure thing,
as well as some other minister implicated in the ”colza case"), there is
still an emphasis on bringing in well-known independents, in spite of the
opposition of the Suarez people as announced by Fernando Abril.

Sources close to Calvo-Sotelo and that can exert major influence in the
negotiations under way at the top echelon of the ruling party, admitted to
CAMBIO '6 that the prime minister still intends to do this.

The makeup of the new cabinet will be the most visible indication of what
kind of maneuvering ability the prime minister has within the UCD and how he
is going to utilize the leverage of power to push forward with his goals and
bolster his own position.

One of the steps that the prime minister has to take to feel more secure is
to bring in prestigious independents who support his political programs and
his plans for the party.

The only way that he can do this is by having more of a say in determining
the election lists than he has under the current circumstances in 000 leadership
bodies. which are mostly controlled by Adolfo Suarez.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with general elections looming in I982, the time factor is another handicap
for Calvo-Sotelo. Until the 23 February coup trials begin (they are
scheduled for March or April of next year), the very shakiness of our
democracy will serve to restrain not only the opposition but also any move
within the 000 itself that might jeopardize the continuity of the
government.

The most widely held view is that from that point on and after an extremely
delicate period, both the opposition and ruling party factions are going to
take more radical tacks, which would make an agreement on the future of the
UCD even more difficult.

The panorama facing the prime minister is obviously quite difficult: there
is internal party opposition to him (in spite of all the conciliatory
documents that are made public), and opposition party pressure will mount
as Parliament opens.

A resolution of this tense situation of confrontation that has triggered a
UCD crisis and that transcends the ruling party in its impact obviously
hinges on a Calvo-Sotelo-Suarez pact. The prime minister's strategy at
present is to reverse the balance of power between him and Suarez so that
he does not have to continue bargaining from a position of weakness.

If such agreements are not hammered out, other possibilities might come into
play across the country' 5 political spectrum. In point of fact, the ruling

party would begin breaking up just a few months before the general elections,
which would certainly enhance the Socialist Party's chances of gaining power.

COPYRIGHT: l98l, Informacion y Revistas, S.A.

8743
080: 3|]0/l2
FOR OFF'CIAL US}: ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

ASISTT ANTISHIP MISSILE TEST-FIRED FIRST TIME
Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 5 Sep 81 p ’09
[Article: "First Test Flight of ASlS'I'l‘ Missile"]

(Textl Aerospatiale has just released a photograph of the new light ASlS‘l‘l‘ antiship
missile's first test flight made in late June at the Mediterranean Test Center (GEM)
on the Ile du Levant. This first test firing of the couplets nissile verified the
weapon's performance in both range and speed, and tested its roll control and
low-altitude altimeter guidance systems. The sea-skinning missile was fired from

a fixed launcher installed on the coast of the Ile du Levant. Aerospatiale reported
that the missile successfully completed this trial flight.

At the same time, the Agrion 15 maritime search and target-tracking radar, developed
by Thomson-CS? for the ASlS‘l‘T weapon system, was undergoing tests at the Gavres

test range near Lorient in Brittany where the high level of shipping activity
facilitates such testing. It will be recalled that the light ASlS‘l'i‘ antiship
missile is being developed. with Aerospatiale's Tactical Missiles Division functioning
as prime contractor, as part of the "Sawari" contract awarded France by Saudi Arabia
last year. This contract calls for the acquisition of frigates equipped with
Aerospatiale Dauphin helicopters armed with ASlS‘l‘T missiles. in addition to the
naval version of Thonson-CSF's Crotale surface-to-air missile and Hatrs's Otomat
antiahip missiles. Saudi Arabia is the first purchaser of the new ASlS'l'l’ weapon
system to be delivered beginning in 1984.

COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1981

8061
C80: 3100/2

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

BRIEFS

ILLEGAL SOLDIERS' COMMITTEESuA navy conscript. Patrick Le Trehondat, will hence-
forth carry out the duties of secretary-general of the IDS [Information on Soldiers'
Rights]. Allied with the CFD‘I‘ [French Democratic Confederation of Labor], the PEN
[National Education Federation] and Socialist Youth movements, the IDS is said to
have formed 25 clandestine "soldiers' comittees" within the French military forces.
The secretary-general [Le Trehondat] has made himself known as such vithout incurring
any sanctions in spite of [Minister of Defense] Charles Hernu's stateaenta against
such illegal "comittees." [Text] [Paris VALEURS ACTUELLES in French 5 Oct 81

p 26] [COPYRIGsz 1981 "Valeurs actuelles"]

cso: 3100/31

36

FOR OFFICIAL l'Sl-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GENERAL FRANCE

NATIONAL RESEARCH. TEGNOLOGY COLLOQUIUH ANNUNCBD
Paris AIR 8 COSMOS in French 5 Sep 81 p 17
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "National Research Colloquiun, 13-16 January 1982"]

[Text] ‘lhe major National Research and Technology Colloquium announced by
Jean-Pierre Chevenemcnt. the new minister of research. will be held at the Palais
des Congres in Paris on 13-16 January 1982. This decision was nade on 30 July at
the second meeting of the National Colloquium Organizing Cornittee chaired by

Prof Francois Gros, a member of the Institute of France. The colloquium's

executive secretariat will be headed by line Marie-Simone Detoeuf. the public relations
officer of the National Institute for Nuclear Physics and Particle Physics.

The sinister had consulted beforehand with directors of those research centers and
agencies for which he now has oversight authority and which include. inter alia:

the National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). National Center for
Telecommunications Studies (CNET), National Center for Space Studies (ONES),
National Office for Aerospace Studies and Research (ONERA), Ate-1c Energy Commission
(CEA). and Solar Energy Co-ission (COMES).

The National Research and Technology Colloquium will have the following six items
on its agenda:

3. "Research, science. technology and society," in which research's cultural
contributions will be discussed:

b. "Research and technology: a choice and strategy for the future." which will
deal with the major balances between research and key fields of activity;

c. "Expansion of research and technology, a powerful factor in getting out of the
economic crisis," which will focus discussions onto the major national and
international trends in industrial research and in extension of the public
sector;

(I. "Research and technology: men and organizational structures." in which special
emphasis will be placed on past results md future prospects, as well as on the
regional dimension of research;

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e. ”Science and decisiveness, partners in the making of choices," during which

nonscientista will speak and publicly debate the stakes involved in
scientific policy;

f. "Resources to be employed" within the purview of the next program law which the
Min ister of Research will submit to the 1982 spring session of Parliament.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1981

80101 DID
CSO: 3100/2

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY