FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10648
8 July 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 42/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR 0mCIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP 0F
MK‘IBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINAI‘ION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(P000 42/ 82)
Coureu'rs
mane
' mas
Briefs
h‘ench Technology in Japan
ITALY

De Benedetti's Views on Overcoming Nation's Hoes
(Carlo Be Benedetti; EUROPEO, 2h m 82) ...............

POLITICAL

FRANCE

Political, Economic Situation Examined After Year
(Michel Hat-hie“; WPERAIO, Apr 82) eeeooooeoooooooooo

Rocard, Hairs, Rosanvallon on Government Policies
(Michel Rocard et al., Interview; mmm, Apr 82)..

SPAIN

Newly Elected PSOB's Bscui'edo Reveals Autobiographical

Details
(Rafael Bacuredo Interview; CMBIO 16, 31 Kay 82) ......

State of Military Hardware, Leadership Reviewed
(CWO 16, 31 m 82) .000OI.DCOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO0.0...
I708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KING”

Defense Secretary Nott's Career Reviewed
(“Icon mthorford; FINANCIAL m, 25 Jun 82) 00.0....

mm
MGR
Briefs .
snm'a 'l‘urbojet
Antitenk Helicopter Mime
GENERAL
FRANCE

National Space Budget Concentrates on Satellites
(u MB, Apr 82) 0000000000000...00.000900000000000

ITALY

Biographic Sketches of Leading nc Figures
(Filippo Lecerelli; PUMA, Zhuay 82) ................
BRIEFS

PRBNCB moms! IN JAPAN-witsui Aluminum Limited has just acquired the
license and rights for the Japanese use of an aluminum refining process per-
fected by [France‘s] Alulinum Pechiney Company. This so—called "segregation"
process was developed at the llercus plant (Ariege Department) after elaboration
at the Voreppe center. The process through segregation controls the crystal-
lization of liquid aluminum and makes it possible to reduce the level of

impurities to less than 10 ppm. [Text] [Paris AIR 21‘ (1)9405 in French 15 May
82 p 66] [COPYRIGB‘rz A. i C. 1982] 2662

C80: 3 100/704

mmmonu
roe OPTICAL USE ONLY

scwmnc ' mm

m: BENEDBITI'S nrvs on omoonmc mnou's woes
Milan sumac in Italian 21. May 52 pp “2-149

[Article by Carlo De Benedetti "Let's Invent A New Itely--‘!'he Economic and
Political Manifesto of Carlo De Benedetti for Ending the Crisis."]

[Tut] Are we condemned to a future of inflation and

unenploynent'.’ No, the vice president of Olivetti says
convincingly. And in EUROPEO he issues a challenge to
government, managers, banks, and unions. llere it is.

Point by points Hill someone accept it?

His curriculue vitae is replete with incomplete experiences: at the heed of
Fiat, he lasted 3 months; at the head of Banco Aabrosiano, 2. Still Carlo De
Benedetti is anything but a capricious and fickle nan. For many years now the
vice president and largest Italian stockholder in Olivetti, he has led the
ranks of the so-called enlightened managers, according to whom the crisis in
our comtry can indeed not be overcome by a return to the overwheleing power
of the bosses ns exerted in the 1956's but rather by an agreement enong the
various segnsnts of society for the recuption of develop-ant.

This is a road which the neareightedness of the unions and the deafness of any
politicians make impassable and which often has bitter delusions in store for
the person who suggests it. Nevertheless De Benedetti persists, intelligent
and tireless spokesman for the fir- that he is. Moreover, now that Confindus-
tria [General Confederation of Italian Industry] is tending to alter its
highly rigid position, refusing to open negotiations for contractual renevale
and hoping for an escalator-type agreement, be Benedetti continues to believe
in the dialogue nethod. Only in this way, according to his, can there be
reached that aajor agreement for the development which this country needs.

Just what this agreement should be, who should participate in it, and under
what conditions, be Benedetti explains in the pages which follow.

There are fundanentally two nondictstoria‘. methods for balancing a nation's
accounts; that is, for governing (vhich amounts to the sane thing). You can
put into effect a rational a priori agreement among the segments of society for
attaining shared objectives; in this way you end up with a social contract. Or

you can allow the balancing to occur a posteriori through the force of econoeic
laws.

MWIEEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

National accounts always end up being balanced, unlike those of an individual
firs which can fail. The nation does not fail: if there is one who receives,
there must also be one who gives; if there is a creditor, there is also a
debtor; and vice versa.

Hhenever the nonetary revenues-~that is, the purchasing power exercised in a
given year—exceed actual productive yields, the difference automatically
becones the anount of inflation. When the state pays out more than it takes in
from its citizens, the difference becomes the public debt which in the final
analysis is a debt the citizens owe to themselves. Inflation and debt are,
precisely, the two typical devices for balancing a posteriori.

To get everyone to agree a priori is not easy. There are historical periods
when agreement succeeds and others when it fails. In the latter case a con-
flict over reallocation breaks out; this is a struggle to get more for one-
aelf by taking it away from others.

The conflict over reallocation, which is the opposite of cooperation in pro-
duction, unhappily characterized the 1960's, in Italy and in the world. In
Italy, especially after the hot autumn of 1969; in the world, beginning with
the big rises in petroleum prices at the end of 1973. This conflict on the
one hand increases monetary demands: on the other hand it hinders and depresses
production. It is a creature of inflation.

Agreement a priori is difficult, but as we shall see it is possible under cer-
tain conditions. To begin with, you have to seek for it within a tine frame
which allows enough breathing space. Long—tern policies and actions are neces-
sary for providing an answer to so many reasonable demands and social expecta-
tions.

The short-tern policy, also called anticyclical, is by definition the manage—
aent of what is already at hand. Therefore, it can perhaps be sufficient
whenever things go well for you, but it is powerless in the face of big crises.

The world today is sick of economic cycles. Politicians and statesmen, whose
duty it should be to look farther than private citizens, have become more near-
sighted. The pursuit of an easily obtained approval of the voters leads then
to grant and promise such and to ask little in return.

The explosion of public expenditure derives from the reaction to the great
crisis of the past, that of 1929. By now, however, at a distance in time of
more than a half-century, public interventionisn gives clear signs of having
become a habit. The state spends more and more, with less and less effect.
And deficits grow; inflation grows; and the room for long-tern investnent
decreases. So a vicious circle is put in motion, one that is hard to break
out of.

Debt and Inflation

Public debt in Italy has been promoted as a method of government. Net public
credit by now exceeds 250,000 billion lira, more than half of the annual

A)

ms omdu. use on“
INJR CINHKJAJ.II§EI(HVLY

national product [gross domestic product: GDP], while in the rest of Europe,
the united States, and Japan this proportion hovers around one-fourth.

The state has gone into debt on our behalf. It is as if each Italian family
has debts of 14 million more than it is aware of; that is, has 16 millions less
in property.

The public deficit in 1982 alone is around 60,000 billion. That is as if each
fanily has spent 6 million more this year than it realises.

Public expenditure is excessive, not so much in absolute terns as in compari-
son with public revenue which the politicians do not dare to increase, knowing
very well how the citizens at that point would rebel against their way of
spending and squandering. There is therefore one who receives and there is

one who does not pay; and inflation gsllops along at a much greater rate than
in any other developed country.

Inflation is not only caused by this system; it becomes indispensable to it.

It replaces a priori agreement; however, it can aggravate social disagreement.
For this reason then. they try to hide it in a way so that citizens cannot make
very precise calculations about what is happening to them.

Inflation becomes concealed in so many ways. It is hidden in delays. in de-
fects, and not seldom in the manipulation of statistical indices. It is held
down whenever a rise in public rates and administrative prices is restrained by
decree (even if the respective costs of these services rise to a higher level),
but sooner or later the discrepancy comes to light.

Inflation is hidden behind the delays in public payments. In spite of the
.fact that this practice has been presented as an anti-inflationary policy by
the incumbent minister of treasury. It is behind the unfavorable position in
the balance of payments whenever these reach higher levels each year and indi-
catc that the country is living above its own means. But sooner or later
these accounts also have to be settled.

And what is there to say about the reforms which start out as moderate obliga-
tions in the first years but then increase exponentially? Like those for pen-
sions, those for health. veritable drifting mines in our economy.

Finally, let us not forget the delays in releasing index figures which at any
rate multiply and prolong inflation. Italy unfortunately is the European

country with the highest index figure for inflation in reference to national
incole. '

Programming

,

In order that the alternative aethod of sensible a priori balancing of accounts
can prevail, a social consensus is necessary; that is, an explicit or implicit
agreement.

IN)I1OIIIC1AI.IEIE(HELY
l!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(3Al.lEﬂ£(ﬂVLY

But an agreement in principle is not enough. It must be effective, with con-
crete applications to cooperation in production because otherwise, you would
find yourself later on with resources too scarce to allocate; contracts could
not be honored: and social conflict would break out; and you would have to
return to balancing with inflation.

This explains the necessity for national programming which will be the instru-
ment for coordination of an exchange of information at a minimum, thus pro-
viding certainties rather than uncertainties, especially at the beginning of
public action.

But programming must also be a method for cooperation in production, to unite
in objectives which are generally common, and to settle inevitable conflicts
of interest within a broader outlook in respect to the roles and responsibi-
lities of each person in society.

I know that this view of programming is not shared by everyone. There are those
who, mindful perhaps of the punitive planning displayed at the beginning of the
1960's, would favor programming with more state intervention, the kind which
proceeds with orders from above.

Experience, however, indicates that there is no reason to believe that poli-
ticians and bureaucrats are more capable than economists.

There are those who would instead prefer absolutely free trade, the laissez-
faire system. But this perhaps has never existed. At any rate, it is not
suitable for the complexity of present economic conditions.

For the best functioning of the market, today some rules are necessary and the
managers must accept them. The rules of the game are an integral part of the
social contract. Provided that they are the right rules. It is worth relat-
ing, for the benefit of clearly mutual interests, how it works in other coun-
tries, the United States for example, which are used to standards more pressing
and strict than ours; and these are not made to suit, or changed when applied
to, particular interests-—as happens too often in Italy.

There must be general rules, well understood by everyone, sufficiently firm but
also readily adaptable whenever necessary. They must be rules which can be
applied and which are applied.

Pluralist programming and a coherent system of rules are the conditions re-
quired for reaching an agreement for development which can work. The 3 years
of the three-year plans are not enough for this purpose just as the 5 years of
the five-year plans are not enough. We need to plan ahead at least for a
decade. Only in this way can we change from an industrial policy which in—
sists on backing the old way at all costs to a policy which promotes the new
way and growth.

IA1.USEGNHLY
FOR OFFICIAI.UGIZ(NVLY

Social Consciousness and Development

The firm, it is said, can succeed in obtaining a social consensus only if the
firm shows itself to be social-minded in its action. This statement is correct,
but its application is often wrong. Here is the fundamental question: what
should the social consciousness of the firm be?

To keep outdated equipment, products no longer competitive, and surplus emplo-
yees who cannot be discharged, this is not true social consciousness. It is
wasteful and destructive of national resources. Above everything else, human
resources end up being maintained by the community in humiliating ways, and
they do not find the courage and means to requalify themselves and get back
into productive activity. Then financial resources end up being absorbed
through the expense of public assistance and losses of the firm so that they
are lacking for investment in production. And the national savings, especial-
ly those of the family, are destroyed by this, directly or indirectly.

Moreover, it is not true social consciousness to cause firms to have a loss by
loading then up with an excess of demands. Many firms would be healthy and
sound, but they cannot make profits because they have been drained by exces-
sive costs in proportion to their respective expenditures in production. The
cost of labor in respect to its productivity becomes excessive as do also the
cost of money in respect to its yield in industrial activity, the cost of raw
materials in respect to the international evaluation of the products they will
get for us, and the cost of the state in respect to what it does to assure

the smooth operation of our firms.

True social consciousness comes about by aultiplying resources. More resources
make possible a greater range of choices for the community and particularly for
the politicians who govern it. And this range allows for financing a higher
degree of social cotmnitment.

Prom personal experience, I believe that the managers can convince the other
segments of society of the necessity for orthodoxy in production.

But we cannot do it with empty words. we need deeds, accomplishments; we need
credibility. Credibility is born in effective, careful, attainable programs;
from the demonstrated capability of manageaent; from a policy of abundant,
truthful, timely information available within the firm and on the outside.
Then agreement becomes possible because the proposal to cooperate in the eco-
nomic development of our country assumes a concrete form.

Possible Development

In Italy we have plenty of room for increasing production. This room--does it
not seem paradoxical--has really been enlarged by so many mistakes, so much
inefficiency, so much recent waste. There is a vast area between what must
necessarily be public-like defense, justice, and the essential elements of
public administration--and what really belongs to the firm; and this area
waits to be reconquered by managerial reasoning.

6
FOI¢OFEKJAJ.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Business methods must expand into agriculture. The agricultural sector has for
many years achieved strong increases in per capita productivity, not so much
because output increased but rather because the nuder of persons engaged in
agriculture declined. Now, however, the industrial crisis has halted the exo-
dus ad the defects in the agricultural productive structure have become
evident.

They are defects derived from insufficient attention to economic policy and
from wrong policies like the one of the European Economic Con-unity which pro-
tects the farmers (that is, the voters) rather than agriculture itself. The

836's means thus come to be spent for price supports rather than for moderni-
zation.

As regards industry, for a couple of years now they have been talking about
de-industrialization. This is a concept which really can be valid; but it is
valid in the sense that the nunber of workers engaged in industrial production
will perhaps have to decline in relation to the total work force. This per-
centage is now around 38 percent in the BBC countries and in Italy, and it has

already gone down to 31 percent in the United States, the most industrialized
country in the world.

But we certainly cannot permit dismantlement of industrial production. It
rather should be strengthened and renovated, with the adoption of the most
up-to-date technology. There are technologies which in many cases require
fewer workers and which offer more added value. It is therefore more correct
to speak of re-industrialization.

Jobs should be shifted to a third sector. Let us be clear, however, about what
this third sector should consist of. The solution is certainly not to be found
in the underesployment of small business, nor in the swollen welfare payments
made to public employees.

It is to be found in a progressive third sector. It should consist of highly
professionalired and specialized activity with the support of the physical
laborers who remain in agriculture and industry. This activity can encompass
financial, comercialization, research, and organizational services. It thus
becomes clear that the renoving of anployees engaged in industry to the third-
sector is more statistical than actual because their accomplishments always
will actually be seen in industrial production and in its competitiveness.

If agriculture, industry, and the progressive third sector attain high levels
of efficiency, then this will increase the room for social services, health .
assistance, education, culture, and so many other activities properly required
for improvement of the standard of living. But we must truly be the producers
who pay for this standard.

Can Italy really accosplish that in a historical restructuring, within her own
boundaries and in confrontation with foreign countries? Many persons, viewing
the present situation, could be pessimistic. Nevertheless, a study done by the
OBCD [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development] in 1979 (therefore,

MWLUSEONLY
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it came out after the beginning of our difficulties) assigned to Italy, in the
period from that time until the year 2000, a growth potential only below that
of Japan. And a very recent European study confirms that between now and 1991
Italy could experience the highest rate of development among the large coun-
tries of the European Economic Col-minity. I believe that these estimates are
reasonable.

The Italian Choice

Even more important to our international trade situation than the problem of
product specialization and also more important than the choice, whenever pos-
sible, of our commercial partners, is the choice of system.

Our system is and definitely ought to remain distinctly Western; that is, the
system of the open market. The models of the East have by now been rejected
even by the Italian Communist Party; and the third way is impracticable
because it combines the defects of the market and state planning without yield-
ing their benefits, as demonstrated in our case by the crisis with public
industries.

The choice of the Western way is not a comfortable choice. This means that
with it we accept the challenge of competition with more advanced and more
sensible countries than our own. The West to which we are referring and with
which we are confronted is not only Europe but also the United States and

Japan.

It is important that the West show in deeds the superiority of the market sys-
tem to the many countries of the Third World which today are hesitating to make
a choice between an uncertain offer of cooperation in production made by the
Western democracies and a dangerous offer of military and ideological support
made by the Communist bloc.

To be confincing abroad, we must first of all be orthodox at home. We must
restore the market and the firm which is our traditional instrument for the
multiplication of resources.

We must also leave the proper amount of room for the products of the Third
World. We therefore need to shift, at least in part, our products toward pack-
ages of more and more advanced technology. The one who stops goes backward;
the one who goes forward leaves room for those who follow.

What we need are not only new products, but new methods of production for our
most traditional goods as well. These methods of production are necessary and
it is possible to build a new concensus at the world level now that the years
of the inconclusive reallocation struggle with OPEC have passed. At the
zenith of those years OPEC gained a cash profit of 115 billion dollars in 1980,
but now is moving back toward an almost even balance.

We must reduce the opposition between raw materials and manufactured goods.

And among similar national products promoted in sharpest competition. The
successful method is the one of cooperation and integration of production,

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USIIIWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through the successive phases of manufacture and through the supply of comple-
nentary products. At the same time, international relations must be inter-
woven with financial integration in order to bring to life a profit-sharing
network which will increase the mutual advantages of cooperation in production.

Competitive Products

The competitiveness of Italian products was very much hurt in the years subse-
quent to 1969, both by a lower international valuation of our traditional
manufactured products in respect to other products like petroleum and also by
our specific national mistakes.

From 1970 until today the rate of exchange for Italy has fallen by a good third.
In more simple terms, that means that in exchange for the sane quantity of
exports we now receive from abroad a third less in imports. In that way we
have become poorer as a nation. And we should not be surprised that the domes-
tic conflict over reallocation has become aggravated by the need to apportion
out among citizens and social classes that kind of tsx--the sheik's tax, it has
been called-which we have been obliged and are obliged to pay to other coun-
tries.

In the decrease of the rate of exchange we find the main cause of the recent
difficulties with the Italian balance of payments. If we assume that the
prices in lira of exports and imports had remained at the 1970 level, from that
date until 1980 we would have acctnulated 16,000 billion in credits in respect
to foreign countries instead of the 32,000 billion in debits that we now have.

So it is not true that Italy is exporting less. We are exporting badly, pro-
ducts which are lightly valued. To revalue our products is the surest method
for increasing development. But the revaluation of national products is a
difficult and complex operation which really requires the agreement and coope-
ration of everyone.

In fact, the conpetitive factors have changed during these years, the mana-
gerial factors and the national ones. ‘

He will begin with the managerial factors. To try to make those products com-
petitive which are clearly sold below cost is not a remedy because that weakens
the firm and the national economy. We must succeed in offering good quality
products, carefully tailored in respect to costs and user requirements so that
the price they bring is remunerative. We need to inprove the quality of sup-
plies, guaranteeing reliability and punctuality, taking into account the full
range specified in tenders and offering a full line of goods and services
along with spare parts.

All that requires a deep-rooted adjustment in the firm. Here then is the most
important and comprehensive factor in competition: managerial soundness. A
firm today rules its world markets if it has known how to provide a sturdy
financial, organizational, and productive structure. And if it has sufficient
profits since these are the prerequisite for bringing together funds adequate

MWUEONLY
FOIlOFFKJAl.USE(HNLY

in quantity and quality at suitable cost; for supporting the burden of applied
research; for having a reason to invest and therefore for introducing new

technology; and for being able to find the best available partners in the
world scene.

But the soundness of the firm depends on the cooperative attitude of the two
principal factors of production, labor and capital; and we are once again back
at the need for a managerial agreement. This depends moreover on efficiency
and on the support which the entire nation gives its own producers. And we are
returning to the point about the social consensus.

International competition today still is more between economic systems than
between individual firms of the various nations. Every defect in law, public
administration, financial systems, industrial relations, and social behavior
has a bearing on national products, especially when these must be sold abroad
or must withstand competition from abroad in domestic markets. Everything in
the nation should be efficient. This is the checkpoint of the social agree-
ment which evidently is working out better in Japan than in Italy.

Savings and Financial Arrangements

Particularly in Italy the firm has been hurt by industrial conflict and the
struggle for reallocation. If we assume that the particular compensation for
the work of every independent worker equals the average for dependent em-
ployees, then we can calculate that the percentage of capital in Italy is going
to be just in excess of 6 percent of available national revenue. In the rest
of Europe. Japan, and the United States, this percentage is double.

From the investigations of Hediobanca of the sore than 1,000 principal Italian
firms, in 1980 private forms recorded an overall profit of less than 60 billion
and the public firms one of less than 2,973 billion. Net self-financing
therefore had disappeared in the private sector and had suffered a steep de-
cline in the public sector. So. if we want to go forward, we must resort to
financing from abroad.

But in national financial markets the firm is subordinate to the requirements
of the public sector. Public deficits of many tens of thousands of billions
each year leave very little room for the private sector. In reference to the
increase in total domestic dredits, the share allotted to the nonstate sector
had fallen from 60 percent in 1976 to 35 percent in 1981 and, by statistical
paradox. the nonstate sector includes firms in which the state participates.

Italian families continue to save but with less enthusiasm than at one time.
Their likelihood of saving in proportion to their revenues has decreased from
26 percent in 1979 to 21 percent in 1981. The state. through its special fiscal
considerations, administrative restraints, and undiscrininating offer of a rate
of return much higher than the rate of inflation, has turned family savings
toward public stocks like the Bot [Board of Trade] and Get. [Technical Control
Center of the National Safety Board] groups. The remainder is almost all going
into bank deposits and these are in turn tied up on behalf of the public sector.

10
FOIHOFFIJAI.UBE(MNLY
FOR‘OFFEJAI.USE(NVLY

Thus, a little more than 60 percent of bank assets are now going into domestic
investment; this includes private firms as well as those in which the state
participates in addition to central and local public agencies.

To summarize, family savings which in the years subsequent to 1976 fluctuated
between one-half and one-third of total savings, have obviously financed other
people's deficits and losses. And therefore they have been false savings,

inexiatent because they have been lacking in real value so that they too have
been doomed for a loss.

The high rates of interest of the present moment should not fool the saver.
They will not last long. We remember past experience: according to Bank of
Italy estimates, in the period 1970-1980 the actual yield of bank deposits on
the annual average was minus 5.h percent and that of state stocks, taking into
account their fall in market prices, was mdnus 9.4 percent.

This is why the saver must be convinced to involve himself as directly as pos-
sible in the development of production. He must risk more by risking less.

This is the crux of the agreement for development. An agreement in which
credit institutions also must participate in a more resolute manner. Otherwise
their record profits will not last forever, and they will increasingly become
teller windows and revenue offices of the public administration. Their credit
must become sore entrepreneurial, more oriented to investment in production.

It Inst be based less on evaluations of extra-managerial estates and on reading
accounting data of the past; and must be based more on an appraisal of mana-
gerial capability and entrepreneurial programs.

Given the cooperation of savers and 'redit institutions along with somewhat
less obstruction from the public sector, investment can then be revived quickly.

Human Labor and Capital

Even more striking today is the problem of unemployment. The number of unem-
ployed officials in Italy has reached 2 million, but many others are hidden in
counterfeit jobs. Integrated funds regularly paid out are equivalent to almost
300,000 unfilled jobs: many public employees are hired and kept on for welfare
reasons; and underemployed positions abound in the independent labor sector:
that is, in agriculture, artisan shops, and small business. "here it is less
concealed than in Italy. unemployment is explosive. In the OECD countries it
has increased from 10 million in 1970 to 25 million at the present time.

Unquestionably, unemployment is a problem of the central government. Unfortu-
nately, however, it lends itself to solution by a direct method; it is so easy
for it to become a nearsighted, hopeless welfare project.

The only solution basically, to state it yet one more time, rests in a renewal
of development. The employment contract coincides with the development con-
tract. But. as I have reminded you, this requires a continuous adjustment of

the production system and therefore more flexibility among the factors of pro-
duction, labor included.

11
IOIIOFFKJAI.USB1MULY
FIMIIDFFICLAL lili¢ﬂﬂl¥

I an convinced that. if a greater and more reasonable flexibility of labor is
accepted. then in a brief period of time the total number of those employed
will increase along with an improvement in quality and stability. This is so
because, under the present system, firms guard carefully against hiring more
employees for periods when production might increase temporarily and prefer to
limit hirings according to the minimum level of activity forecast for several
years into the future.

An increase in employment is therefore impossible without a clear and honest
agreement. Unions, in particular, are called upon to make a decisive choice:
to protect in extreme fashion the employees already under their aegis and thus
prevent new hirings, or on the other hand to make room for the youth, the
women. and the citizens of the South who are given only marginal consideration
under the present system.

Abroad only 3 unemployed in 10 are looking for their first jobs; in Italy the
proportion is 8 out of 10, and their average waiting time is appreciably
longer. To make the position of a union laborer into a sort of carte blanche
for every sort of claimed right has been a serious Italian mistake. Now we

have to find the courage to protect employees less so we can protect the citi-
zen more.

A realignment of labor must coincide with a revaluation of national human capi-
tal. This is the most precious resource of any country. To build it up
requires many generations of technical and cultural maturation; and, when it is
built up, we can then survive even the destruction of wars, as Germany and Japan
have demonstrated.

In Italy we have succeeded in deteriorating in time of peace through the ex-
cesses of guaranteeing everything to too many. of welfare, and of.an egalita-
rianism extended to the point where individual performance is obscured.

Now we must turn back to the prize individuals to find professional ability
and conmitnent. Lacking this prerequisite, the truly necessary efforts for
training. qualifying, and requalifying would produce scant results. On this
point we must arrive at a convincing social consensus in the interest of all.
And there must also be a cooperative effort on the part of the one looking for
work, realising that he cannot stand forever waiting for what Providence will
provide. We need for workers to adjust themselves to the requirements of the
productive world which has surpluses of certain jobs and scarcities of other
specialities.

Then we need for workers to became convinced that further real increases can
come about only through development.

In the years from 1969 to 1980 the proportion of available national income
going to dependent employees in Italy rose from 56 percent to 66 percent.

Along with this "victory," inflation which was 3-6 percent annually rose to a
16 percent annual average and in 1981 it reached 20 percent. The rate of deve-

lopment. which was 5-6 percent, fell to 3 percent on the average and in 1981 it
was zero.

12
ﬁOI‘OIIIClAl.lEIE(H§LY
FIIICHﬂﬂCIAI.lﬂiE(HNLV

Hell then. think about what would have been enough to attain just 1.7 percent
more in the rate of development so that the dependent workers could have had
what they had had without the necessity of increasing their share of national
revenues.

Diverted Managerial Expertise

In our country, apart from how it might appear at first glance, managerial
expertise is still alive and vital. But it has been diverted into channels
which now and then are not very orthodox, like those of underground labor and
tar evasion, like handling the many obstacles to production imposed by legal
regulations; and like dealing with the many uncertainties which impede long-
term managerial programming. From these things have arisen also some devia-
tions in the speculative or financial sense, to which no blame can be attached
but which displace energy from its fundamental task of producing more and
better.

Accomplishments of the firm have come to depend more and more on external fact-
ors beyond the control of the individual manager. After-the-fact concealment
policies have also been applied in firms, helping those which lose at the ex-
pense, in the last analysis, of those which are more productive. There has
started to grow, for this reason, the temptation to cease being a firm which
assists and become one which is assisted. Other dangerous temptations have
accompanied the growth in managerial difficulties. For the large firms it is

a temptation to change their economic weakness into a political force and to
try, along with the rulers, to find particular solutions to their own problems,
these every now and then quite removed from the market logic.

For the managers of small firms there is the temptation to become overly
business-minded, to enclose themselves psychologically within the walls of '
their firms, to refuse to grow even when it is possible, and to keep themselves
apart from political and civic duties.

Both the above sorts of behavior are wrong. For managers, responsibilities
outside the firm are necessary for improving the environment in which we find
ourselves operating, to make it more rational not only for our own benefit but
also for that of the country. ‘

It is really a tiring task to bring to maturity a modern economic and mana-
gerial culture among our citizens and especially in the political realm; to
build a new style of industrial relations with workers and unions which is
based on mutual credibility; and to effect a difficult but necessary refutation
of the welfare philosophy and replace it with a request for support on matters
which are legitimate concerns of the country.

This task also plays a part in establishing conditions under which the social
consensus around a development project is achieved. For the managers, such a
task is a professional duty just as it is a professional duty to be pruden-
tially optimistic.

COPYRIGBT: 1982 Rizzoli Editore

9972
C50: 3104/216 13

FOIlOFiﬂC1A1.lﬂI£(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

POLITICAL, ECONOMIC SITUATION BXAHINED AFTER YEAR
Rome MONDOPBRAIO in Italian Apr 82 pp 53-57
[ﬁrticle by Michel Mathieu: Mitterrand, a Year Later]

[Text] The falling-off in leftist votes in the local elec-
tions marks the end of the honeymoon between Mit-
terrand and the voters, and the beginning of a
phase of difficulty and uncertainty. One of the
earliest difficulties to arise stems from the
lack of synch between the old opposition mindset
and that of a government that has yet to settle
into its definitive form. Other weak points
have to do with its marriage of convenience with
the communists, not to mention the actual content
of its economic policy, still wavering between
orthodox Keynesian positions and creeping mone—
tarism.

It was evident that the sails would not be swelling quite so
proudly and that navigation would be a bit more tricky after a
year of the socialist experiment in France. The first signs of
rough weather ahead came with Peyrefitte's victory in the first
round of elections for seats in Parliament, and the local elec-
tions in March confirmed the guarded prognosis. The veil of mist
that envelope the capital has wafted even into the corridors of
power. No, Jacques Attali cannot see me: he has no time to give
to reporters before next month. In Michel Rocard's office over
on the Rue de Varennes, everybody is busy, but the prevailing tone
is one of prudence. I as permitted to speak with Michel Rocard,
but the minister for planning and territorial management is the
man who answers my questions (see interview, next). Is this the
same man who erupted onto our television screens on the evening
of 10 May in '81 to summon all of us to meet at the Bastille? .

Though that historic date upended the order of preference and our
long-held feel for the direction of relations between the "social
parties,“ it has also gradually altered the pattern of discourse
between the left-wing parties and their leaders now ensconced in
government. The men themselves have also had to change their ways

1h
roa omcuu. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-- and some have not done it quickly enough -- and shift their
rhetorical gears from the opposition mode to the loftier levels
suited to government ministers. This, for that matter, is what
the French were asking for, particularly the voters of the center
and left-of-center, who were deeply troubled during the early
months of Mitterrand’s 7-year'term by a public style that was any-
thing but presidential. Even today it is clear that the style

and the codes of rhetoric and behavior of the new majority are not
altogether to the liking of that portion of the electorate.

Who Were the "Bolters" in the Local Elections?

Who, socially speaking, were these voters in the crucial "swing"
sector who deserted the left once they entered the voting booths?
The finger has been pointed at several categories of workers, at
the elderly, at the wine-growers, the farmers, the young, and at
management. Some of them abstained, others changed sides. While
some communist voters stayed away from the polls, others, probably
pro-Chirac supporters who voted for Mitterrand in order to defeat
Giscard, took their plaCes at the ballot-box. According to Serge
July (managing editor of LIBERATION) and Pierre Rosanvallon (see
interview, following), the poor showing in the local elections is
unquestionably attributable to this “rejection front." Why, though,
did only a tiny remnant of this ad-hoc electorate stick together?

Jean Daniel has the answer: “In the euphoria induced by their
state of grace, whenever a problem arose they took shelter behind
the contract that was established by Francois Mitterrand's 'man-
date' from the voters." Just who was it that signed this contract
with the president? "Euphoria was still running high, and they
decided that it was the majority of the voters who had signed,
that at long last they had come down where the so-called sociolo-
gical majority was, totally overlooking the real majority deter-
mination to get rid of Giscard.‘

But, in order to explain the situation as it really is in France
right now, we must allow for the paradox inherent in this mar-
riage of convenience between the socialists and the communists. It
must be remembered that one of the rationales behind that marriage
was the determination to weaken one of the partners -- the Commun-
ist Party -- which was all that stood in the way of the victory of
the left. More than a million of the PCF's electorate voted just
a year ago against Marchais and for Hitterrand in the first round
of the presidential elections. Once the socialists pulled off
their triumph at the polls, they no longer needed the communists,
yet they strengthened their ties with them, undoubtedly so as to
guarantee labor peace for a while, or to weaken them still fur-
ther by bringing them into the cabinet. The entire rationale for
weakening the French Communist Party, though, collapsed, in part
at least, with the returns from the local elections.

In the unstable climate of the socialist left there is, further-
more, the "culture party," whose positions have not always been

15
ran omcm use any
FOR OFFKIAI. USE ONLY

taken seriously by the government, at least at first. It is a
party made up of students, professors, university people, research
workers, exhcetives or cadres, whose function is to spread and
generate ideas. This is the party, for example, whose counterpart
in the United States shouldered responsibility for a decisive strug-
ale to end the war in Vietnam. In France, it has busied itself of
late years brainstorming strategy for a break with capitalism and
for a break with totalitarianism. That led to the discovery that
capitalism, blamed by the classics of socialism for alienation
(Marx), imperialism (Lenin), and war (Jaurés) could in fact be re-
conciled with democracy better than could so-called real “social-
ism.’I

Paul Thibaud's analysis is similar to the one Jean Daniel gives us.
He perceives a policy open to social reality, in which the adver-
sary is also the subject of a human experience that must bu recog-
nized. .'There are in France right now," he says, "the conditions
we need for the socialists to gain some maturity in government, and
for a creative co-penetration with the facts of life today." As
evidence, he cites the shrinking audience and prestige of the
French CP, the ebbing of dogmatism in leftist culture, and the very
nature of a crisis to which there are no simple answers, but which
unequivocally calls for a pluralist mobilization of different so-
cial energies. "Politics, particularly the way the socialists play
politics,” he complains, "is not favorable to any evolution in that
direction." The reaffirmation of the present majority at the Val-
ence congress," he adds,"came about with a decision to stand pat

on a do-nothing strategy." Even so, aside from the party's inter-
nal squabbles, there are those who argue that when the government
drapes itself in the cloak of socialist orthodoxy, as it did in its
platform, or when it confines itself to.a "penny catechism" of re-
publican values, as in the president's public statements, it is in
danger of failing to act in the context of a modern culture, one
that responds to the needs and desires of French society today.

Criticism of the Intellectuals

The government is not solely responsible for this rejection. The
langourous pace of the ongoing debate over the thrust and instru-
ments for reform action also reflects the crisis in social thinking
in France, the impasses or the shortcomings of intellectual think-
ing on this point. This disarray among many segments of the intel-
ligentsia with regard to social action perhaps explains why there
has been such a dearth of critical opinion and proposals from them
in the press. What we can glimpse, though, is a deep distrust of a
leftist government that has refused to pay attention to criticism
of statist and productivist orthodoxy which a great many French
intellectuals have long been proffering. If, after 23 years of
opposition and exclusion from the life of the state (from 1958,

the year of de Gaulle's coup d'etat, to 1981, the year of Hitter-
rand's election) the men now in government have encountered major

16
FOI(WFK]AL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

difficulties at first in bringing their behavior and their voca-
bularies into consonance with their new responsibilities, French
intellectuals, on their part, have experienced problems of their
own in overcoming their atavistic suspicions of the state, whatever
its political coloration, and have kept their distance for a wait-
and-see interval that has indeed dragged on too long.

Many of those who had centered their political thinking on a cri-
ticism of totalitarianism, and who never flagged in inveighing
against the /union of the left/ for socialist complacency toward
the Communist Party, found themselves caught off balance after
Hitterrand's victory at the polls, and what made it all the harder
to stomach was the fact that nobody really believed it would hap-
pen -- not even the PSP itself. Ever since 1968, there has been a
steadily widening gap between the PSP's leadership's commitment to
the joint program with the PCP and the intellectuals who, after
Prague, have been critical of totalitarianism. "I'll give Hitter-
rand 6 months. I won't bother him at all for that long," was the
presumptuous indulgence Claude Mauriac offered on the morning after
10 May 1981. I‘The pace of intellectual research," observes Serge
July, "came from a different drum. [The intellectuals] stayed out
of the issue of the central government, except maybe Foucault who
has been working for years on an analysis of the techniques of go-
vernance. The left did not rise to power in the wake of a ferment
of ideas, but climbed there over what was left of the inherited
panoply of the Sixties' structural reforms. "It is equally true,"
he adds, "that for more than 20 years the voters held back history
and that, despite the French and international crises, simply stood
there and would not let it pass.... The intellectuals were wrong
again when, after the French CP campaign against immigrants and the
clamor against drugs, they believed that Poujadism had given the

C? a whiff of oxygen. That campaign, though, turned out to be a
catastrophe for the communists. A good chunk of their electoral
support bolted to the socialists."

The Reform Debate

“bile the intellectuals were reacting as they always do to any
change, with attentive skepticism, Mitterrand was launching his
string of reforms. The phenomena that had fostered the emergence

of the "broad consensuses" were behind him: the death penalty was
abolished, as was extradition and the expulsion of the immigrant
workers, while the president's stands on the Soviet super-rearma-
nent and on the Third World evoked resounding international response.
And yet, the atmosphere gradually grew a little muggy. While, on
the one hand, the president's intuition, which allowed him to broad-
en his area of support, was intact, on the other hand there was
growing indifference to any project emitting even a whiff of uto-
pian visions. In this sense the Italian communists are wrong when
they say that Mitterrand won by following a "third road."

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even though the honeymoon may be over between the government and .
the socialist electorate, this is due not so much to the pace of
its reforms, as one might assume from the Mauroy-Delors feud, as
to the very content of the reforms. Did the government perhaps
waste a lot of effort over nationalizations when the the prize at
stake was something else? According to same observers, these re-
forms don't affect anybody directly, given the fact that, even be-
fore this latest round of nationalizations, France had an economy
in which credit was strictly regulated and was never granted with-
out the consent of the state, even in the case of the private
banks, while the state was guaranteci decision-making power on
the boards of directors, thanks to its $1-percent share holdings.
Many perceived the nationalisations as simply reflecting socialist
determination to give the lie to those who charged them with not
being true leftists and to prove that they had the courage to
bring down the money power. Pierre Rosanvallon‘attributes some
pedagogical virtue to the nationalizations vis-a-vis the unions,
which were thereby forced to take the state of the economy into ac~
count in their policy decisions, something that hitherto had been
leftaltogether to the discretion of enterprise.

Over at the CPDT, though, they make no secret of the fact that all
eyes are looking in other directions, that socialism will come to
pass when the workers have a say in corporate decisions, or that
the final goal is worker-management. According to Edmond Maire,
however (see separate interview), these demands for equal voice

in decision-making go beyond the bounds of individual corporations
to invest the global management of the French economy: "If it

is decided that the union represents labor, and that it must con-
fine itself to labor matters, then our country will be depriving
itself of the means it must have to regain economic soundness."
And he adds: "If the unions are not made part of the debate on
industrial policy right now, we shall be depriving whatever plans
we make of a dimension derived from labor's experience, but also of
the talent for innovation and leadership of our wage-earners as a
whole."

The government does not seem to be insensitive to this new request
from the unions and the Aurox bill on the authority of worker-man-
agement bodies within the corporations, which will come up shortly
for debate in the National Assembly, will tell us how far it plans
to move in this direction. Industry, meanwhile, is bringing pres-
sure to bear in order to hold outside influence to a minimum in a
field it considers its own turf. The cadre union (CGC) is making
a big issue of it, and calling urgently on all its membership

to close ranks solidly against what it sees as an assault on its
own decision-making prerogatives: "The challenge to our specific
representative character, the creation of plant councils, and the
institutionalization of the political debate in the nationalized
corporations will lead to a destabilization of the hierarchy and
put in question yet again the function of middle-management workers."
The bogeymen of "people's commissars" and the “dictatorship of the

18
FOR‘0FFK]AI.USE‘DNLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proletariat" are being brandished once again amid a rising tide
of rhetoric that has got out of hand and is beginning to perceive
an anti-CGC "plot“ on the part of Mitterrand himself.

"If things go on like this," threaten Paul Marchelli and Jean Menu
of the CGC, "we shall be forced to resort to the same methods the
farmers did, unless the cadres agree to be silent hostages of the
workers' organizations."

The tone, one senses, is considerably shriller than that surround-
ing the nationalization debate, which, aside from a few tactical
skirmishes by a rear guard of CONSBIL CONSTITUTIONAL, was relatively
well received. Basically, what is at issue here is an old repub-
lican tradition to which de Gaulle himself bowed his head -- wit-
ness the first measures he took when he took office. Even though
the appointment of communist Georges Valbon to head Charbonnages

de France, while it was a surprise, went unchallenged, the outcome
of the local elections, combined with all the pressure on the franc,
have generated increased interest in and, in places, a massive loss
of confidence in the French economy.

’Twixt Keynes and Friedman

What people fear most is a resurgent pro-monetarist offensive that
began with the advent of Raymond Barre, during the Giscard era, at
the finance ministry. The danger is that the left, traditionally
the target of charges of managerial incompentence, might find it-
self put on the defensive again.

The press shows that the French are sensitive (either pro or con)
to such social changes as affect such minorities as the immigrant
workers, the elderly, and prisoners, but they do not forget that
the socialists were put into government to alleviate social ine-
quities, yes, but also, and most importantly, to reduce unemploy-
ment and get the economy going again. It is not beyond the realm
of possibility that a particular kind of voter cast ballots for
the socialists in order to get a labor truce and a breathing space
while the courts are swamped with bankruptcy and foreclosure cases.
Once Giscard's failure became evident, perhaps the socialists looked
like the best bet to make labor behave more responsibly and to get
legislation passed that would have triggered protest, coming from
any other source.

The fact remains, nevertheless, that the fog surrounding the fin-
ance ministry's course is a source of mounting concern in Francs
and abroad. Something of a “Barre-man" in his call for regaining
France's competitive edge, Delor's handling of the economy is at
the same time Keynesian in its recovery goals. Economic recovery
is very sluggish in getting off the ground, even so, witness the
stagnation in sales and the accumulation of defaulted notes, while
the tight strings on bank credit are proper to the wholly opposed
logic of monetarism. Keynes' prescription for a case of recession
and rising unemployment in fact called for a deficit in the public

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

budget combined with redistribution of purchasing power for the
benefit of those hardest hit by the crisis.

Economist Roger Friouret has pointed out, however, that those who
applied this remedy did so in a situation in which prices were
contained. The most recent large-scale test, Helmut Schmidt's in
Germany (1976-1981) came during a period of contained inflation

(5 percent). Priouret is therefore concerned at the risks the
Mauroy government is running in implementing this policy in a
country where the inflation rate is running at around 14 percent.
The budget deficit, on the other hand, although it looks pretty
big at 95 billion, is still less than half that of all of Germany's
state-owned companies in 1981. Income redistribution thus far has
been limited to the neediest, and this year will be somewhere on
the order of 35 billion francs. According to Keynesian orthodoxy,
the money supply, or the sum total of means of payment created

by the issuing institute and the banks, should grow at a rate that
enables industry, business, and consumers to buy the surplus pro-
duction (3 percent)forecast at the increased prices (13 percent)
forecast.

"It would therefore be logical," Priouret explains, "for Treasury
Director Jean Yves Haberer to ask the economy and finance minister
to increase the monetary mass by an amount equal to the sum of

both those figures, or 16 percent." And this is where the tradi-
tional monetarist prescriptions of Friedman and the Chicago School
come in, according to which the only way to regulate the economy

is by controlling the money supply: increasing it if the economy
is recovering, and tightening it if the economy is slowing down

and the rise in prices slows. The pragmatists, though, buy only
part of the doctrine: reduce inflation by putting a cap on the
money supply growth somewhere below the needs of the economy. It
is in this spirit that Renaud de Lajeuniere, governor of the Bank
of France, s ested that Jacques Delors fix that ceiling at 12
percent in lugs. Jean Yves Haberer argued strongly for the 16-
percent view. Delors split the difference and decided on 13 per-
cent: a ceiling markedly below that called for by orthodox Keynes-
ian policy standards. .

Roger Priouret points to another contradiction in the allocation of
credit, which has gone to further labor rather than industrial
goals. Control of the money supply leads to a tightening of credit
and to control over its allocation. In France this logic has
taken on the rigid form of an allocation system that establishes

in advance for each half-year period and for each lending institu-
tion, the percentage of additional credit it may extend. Jacques
Delors has given a slight edge to export (up 14 percent), which is
to be expected, but housing construction did a lot better (up 14
percent). For the commercial and business banks the total increase
is just a hair over that for 1981. The big losers are the finance
institutions that practice leasing (lease-sale of plants or equip-
ment for industry and business), whose percentage increase in al-
lowable lending is lower than it was in 1981. Logic would argue

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI(NWKJALIﬂﬂEONLY

that in a time of technological changes, and in a country that

has a lot of catching up to do, industry would be favored over
housing construction (which, be it noted, is not nearly so sore
beset as that industry is in Italy). In 1946, Jean Monnet had

to make that cruel choice because France's industrial production
apparatus had to be modernized at all costs. Roger Priouret thinks
that this hard choice will come back to haunt us.

Chirac's Scarecrows

Politics, economics, culture. The outside observer finds it hard
to find his bearings amid the light and the dark. The change has
come most visibly, in French daily life, on the television screens.
There has been a shift from TV at a fairly low cultural level but
quite popular, to TV that rightly pursues educational goals. The
change has been too abrupt, though, and not very balanced, and the
upshot is that viewers are now offered programming that many see
as ”boring" and "half-baked.” The right wing, which up until the
local elections had been licking its wounds and trying to get some
kind of image back, did not miss the chance to lash out at a go-
vernment that basically offered very little to laugh at. But it
is precisely these countless minor missteps that have somewhat
dimmed the government's image.

other more serious errors of a direct political nature have sown
some more serious doubts, such for instance as the bill introduced
by communist health Minister Jack Realite, concerning examinations
for hospital interns, which was so complicated that it sent all
hospital personnel, from the right as well as the left, out on a
general strike that ended only when the bill was withdrawn. Clumsy
moves like these, in addition to projectingthe image of a govern-
ment with advanced degrees in creating confusion, hint at a fail-
ure to get together and to communicate with the people most con-
cerned, quite ill-suited to the spirit that ought properly to in-
spire a socialist government. It is unthinkable that the govern-
ment go on handing ammunition to its detractors on a silver plate
when the latter are basically reduced to making point by point
answers on minor issues.

When ape stops to think calmly, one can say that the government has
stuck to its program practically to the letter, without coming any-
where near the catastrophes prophesied by the right. Even today,
though, the right has not managed to update its orientation enough
to be able to propose solutions that respond to present-day needs.
Instead, it wallows in anticipation of disaster and verbal terror-
ism, doing its best to magnify every minor misstep the government
makes, or raising its voice, as it did over nationalization, against
the tribute paid to “ideological and doctrinal rites.“ Chirac,
meanwhile, never wearies of waving his raggedy scarecrow before

the eyes of the French, telling everybody who will listen never to
doubt for an instant that "the French socialist leaders or socialist
voters want to put our freedoms in doubt, while the system and ex-
perience prove that wherever socialism has been tried, it has in-
variably led to an impoverishment of the economy." Chirac is very

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁOR¢NﬂﬂCJAl.US£(NVLY

wary, right now, of sharpening his analysis enough to get into any
technical detail.

There are still 6 years left in Mitterrand's term, and the presi-
dent intends to make the most of them. Hence the reserve that sur-
rounds his econonic policy.

As I wait to get back on the train for Rome, the evening papers
have banner headlines announcing that unemployment has dropped be-
low the z-nillion threshold, while pressure on the franc is easing.
And the government is back-pedalling, postponing repeal of the
Peyrefitte Act on public order, hitherto viewed by the socialists
as too restrictive on civil rights. Is this a change of course, or

state control to local jurisdictions over a 3-year period. Amid
the lights and shadows, the Hauroy government is still sending a
message of instability.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Mondoperaio, Bdizioni Avantil

6182

680: 3104/217

22
FOR10FFﬂJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

ROCARD, MAIRB, ROSANVALLON ON GOVERNMENT POLICIES
Rome MONDOPBRAIO in Italian Apr 82 pp 58-62

[Interviews with Michel Rocard, Edmond Maire, and Pierre Rosan-
vallon, by Michel Mathieu]

[Text] In Paris, as part of our survey of a year of social-
ist experience in government (see preceding article)
we interviewed Michel Rocard, minister for planning
and territorial management; Edmond Maire, secretary-
general of the CPDT, a labor union with close ties
to the PSF; Pierre Rosanvallon, university lec-
turer, Socialist Party activist, and author of "The
age of Worker Management (1976) and of the just pub-
lished "Crisis of the Welfare State".

Rocard: The Spirit of the Plan

[Question] A provisional economic plan that calls for a strategy
to put the unemployed back to work has been introduced, What are
your goals, and how do you plan to reach them?

[Answer] The goal is a modest one, but basically an ambitious one,
since it calls for the creation of 400,000 to 500,000 new jobs in
the next 2 years. This will be possible if we get economic growth
rolling on new tracks, solid and more stable than the old ones. we
are shooting for a 3-percent annual growth rate for 1982 and 1983.
Among our first concrete measures we have already increased low-
and middle-income consumption by restructuring the minimum wage
(SMIG)and several social services. At the same time we have sought
to compensate employers, at least in part, for the cost of these
new tax burdens. The recovery in family consumption is already
visible. And this tells us that we are on the right track, since
it will certainly have a salutary impact on business. Barring a
clumsy error on our part, the consequence should be an incentive
to investment, according to the logic of the plan. As for unem-
ployment, we have already crossed that 2-million-job threshold:
this is just the beginning of the way back up.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(N‘LY

[Question] In an open economy, the domestic economy is exposed to
foreign competition with direct impact on the nation's balance of
trade. What is the plan't specific thrust in this area?

[Answer] There are two key thrusts to the 2-year plan: an ambi-
tious program of energy conservation, investment, and research in
the field of new energy sources, and a strategy for winning back
our foreign markets. Here the public sector, expanded through na—
tionalization, has girded itself to make a critical contribution to
the achievement of these industrial expansion goals. The nation-
alized industries will in fact play an essential role in the basic
and advanced technology sectors, but they will continue to be sub-
ject to the nor-a1 rules of competition, and above all to the laws
governing commercial corporations. Their heads have full adminis-
trative autonomy. Relations between them and the state as share-
holder have been formalized in a contract under which their access
to financing, and especially their access to public subsidies, is
subject to the same rules as apply to all other corporations.

[Question] Don't you see a conflict between planning and decen-
tralization?

[Answer] Anybody who adduces that argument displays his indiffer-
ence to freedom and to the rights of local jurisdictions, not to
mention his own inability to shake off an authoritarian and cen-
tralist view of planning. For my part, I remain a convinced advo-
cate of the soundness of regionalization and planning as the way
to orderly implementation of reforms. After all, it is planning
that will, in the long run, make sure that decentralization will
not turn into a witless scattering of effort or into exacerbation
of personal selfishness, but that the priorities laid down by the
national government will meet with compliance at every level.
Without decentralization, the planning process would very swiftly
wind up as a standardizing, many-tentacled octopus, which would,
in the end, eat away at and finally destroy the very liberties it
set out to expand.

[Question] Obviously, you are talking about a democratic plan and
demoeratic decentralization processes. How do you plan to make
democracy work?

[Answer] As we have planned it, decentralized planning rests upon
two principles: pluralism in the levels of elaboration and imple-
mentation of its decentralized patterns, and in clear-cut contrac-
tual relations between the state and local jurisdictions and be-
tween the state and individual enterprises.

[Question] Your orientation, then, aims at achieving a synthesis
of regional plans?

2h
FORCHWﬂJALlBEIRHX
FOR OFFICIAL ussomv

Our aims reach farther than that. In order to respond to our re-
gional aspirations and the needs of our time, the plan must allow
for the strategic necessities in the economic and industrial field,
but it must not neglect the cultural field, either. Let me explain
that. Regionalization as it is incorporated into the plan responds
to a threefold need: economic, which roots the planning process in
the life of the local community, embodied in the people most inti-
mately involved in its development -- its elected officials, its
unions, and its business community; the social requirement, which
is one of respect for local history and identity, which is all too
often crushed by economic development, and for human and social
groups; and then there is the political requirement, which is to
pin our faith on the broadest possible input into formulation of the
plan, perceived as the area of social compromise and as the vital
tool in the nation's dialogue with itself.

[Question] What relations will you establish with business and in-
dustry to achieve this broad consensus and that self-reliant devel-
opment that is to result from it?

[Answer] I have already sentioned contractual relations. The plan
is a mandatory transition that will allow our society to relearn
to negotiate with itself. This, however, will mean that all eco-
nomic and social parties must be better represented in the planning
process, and that there be a healthier relationship between the
government and all portions of society in determining the guide-
lines for our nation's future. A multi-year plan implemented by
the government cannot be brought into question after the fact by
the machinery of economic fine-tuning or by the requirements of the
annual budget.

Maire: Criticism from Organized Labor

[Question] There is a lot of uneasiness on the labor front. It
would seem that the government, among its other omissions, has yet
to come up with any specific blueprints for implementing the 39-hour
week.

[Answer] It is a long-standing French tradition to blame the state
or the government whenever anything goes wrong. The issue of the
39-hour week is the best example you could have found. The 39-hour
rule is sound not only in principle, but in content. It governs
what is within the authority of the state, and nothing more. It is
not up to the state to impose specific shift-lengths on every com-
pany. It is not up to the state to lay down the rules under which
a company may or may not create new job openings. The employers
resisted implementation of this rule, and that gave rise to various
and sundry attitudes in labor. Some of us, perhaps too many of us,
asked the state to intervene even more heavy-handedly, to spell out
the impact of the entire maneuver on the length of the work-week,
thereby cutting the ground out from under both parties, particular-
ly the unions, in that everything would be handed down from on

25
ma omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high, and we could take our own sweet time about arriving at a sol-
ution for every problem. That is not possible.

[Question] The 1985 target for the 35-hour week is still on the
agenda for the unions as well as for the government. Do you think
the government will see to it that you get paid for those unworked
5 hours?

[Answerj’ Absolutely not. I have just finished a second reading

of an interview with Jean Auroux: the labor minister said that the
35-hourweekcannot be achieved without some modification in the dis-
tribution of incomes and wages. We shall take a harder line on the
issue than the government does. We cannot accept the notion that

in order to get to the 35-hour week we must accept a wage cut. In
addition, there is going to have to be tax reform that hits the
higher income brackets. France, when it comes to taxes, is still
the most unfair of all the industrialized nations.

[Question] One gets the impression that the CFDT has recently step-
ped over the boundaries of its union role to enter the political
lists.

[Answer] French political tradition still does not admit organized
labor's full responsibility in society. The unions are recognized
as qualified spokesmen only in the area of labor relations, less

so in the economic field, and least of all when the issue is a plan
for the overall development of society. The political parties tend
to consider themselves as the sole protagonists in any strategy for
social change, and to relegate the unions to do nothing more than
stand up for their narrow interests. This conventional view is
wrong. It takes no account of the many kinds of progress that
could come from a plurality of ideas and approaches to social change.
And it could cause a great deal of controversy in relations between
the government and the CFDT. But, after all, these are problems
that will be solved when the action begins, not while we sit here
theorizing.

[Question] When you say 'action,‘ do you mean real participation
in the decision-making process and in corporate management?

[Answer] If the role of the unions is limited to the labor turf,
our country will be robbing itself of forces that are indispansa-
ble to a restoration of economic health. If the unions are not
summoned, as of now, to talk about industrial policies, any plan
they may come up with will be deprived of that dimension that stems
from labor's experience, from its innovatise potential; it will
be deprived of the innate responsibility of plant cadres above all,
but it will also lose that quality among the workers themselves.
They have worked out a plan for the steel industry without even
bothering to consult the unions. And we could say the same about
the plan for the textile industry, or the plan for getting the‘

26
FOR¢HHWCUU.USE(NWLY
NR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

housing construction industry moving again, This myopic vision of
organized labor's role is a mistake, not just on the part of the
employers, but on that of the French administration, no matter
what its political coloration may be,

[Question] The government consulted you on several points, none of
the- minor issues, certainly, such as social security reform, on
which the government had to face strong opposition.

[Answer] We are pleased that the government is sticking to its
guns, despite opposition from business and industry. In spite of
the difficulties, there will be reform providing for elective choice
of top social security officials. There you have an example that
moves toward worker-management. It has not been easy,_though. The
government sometimes gives the impression that it is following a
zig-zag course, that it is promising more than it can deliver.

[Question] Just recently you urged the government to pursue a po-
licy of financial toughness. That's fairly unusual for a labor
union. How do you explain this attitude?

[Answer] We have no love for austerity as such. But we do believe
that the worst of all risks would be economic, monetary, and finan-
cial breakup, partly because it would be the workers, the elderly,
the families that would have to pay for it. And, of course, the
main thing in France today is to demonstrate that the left can
administer and govern the process of change.

[Question] Yvon Gattaz, president of the Businessmen's Federation,
sees the 35-hour week and the fifth week of paid vacation as an ad-
ditional cost to the nation, and as refutation of any policy of
fiscal toughness.

[Answer] The president of the CNPP is putting out slogans equal to
and contrary to the glib shibboleths making the rounds in union
quarters, such as "The bosses can afford it." Last month, speak-
in at the Press Club, he argued that French business is taking a
nosedive. True, the number of bankruptcies did increase last year.
Right now it is visibly declining. The problem, however, is not
one of increasing business profits indiscriminately without any
checks, but one of coming up with a selective policy, business by
business and sector by sector. An industry policy, in short, one
that is consonant with French tradition, but with a new element in
its makeup: an equal voice for the labor organizations in the
decision-making process. If business and industry can hear out of
this ear, we are ready for dialogue.

[Question] If Parliament passes the bill granting freedom of poli-
tical expression in the plants, isn't there danger of confusion that
would be prejudicial to the consistency of labor action, a degree

of competition that would be, at the very least, troublesome?

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(”?KJALUSEOWLY

[Answer] Let's turn the problem around. It took almost a century
for the labor movement to achieve, in 1968 at long last, recogni-
tion of labor's right to maintain a union presence in the plant.
Now, with no sweat and no struggle, they want to decree from on high
that freedom of political expression be assured in the workplace.
Maybe it merely means encouragement for the Communist Party in the
plants, where it is already firmly established, with the risk of
proliferation of political or para-political associations under the
thumb of the employers. Let's be frank about it: the neo-Gaullists
seem to be in a good position to profit by these new opportunities.
With the risk, of course, of a revanchist policy and of a troubled
and confusing coziness with the CP's plant units. And the upshot
would be a denagogical challenge to the very financial restraint we
were just speaking of. It’s foolhardy to pass laws without first
knowing how you are going to cope soundly with the consequences of
legislative innovation. having said that, the CPDT is not opposed
to the principle of political units in the plants. It merely puts
government on its guard against the risks that the introduction and
expansion of their activities could lead to right now.

[Question] The franc is under heavy pressure, and inflation has
not slowed, despite the fact that the nation's oil bills are some-
what smaller. Are you ready to do as the German unions have done,
and accept some sacrifices in purchasing power?

[Answer] France's difficulties are bound up with Europe‘s. Mit-
terrand has only Just informed us that he intended to put the ques-
tion of jobs in the center of the Communities' agenda in the next
meeting of European finance and economy ministers. But, above and
beyond this- necessary international action, an economic recovery
policy requires something quite different. We have no desire to

_ wake up some fine morning to find ourselves faced with tragic op-
tions. Proper governance of change also means not hanging back
whenever an obstacle comes up, and saying that we'll pay the bill
later. What we want, beginning right now, is a policy of fiscal
rigor, in which everybody does his part according to his means, his
influence, and his power. The CPDT is not the only voice in organ-
ized labor that talks like this. There is no dearth of signs of
broader responsibility among the workers and their organizations.

[Question] How do you, as leader of the CFDT, explain the decline
of the left-wing vote in the local elections, coming so soon after
the landslide of 10 May 1981?

[Answer] Since then there have been a lot of illusions as to the
demiurgic virtues of political power. The present majority, in and
of itself, was the source of these illusions, at least in the sense
that throughout the entire period of the Joint program, all it took
was a good showing at the polls to make people believe that it was
possible to implement that program. The new embodiment of political
power, though, looking at the deadlines that confronted it, inevi-
tably began to modify its approach. And it's a good thing. It re-
fused to settle every issue with new laws, but instead restored

28
FOR(HTK]ALIRHEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

some breathing space for negotiating and bargaining among the so-
cial parties. It shed bright light on the real limitations of

any political act in a given domestic and international economic
situation. This is a prime cause of the difficulties. The se-
sand was Poland. Everybody knows that the socialist-communist
alliance in the cabinet was already fragile as of 10 May 1981, af-
ter a long period of dispute. But then at the end of 1981 we all
became aware of the diametrically opposite positions of the Com-
munist Party and the Socialist Party. This certainly weighed on
the coalition: and we saw how heavily it weighed when the returns
from the second round of local elections came in. The third cause
was a question of style and substance simultaneously. The govern-
ment's ambitions were perceived as numerous, but its accomplish-
ments negligible by comparison. The fact is, though, that the
government now seems to be concentrating on more clear-cut but
more trenchant goals, seeking to find essential rather than cos-
metic solutions, and that looks like a change of course.

Rosanvallon: The Entropy of Reformiam

[Question] How do you define the social measures of the present
government with reference to the two basic scenarios of our day:
the statist and the liberal?

[Answer] A statist orientation today would encounter major finan-
cial difficulties, but above all it would run into widespread so-
cial resistance, which would be difficult to overcome. One might
point out that the tax bite in the Scandinavian countries has top-
ped the $0-percent' ceiling, and deduce from that that we have yet
to reach the outer limits of "tolerable“ socialization. In a state
of sluggish growth, though, that comparison makes no sense. Same-
thing really big would have to happen to enable the welfare state
to grow without matching growth in anger and resistance. It would
take an event stunning enough to catalyze a collective will to give
meaning to any strengthening of the redistribution machinery. As
prisoners of the contradictions inherent in the statist social sce-
nario, we should be witnesses to the multiplication of the per-
verse effects that have come with the expansion of the submerged
economy and moonlight work, and the increasing segmentation of the
labor market. Creation of a dualistic economy and a dualistic
society is actually the self-defense compensating machinery that
society has devised to slow the expansion of socialisation and to
contain its costs.

The liberal scenario produces more immediately visible effects. It
automatically implies new dimensions for the redistribution poli-
cies. It is a socially regressive scenario, which assumes a strong
state, ready to deal with any discontent that may surface. It is,
basically, a scenario that has meaning only in the cynical perspec-
tive of a social coalition consolidating its power bases to the
exclusive advantage of the weakest minority in the population.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY

Both these scenarios are unacceptable for various reasons. Both
are based on assumptions of the finite nature of social develop-
ment. Neither contemplates the possibility of new needs' emerging
in the years ahead. The welfare state is a form of reinvesting
the economy in society to make up for the negative effects of the
.arket o

[Question] The trouble with the welfare state lies more in the
manner of reinvestment than in its basic principle. How can that
be remedied?

[Answer] There is no other way than to bring society closer to it-
self. we must make it denser, thicker, multiply the bonds that
tie one portion of society with another, get individual citizens
back into circuits of direct, one-on-one solidarity.

First of all, we must clear up one basic misunderstanding: that of
the utopian community, according to which individuals make up a
kind of extenaea—falily'that is ‘all but self-sufficient. It is
disconcerting to note that the alternative to the market-based so-
ciety or to desocialization is often perceived in this nostalgic
form. The methodological distinction between the organic commu-
nity and the individualistic society has wound up as a value judg-
ment. We cannot go on dreaming of the new family hearth as a means
of offsetting market-based socialization.

This being the case, how do you go about reconciling the emergence
of new statist patterns of solidarity with the desire for autonomy?
There is no theoretical answer to that question. The problem is
not one of identifying an ideal - of the sociological type -- that
would be neither the community nor society. The prime condition
for the propagation of the “social instinct" is increased leisure
time. The less free time people have, the readier they are to call
on the state to intervene, and the more eagerly they turn to con-
suming what the market has to offer. Viewed from this angle, re-
ducing working hours is no.longer merely an economic requirement
linked with reducing unemployment, but it becomes the necessary
condition for learning new patterns of living. This process of
bringing the society closer to itself is not therefore to be taken
in the narrow sense -- such as reconstitution of static and closed
micro-collectivities -- but, on the contrary, must come through the
multiplication of temporary or limited membership, ”belongings.‘I
The idea is not constriction, but rather expansion of the freedom
of each individual.

[Question] Let's get down to more practical and immediate problems.
How do you explain the disappointing outcome of the local elections?

[Answer] Don't forget that a lot of people voted against Giscard,
rather than for Mitterrand in the presidential elections. But it
is not only this. Another important factor is that there is a kind
of entropy at work on reformism in France. As we have seen, you

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

need a mobilization - financial, legislative, and political -
of considerable intensity to achieve what are basically fairly
modest concrete results. French reformisn operates something
like a thermodynanic engine, which means that there is a prob-
lem of what you get for what you put out. And in fact there is
this element, this opacity in our reforms, in the discontent of a
portion of our population.

[Question] Doesn't this loss of the government's popularity cast
a pretty threatening cloud over the 1983 municipal elections?

[Answer] That is what a lot of experts are afraid will happen.
But we mustn't forget that there are also some positive factors in
the French equation, such as the slowed rate of inflation and the
levelling off of the unemployment rate. 0n the evening of 10 May
1981, very few of the government's experts thought we could reach
this goal in 1982. From the point of view of economic success,
the crucial turning-point will cone when they write the 1983 bud-
get. You can devise scenarios, and you can advance hypotheses,
but the moment of truth will come with the decisions that must be
made on the future of our social security system.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Mondoperaio Bdizioni Avantil
6182
cso: 3104/217

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIR

um: necrno PSOB‘S ssamno mans maroommcn. perms
Madrid mm 16 in Spanish 31 Kay 82 pp 31, 33

[Report on interview with Andalusian President Rafael Bscuredo; date and
place not specified]

[Text] as is 38 years old, of sound bearing, and is the first president of
the Andalusian people. In addition to winning their votes. in recent years
he also won the hearts of most Andalusians.

"Son, my arm," Andalusian mothers greet him in passing. After a triumphant
campaign throughout Andalusia that restored the political illusion of other
times to the inhabitants of his land, Rafael Bscuredo, at the head of his
party, and without having to await the election foreseen in the Andalusian
parliament. has becou the first president of the recently established
Andalusian autonomy.

He was born on 20 February well after war's end in the town of the butter
cakes: Bstepa. lie was baptized in the Church of the Carmelites in that town,
"but when l was 10 days old they brought an to Seville," he confessed to
CAHBIO 16 in the first interview granted after winning the Andalusian elec~
tions. And he defines his family this way: "0f the lower middle class.

My father worked all of his life, first as an administrator and later as a
representative of a meat products company. And my mother came from a family
of merchants in Batepa."

He is married to the socialist representative Ana Maria Ruiz Tagle, his
university sweetheart. He has a 7-yearoold daughter. Patricia, and he lives
in a protected home in a nodest area in the suburbs of Seville, although
with his savings he was able to build a small house in the country near the
olive groves. where he spends his sumaers.

For Rafael Bscuredo the entire Andalusian electoral consign passed in a
multitude. There were times when it overflowed with emotion for him, as in
Seville, when he was acclaimed by 50,000 people, and later, on election
night, when he was united with telipe Gonzales in a long embrace. And
finally, when he entred the junta data reception center to the chorus of
"president. president." It was the end of a journey for that boy. who went
from law school delegate in the 1960's to president of the Mdalusian

Autonomous Government .

I’OROWIC‘JAZLUSIMY
FOI:0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

[Question] Have the P80! [Spanish Socialist workers Party] and Rafael
Escuredo been so successful lately?

[Answer] There has not been a single party in Andalusia that has achieved
our level of identification. The talk of the “party for all Andalusians"
was the truth. The party has projected its policies of change and its
Andalusian essence. And it has adopted the identifying characteristics

of this people.

With regard to myself, I do not know how much tine I have spent or how many
gray hairs I have acquired. In these 3 years I have covered 300,000 km by
car and I have averaged two and a half functions a day. In recent days I
have spoken with 250,000 persons, and in these 3 years with lore than 2
million Andalusians. But as now, face to face. Some will say that it was a
marketing operation.

As a youngster Rafael Escuredo studied for his bachelor's degree in the French
school. "It left its mark on ne, because it was a tolerable education for

the time." He then studies law, and his great obsession is to becomes labor
law professor. "But in 1968 Felipe calls ac and he proposes to ne and Ana
Maria that we form an assessor's office for labor. He did it. I returned
from my military service and we were married. There I said good-bye to the
professorship."

Those were difficult tines. "He repeatedly violated the principles of the
vertical union. we had to put up with the incomprehension of labor author-
ities and police suspicions." But that was his political schooling, those

10 hard years, "I got to know the working Seville and the labor and political
movement. The great mobilizations of the 1970's...."

That year he joined the P503, but he left it in 1972. "There was constant
conflict with the exile; we were censured. I was in favor of breaking off,
of ceasing to make policy from Tolouse. I made a mistake, but I recognized
it. After 2 years I talked with Felipe and I returned.

[Question] Escuredo, a man with popular charisma who is always controversial
within his party....

[Answer] That is true. I have been a social democrat, that is, a moderate
since 1968, and I have always been a critical character within the party--

perhaps because of my character or my upbringing. I continue to support a

federal party, but in practical politics, in which different sensibilities

are represented in the administrative organizations. I as not in favor of

having the majority get everything.

[Question] It now appears that there is total agreeaent.

[Answer] Yes, after the Granada Congress, the first that I did not lose.
That is why I decided to become a candidate. That congress was the most
serious act of political generosity that the socialists at the national level
have been able to perform. It was not an ideological problem, but one of
incorporating a realistic rather than a shamefaced nationalism.

lNNIl“ﬂﬂCiEi.U§E¢NULY
ll”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USElNVLY

[Question] And have the personal problems with party leaders been resolved?

[Answer] Questions of a personal nature are inevitable if there is mistrust.
But I can say that I now feel comfortable within the party. There has been a
phenomenon of personal integration and comprehension on the part of everyone.

Rafael Bacuredo became a delegate for Seville on 15 June 1977, as did his
wife. "In that the two of us first shared a pocketbook, then an office

and now political life, that makes for total identification and understanding.
Otherwise, the complex life style that we lead would be impossible. The fact
is that for 20 years now we have been involved in the same things."

At noon his daughter Patricia, who attends the nearby Gexnan school, generally
goes to the Junta to find him. She declared to CAHBIO 16: "I liked papa
better when he was just an adviser, because he was home more and we went
places a lot."

[Question] An absolute majority is a big responsibility for a government...

[Answer] I expect to govern Andalusia based on the responsibility and
principles of the socialist program. But if the national government or the
central administration attempts to withhold anything from our people or
carries on a policy of obstruction, we will answer firmly and belligerently.

[Question] On that subject, can there be support in other autonomies?

[Answer] I have issued a call for the president of the government to convoke

a meeting of presidents of autonomous and preautonomous entities so that s
solidarity commitment may be worked out. That idea is necessary in order to
consolidate the state. Heretofore the policy has been to put pressure on the
state by taking advantage of crisis currents in conjunction with a weak govern-
ment. That is why this affirmation is necessary. The state is all of us, and
we should contribute without deceit to the concept of a united Spain.

[Question] Speaking of deceit, there is talk of autonomous entities that for
certain have been spying on Rafael Bscuredo in this campaign and that favor
convoking a parallel summit behind the back of the government.

[Answer] I knew about the espionage. But I will have nothing to do with an
underground game that could undermine the idea of a democratic Spain and of
constructing the state comprised of autonomies--which should be built on the
principle of solidarity and with absolute repsect for the laws and the
constitution, affirming, of course, that the principle of national sovereignty
resides in the Spanish legislature.

This Rafael Escuredo is a different type of politician. And one must under-
stand him this way: "Those who are involved in politics live in a sort of
prison. It is something that I will not get used to. And I am not going to
give up my freedom. Maybe that is a different style, but that is the way

it is. If I feel like going out with ny friends for something or to a discs,
I do it. I am not prejudiced, because I am not the sort of politician who
glorifies his own image, although I too know my own limits.

FOI1DIFIJgi.USB(HHLY
F0!(Nﬂﬂ[ﬂAl.USB¢NﬂLY

He is also a politician known to be courageous. He was that at the peak
of his triumph, "but I was that also, and facing the consequences, in 1979.
when many were crying."

[Question] when will the Andalusians see that they are autonomous?

[Answer] It will not be possible to verify the change until the statute is
full of the foreseen powers. At that time one can begin to use the means
that are indicated in the statute as benefiting majority interests. Prior
to that there will be a new policy, a new style. we will not govern by
imposition or arrogance, but through the participation of the social and
cultural sectors. And there will be a policy of immediate action in order
that the central government can attend to the demands of our people.

[Question] Specifically, how will that policy and that participation be
manifested?

[Answer] The participation will be manifested in many ways, especially in

the creation of advisory councils in the various sectors: Agriculture, cattle
raising, fishing.... He are going to make big changes in the area of educa-
tion and culture. In the economic aspect one must launch a development plan,
with the support of the financial institutions-Bank of Andalusia, savings
banks and small and medium managers--and the social institutions, such as

the unions.

Another area of negotiation is with the government, to assure that the general
budgets are proportionate to the actual state of underdevelopment. The
objectives are to avoid strikes, achieve growth in the gross internal product
and create jobs. The increase in investment by the public sector should go
into the infrastructure and services, and that of the private sector should

be for production. 0f the public sector investment, 35 percent will be
dedicated to the creation of jobs.

Rafael Escuredo has few friends.

He cares little for sports. "I have never gotten around to practicing any
of them, but now I play golf. although I am no 'Seve'. Indeed, I play
pretty badly. I started to do it because I remember that as a youngster I
played minature golf, and an American friend recently gale me some clubs.
At least I walk 8 kn...." he likes Anerican "adventure and entertainment"
films, and he loves Mozart, "always Mozart." This is Rafael Escuredo.
president.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informscion y Revistas, S.A.

9746
C50: 3110/15?

FOI!“NNC£§1.USE(HUUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

STATE OF MILITARY 3mm. BABIES]!!! mums
Madrid CANDID 16 in Spanish 31 May 82 pp 36-100

[Text] An arny that intends to renew its equipnsnt and rejuvenate its co-nnd
personnel will parade through Zaragoza this week to cousenorate PAS (Arned
Forces) Day.

These festivities were created by the democratic systea so that the PAS, which
defend territorial integrity, the constitutional systen. and the safeguard of
national sovereignty, nay receive the homage of the people who put its ships
and aircraft in the army's hands.

These services, which want to be loved and understood by society, mat reduce
their personnel expenditures, they must purchase firing ranges, they met im-
prove military training plans. they lust raise the level of specialisation in
their nan. they nust also elevate their econonic level and redeploy their guns
and tanks toward the country's real strategic objectives. A tall order indeed.

But what shape are the Spanish services in? "hat is their real firepower?
The answer to these two questions was given to M10 16 confidentially by a
reserve lieutenant general: "If Spain were to becone involved in a nilitary
conflict with any "editerranean country, our any would not even last 3 con-
secutive days of war."

The answer perhaps is exaggerated but not too nuch so. In any of the world's
prestige naviss ships are considered obsolete and antiquated after completing
25 years of service; in Spain, out of the 215,000 tons of shipping in the
Navy. 118,000 are more than a quarter of s centu old and another 33,000 tons.
aade up of the attack transports "Castilla" and" agon," built in 1958, are
about to reach retirenent age.

This means that 70 percent of the current fleet tonnage, nade up of 1110 war—
ships. transport and landing vessels, would have to be replaced rapidly so
that the Navy could uaintain its current naval power.

The Air Force is in a ainilar situation. Host of the fighter-bothers on active
duty have had more than 10 years of uninterrupted flying. And some of the nest
powerful aircraft. constituting the combat forces. the "Phanton" P40. cons
fron "American aid.” These aircraft were turned over to Spain half a dozen

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

years ago in very bad condition after they had been employed during the wars
in Vietnam and Cambodia, where they put in several thousand flying hours. .

The F-S aircraft are also due for replacement. These aircraft, which can
carry up to lo tons of bombs and which can fly 1.5 times the speed of sound,
were built on a license basis more than 15 years ago and, according to experts
in the field, none of them would be able to withstand a clash in the open sky
with any of the Argentine or British fighter-bombers now operating in the
Halvinas Islands war.

The Army situation, with 255,000 men, 900 tanks, 600 armored vehicles, and
several hundreds of pieces of artillery, looks even in worse shape. A good
portion of the battle tanks consists of H-lo7 and “-68 tanks, the famous
"Patton" tanks which were built by the Americans soon after World War II; in
their case it was necessary to change the engine, the gun, and the aiming in-
struments so that they might continue to be operational. In spite of this,
the "Patton" is an old tank which consumes many liters of fuel to move its
almost 1.0 tons of steel; it does not have the mobility, the firepower, the
armor, or the atomic protection of the modern German "Leopard II" tanks, the
French aux-32 tanks, or the British "Chieftain" tanks.

The mountain divisions and the Alpine brigade erein a similar situation; they
are responsible for the defense along the Pyrenees border. The 52 AA artil-
lery pieces, with 105 and 155 millimeter caliber, constituting most of the
heavy weapons, are being shifted from one side of the mountain barrier to the
other, that is, the barrier that separates Spain from France, on the backs
of 600 mules and 250 horses.

Comand Personnel

Armored troop carriers and the armament of other units are also old and defic-
ient; the AA artillery has no electronic systems for fire control and is prac-
tically ineffective. "Hitting a ground-hugging aircraft with a 20-millimeter
shell is almost as difficult as hitting an eagle in flight with a pistol,"

one gunner told CAHBIO 16.

Only the Brunete Armored Division, with headquarters in Madrid, is on the
European level; its 250 MIX-30 battle tanks and its 270 tracked armored ve-
hicles plus its 66 pieces of SP medium-ranged artillery give it a firepower
and a mobility comparable to those of a similar French or Italian unit.

But the problem involves not only armament. The career comand personnel of
the FAS consisting of 69,991 individuals, according to the 1980 Military
Statistical Year Book, make up a group of persons between 6 and 8 years older
than their counterparts in any European army and at the same time do not attain
their level of specialization.

In 1980 the Spanish Army had 1,328 generals (763 in reserve), 12,110 coal-an-
ders, 22,313 officers, and 310,243 “00's. The majority of the active-duty
generals, according to the statistics in the Military Statistical Year Book,
are more than 63 years old. The youngest one is over 58.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These generals are responsible for cot-ending the nine captaincies-general,
the unified comnds of the Canary Islands and the Balearic Islands, as well
as the comIanders of all of the major Spanish military units.

"With all due respect for their person." said a major on the general staff,
"their age does not enable them to spend two weeks on maneuvers out in the
field, sleeping next to a gun, as their European 50-year-old counterparts
are doing."

Since promotions are based on seniorit ', the aging of the military top com-
mand has an effect on the entire army. A man who graduates from the Academy
as a lieutenant at 22 has to wait 9 years to get promoted to captain. another

12 years to make major. and another 8 years to reach the rank of lieutenant
colonel.

This enormous slowness in promotions has produced some rather strange anec-
dotes. An Italian brigadier general was unable to believe until a short time
ago that a Spanish comrade-in-arms. of the same age and with the same amber
of years in the army, is still a lieutenant colonel. The Spanish officer had
a lot of trouble in convincing him that he had never been arrested for any-

thing and that his failure to be promoted was due to the slow renewal of army
cot-land personnel.

Army career personnel enter the Military Academy at the age of 17 and after
5 years of physical toughening and a long process of learning the art of war,
they come out as lieutenants with something like 70.000 pesetas in pay.

Promotions do not considerably improve their economic situation. Amajor with

21 years for pay purposes, married and with three children, makes less than
100,000 pesetas when on duty in Madrid. "The money is just enough to survive,"
he points out, "but there is no room for luxury."

Apart from low pay. career military personnel do not have much opportunity for
promotion within the PAS. in 1979, only 58 out of the 69,991 career personnel
or 0.07 percent took advanced training courses abroad to perfect their know-
ledge in electronics, information processing, radar, missiles, and aircraft
and helicopter maintenance.

As a result of that, the Spanish Army's skill level is deficient beyond the
limits of the kind of conventional warfare that was fought years ago. In
1979, only 218 career personnel were specialists in survival during a nuclear
or chemical war and only 231 officers and comnders had taken the courses
necessary to cormsnd a missile launching unit.

The low level of military career personnel in the us when it comes to coping
with a modern war is not considered a serious problem.

"The serious topic," a captain told CAHBIO l6, "is that there is no money to

buy missiles, radar. or electronic warfare equipment. Training personnel,
once the equipment has been procured, is very easy."

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At any rate. in broad sectors of the army and civilian society, a structural
strengthening of military training is considered very necessary to turn out
the new military professionals who will be more in keeping with the current
concept of war and of armies so that they may guarantee the freedoms of demo-
cratic societies.

Military Training

”An in-depth reform of military training," this magazine was told by an in-
structor at the Zaragors Academy, "must involve the preparation of now our-
ricula and the hiring of civilian instructors and professors by the military
academies, as is happening in most of the Western countries, where military
training is not the monopoly of the army alone."

what is the origin of career military personnel?

According to data published by the Ministry of Defense in a restricted report,
out of the 652 cadets who entered the Zaragoza Military Academy in 1980 (38
and 39 graduations) 418 or 66.12 percent were the children of military per-
sonnel. 25 were the children of government officials. 50 came from self-
employed circles, and the rest came from other social strata.

As for the place of origin. 125 cadets were born in the province of Madrid;

61 were born in Zaragora and Toledo, two cities with a strong military back-
ground. and as many others were born in Cadiz and La Coruna. both of which are
provinces with a strong military tradition relating to the navy.

When these future lieutenants finished their studies and get married, they
will probably live in one of the 35,255 housing units or military barracks
which the three services maintain throughout the country and where one out
of every two career personnel will live. When they get sick, they will be
taken care of in one of the 27 hospitals or one of the 26 private clinics

contracted for by the PAS throughout national territory.

Medications will come from almost 160 military pharmacies which almost exclu-
sively sell products bearing the emblem of the PAS while food will be purch-
ased at military exchanges. If on top of this we mention the fact that the
PAS have their own military clubs with rooms plus exclusive hotels through-
out Spain and that, according to an unpublished official survey. more than
452 of career military personnel marry the daughters of fellow soldiers, we
can say that the army is one of the most self-contained professional groups.

Career military personnel defend their position as follows. "we do not like
to live in a ’ghetto'," a lieutenant told CAMBIO 16. "What happens is that.
in spite of everything that has been written so far. the career soldier lives
badly and cannot keep up with his neighbors. This is why. when he wants to
take his lady out to dinner and dancing, he has to go to his own club, where
prices nevertheless are not much lower than in any restaurant."

3
liliCﬂﬂﬂC]:&.lEﬂi(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In spite of low pay, more than half of the defense budgetwspecifically 51.9
percentugose to pay career personnel.

This brings up a serious problem: After deducting personnel expenditures and
the enormous amounts of money necessary to maintain the vast assets in terms
of the installations, facilities, and materiel of the PAS from the defense
budget, there is barely enough money left to purchase new weapons.

To alleviate this problem, the Parliament last May found itself forced to pass
s Budget Allocation Law for the Armed Forces. This lswwill permit the im-
plementation of an investment program which will place the PAS on the level

of any European army.

The investment to be made over a period of 8 years, between now and 1990,
comes to more then 2.5 billion peaetas, 21 of the gross domestic product, and
is earmarked exclusively for the procurement of new weapons.

This means that, over the next 8 years, Spain will spend 1,000 million peeetas
per day to rearm itself. This amount is not excessive, according to military
experts, keeping in mind that a coabat aircraft costs 1,000 million pesetas,
a "Roland" AA missile costs about 60 million and an aircraft carrier costs
more than 100,000 million.

This enormous effort, unprecedented in the history of Spain, will pernit the
Army to replace all of the equipment of the armored and mechanized divisions
through the purchase of a new battle tank with atomic protection and great
firepower, plus the procurement of new armored vehicles.

The new battle tank, which will be built in Spain, on a license basis, already
has a name; it is "Iberia." No countries are conpeting for the sale of the
patent: Germany, with its "Leopard II," and France, with its Aux-30 of which
Spain built an improved version now undergoing testing.

The Army's modernization will also involve its defense with the purchase of
short-range missiles plus transportation and attack equipment, including about
100 new helicopters. The Signal Corps will also be boosted through the inclu-
sion of an 39 battalion, which will be responsible for jellies and obstructing
enemy comaunicatione.

Aircraft Purchases

The Budget Allocation Law will permit the Air Force to purchase 1“ nultirole
aircraft with a long action radius, capable of carrying 6 tons of bombs at
twice the speed of sound. These aircraft, which we want to purchase, with
spare parts for 12 years, must be completely maintained in Spain so that the
country will not depend militarily on any other power in case of war.

There are two United States companies which offer the best term for the sale

of the future Spanish combat aircraft: McDonnell Douglas, which makes the
F-lsA-lé, and General Dynamics. which builds the P-16.

ho
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is the intention of the Defense Ministry that 70 percent of the new
fighter-hoebers be built in Spain and that only the indispensable optical and
electronic equip-ant. The llavy wents to carry out its nodernization progra-
on the basis of the Budget Allocation Law. In addition to finishing the
aircraft carrier "Presupueetarias," which will enter service in 1985, the
Navy hopes to build seven new frigates for the protection of shipping. two

destroyers equipped for m. 12 sdseile boats. 12 ninesweepers. end four
landing ships.

The Navy furthermre needs to purchase new not. "Barrier" eircraft end new
helicopters to replace eons of its 80 eircraft, organised in eight squadrons,
which constitute the Navy's most effective end rapid eyeten for lending nie-
sions and for Karine Corps support missions.

Along with this display of arnanent, the Spanish ArIy will build a new nan-
euver area covering 25,000 hecteres in the province of Ciudad Real and, ac-
cording to NATO reconcndation, a great effort will have to be made over the
next several years to reduce its personnel.

While Spain in 1968 invested 61.8 percent of its budget to pay its army per-
sonnel, the French only spent 35.4 percent, the Italians spent 33.9 percent,
end the British spent 60.2 percent.

In 1982, the personnel expenditures of the PAS, which have a budget of
603.990 nillion peeetas, was reduced to 51.7 percent.

The Defense Ministry reorganized the personnel structure of each service since
NATO assigns Inch ilportence in Spain to the develop-cot of aviation and naval
operations. The exact opposite, however, is happening right now: Out of the
362,000 Ien who, according to MILITARY BALANCE, nske up the PAS, 255,000 are
in the Any, 69,000 are in the Navy, end 38,000 are in the Air Force.

Spanish nilitary leaders who nnintain periodic contact with the supporters

of the Atlantic systen have arrived at the conclusion that the Army must also
reduce the nunher of its ceptaincies~right now there are 9, plus the
Balearic Islands and the Canary Islands—to four or five. according to the
country's strategic concerns. and it nuat redeploy the forces of the Amy.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Infomcion y Revietee, S.A.

5058
080: 3110/1235

hl
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWMUSEONLY

munch. . nun- uncoou

DBMS! 830mm "W's CAREER mm
”251105 London mm. TIMES in English 25 Jun 82 p 18
[Helcoln Rutherford article: "Hr lott'a Changing Portunee"]

[Tm] Mr John Nott, the defence secretary, has begun to fight back. This
week he ptilisheduunchsnged—the annual defence eetieates which had been pre-
pared before the relklmbcrieie. Next week he will defend his policies in the
House of (Io-ms.

Hr Nott used to be a rising star in lira Thatcher's cabinet, sonstines tipped

to succeed Sir Geoffrey have as chancellor of the exchequer. a. was chosen 18
months ago to replace Hr Tracie Py- et the Defence ninistry became the lat-

ter was threetening to resist rather than further trin defence expenditure.

Mr Py- felt deeply that the Tories had co-itted thenelves in their election

manifesto to a erbstentiel increase.

Hr Nott went in as e mt. as soneone loyal to Hrs Thatcher and ready to
accept her brief that defence expenditure could be increased by no more than
the NATO target of 3 per cent a year in reel term. He shared the priee
ninistsr's philosophy that the first priority of the conservative govemnent
was to restore the econouy at home; defence and foreig: affairs were secondary,
thong: lire Thatcher's priorities nay have changed sliditly since the Falklemh
crisis.

For a tins Hr ﬂott succeeded. He is--or was—one of those people who, like
President Reagan, can lake the light shine out of the prine minister's eyes.
Last July he produced a defence reviar which was approved by the entire cabinet.

In the autun things began to go wrong, as the Treasury soudtt to claw back
soles of the expenditure which it was thought had been agreed in the sun-er.
This is a perennial exercise for which he should have been prepared, but it
seens both to have surprised and pained hin. Hrs Thatcher sided not with the
defence secretary but with the chancellor.

ﬂare is one particular enqle. Sons savings had been worked out, but the
Treuury was still denending another 200-: pomtb. There had been an approach
fro- the Australians about the new aircraft carrier HHS Invincible. The
governnnt was anxious to get back into the business of selling carriers and
related equip-ant abroad. So it was agreed to nest the Treasury demd by
selling the Invincible to Amtrslie for sole 175- pounds.

ha
mmmmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Nott says that he wanted to keep it, though adnitting that acne of the lili-
tary advice which he accepted was that it was unnecessary to British defence.
Anyway it was the sale of the Invincible which sowed more seeds of trouble to
cone, especially in the Tory Party and in the navy lobby-weaned.” called the
retired navy lobby.

Mr Keith Speed, the navy ninieter, had already resigned in protest against the
naval rmdovm. There was a rising swell of opinion against Hr Rott in the
Tory ranks. The culmination was the outbreak of the Falkland crisis. not only
became Britain was forced to rely on the Invincible, which was due to be sold,
and on other ships destined for the Knacker‘s yard, but also because of his
disastrous performce in the fateful house of Con-one debate on Saturday,
April 3.

Hr Nott was unlucky. He was the closing speaker in a highly emtional session
and was howled down, not least from his on side. (The speech does not read

too badly.) Yet afterwards, when he and Lord Carrington. the foreign secretary,
went to nest Tory HPS, his luck changed. It was the foreign secretary that they
turned on. Lord Carrington is said to have decibd on the spot that he eust
resign and the announcement duly cane two days later.

Mr Nott learned the news on the Hhitehall grapevine shortly before it broke.

he responded by telephoning No 10 Downing Street and saying that his own letter
of resignation was on the way. He was ready to go. but admits that he did not
really expect the offer to be accepted, if only because it would have neant
too big a cabinet reshuffle at a tine of crisis.

Hunt of the rest is well known. The defence secretary becane ex officio a
neaber of the inner cabinet conducting the Falklands exercise. he gave one
appalling television perfornance, trailing behind Hrs Thatcher during her
"rejoice, rejoice" renarks after the recapture of South Georgia. In the house
of Coupons he was faltering. he also took the flak from the row between the
defence correspondents and the Ministry of Defence over the coverage of the
cawaign. Some of the sniping at him came from Downing Street.

This week. however, he scene to have decided to go down fighting, possibly
even to survive. Hr Nott has taken the initiative in two ways. First he per-
suaded his cabinet colleagues to agree to the publication of the 1982 defence
estimates as prepared before the Falklands crisis. Second he went public after
a meeting with the chancellor and the print minister at which it was accepted,
in general, that the defence replacement costs of the Falklands war would be
borne by the exchequer without prejudicing the 3 per cent increase in defence
spending or existing progresses in any way. The defence secretary said that
was a fire agreement.

It was a daring act, for the replace-est costs of the caspaign are by no eeans
established. As of early June, they are put at around 500:: pounds in 1982-83
and perhaps 250- pounds in each of the two succeeding financial years.

Early Jme was early days: the full evaluation of the losses has still not
been made. Also, the 5001: pound figure does not include the cost of the garri-
son in the Falklands and cannot, because no one yet knows how large the garri-
son will have to be.

113
roe 0mm usroNLv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The other ites which is not included is the 175 nillion pomds or so which will
have to be fond for the defence budget if the Invincible is not after all sold
to Australia. as political pressure in the Tory Party now scene to dictate.

(Hr Nott suggested to the house of (Io-ans select co-ittee on defence on Wed-
nesday that the Australians nidlt be attracted to order a brand new carrier fro-

a British yard, plus all the latest equip-ant that would drst on the lessons
of the Falklands experience.)

By going public on the government's co-itnent to net the replscsnent costs.
the defence secretary see. to be pursuing two sins. One is to stop being
nessed about when it cons to the manual review of public expenditure, rather
as he believes he was after the bfence review last year. Mr Nott hopes that
the Treasury will be obliged to stick to the co-itnsnt. alsost whatever the
cost. so is perfectly well stare that the agreemt was only in princhple,
that it was mcosted and that the Treasury will seek to claw back. But he has
tried to pre-elpt.

The other sin is rather sore subtle. The replacenents for the Falklands losses.
he said, will not necessarily be on a "like for like basis." In one sense that
is a truisn. It would be foolish to replace an old ship with a replica. Yet
there is sore to it than that.

There was already an argment going on, even before the Talklmds crisis. about
placing orders for new ships. The essential problen is that, under Hr Nott ‘s
defence review, the ante: of ships will he run down before new vessels are
cot-issioned. some of the Tory critics says that this decline in nmers will
be positively dangerous. The defence secretary's response see-s to be that
that is a risk worth taking, if the country can get the rignt ships in the
future.

The particular argmsnt is about frigatea—the existing type 22 and its desig-
nated successor the type 23. As this week's defence estinates state: The
nove toward the next generation of frigates—the type 23-"reflecta our policy
of replacing ships rather than undertaking nid-life mdernizstion."

The type 23 would be snaller, cheaper and more all-purpose than the type 22,
but the point lies in the equith it could carry. It would be a siwle
platforn for weapons systems. There is a plan for an Anglo-Italian helicOpter
which would go on board and which would be designed to hunt, find and destroy
submarines, all in the ease aisaion.

It is worth noting in passing that, for all their prowess in snti-srbanrine
warfare, throughout the Falklands expedition the British forces never even
located any of the nsin Argentine suburinas. The Hermes. the Invincible, the
Q82 were potentially prey to stbnsrine attack at any tine.

The trouble is that it would be such easier to order more type 22s. They
could be built more quickly because the yards would be familiar even with a
revised version. The first type 23 would be unlikely to be ready before 1988.

It would also be easier to go for sore type 22s under the way the present finan-
cing of Defence Ministry spending works. The nosey tendsto he allocated on

a year-to-yesr basis. If it is not spent. it is clsined back by the Treasury.

hh
MWMMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Nott is under strong pressure to announce orders for more type 22s next
week, probably during the defence debate, since there is some eoney in this
year's budget. he cannot yet announce orders for the type 23 because the prep-
arations have not been cleeted.

That is what lies behind some of his more cryptic statements of the past few
days. he intends to resist the pressures to go for more type 22s and to use
so. of the Falklands replacement money to go for yet more type 23s in the
longer term, thong: whether he will get way with it is another matter. lie
would like not to place the new orders until towards the end of the year.

There is the wider point of sticking to his original defence review. Hr Nott
insists that it would be naive quickly to recast the whole of British def-ace
policy in the lidat of one totally unusual and unlikely-to-be-repeated caqaip
in the South Atlantic.

The verities stand. These are that the principal military threat cones from
the Soviet Union. minly on the central front and the northern flank of Europe.
It would be politically and militsrily mdesirable to cut back on British forces
in Germany. and would not necessarily save any money.

The air defence of Britain is so thin that it is better not to talk about it.
Thus, given the financial constraints. if cuts have to be made they had best
fall on the navy. The best way of comensating for that is to try to make the
navy more cost effective in future.

There Hr Nott's cese seems to rest. His political future is uncertain. He has
been heard to say—though one should be skeptical whenever politidms talk

in this way—that he would not mind quitting politics altogether. Alternatively,
he could be moved to another department.

Possibly the best development of all would be for that to happen and for a new
secretary of state to come in and reach the same basic conclusions as Mr Nott's
defence review. For Mr Nott, despite an engaging if at times infuriating
personality. does have some defects. He has a very low boiling point.

More iaportsnt. he is clearly not ready to tackle the central question of de-
fence erpenditure, which is why costs rise so fast and why expenditure is not
better organised. lie is not ready either to seek reform of defence tasks

through mo.

The most likely successors are Mr nichael Reseltine and Mr Peter walker. Rho-
ever it is midit even have a new look at Trident. to which Mr Nott and Mrs
Thatcher remain col-itted.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

680: 3120/ 68

us
me emu“. useomv
BRIEFS

SNECNA'S mum [National Conpany for the Study and Construction of
Aircraft Engines] is exhibiting jointly with Turbo-eca a Larzac 04 turbojet
engine putting the st-ess on the 04420 version, the more powerful one. whose
stationary testing began in Bordes on 3 March 1982. This version with enhanced
thrust (1,440 kilograms of thrust ‘on the ground) is slated for the buyers of

the Alpha Jet [training aircraft] for special flights (low-altitude penetration)
or under adverse atlsospheric conditions (heat, high altitude). The promised per-
fornance characteristics have been reached right from startup. The exhibit

stand of sum is decorated with photographs of its principal products: The
CH? 5602, the CPU 56-3, the (236-50, and the 61’6-80 in the civilian aviation
field; the H 53, H 88, Atar 9K 50. and Me in the military field. [Text] (Paris
AIR 31' 00908 in French 15 May 82 p ‘91 (009mm: A. 6 C. 1982] 2662

AN'rrrANK HELICOPTER moms-qt 'i'urboneca a hookup of the m 285-!!! [sic--read,
Hm 385-18] engine is attracting attention: What is involved is an engine
resulting fro- Prench-Gernan cooperation with the mo [mgine and Turbine
Union. m1 and slated to power the future PAH 2 antitank helicopter if this
project is indeed inplenented. While waiting for the govern-ent's green
light, Turbo-eca is continuing to study this engine, which now resesbles the
m 333 except that it is sore powerful. This engine can generate 1,230
horsepower thrust in maxim emergency. 1,110 horsepower thrust in emergency,
1,015 horsepower thrust on takeoff, while it can cruise on overdrive at 950
horsepower thrust (with a specific consuwtion of 235 grams of fuel per horse-
power-hour). he announced mass is 160 kilograms. The m 385—!!! succeeds
the m 380, of which two prototypes were built but whose tests have been
halted. [Text] [Paris AIR 3T COSMOS in French 15 Hay 82 p 49] [COPYRIGﬂ‘i‘2

A. e C. 1982] 2662

C80: 3100/70!

”WWONLY
MWLIJSEONLY

Gm rm

RATIML SPACE BUDGET CW1” on snmurss
Paris LA m in French Apt 82 pp ‘37-‘38
[Articles 'Three Billion Francs for Space Outlays in 1902']

[Text] The French space effort in 1982 totals scue 3 billion francs. that is.
nearly 19 percent more than in 1901 (when it aggregated 2.5 billion francs).
Most of this budget (2.5 billion francs) represents govern-cut subsidies while
the balance (0.5 billion francs) consists of the funds of the 0138 [National
Center for Space Studies] itself.

The 1982 French space budget (2,953.7 million francs) is broken down among the
portion allocated to the mropean program (951.6 million francs), bilateral
progress with the United States. the Soviet Union, and the Federal Republic of
Ger-any (475.9 sillion francs), the national progrn (628.1 million francs),
the research and development progren (95 sillion francs), and program support
outlays (002.6 sillion francs). which includes the operating costs (422.6
lillion francs) of the C1138 facilities in Paris, Bvry, Toulouse. and Kourou
[French Guiana].

This year nearly half of the space budget (1,245.1 million francs) is earmarked
for satellites; the credits assigned to launchers. mostly Ariane rockets, being
much more sodsst (290.4 sillion francs). Practical projects are nevertheless
still highly favored (1,453 million francs) compared to (theoretical) science
projects (290.7 nillion francs).

The French space progras is now prisarily devoted to building Teleco- l telecon-
nunications satellites (launching scheduled for the end of 1983), direct TDF 1
[French television network] television (1985), Spot 1 remote sensing. (1984).

and Spot 2 (1986). as well as the formation of the Spot-Image Coepany charged
with the couercialisation of remote sensing data. The CUBS also plans to
build a new French Sign scientific satellite which would be launched at the
end of 1905 at the tile of the first flight of the Ariane 4 rocket. This gains
imagery satellite weighing 1.5 tons would be placed in an orbit ranging between
3,000 and 200,000 km.

The national research and development progra- is especially linked to the pre-
paration of the future program: the Star satellite-relay program the autonatic
Solaris orbital station. the llernes nanned and recoverable space shuttle. and
the cryogenic high-thrust engine (100 tons) for the future European Ariane 5
launcher which is scheduled to replace the existing rockets in 1994.

b?
”WISE“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the bilateral cooperation program is now dominated by the major French-Soviet
projects under way. This means essentially the flight of the first French
astronaut officially slated for the end of June 1982 and the Vega Iission which
calls for the launching of two auto-atic probes toward the planet Venus and
Balley's couet in 1984; the other operations under way in the context of
French-Soviet cooperation involve the Gal-Ia 1 experiment (1982), the on
satellite of ultraviolet spectrometry (1982), the Coslaos biosatellite carrying
a prinate (end of 1982), experinents on the Prognoz H985), and another bio-
satellite (1984-86). But France and the Soviet Union also are readying a

new exploration eission in the atslosphere of Venus to be carried out by ballo ns
in 1988.

France's cooperation with the United States is especially evident now in the
Argos program for the locating and collecting data, a program which has just
been extended through 1990-91, as well as the Sarsat program for search and
salvaging by satellite slated to get under way in March 1982. In the scientific
field France's cooperation with the United States has been disturbed by the
ISM! probes. Despite everything, however, an aeronoauc experiment is planned
with a Lidar mounted on top of an American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft in
1983, a high-resolution solar imagery experiment (AM) in 198‘ and 1985, and
an experiment in astronomy to be carried out with balloons in 1985. France
also envisions cooperation with the United States in the preparation of future
nissions using satellites of the Explorer series (ultraviolent spectroscopy.
planetology, etc.).

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Societe d'editions scientifiques

2662
050: 3100/704

ha
mmussom
“WWW!”

6mm ITALY

BIOGMIC sums 0? mm: vs FIGURES
Hilan PAIN in Italian 26 my 82 p 78
[Article by Filippo Lecarelli: "Ciriaco .& Co."]

[Text] It is said at the DC that they have built a
strong political nachine. Now the old friends of the
new party secretary are rewarded.

A refined intellectual. An all-purpose secretary. A forner ninieter who

is a very clever mediator. An econaeist. An heir apparent. They are all
southerners, and all have known each other for years. This is the staff of
the new secretary of the Christian Denocretic party, the group of coworkers
Cirieco Di hits will bring with hi. to Diane del Gesu [no party head-
quarters, Bone].

”They have been friends free the very beginning." they say at the DC.
”Together they have drunk the bitter cup of being in the perry ainority for
long years and together they have built, piece by piece. a strong political
machine. “No weeks ego they ended their own long aarch."

Ciriaco's private secretary, Peppino Claente, is a little, held, and eager
nan. Be is responsible for the ties between none and the Avellino province,
the endless telephone calls with the neyors, and contacts with the leader's
electorate. 'For all those persons who would wish to talk with De Hits.
Clemente, a rather unostentetious person by nature, will continue as the
mnber one person to go through at Piazza del Gesu.

The true ”prince's counselor" will be Giovanni Di Capu'a, Journalist and
writer. with bald te-ples, like the DC secretory. about 50 years old, with
a serious air and sober and courteous unners, he was for-erly a friend and
disciple of Nicole Pistellie. the ideologist of the DC left who was one of
the founders of the faction called The Base. During his many years of
service, Di Capua has nsnaged the news agency of the Base group, Radar.

and has even written a fine historical reconstruction of Italy‘s entry into
NATO ("ﬂow Italy Joined the Atlantic Pact"). a book on the presidency of
the Republic ("The Keys to the Quirinale"), and a dictionary of political
terns ("Political Horde") in which he sought to explain the origin of the
jargon celled "politicalese." In 1978 he wrote the lines for a cabaret show
at the Pescera Friendship Festival. Today he writes editorials in the

1:9
memmsovmr
FOI1OFFNC1AI.IEII(MdLY

Neapolitan daily, 1L HATTINO, which is connected with the DC, and has become
managing director of one of the two financial organizations which sought
to take over the Vallecchi publishing house.

De Hits will obtain advice and counsel on economic questions from Gianni
Zandsno, university professor, president of INSDD [Newﬁ Enterprises for the
South], a financial agency connected with the Fund for Southern Development.
For about two years landsno was one of the few southern economists to have
a regular column in the Turin daily. LA STIHPA.

Clenente, Di Capua, and Zandano will be the secretary's nan behind the
scenes. Instead, Riccardo Hisasi, former minister ‘of Education, and
Clemente Hastella, a young deputy fron Benevento who is Ciriaco'a local
heir apparent, will have officialiresponsibilities. The first will
replace Antonio-Cave as head of the political secretariat. the second in
all probability will assule responsibility for Spes [expansion not given],
for propaganda and information.

Misasi. 50 years old, from Calabria, has been a friend of Di Mite since the
time they studied at the Agostinianun college of the Catholic University of
Milan. For years he has lived with his family in the same building
occupied by the new DC secretary. Intelligent and taciturn, Hisasi is a
double-faced Christian Democrat: open and easy-going in knee, he is harsh
and arrogant in Calabria.

Clemente Hastella has dark eyes, is very friendly, and has a sharp tongue.

He was born in 1927, is a forner journalist of the 3A1 [Italian Radio and
Television], and thanks to De Hita's help, he became a deputy at 29. He

can be considered as the synbol of the Christian Democratic party's modernity,
the man who serves as the link between the party and important sectors of

the communications world.

But aside from the leaders whom he knows best, and also to counterbalance his
staff's southern character, De Hits wants to use as his co-workers new
persons to whom he can entrust key sectors of the new DC. Henceforth,
Senator Giuseppe Tonutti, former president of the Savings Bank of Udine

and Pordenone, will take over the party's disastrous finances, previously
entrusted to the care of the forner adninistrator, Filippo Hicheli. Then.
leaders of the left such as Tarcisio Gitti, deputy fron Brescis, and
promising deputies like Giovanni Gorio fron Asti, or seasoned administrators
of local organizations, like Harino Cortese, a regional counselor fron the
Veneto region, will be used to full advantage.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Rizzoli Bditore
9772

C80: 3106/220 END

50
KJAI.U§E(MULY