FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10415

26 March 1982

West Europe Report

("'- OUO 19/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
ME

JPRS publications contain informtion primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context,
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by saurce.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP 0F
HKTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
REST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 19/82)

Courem‘s

ENERGY EOONCHICS

Bzmnm

Problems of Natural Gas Supply Viewed
(Pierre Thonon; POURQUOI PAS?, 11 Feb 82) .................

800110416
ITALY
Labor-Lev Expert Discusses Union-Management Relations
(Gino Giugni Interview; 1!. HONDO, 5 Feb 82) ...............
SPAIN
1982 Economic Improvement Expected
(0.01310 16, 25 Jan 82)
POLITICAL
FRANCE

'Blind' Europe Sees USSR Peaceful Intentions, W111 To Negotiate
(Cornelius Castoriedisg PARIS HATCH, 5 Feb 82) ...........

Policies, Backgrounds 01‘ Mitterrand Advisers Examined
(Sm Cohen; Moms, “0 20’ 1982) OIIOOOOOOOOOOIOIOOIOQOO

-e- [III-WE-ISO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reasons for Improved PCP—Chinese Relations, Other Policies
(K. S. Karol; LB NOUVEI. OBSERVATBUR, 13-19 Feb 82) ......

ITALY

Colombo Urges More Contacts Among NATO Allies
(M110 Colombo Interview; comm DELLA 31m, 3 Mar 82)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY EWOMICS BELGIUM

PROBLEMS OF NATURAL GAS SUPPLY VIEWED

Brussels POURQUOI PAS? in French 11 Feb 82 pp 110-15
[article by Pierre Thonog7

[my Our energy independence is not for tomorrow. If all
goes as well as hoped by t‘n_e Ines [Institute for Development
of Underground Gasificatioy, a sort of public research bu-
reau financed 1+0 percent by EEG and 60 percent by the Belgian
and German governments, practical exploitation of gas extrac—

ted from our deep coal deposits will not be possible before
19%.

And even so, not at Thulin. Rather in the Campine, and possibly in the Black
Country. But surely not in the Liege basin, and only in slight amounts from
the Borinage. The problem is purely technical. As of now, the only indus-

trial user of coal gas is the USSR. The technique is perfected for deposits
at ground level or barely below it. Our deposits are too deep; their gasifi-

cation requires a very sophisticated technology whose cost is Justified only
for enormous and continuous veins.

Moreover, it will never be anything but a poor gas, weak in heating power: in
the 2,500 to 3,000 Keel/m) range, which could possibly be raised to 12,500 by
special and necessarily more costly treatment.

The Birth of Einstein

Then why all the great beat of tomtoms orchestrated last week to mark the "take-

off" of underground gasification at the "“zulin experimental site? Here hot
air?

One thing is certain: the doubting Thomases who came to the site saw nothing.
They were asked to believe that something was going on about 900 m down. At
the end of a drill pipe, an electrical firing coupled with an injection of
compressed air so as to bore a channel allowing the gas subsequently extracted
from the coal to reach the outlet-in this case another drill pipe. It is not
certain, however, that it will then follow instructions. If everything hap-
pens according to the calculations of the Belgian and German engineers, that
passige will exist a good month from now. But not before May will gas final-

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1y reach the surface, to be lighted with a match and finally seen burning--as
oil is seen bursting from the ground and falling on the engineers in the final
scene of films on the epic of black gold. ’

'Wewspapers of the time were not in a position to announce the birth of Einstein
or Mozart," said the secretary of state for energy to his guests at the prema-
ture "inauguration." "Today we are perhaps witnessing the birth of a new na-
tural resource for our country...."

It is true that if it "produces" it would indeed last several dozen years, if
not one or two centuries: deep coal reserves in the Belgian subsoil exist in a
proportion of about 100 to 1 compared to reserves exploitable by traditional
methods, which have made the prosperity of industrial wallcnia for more than a
century.

Meanwhile, we must still keep our feet 900 m above the level of the deep veins.
All the more so-and let us keep this well in mind--since coal gas will proba-
bly never be suitable for all-round use, but will only have limited applica-
tions such as, for example, supplying certain electric power stations of modest
demand.

Dependence on Others, as for Petroleum

So for general use of gas in our energy supply, we can count only on natural
gas, and this is certainly also true for the next generation. Looking ahead to
the exhaustion of the Dutch reserves which have supplied us for several decades,
we shall then lapse into a dependence of the petroleum type visPa-vis the sup-
pliers, Algeria and the HSSR, neither of them being particularly reassuring or
dependable because of their distance on the one hand, and their political re-
gimes on the other. Other foreseeable suppliers are Canada, Cameroon, Nigeria,
Trinidad, and Qatar.

At the moment, only one contract is concluded, with Algeria.

A contract for which we perhaps bid too high in vain. When we concluded and
confirmed it, by authority of M Olson [ﬂies premie£/, we wished to show such
good will that we not only offered a higher price than any other natural gas
buyer in the world, but then enhanced it by pegging it to oil prices. Today
socialist France has just struck the same sort of bargain, for a greater fig-
ure, matched in addition by a "political premium" which is added to the price
of the gas proper. Such blandishment instantly won for the former colonial
oppressor preferential treatment as a newfound elder brother, especially in
view of the advantageous economic quid pro quos of the contract itself, such
an contributions to Algerian industrialization.

Already hampered by delays encountered in starting the program (on both sides:
Zcebrugge with us, and the liquefaction plants in Algeria), our handsome and
costly contract reverts on that ground to second rank among Algerian priorities,
which already amply demonstrates the precariousness of this sort of energy de-
pendence.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
But the essential does not appear to be again at issue: an annual supply of

2.5 billion In), corresponding to a quarter of our 10 billion a} yearly con-
sumption.

Finally, the Methania Sails

In principle, the first delivery should even reach us this fall via the oil
port of Saint Nazaire. The Hethania, that celebrated supertanker specially
built to bring us Algerian gas, will thus be able to leave the Norwegian fjord
in which it has been languishing at the modest cost of Pr 500 million a year
for inactive maintenance, after having cost Fr 5 billion to build.

With regard to the other large future supplier, the USSR, we are preparing to
follow cautiously the path laid down successively by the Germany of M Schmidt
and the France of M Hitterand: by negotiating a long-term contract for an an-
nual supply of 3 billion m}, or approximately 30 percent of our needs (which,
as is the case for our neighbors, comes to only 5 percent of our primary ener-
gy needs. As H Knoops confirmed in response to a parliamentary question a few
days ago, events in Poland have not called into question again, with us either,
"the principle of contacts with the Soviet Union."

They will serve, on the other hand, to justify additional investments for stor-
age, which is at present limited to one facility under aquatic dome at Loenhout
(Hucntwezel) and two facilities in old mines at Anderlues and Reseaix--whieh
only goes to show we always come back to coal.

For in the face of the truly alarming precariousness of our"supply lines, a
government at such a loss as ours in fact has nothing better to do than what
a mother of a family has done at every alert since the Korean war. Henceforth
M Knoops will not rest until we have the same permanent "strategic" stocks of

gas as we have of oilnto hold out three months. Thanks, papa.

(XJPXRIGHT: 1982 Pourquoi Pas?

6116
080: 3100/372

3
FOR orncm. use ONLY
LABOR-LAW EXPERT DISCUSSES UNION-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
Milan IL MONDO in Italian 5 Feb 82 pp 11-13

[Interview with Gino Giugni, socialist, professor of labor law, author of work-
er's statute, by Vittorio Borelli: "Watch Out, the Boss is Firing." Date and
place of interview not given.]

[Text] The industrial relations' model which characterized the 1970's suffered
a crisis in the fall of 1980 due to the FIAT controversy. In 1981, in fact,
the hard line policy of Cesare Romiti and the Agnelli brothers quickly encom-
passed the whole Italian industrial structure and is now beginning to affect
even the superguaranteed public employment. Perhaps the most emblematic sign
that the rigid system of guarantees built by the unions after the hot autumn of
1969 is crumbling, lies in the relative ease with which firms can now lay off
nonessential workers.

"hat does all this mean? That we are shifting fro: the all-powerful trade un-
ion to the all-powerful management? That the much talked about statute of

workers' rights soon will be substituted by a statute of businessmen's rights?
What model will eventually characterize the industrial relations of the 1980's?

IL HONDO discussed this ussue with Gino Giugni, famous scholar, tenured profes-
sor of labor law at the university of Rome, socialist author--together with
Giacomo Brodolini--of the workers' statute.

Question: Recently Felice Hortillaro, Pedermeccanica's director general, in-
plicitly discounted the workers' statute affirming that firms can lay off
workers today because the general balance of power shifted in their favor.
What do you think of that?

Answer: Hortillaro is not completely wrong. The statute, on the other hand,
never prevented collective lay offs, since it was conceived to prevent abuses
against individual workers. It is also true that the unions were the first to
interpret the_lsw in far-reaching fashion, thus contributing to the creation
of that job security culture which is exactly the opposite of a modern indus-
trial culture, but this has little in common with the spirit and letter of the
statute. Only farsighted union leaders like Bruno Trentin realized since
1974-75 that, in the long run, the job security culture would have harmed those
same workers. Be it as it may...today things are painfully changing, even
though cases like that of the 150 transfers blocked at Italsider in Genoa show
that there is still a long way to go.

h
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: Therefore, are lay offs in order when necessary and justified?

Answer: Let me make it clear; it is only just that society tend to guarantee
the continuity of work for all. The error lies in the belief that the continu-
ity must apply to a specific position held.

Question: How do you assess the union's initiatives in the areas of job place—
ment, professional training and mobility?

Answer: Let us recognize that the unions never had a policy in these areas.
The reason is linked to their structure; In Italy unions exist within the fac-
tories, not in the market place. Therefore, they limit themselves to protec-
ting what they have also when they get involved in the market place. A case in
point is the law on mobility which is being discussed in Parliament for 3 years.
Hell, even amid many incongruities, there was an attempt to give more room to
nominative calls in former bill 760, which never became law. introduced by the
then minister Vincenzo Scotti, but the unions opposed it. On what basis nobody
knows, since surveys made by the unions show that over 90 percent of hiring
takes place outside of placement channels. And the funny thing is that diffi-
dence toward the placement system created in 1969 concerns employers as well as
workers.

Question: Your party, PSI, [Italian Socialist Party] recently introduced a new
proposal for a labor agency. Is it a proposal complementing the old 760 or is
it something entirely different?

Answer: Entirely different. There are two positions within PSI on this point.
The first says: Let us pass [bill] 760 as an experiment and let us switch to
the [labor] agency at a later stage. The second, which I share, says instead:
bill 760 is a mess, if we pass it we will never manage to introduce the labor
agencies which take in account a much more advanced system of controlling mobil-
ity. It must be said, however, that on these topics among all parties and the
unions as well some confusion reigns. Amid the chaos of opinions I fear that
the line of compromise at the lowest level will prevail, namely that of experi-
menting with [bill] 760.

Question: with regard to laws and magistrates: in the 1970's the judiciary
intervened several times in labor disputes. However, you criticized rather
vigorously the so-called hardline judges...

Answer: First of all it is only fair to recognize that had there not been
judges capable of discerning the elements of innovation and progress in the
workers statute, the social conflict would have been even greater. Therefore,
I do not criticize the judiciary system in itself. I criticize, instead, the
small group of magistrates who, through the statute, pursued political objec-
tives. Some sentences have been used as ideological-political weapons to de-
stroy the capitalistic system. Some judges, in final analysis, wrongly be-
lieved that there could be a judicial way to socialism.

And it must also be added that, with regard to this problem, management's be-
havior was self-destructive and childish: instead of reacting, it hid behind
the most absurd sentences complaining that factories had become unmanageable.

5
son omcuu. use onm
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

Question: -Getting back to the unions. Don't you believe that the job security
culture is also fruit of an antiquated analysis of class composition? In other
words, is not the workers' doctrine also the expression of the culture of mass-
workers, of those of the large factories of the 1960's?

Answer: To avoid being prisoners of the most simplistic sociology, we must
recognize that ongoing changes were already visible 10 years ago. Unions, not
only the Italian ones. understood with great delay that the old working class
was disintegrating. Also in the United States unions have for some years been
paying a very steep price for having walled themselves inside the factories.
The workers' doctrine, in a situation whereby the working class is numerically
a minority and politically burdened with different interests, comes out sterile
and a loser. Let's be careful, however: if on one hand it is right to give up
the old concept of workers' centralization; on the other the role of factory
workers in a political strategy of renewal cannot be underestimated. It would
be extremely foolish to counterpoise trade unions of a tertiary nature to work-
ers' trade unions. In number, unity and tradition factory workers are an essen-
tial element for an innovative alignment.

Question: Several surveys showed that also the workers' culture is changing.
Today the number of workers being a subjective antagonism toward their plant is
getting smaller...

Answer: With a concise and perhaps pessimistic expression one could say that
today the majority of workers are somewhat absentee-proned and somehwat indif-
ferent. But this is also fruit of the many defeats endured by unions and of
the strategic weakness of left wing parties.

Question: As far as the new class composition is concerned, what do you think
of the intermediate rank movement?

Answer: The ranks have been a relaity for years and it was about time that
everybody became aware of them. With this premise, I say, frankly, that their
movement is still characterized by great improvisation and great confusion. An
example is the request to modify article 2095 of the civil code. The ranks
legal recognition will be (since all except PCI [Italian Communist Party] are
now in agreement) a purely formal act which will not alter at all their situa-
tion.

Question: I agree, but what are the confederate unions offering as an alterna-
tive?

Answer: Historically confederate unions have associated ranks with symbols
(labor centralization, class unity, etc.) in order to cheat them on salary with
the line on equalitarianism. The ranks' diffidence is understandable.

Question: The idea of union unity appears worn out and, perhaps, forever com-
promised. In the meantime autonomous unions have gone to pieces as well as the
ranks movement itself. Don't you believe that in this picture of disarray,

COIL [Italian General Confederation of Labor), ICFTU [International Confedera-
tion of Free Trade Unions], and "IL [Italian Union of Labor] could each come

back, as in the 1950's and until 1968-69, for a fair share of the movement?

6
FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(MVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Answer: Unfortunately this could really happen...UIL as the union for public
employment, CCIL as the union for workers and ICPTU as a little bit of both.
Personally I think that union unity could be reaffirmed by adhering to an inter-
classist political proposal. like in France and in Greece. On this, perhaps,
Bettino Craxi is unconsciously right: in his policies there are no classes.

In the final analysis the examples of Francois Hitterand and Andrea Papandreu
show that left wing parties can go to the government even without entering into
an iron pact with the unions. Only the German Social Democrats are still tied
to a pact with the unions, but it is not said that they could not do without it.

Question: You are very critical of unions. How about business leaders? How
do y0u assess the hardline policy which is emerging within the General Confed-
eration of Italian Industry?

Answer: I don't think that a true hardline policy is involved. And much less
I believe, as often said, that Agnelli are the leaders of this forward wing.
The more knowledgeable managers are well aware that a modern economy does not
live in permanent conflict with the unions. I rather think that industrialists
are trying to obtain all they can out of the crisis of their natural inquisi-
tors. It is obvious that in a moment like this avenging temptations may also
emerge.

Question: Prom more parts it is being affirmed that the crisis of large indus-
tries has also caused the crisis of the reformative culture outlined over 10
years ago in the famous Pirelli document...

Answer: That large industries are in crisis, is a fact, that it is an irrever-
sible crisis, I am inclined to deny it. On the other hand, I believe that it
is from FIAT itself that the signals of a political counteroffensive have been
launched. In the final analysis, I do not believe that one could do without
the contribution. not only financial, of large industries. Who, if not large
industries, has the means to compete at the international level in the ever
more decisive areas of research and new technologies?

Question: Within EEC [European Economic Community] the participation of work-
ers in the management of firms is being discussed at length. Do you think that
in Italy as well we could switch from a grievance and struggle-oriented union
to one with a greater degree of participation?

Answer: I wouldn't know; it will depend on many things. What I know for sure

is that the union is being confronted with a decisive choice; either it moves
along the path of participating in the decisions that are taken daily at the
center and at the periphery (which does not mean giving up autonomy and struggle)
or it will remain in the area of grievance redressing. In this latter case I
believe that its wekaness will continue. We shall see with the forthcoming con-
tract renewals..with a strategic retreat, perhaps unions may recover.

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1982

9758
C80: 3106/128

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1982 MIC 1mm exam
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 25 Jan 82 pp 40-d5

[Text] Spain and the western economies have entered 1982. the ninth year of the
crisis, with an outlook that is moderately optimistic. All indications are that
the worst is over. That we are coming out of the tunnel. And that we must face
the future with a changed attitude: It is no longer a question of survival, of
standing firm against the lashings of the crisis, but rather of starting to move,
to function again. But with new rules. with new aims. with new instrumentalities.
The new economy is in the course of being born.

This optimism begins beyond the Pyrenees. All the world's industrialized nations,
from Burope to the United States, including Japan and Canada, expect the economic
crisis to subside definitively in 1982. Initially. the improvement had been ex-
pected to make its appearance during the first months of this year: but the U. S.
ec0noay has not recovered as much as had been anticipated. so that the improvement
cannot be expected to get off the ground now until near the end of the year. But
one thing seems clear: This crisis, which has battered these countries since
1974. is dead. And arising from its ashes is a new approach to enterprise, to
competition, to capital formation, to work and to development.

This current of optimism, while not yet one to set the bells ringing, has reached
Spain.

, According to the OBCD. which brings together the 24 most developed Western coun-
tries, the Spanish economy will improve during 1982, and the year-end should shew
better results as regards its overall growth. prices and unemployment. The OECD's
forecasts indicate a growth of 2.5 percent, a much higher one than the average
growth they project for the OBCD counties as a whole (1.25 percent). the highest
of all the countries except Japan. and equal to that of France. These forecasts
indicate a lZ-percent rise in prices, a foreign trade (current account) deficit
of $4.5 billion, and a slower unemployment growth rate than in prior years.

The OECD finds that there was a recovery of economic activity during the second
half of 1981. based on a continual rise in investment and a resurgence of exports
that extends to tourism as well. all signs pointing to a consolidation of this
recovery in 1982, which in turn will produce a slight drop in overall unemploy-
ment concurrent with the virtual doubling of the country's economic growth over
that of 1981.

8
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬁﬂ(JAl.USElMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another body, the IMP, has developed a slightly more negative projection from the
results of the checkup on the Spanish economy it has just completed, although it
underscores “the substantial achievements attained by Spain in recent years in
adapting to the new circumstances arising from the crisis, its economy having
transformed itself into a more flexible one."

A month ago, Juan Antonio Garcia Diez stated in the Congress: "Our objective is
a 3-percent growth in 1982. This rate can be attained and, clearly, it is much
less than the Spanish economy would need to ensure its health." Bearing out this
view, the economy was already on its way to a 3-percent growth by the start of
the new year.

To achieve this level, Garcia Diez is relying on a budgetary policy (public
investment), monetary controls on inflation and maintenance of credit levels to
the private sector, energy and industrial restructuralization policies, an inter-
national eoonomic rowth, and above all on compliance with the ME [National En-
ployment Agreement .

In the view of our government economists, 1982 trend will take an unmistakable
turn in the direction necessary toward a solution of the economic and social
problems that are plaguing the Spanish economy, although we will still be a long
way from a definitive solution. "All signs seem to indicate that 1982 will be
the year of cast-off from the crisis. In 1980 and 1981, the Spanish economy
undertook a number of very important energy, wage and salary, industrial and
staff organizational adjustments and a public investment effort, that with the
help of a favorable international situation are beginning to bear fruit,‘I said
Anselmo Calleja, director general of economic policy, to CAMBIO 16.

There can be no doubt that we are actually on the road to improvement, when
Carlos Perrer, president of the C808 [Spanish Confederation of Business Organi-
zations] and a man who has for the last 5 years been making pessimistic statements
(some of them very hard-hitting), has just indicated that this year "The economic
situation will improve. Unemployment will continue rising, although, we expect,
less than in 1981. Inflation will be lower and production will increase slightly.
As a result of all of this, private investment will grow."

Revival Already Under Way

This is good news, if we consider that private investment has registered negative
growth rates over the past few years. Abounding in this optimism, Jose Luis
Ceron, chairman of the Economic Comttee of the OBOE, holds forth his expectations
for this new year: '"l'here are already trends that have not as yet surfaced and
that, if not disrupted, point to a certain revival: A revival in the buying of
investment securities, the effects of public investment the impact of which did
not begin to be felt until near the end of 1981, positive trends in the export
sector, the ANS and even the world Soccer Championship Games."

As seen by Jose Luis Leal, former minister of economy, the future looks promising,

but not to the extent of warranting joyful proclamations. 'I do not think our
economy will grow more than two percentage points in 1982, which means that the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key:

 

 

on
00"“ 99‘ t: _

+1.125 :;1:";..~-~

..m-l\
, .‘n
1"

1. Factors indicating cast-off.

Growth - Percentage increase in
GDP [Gross Domestic Product].

Economy - (OBCD), (CECE).

Unemployment - Evolution in
numbers of jobless.

Prices — Percent increase in
prices (CPI [Consumer Price
Index]).

10

6. Foreign trade deficit - Current ac-
count (exports minus imports plus
tourism, services and transfers).

7. Investment - Percent total invest-
mentment growth (public and private).

8. Private consumption - Percent annual
variation.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR4OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

unemployment situation will deteriorate further, thOugh at a slower rate than in
1981. Inflation may also be expected to abate and our foreign trade deficit to
show some improvement. In sum, a situation that will still be difficult, similar
to that of the other European countries,‘ he commented to CAHBIO 16.

There is certainly no lack of prescriptions. According to Julio Rodriguez, P803
[Spanish Socialist Workers Party] economist, a number of steps must be taken if
the Spanish economy is to be reactivated and hitched to the 1983 international
recovery train: A moderate wage increase, steps favorable to improvement of the
entrepreneural climate, stabilization of social security costs, a reduction of
tax fraud and an increase of indirect taxes, actualization of real increases in
public investment, containment of inflation, moderation of interest rates, more
stable financing facilities for the purchase of homes, a realistic energy pricing
policy, productivity increases, streamlining of public-sector expenditures, and,
above all, adherence to the ANS.

At the other extreme, Abel Hatutes, of AP [Popular Alliance], lays down three
conditions for attaining an effective and lasting growth: An increase in savings
and investment, an improvement in our foreign trade balance (above all, as regards
exports), and containment of inflation. He also puts much stress on containment
of public and deficit spending, tax incentives to investment, more efficiency in
the social security sector, liberalization in depth of the economic system, and
development of the 'locomotive sectors? of the economy (housing, public works
projects, as well as energy and transportation).

A factor on which he does not touch, namely, revival of private investment, is
one of deep concern to the government, which knows that public investment alone
cannot resolve the unemployment situation and the crisis. Anselmo Calleja, direc-
tor general of political economy in the Ministry of Economy, made the following
comment to CAMBIO 16: “Two things worry me that I consider basic to a substantial
improvement in the economy. One is the need to revive investment, above all in
the construction sector. The other is the threat of being swallowed up by the
public sector. This ferocious tiger that devours everything placed before it
must be tamed. We must make a start with regard to transfers of funds to the
public enterprises and the streamlining of social security, despite the fact that
dealing with these issues is difficult and even unpopular.“

There are also prescriptions originating abroad. Thus, the IMP has just recom-
mended the liberalization of the Spanish economy by ”correcting structural rigid-
ities.‘ The IMF suggests increasing competitiveness, developing exports, bring-
ing labor costs down still more, liberalizing the financing system in depth,
containing the public deficit, improving the tax collection system, and reforming
social security.

Our Unemployment Burden

A serious problem hovers over this optimism and casts its continuing pasl over the
Spanish economy as it enters 1982: Unemployment. Two million Spaniards are job-

less and 150,000 youths are entering the available work force every year. During
November, 1,500 newly unemployed workers per day entered the rolls of the jobless.

11
FORlDFFK]Al.USE(MﬁLY
One chilling statistic alone suffices to measure the gravity of the problem:
The number of persons registering in Employment Offices--the number of unemployed
is actually higher-~is running 10 persons per available job.

”The struggle against unemployment,” says Carlos Romercnassistant director general
for employment in the Ministry of Economy. to CANDID 16, 'is not a one-year objec-
tive. It is a high-priority issue that must vertebrate economic policy in its
entirety; it is not a matter of just a few job programs. There are no short-term
miraculous solutions, and it would be a major achievement if only the number of
unemployed by year-end 1982 could be made no greater than that at year-end 1981."

It must be remembered that the government's objective in signing the sun was to
create 350,000 jobs between June 1981 and December 1982. 'It is a very difficult
if not impossible objective to attain,“ our magazine was told by Crisanto Plaza.
economist. "During good years. back in the 1960's, the net number of new jobs
created annually by the Spanish economy was averaging 105.000. and from 1970 to
1974 it averaged 180,000. The economy would be doing well to create half the num-

ber envisioned by the ARE. The important thing, as I see it, is to change the
trend."

It is Carlos Romero's view that the unemployment problem can be gainfully attacked
on various fronts. One line of advance could be that of distributing existing
employment: agreed early retirements. increased overtime pay. an attack on moon-
lighting, above all in the public sector (incompatibilities), and in-depth com-
pliance with the ANS. Another would be that of limiting l'doubln-dipping,‘I reform-
ing the social security system, continuing the wage-moderation policy. and lower-
ing of business financing costs. And, easing the contracting terms for new jobs,
making fuller use of the AME. 'Little use has’been made of part-time and on-
the-job-training contracts.‘

“Besides,” he adds. "there is a whole array of measures to stimulate public and,
above all, private investment, as well as those of a general economic policy
nature: Development of sectors of the future, industrial reconversion. a plan for
modernizing agriculture and the food farming sector, technological development,
and a a suitable professional and occupational training policy. 'If the planned
growth objectives become operative. the time will have come to develop a broad
complex of measures and make of employment our major national objective,‘ said
Carlos Romero in conclusion.

Dispelling Uncertainties

But for the scheme to become operative, there must be a genuine revival of private
investment. Uncertainties will have to be dispelled (the fact that 1982 is a pre-
election year does not help things, and much less will it do so if there is a risk
of early electiOns), incentives will have to be greatly increased, particularly
as regards exports, new contract terms will have to be eased, and, above all, the
cost of credit to business will have to be reduced. ”Jose Luis Caron, business-
man and "economic brains" of the C308, says, ”The problem of the price of money
continues unabated. while others are improving.’

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility that the central bank may be able to reduce the price of money,
as the workers have reduced their wages, is still not in sight. Recently, Juan
Jose Tbrribo, former director general of monetary policy and a member of the

board of directors of the Dance Urquijo, said: 'Poreseeably, interest rates in
Spain will remain high during 1982, since the deficit in the public sector will
rise. thus generating pressure on the Banco de Bepana.‘ Other banking circles,
for their part, add that they do not discard the probability of a tight credit
market this year, with insufficient credit to be able to guarantee a low infla-

tion rate-~a problem that did not arise in 1981 because there was scarce demand
for credit on the part of business.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Revista y Informacion, S.A.

9399
C50: 3110/75

13
FOR‘OFFK]AI.USE(NVLY
'BLIND' EUROPE SEES USSR PEACEFUL INTENTIONS, WILL T0 NECOTIATE
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 5 Feb 82 pp 96-97
[Article by Cornelius Castoriadis: "The West is Already One Battle Behind"]

[Text] Philosopher Cornelius Castoriadis is one of those
most familiar with Marxist thought. He established the once
legendary periodical SOCIALISHE OU BARBARIE (1949-65), which
was a veritable intelleCtual crucible of critical reflection
aimed at Soviet imperialism in the name of socialism.
Castoriadis has just published a book whose title seems to
us to have sadly prophetic current application: "Faced With
"at."

The main ally of the Kremlin is the stubborn blindness of the Western
peoples. This blindness has to do first of all with the real strength of the
USSR. Still today and despite the hullabaloo about the 88-205 (and as if they
were the only issue), people continue to believe that because the United
States has the most powerful industry in the world, it is also the strongest
in the military sense. But strength is not the total of military hardware and
soldiers alone. The USSR enjoys a privileged geostrazegic position, with a
central location which allows it to "operate on the basis of internal lines."
and to deploy its forces in the necessary spots speedily. The Westerners are
always running to catch up following the actions the USSR undertakes where it
wants and when it wants. The USSR has political and military unity of com-
mand. Its forces are truly "integrated," unlike those of NATO. Its political,
military, diplomatic and propaganda activities are also integrated, unlike
the perpetual cacophony in the West. Russia actively exploits the social,
political and other crises which occur in the sphere of the Western nations.
The reverse is not true. Soviet society as a whole is organized on the basis
of the goals of the regime, a situation which is inconceivable in the Hestern
countries. Young Americans halted the war in Vietnam. and demonstrations by
paclfists and neutralists in Europe have just recently rallied hundreds of
thousands of persons. After the crushing of Hungary there were only five
demonstrators in Red Square. After the same thing happened in Czechoslovakia,
there were seven. and after the similar events in Poland on 13 December 1981
“one o

The leading Soviet circles are concerned with nothing other than the expan-
sion of the empire. and they are professional government leaders. Western

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

politicians are sometimes only "amateurs" whose main concern is in many cases
reelection. The leaders of the USSR have only one motivation: the expansion
of their power. The Westerners, for their part, dream of maintaining a shaky
"status quo.” In the end, as a result of all this, the Soviet Union can have
and does have a long-term strategy and policy. The Hestern regimes have none
and can have none. Their blindness has to do also with the Soviet regime, its
nature and its intentions. Even when they realize that it has nothing to do
with socialism or the workers class, people do not see that the USSR is not

a country like others, since the Soviet regime is not a regime like others,
less liberal or more harsh, but a new historical animal. This regime has not
created a new breed of men, but it has created a society without historic
precedent, with its own blind dynamics, for all practical purposes incompre-
hensible to Western man, whether "liberal" or "Marxist." Each of the 270
million citizens in the USSR is a human being like you and me. But taken
together, and placed under the yoke of the regime, for as long as that lasts,
they are something else: mechanical limbs of an impersonal golem which ex-
tends a jointed arm from time to time and seizes something.

Blindly, people cling to a belief in the "peaceful" intentions of the Soviet
Union or its "willingness to negotiate." Each time it has negotiated, the
USSR has ended up with the main advantage, and each time it has suited its
whim, it has calmly violated the agreements it had signed, and no one even
dares to call it to acc0unt. We never cease "o hear about Yalta: the agree-
ments called for free eleCtions in the Eastern European countries. When and
where have such been held? In Hungary in 1956, after the failure of their
first invasion, the Soviets withdrew their troops, promising that they would
leave the country alone. This was done in order to bring up reinforcements,
with which a few days later, they massacred the Hungarian people. The agree-
ment signed in Moscow in 1968 with Dubcek (who had a gun at his head) was
violated immediately afterward. Now they are being accused of violating the
Helsinki Accords in Poland. But these agreements called for the free circula-
tion of individuals and ideas. 60 and see the Berlin wall, and count the
Soviet tourists you see in the streets of Paris. Many Americans claim that
the Soviets did indeed violate the SALT l treaty but even that is not the
issue. The SALT I agreement gave them nuclear parity with the United States,
which they did not have previously. This was not enough for them. During the
decade between 1970 and 1980, they undertook a fantastic production and de-
ployment of all other weapons. Rest assured that if the agreements were
signed on Euromissiles in Geneva tomorrow-o ‘even on intercontinental
missiles--you would hear a few months or years later of great Soviet advances
in other military realms. Rest assured also that if the Soviets succeed in
"normalizing" Poland, a new peace campaign will be launched and everyone will
believe in it, yourself included.

The case of Poland provides an admirable and tragic illustration of all of
this. There is no need to emphasize that the Polish affair has been a tremen-
dous setback for the Kremlin, and a matter which has not yet been concluded.
By means of a 40 percent reduction in the standard of living (price increases
of up to #00 percent), Jaruzelski is attempting to break the Polish people,

15
FOR orncm. ass ONLY
to bring them to their knees. It is not certain that he will succeed, much
less that this will advance an economy ruined by 35 years of a communist
regime. But see how the Kremlin, caught in this trap, has nonetheless been
able to maneuver skillfully, while the Western politicians argue. Caught in

a terrible bind, it was able to choose the means and the time in Poland, pre-
paring its move for months and converting the Polish affair into an addition-
al bone of contention among the Western "allies," and bringing the fear of
war into play again (aided by Brandt, Schmidt and Chevenement). It was also
able to transform it into a new. chilling and bitter demonstration to the
peoples of the other Eastern European countries that rebellion is useless.
Forty days after a state of war developed in Poland, Western bankers. with
the blessings of their governments, were preparing to finance the survival of
the regime.

Why this obstinate blindness? Let us set aside the idea that it would be
difficult to learn the truth. Everyone knows what has happened. The data on
the superarmament of the Soviet Union is to be found everywhere, and is less
difficult to memorize than the membership of the soccer teams competing for
the World Cup. The main thing is first of all that people do not want to
think about what is extremely disagreeable. It is in error that, in many
languages, a characteristic which is absolutely typical of human beings is
imputed to the poor ostrich. The fact is that acknowledgment would also
oblige people to do something--to take responsibility for their collective
life. And so the fear of war itself becomes a factor which. confirming the
Soviet Union's belief in its own impunity, contributes powerfully to increas-
ing the probability of war.

This pertains to people in general. The situation with the "intellectuals"
and the "leftists" is clearer still: apart from the outwork Marxist ideas of
which their heads are full, they are forced to camouflage the situation,
since none of their schemes provides an answer to it, and they are in danger
of having to admit that, faced with this situation, they have nothing to say.

The leading circles in the West, entirely disorganized, s e to their short-
tcrm interests. Businesses and unions think of "exports," bankers of their
credit, and politicians. naturally, of their schemes. "Detente" was promised
by Nixon and Kissinger in order to get the American voters to swallow
Vietnam, the Cambodian invasion and Watergate. Kissinger today, wearing
another hat, is trying to sell himself as the spokesman of a "hard line"
policy. In fact, the Polish affair has been transformed, where politicians of
all hues are concerned, into a weapon of guerrilla warfare among the majority
parties as well as those of the opposition.

The harsh reality is that one can expect nothing of the Western regimes and
governments. Only an uprising by the people, here as well as on the other
side of the iron curtain. can halt the race toward war. This is why aiding
the poles in their struggle is more than ever a vital necessity if catas-
trophe is to be avoided. This is why it must be remembered that in this
affair. the blindness resulting from the fear of war is likely to lead both
to war and to enslavement.

COPYRIGHT: [1982] par Cogedipresse S.A.

5157
cso: 3100/381 16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLICIES. mcxcnouuns or nrrmmn wvrsms mmuzn
Paris POUVOIRS in French No 20. 1982, pp 87-100

hEArticle by Samy Cohen, researcher at the National Foundation for
Political Science (CERI) and director of research at University
of Paris I: "The Men in the Elyseev]

[Text] Is there a "Hitterrand style'I permeating Elysee operations,
governing the choice of his staff, and the assignments he gives each
of them? (1)

Quite apart from the fascination the prince's advisers hold for the
collective imagination, the presence of the president's lentourage"
poses a basic constitutional question. In the system of “unequal
diarchy" which has been the 5th Republic's experience, these men are
one of the important factors in the division of power between presi-
dent and prime Minister. Thanks to the information they gather and
pass on to the chief of state, and to the dossiers they put together
for him, these men make it practically possible for him to guide and
direct government action. Given a prime minister who controls the
civil service apparatus, the police, and the military, the absence
of such staff would considerably weaken the president's role. In-
versely, installation in the Elysee of a powerful apparatus capable
on its own of preparing and implementing important decisions would
weaken that of the prime minister. It would constitute one more step

toward presidentialization of the system.

The first three presidents of the 5th Republic all had men about them
who were numerous enough and competent enough to enable presidents to
lay down major policy lines and monitor their implementation, but ne-
ver gave them the opportunity to establish a real "second government"
in the Elysee itsel . Intervention by the president's men in the
operations of the ministries was frequent -- particularly under
Georges Pompidou and Giscard d'Estaing -~ but their effectiveness de-
pended largely on the character of the ministers. A prime minister
opposed to a presidential decision could hamper its implementation
under the critical but powerless gaze of the “Elysee people."

Experience has shown that the prime minister hasheldenough trumps,
under certain circumstances, to force concessions from the president.

17
The president, on his part, knew that it is often less costly, poli-
tically speaking, to humor one's prime minister than to fire him. We
tend too often to forget the role Georges Pompidou played in May
1968, the reforms Jacques Chaban Delmas pushed through in the teeth
of presidential hostility and that of the president's chief adviser,
Pierre Juillet, and the various economic measures Raymond Barre got

through, not to mention his important role in the composition of
cabinets. (2)

Has the election of Francois lﬂtterrand as president marked a break
with the past? The experience of his first 6 months in office shows
that there is no clear answer to that question. Three areas must be
surveyed and separated:

-~ the one where the change is radical: the choice of men;
-- the one where the change fits comfortably into the con-
tinuity: the internal functioning of the presidency;

-- the one where continuity is all: the weight of the
Elysee apparatus in the decision-making process.

I. The Choice of Men (3)

When General de Gaulle first moved into the Elysee on 9 January
1959, one of his very first acts was to put together his own team of
personal staff. A majority of his recruits were high officials in
whom he had complete confidence, and some of who had already served
on his staff in London, in Algiers, or in the Provisional Government.
As for the Rally of the French People (RPF), of which he was leader
for several years, only a handful of party stalwarts came to the
Elysee with him. Intellectuals, businessmen, organized labor, and
members of the professions were barred. The main idea was that only
high officials -- those who serve the State -- possessed the quali-
ties of devotion, discretion, and competence required to deal with
"affairs of State.’I Georges Pompidou and Giscard d'Estaing, also
leaders of the party, stuck pretty much to the same line of thought.
Pompidou took along the staff he had assembled at Matignon when he
was prime minister. Giscard brought with him mainly those who had
been closest to him at the Finance Ministry. In all three cases,
the men were not very different from one another in origin, age, or
background. Their differences stemmed mainly from the values they
held and from the ties of personal fealty that bound them to their
leader.

The 'Wutterrand style," though, is quite another thing . It reflects,
first ofall, the "party activist tone of the Elysee." (4) The inner
core of the Blysée team is made up of personal staffers who have
worked for the first secretary of the Socialist Party and who, in 1981,
were almost all part of his "campaign cabinet,n headed by Jacques
Attali, who today is special adviser to the president. Men used to
working with Francois Hitterrand.- Their backgrounds are as disparate
as may be. They are almost all members of the Socialist Party or on
its fringes. Aside from Jacques Fournier -- who comes from the trendy

l8
Center for (Socialist) Studies, Research, and Education (CERES) --
and Francois-Xavier Stasse -- a Rocard man --, they are indeed
Mitcerrandists to a man.

Francois Hiumrnmd has also found room for his personal friends:
Andre Rousselet, a businessman, is currently his chef de cabinet;
Francois de Grossouvre, a farmer who runs his own operations, is
chargé de mission to the President; Guy Penne, a physician, keeps
tabs on African affairs»forthe Blysée; writer Paul Guimard is in
charge of cultural affairs. Francois Hitter-rand has also made it a
point to pay homage to two of his deceased friends, Pierre Soudet and
Georges Dayan, by finding a place on his staff for the widow of the
former, Laurence Soudet, and the daughter of the latter, Paule Dayan.

The team will be rounded out by two people from organized labor:
Jeamwtte Laot (member of the executive commission of the CFDT), and
Robert Cheramy (co-secretary-general of the SNES). There will also
be a couple of high officials, including one counsellor of State
(Jean-Louis Bianco), a diplomat who was one of the very first members
of the Center for Analysis and Planning at the Foreign Affairs Min-
istry (Pierre Morel), an engineer from the Bureau of Mines who is an
expert on energy questions (Gerard Renon), and an administrator from
the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE),

(Christian Sautter).

All in all, Francois Mitternum has provided himself as president with
the most heavily "political" team in the history of the 5th Republic,
but also with the one least homogeneous. (5) His is the one on which
high officials are least in evidence (they account for only about a
third of the team). It is also the one on which graduates of the
great schools are fewest (they number about a fourth, whereas they
accounted for two thirds under Giscard d'Estaing, half under Pompi-
dou, and only two-thirds during the final years of Charles de Gaulle's
presidency).

The man who best symbolizes the change in political staff around the
Elysee is Pierre Bérégovoy. For the first time since the birth of
the 5th Republic, the secretary-general of the Elysee is not a high
official. He is a graduate of no great school -- not BNA, not Science—
po, not the Ecole Normale Superieure. Pierre Bérégovoy is a self-
taught man. Born to a family in modest circumstances, he began his
working life as an adjuster and metalworker in a textile mill, then
went to work for the railroad (SNCF). In 1950, he moved to Gaz de
France, where he advanced quickly to become chargé de mission in 1978.
In 1979, he joined the Economic and Social Council. His official
biographies all show, under the heading "degrees": CAP d'ajusteur."

Pierre Bérégovoy also has a long history of political activism on be-
half of socialism. In 1946, he joined the SFIO (French Section of
the Workers' International), then left it in 1958 to join Alain Savary
in founding the independent Socialist Party. A few years later, he
was one of the founders of the United Socialist Party (PSU). He
worked closely for a long time with Pierre Mendes—Prance. In 1965,
he lent his support to Prancois Miccerrand's candidacy. In 1967, he
founded the Modern Socialism Club and wound up in the new Socialist
Party in 1969. While he has never been elected to public office, he
quickly moved into the select ranks of PS leaders. It was he who, in
1977, led the socialist delegation into the negotiations for imple-
mentation of the Joint Program. In 1981, he was active in Francois
Mittetrand's campaign and headed an elite team whose main job was to
write replies to questionnaires sent by various associations. As
president, butxerrand first made him responsible for operating the
presidential "antennae" and handling relations with the civil service,
pending his promotion to secretary-general at the Blysée.

II. Internal Operations

At this level the change is less obvious. Anyone who has had occa-
sion to watch the president's entourage at work in the past is not
going to find himself in unfamiliar territory today. He will most
certainly wonder about this johnny-come-lately who is ﬁgecial adviser
to the president and occupies the office right next to tternmd 9

But he will find most of the familiar structures unchanged: the
general secretariat of the Elysee, the private general staff, and the
cabinet (6).

Relations between the president and his entourage are handled, as al-
ways, on a hierarchical basis. Even today, the president does not
sit down to work regularly except with a minority of the "top advi-
sers“: the secretary-general to the president's office , Pierre
Bérégovoy, the chef du cabinet, Andre Rousselet, special adviser
Jacques Attali, and Francois de Grossouvre who, with the title of
“head of missions to the president of the republic,“ busies himself
with relations with the special services. Only these four men see
Francois MUIenund on a daily basis. Not at times set in advance, as
in the past, but rather "at the request" of the president or one of
these men.

The secretary-general is still the pivotal personage in the entourage.
He is the "contact man with the prime minister." He is the one who
keeps the lines open between the Blysée and Matignon. It is to his
desk that the important political dossiers come -- the ones that put
the president into rapport with the government -- before they reach
the presidential desk. He, together with the secretary-genera]. of
the government, is responsible for planning and preparation for cabi-
net meetings. He is the only member of the team to attend them. (7)
He is also present at the regular interviews between the president
and the prime minister on Tuesday mornings, as well as at the short
private talk the two men have on Wednesday mornings before the cabi-
net meeting. He is almost always present at the Wednesday lunch
along with Francois Htcuuwand, Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy, PS first
secretary Lionel JoSpin, a few ministers invited on the basis of the
news of the day, and often the leader of the Socialist contingent in
Parliament, Pierre Joxe. Pierre Bérégovoy is the Blysée' 3 contact man
with the Socialist Party, of which he is a member of the steering com-
mittee. He is present at all important Party meetings. At the
Valence congress, he took part in the deliberations of the resolutions
committee.

Pierre Berégovoy has the biggest staff in the Elysee. He has a deputy
(Jacques Fournier), an adviser to the secretary-general (Michel Char-
asse), who deals with constitutional matters, decentralization issues
and relations with the parliamentary assemblies, a spokesman (Michel
Vauzelle), a press attache (Nathalie Duhamel), and a score of tech-
nical advisers and charges de mission. Each of them concentrates on
the activities of one or more ministries, updates the files for the
next cabinet meeting, and makes sure than any information that might
interest the President gets to him in time. They perform certain
tasks, such as preparing his speeches, whose early drafts they edit.
They receive visito;s whom the president hasn't time to see. All

of this activity goes on under the watchful eye of the secretary-
general or his deputy.

Distribution of jobs is clearly defined, but, owing to the interminis-
terial aspects of some cases, technical advisers and charges de mis-
sion are often led to drop in on each other and coordinate their ac-
tivities. On this basis, for example, there are regular consulta-
tions between Christian Sautter (international economics), Guy Penne
(African affairs), and Regis Debray (who keeps an eye on Third World
problems, particularly those of Latin America. Debray, however, does
not play the part of your conventional diplomatic adviser. He main-
tains few contacts with the official representatives of foreign coun-
tries. On the other hand, he is always ready to meet with the "un-
official" ones: politicians, party activists, intellectuals, jour-
nalists, representatives of certain liberation movements, etc.).

You see the same team behavior in the economic sectors with Jacques
Fournier, Alain Boublil (industry, housing, transportation, the post
office and telephone system), Francois-Xavier Stasse (the economy,
budget, planning), Gerard Renon (energy), and Christian Sautter. 0r
again in the more political areas of relations with Parliament, which
are the province of Michel Chasse, Pierre Castagnou, and Paule Dayan.

The staff director (Andre Rousselet), assisted by his deputy (Jeanu
Claude Colliard), is in charge of three principal missions: he deals
with the administrative and financial management of the Elysee Pal-
aCe and with the organization of presidential travel (a direct respon-
sibility of the chief of staff, Jean Glavany, who, among other things,
handles the president's relations with the departements of Nievre and
the Landes): he stays on top of ”communication problems" (particu-
larly the plan for audio-visual reform and the appointment of jour-
nalists in this sector); and finally, with a great deal of discre-
tion, he maintains contacts with business circles (newspaper pub-
lishers, banks, or major industrial conglomerates, etc.) whenever a
given financial problem might have political repercussions. It was
under this mandate, for example, that he kept such a close eye on the

21
nationalizations problem, and why he took a hand in shaping the instru-
ment with which it was to be settled.

As of now, there is nothing new about the basic internal organization-
al plan. The innovation is to be found in the special adviser-Jauuns
Attali -- with his two backup men, Jean-Louis Bianco and Pierre Morel
-- has two major responsibilities: the first is in the order of
prediction. It consists in thinking through the medium- and long-
term implications of domestic as well as international issues. His
is a function hitherto more or less neglected, andone to which the
members of the general secretariat, constantly absorbed in impending
presidential deadlines (the next cabinet meeting, the next speech,
the next trip, etc.), can devote only scraps of their time. Among
the issues the special adviser has had served onto his plate are the
future of new technologies (satellites, office computers, automatic
long-distance communications, and more), the long-term implications
of audio-visual (television) reform, the structural roots of infla-

tion, and the possible remedies for each of them within the next 2 to
10 years.

Second major assignment: the preliminary work for the big multila-
teral summit meetings (8). The special adviser here plays a role
analogous to that of the “product director" in a big corporation. He
has full responsibility for the background file which he prepares
with the help of his staff, members of the general secretariat who
may be involved, and officials from the various ministries concerned.

The problem is that these two assignments by nature partially overlap
the work of the general secretary and that of the office manager.

The special adviser's job description is a long way from specificity.
For a man of action, the medium term is not always distinguishable
from the short. The multilateral "summit meetings" are clearly an
extension of the bilateral summits, which are in the province of the
general secretariat. Any important diplomatic activity on France's
part in the interval between these "summits" is going to involve both
the special adviser and the general secretary. The two men share
high-level contacts with foreign governments. They travel with Pran-
cois Himmrrand when he travels outside France. Further, Jacques
Attali is not confined to the two major missions already noted. His
authority runs horizontally. With his own sources of information,

he may see fit to give the president the benefit of his opinion on
any subject whatsoever, and to react to events as they occur. He

can also be called upon for special missions to foreign governments.

In a very short space of time, there has grown up around Francois Mit-
terrmuﬂs double circuit of information that operates on a competitive
basis. Overlapping :Jsponsibilities, which hitherto had been stu-
diously avoided in the Elysee are becoming one of the new features of
its operations. That kind of system does not bother Francois Mitterr-
and so long as it provides him with more complete information. But

it does give rise to tensions in his entourage. Short of taking

over direct responsibility, the highest satisfaction the counsellor

to the prince can savor is that of being heard and heeded by the man
he counsels. Why should anyone be surprised if competition is not
viewed with a kindly or tolerant eye?

It is hardly likely, even so, that internal tensions like these will
constitute any serious impediment to the consistency of governmental
action. There are several reasons why:

-— The president's men have no decisions to make. They do not run
ministries. The work they do is done for the eyes of one man, and
one man alone. They can have no influence on the decision, since it
is the president alone who must make it.

-- Overlapping is not tantamount to a total tangle in the lines of re-
sponsibility. The special adviser's work is often done upstream of
the actual decision, at the first-start stages. He is what might be
called the scout for the team, but he does not command the secretary
general's grasp of the background dossiers for the cabinet meetings.
The special adviser is required to be inventive, while the secretary
general is required to be watchful, to let nothing creep into the
dossiers that might even look like a npolitical gaffe.’I

-- Competition is also tempered by a degree of collaboration between
the special adviser's staff and the general secretariat. There is

no real compartmentalization. The special adviser's office talks to
the secretary general's staff. The two men see each other often.

The general secretary's primacy within the Elysee team is recognized:
as is the necessity for informing him of everything that might be im-
portant if there are not to be over-serious policy clashes on dealings
with the outside world. Attali and Bérégovoy lend staff members to
each other. The special adviser has members of the general secreta-
riat staff who are skilled in preparing for multilateral "summits."
Inversely, the members of his team go over to give the secretary-gen-
eral a generous hand in their preparations for the bilateral summits.

These four men are not the only ones with direct access to President
Mituuwand. Three other men have it, too, but not on anything like

a daily basis. The most important of these men -- important because
of the responsibilities with which he is entrusted -- is the personal
chief of staff, General Jean Saulnier. This soldier is one of five
of six high-ranking colleagues of the president. He is the "strike-
forcc" man, the one who maintains liaison between the chief of the
general staff and particularly that between the president and the

Air Force's Strategic Operations Center at Taverny.

After him comes the deputy secretary general to the president's of-
fice, Jacques Fournier. In other administrations, the man who held
this post was one of those who saw the president most frequently, and
his office was close to that of the head of state. These days, he
works more closely with the secretary general of the Elysée, and his
office is in one of the wings of the Elysee Palace, a long walk from
the central building which is the prime strategic turf for access to
the president's office. Even so, his role is very important: he re-
places the general secretary when the latter is away. He assigns
work to the technical advisers and charges de mission who monitor the
pulse of economic and social affairs. He coordinates the Elysée's
work with Matignon on these same issues, and, ex officio, takes part
in the interministerial committee meetings on the Rue de Varenne.

The last member of the group is the adviser on African affairs, Guy
Penne. The importance both France and the African countries attach
evenrunv to direct ties between one head of state and the other, and
his role as the president's personal envoy, which he continues to
fill, explain why Guy Penne is one of the few who have the right to
deal directly with Francois Hitterrand.

The other advisers communicate with the president in writing and, as
a rule, work with one of the "big men." A few privileged characters
are sometimes summoned by the president who will ask for their views
or for more specific information on a particular dossier.

Formal meetings at the Elysée are rare. Francois Hitterrand, accord-
ing to the men who work with him, does not like this particular pat~
tern of collective work. In 6 months, he has held only two full-dress
meetings with his full staff, both called to straighten out details
of internal organization and to spell out the Blysee's official at-
titude vis-a-vis the outside world. There are, however, two select
meetings that are quasi-formal. The first is chaired by the deputy
general secretary. It is held every Wednesday morning, and all
advisers responsible for economic and social matters are in attend-
ance. Once a week or so, without any fixed day, the secretary gen-
eral, his deputy, the directeur de cabinet, and the special adviser
get together. This is what is called the "appointments” meeting,
where they talk over appointments to the highest posts in the civil
service and in the para-governmental sector.

III. Is the Elysée Team a Powerhouse?

Do Francois Mizcerrand's men make up this "actual second government ,"
as was recently suggested (9)? Ever since de Gaulle's day, this kind
of assessment of the role the Elysée's offices actually play has gone
through countless reruns. And yet, there is no indication that the
Republic has changed, or that Francois Hitterrand has appreciably al-
tered the clout of his entourage at the expense of that of his minis—
ters, thus taking another step or two in the direction of presiden-
tializing the system. Nor has the expansion of staff, from some 30
or so in the final year of Valery Giscard d'Estaing's term to around
40. There are more people on the staff in the Blysée's general sec-
retariat (24 in all) than at any time in the history of the 5th Re-
public. These differences, however, are of minor importance. We are
a long way from the swarming hives that perform the multifarious ser-
vices attached to Matignon (10). We are even further from those of
the White House, whose White House Office alone has several hundred
on its payroll (11).
The Blysée's is still a lean team, with no capacity to plan and im-
plement major reforms by itself. It has no more autonomy than it ever
did. Matignon still plays a stellar role in the elaboration and exe-
cution of important decisions. Contrary to what might happen in the
United States, the president's advisers in France have no way of tak-
ing over from members of the cabinet. The cabinet ministers still

have considerable braking power to bring to bear on presidential op-
tions.

The men around the head of state seek to round out their influence

by means of diligent and detailed digging for information. They are
rarely content to accept the bare-bones dossiers which reach their
desks after being filtered through the particular biases and crochets
of ministerial staffs. They take assiduous part in meetings of the
interministerial committees. They can, when circumstances warrant,
call meetings at the Blysée at which competent officials are in atten-
dance. They can, if necessary, short-circuit even a cabinet minister
and go directly to the man handling the dossier they want to see.

The independent authority of the president actually creates a degree
of independence between the advisers and the ministers. The former
need the cooperation of cabinet members to put them in a position to
give the president complete information. Cabinet ministers know that
establishing and maintaining good relations with the men in the Bly-
sée can bring them certain advantages. It gives them a chance to
find out the president's real opinion of them. It also enables them
to make sure, very quickly, that such and such a move on their part
has the president's approval. And finally, in the bureaucratic wars
between his troops and those of other ministers, on any decision of
an interministerial nature whose final settlement will be adjudicated
by the head of state, the cabinet minister knows it is important to
make sure he has the backing of whichever of the president's men it
is who is in charge of the dossier on that issue. None of this, how-
ever, is new, and it does not give the president's advisers any deci-
sive advantage.

It would be more helpful to replace the theory of the super-executives
with the two-pillar theory, Francois Hinterland, like his predeces-
sors, relies at least as much on members of the cabinet as on his
personal advisers to govern. He often works with his ministers, par-
ticularly those in key positions. Every week he receives the prime
minister and the ministers of Interior, Economy, and Foreign Rela-
tions. Pierre Maury is the only one who has set hours to confer with
him. The others are summoned on the basis of the urgency of the is-
sues they are dealing with. Francois Miumrnmd also consults with
people who move in other circles. He receives personal friends, wri-
ters, university professors, and, of course, politicians, particularly
Socialist Party leaders (Lionel Jospin, Pierre Joxe, who heads the

PS contingent in the National Assembly, Louis Mermaz, president of the
National Assembly. Unlike his predecessors, though, he seldom works
directly with high officials.
Francois HINﬁfﬂHw has said that he feels comfortable surrounded by
our institutions, that they were "made to order" for him. A logical
man, even with himself, he has not made any essential change in the
weight of his own "institution": the president's advisers.

Official Presidential Staff Table of Organization

Presidential Secretary General: M Pierre Beregovoy

Special adviser to the President: M Jacques Attali

Charges de mission for the President: M Francois de Croussouvre
(special services), M Paullegatu: (relations with the major bran-
ches of government and with ministerial staffs).

Presidential General Secretariat

Deputy Secretary General: M Jacques Pournier

Adviser to the Secretary General: M Michel Charasse (decentralization,
Parliament, constitutional matters). Elected Senator in October.

Spokesman: M Paul Vauzelle

Press Secretary: Mme Nathalie Duhamel.

Technical Advisers

M Jacques Bonnacossa (Trade and Crafts)

M Antoine Bonnefond (Justice)

M Alain “Nblil (Industry, Housing, Transportation)
M Pierre Castagnou (Parliament)

has Yannick bureau (National Solidarity)

H Henri Nalle; (Agriculture)

M Guy Penne (African Affairs)

M Gerard Renon (Energy)

M Charles Salzmann (Information, opinion polls)
M Francois Stasse (Economy, Budget, Planning)
M Christian Sautter (International Economy)

M Hubert Vedrine (External Relations)

Charges de Mission

M Robert Cheramy (Education) Mme Jeannette Laot (Labor)
MnePaule Dayan (Parliament M Claude Manceron (Culture, Univer-
M Regis Debray (Third World) sal Exposition)
M Paul Guimard (Culture) M Jacques Ribs (Repatriates)
Presidential Cabinet

Directeur du Cabinet: Technical Adviser:

M Andre Rousselet M Gilles Menage
Deputy Cabinet Director: Chef du Cabinet:

M Jean-Claude Colliard M Jean Glavany

26
Charges de mission: M Jean-Louis Bianco (Long-term thinking about
domestic issues)

M Pierre Morel (multilateral summits, strategic
matters)

Mme Laurence Soudet

Mme Paulette Decraene

Mlle Marie-Claire Papegay

Personal
Secretariat:

 

SOURCE: Government Secretariat General, "Makeup of the Government
and of ministerial staffs (Prime Minister: Pierre Mauroy). List
approved 21 August 1981 by La Documentation Prancaise.

This body must be carefully interpreted, because it tends, like any
other table of organization, to freeze in concrete a body which is
perhaps more changeable than otherwise. Furthermore, certain assign-
ments (those of Jean-Louis Bianca and Pierre Morel) do not reflect
the actual state of affairs. The details of the sectors covered were
added by us.

 

The President's Personal General Staff

Air corps general Saulnier, personal Chief of Staff
Senior Captain Jean-Pierre Fourquet
Artillery Colonel Guy Barascud
Air Force Colonel Bernard Nicolas
Lieutenant Colonel Philippe Mercier, Aide de camp
Chief Admiralty Commissioner Jean-Francois Cleret
Lieutenant Commander Michel Olhagaray, Aide de camp
Military Commandant of the Elysee Palace:

Gendarme Colonel Arnaud Wautrin

SOURCE: JOURNAL OFFICIEL, 22-23 May, 3 June, 14 June, and

.—_———————-———

FOOTNOTES

1. This study was conducted on the basis of repeated in-depth intcr-
views with a dozen or so of the people on Francois unmenmndk
staff. I should like here to thank those who were kind enough
to devote a portion of their time to answering my questions.

2. See, on this topic, Samy Cohen's "Advisers to Presidents: from
Charles dc Gaulle to Valery Giscard d'Estaing," Paris, PUF,
1930, 200 pp.

3. As of the end of November 1981, there were 34 civilians and 7
military people in Francois Mitterrand's entourage. These nun-
here do not include the president's personal secretaries. They
do not include, either, the five unofficial staffers.

27
6.

10.

11'

Jean-Marie Colombani, "Six Months of Socialist Government. III:
Party Activism Enters the Elysee in Force," LB MONDB, 15-16
November 1981.

Broken down by original occupation, this is how they line up (we
used as our reference the main occupation over their careers of
the 34 civilians named in the JOURNAL OFFICIEL): high-ranking
civil service officials: 11, including Counsellors of State (5);
civil administrators (3); Foreign Affairs (1); Engineer of Mines
(l);-INSBE Administrator (1); professionals: 3, including two
attorneys and one physician; 3 writers; two magistrates; two
labor union officials, two contract consultants to the Ministry
of Planning; two middle management people from the public sector;
two permanent [Socialist] Party officials; five from other call-
ings (1 university professor, 1 head of research at INRA, 1
journalist, l farmer-landowner, and l businessman).

Francois .chterrand restored the title of directeur de cabinet
which Valery Giscard d'Bstaing had abolished.

Unlike the situation under Valery Giscard d'Bstaing, where for
7 years the president's spokesman also attended cabinet meetings.

To wit: the European Councils, the industrialized nation summits
and the North—South summits.

Marcelle Padovani: "Elysee: How Does the Mitterrand Team Work?"
LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR, 25 JULY 1981.

On this count, see particularly Jean Massot: "The Head of Govern-
ment in France," Paris, La Documentation Francaise, 1970,

320 pp-

See particularly: Arthur M. Schlessinger: "The Imperial Presi-
dency," Paris, PUP, 1976, 561 Pp; and Richard M. Pious: "The
American Presidency," New York, Basic Books, 1979, 490 pp.

COPYRIGHT: Presses Universitaires de France, 1982.

6182

650:

3100/347

28
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

REASONS FOR IMPROVED PCP-CHINESE RBLATIWS, arm POLICIES
Paris LB NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR in French 13-19 Feb 82 p 3‘
[Article by K. S. Karol: "Deng Xiaoping's Surprises"]

[Text] Bow Peking manages to ignore Warsaw without approving
Moscow and to worry the United States without reassuring the
USSR.

The PRC is the big absentee from the international debate on the military coup

d stat in Poland; this week the PRC however returns to the current affairs scene
through a somewhat unusual slant: Its spokesnan has just revealed that the re-
gime's strongnan--and the chief architect of rapprochement with the United States--
Deng Xiaoping, because of his age (77 years) will no longer be in the "front rank"
of battle and would be content with giving his advice on the major strategic issues;
on the other hand, the Chinese Columnist Party, after 20 years of bitter debate
with the French commists, has delegated its ambassador to Paris to attend the PCP
[French Communist Party] congress and has invited Georges Harchais to come to Pe-
king. Suddenly, people are wondering whether post-Mao China, disappointed by the
United States, might not be looking toward a rapprochement with the Soviet Union,
which would constitute a serious upset on the international scene.

Subject of Dispute

Theoretically, the problem has been on the agenda since the failure of the mission
to Peking by the United States Secretary of State Alexander Baig. in June. Ronald
Reagan, during his election campaign, had pledged to lift the embargo on offensive
weapons sales to Taiwan, but he hoped to persuade the Chinese to go along by pro-
mising then to reequip their own armed forces under very advantageous conditions.
Peking's response was negative and angry. Hence the assumption that this new dis-
pute with the United States would sooner or later cause China to turn toward the
USSR.

However, news reaching us from Peking at least is ambivalent and does not clearly
indicate a desire on the part of the Chinese to revise their attitude toward Soviet
hegemonism. Moreover, certain decisions by the leaders of the CCP [Chinese Conun-
ist Party] spring mostly from the great difficulties they are having in carrying

out their domestic projects, rather than from their diplomatic concerns. Here is
the most striking examplezpeu‘ns', relations with the Polish coup d'etat leaders.

2
FOR OFI'ICIZL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

China neither condemned or approved Jaruzelski's coup. It simply engages in "honest
information"-Chinese style-which consists in camouflaging troublesome facts so as
not to have to comment on them. In the latest issue of BEIJING INFORMATION, it was
explained therefore that "The additional burden of the Polish crisis turns out to
be so heavy for the Soviet hegemonists that their forces are no longer able to keep
up with their ambitions." It was then added that all of Eastern Europe would like
to liberate itself from the "Soviet yoke" but not a word was said about Solidarity
and about the very nature of the Polish crisis. The Chinese have perfected this
exercise in camouflage in their textbooks on the break between the CPSU and the
Italian Communist Party. They came out in favor of the Italians and against the
"impudent prosecutors in the Kremlin“butwithout aver mentioning Poland, which pre-
cisely is the subject of this dispute.

Having said this and realizing that China, according to its own statistics, is
suffering from an annual inflation rate of 8-10 percent, that it has 20 million
unemployed, and overblown and increasingly corrupt government machinery (according
to official statements), one can understand that it does not want to disseminate

too much news about independent and Polish-style self—managed labor unionism. Soli-
diarity's postulates might well produce an entirely too favorable echo among the
Chinese workers-at least among those who have not forgotten the egalitarian and
antibureaucratic slogans during the time of the Cultural Revolution.

What is even more surprising on the other hand is the fact that China, apparently,
is trying to lighten the Polish burden of the Soviets by stepping up its shipments
of meat and light industry products to Poland. Since 13 December, the Chinese re—
portedly sold Poland more meat than the Soviets and last week they signed a trade
agreement with Warsaw calling for an increase in trade by 30 percent as compared
to last year.

But here again, the key to Chinese action is not necessarily political: China this
year had one of the best harvests in its history and. contrary to the USSR, it has

a farm surplus. Moreover, not being sufficientl competitive on the Western
market, with the exchange of equipment for the o d industries imported from that

region.

Invitation to a Trip

From all of these facts one certainly cannot deduce that there is a possible eclipse
of Deng Xiaoping. For my part, I believe that Deng, having achieved a secure and
strong position at the top of the Chinese Communist Party, comparable to that of
Mao, is now withdrawing a little bit from current affairs-as his predecessor had
done at the time--in order to prepare a more long-range program capable of extri-
cating China from its serious political and economic crisis. The experience of
these past years shows that purely pragmatic visual navigation did not permit that
country to modernize rapidly and that it instead generates strong social tension.
Deng therefore will probably come back to the Maoist doctrine of the Sixties, be-
fore the Cultural Revolution, when the Communist Party itself was charged with im-
posing, from within. a modest and exemplary way of life upon its cadres. But this
will not be an easy operation.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhat does the Chinese invitation to Georges Harchais nean in this context? This

is not just another trip; it is, instead, quite in keeping with the style of the
current leadership team in Peking. Deng and his friends for a long tine have not
been establishing any prior anti-Soviet conditions regarding the resumption of the
dialogue with the Western communist parties. They invited Georges Harchais to
Peking several weeks before the PCP Congress at Saint-Ouen and their gesture has
already been reconpensed: "Honest infomtion"--in the style of the French con-
mists—as a matter of fact eliminated any allusion to the intercomnist wars of
recent years and therefore any condemnation of "Guinese aggression against Vietnam"
or against Chinese support for the Khmer Rouge.

And here is the second reason for the invitation extended to Harchais: It is be-
lieved in Peking that the PC? is now a party that is included in the government
and that it therefore constitutes s worthwhile conversation partner.

Here is the third reason: The trip to Peking by a tel-Innist leader who is very
close to the Soviet line seems to worry the Americans who are afraid of a Chinese-
Soviet rapprochement. For Peking, it is not a bad thing to show Reagan and Haig
that China, in case of a rupture, would have a ready-Iade spare policy.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

5058
cso: 3100/368

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL ITALY

COLOMBO URGES MORE CONTACTS AMONG NATO ALLIES

PMD71631 Milan CORRIBRE DELLA SBRA in Italian 3 Mar 82 pp 1-2

[Interview with Foreign Minister Emilio Colo-b0 by Dino Prescobaldi: "Sub-
marine's Intrusion Confirms Need To Improve Country's Security"]

[Text] Rome--[Question] The Italian Government has described as "irrespon-
sible" the violation by a nuclear submarine-still unidentified, but which

many consider to be Soviet-of our territorial waters near the Taranto Naval
Base. th was it decided to use such an adjective, which seems very serious
in diplomatic language?

[Answer] The violation of our territorial waters is all the more serious
inasmuch as it is to the detriment of a country that traditionally performs
a role--greatly appreciated on the international plane-of moderation and
alleviation of frictions, especially in the Mediterranean area.

[Question] Do you believ; that the submarine's ”irresponsible" operation
will have political and military repercussions in an area where Soviet aims
are already prompting so many anxieties? I am thinking, for instance, about

the kind of alarmed reactions that the incident will have caused in neighbor-
ing Yugoslavia, where the troubles of the post-Tito period are becosing
increasingly apparent. Such an unscrupulous tactic is bound to frighten
first and foremost the small countries unprotected by a system of alliances.

[Answer] Do not try to make me say more than we have already said: The
Foreign Ministry has already expressed its opinion in an official note. I
feel it is necessary to reconfirm the concern with which Italy has been
observing for some time the exacerbation of tensions in an area as vital for
us as the Mediterranean. As far as we are concerned, irresponsible initia-

tives such as the one undertaken by the submarine discovered in the Gulf of
Taranto can obviously only increase the diligent vigilance effort of the

Italian authorities responsible for defending the security and defense
requirements of our national territory. [answer ends]

Colombo recently visited the United States, where in a lecture at Georgetown
University he issued a proposal for improved cooperation between the United
States and its European allies, especially on matters of vital strategic
interest. THE BALL STREET JOURNAL wrote that "Italy, an undervalued U.S.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ally, is promting a policy of mutual understading between Europe and the

United States." It added: "The message launched by Colodo is that, before
another crisis like the Polish one exposes the West's divergences, the United
States and its European allies Inst consider the methods for containing such

divergences ir their respective strategic outlooks, instead of continuing
their effort to conceal them."

So the question of how to build "new understanding" is now doubly topical,
both in view of the increased Soviet military threats and in view of the
tensions—diplomatic, monetary, and so forth—apparent within the alliance.

I asked Cololbo to explain to me how his proposal originated: "The idea
launched at Georgetown University," he said, "stems from the need to remedy
the deterioration in the atmosphere between the allies on both sides of the
Atlantic, which has become exacerbated following the Polish crisis. In my
speech I outlined an analysis of the sectors in which European and U.S. view-
points do not converge and of the historical and political causes behind our
differing approaches.

"All this should cause no surprise. The Atlantic Alliance does not rest on
the principle of limited sovereignty; it is based on consensus. as well as on
the awareness that the United States has everything to gain if it can depend
on a responsible partner with whom to share its fundamental objectives."

[Question] And so?

[Answer] Hence it is desirable to create among the allies a permanent system
of contacts to couplete and integrate the present system of consultations
centered on NATO and the yearly sumit meetings of the seven top industrial
countries, thus permitting greater cooperation in broader geopolitical areas
and a scrupulous inleuntation of the summit meetings' directives. In con-

clusion. the linchpin of the consultations should be periodic meetings of
foreign ministers.

[Question] A few days ago a well-known U.S. columist annoanced that
Vashington, tired of having to negotiate with all the allies, was returning
to the old idea of the Western ”steering committee" composed of four coun-
triea: the United States, Britain, France and Genny. Subsequently this
report was categorically and authoritatively denied. What kind of reception

was given to your proposal of periodic meetings of European and U.S. foreign
ministers?

[Answer] Apart from favorable reactions in the U.S. press, there have also
been signs of interest in Europe, especially in Bonn and Brussels. (It seems
that German Foreign Minister Genscher intends to revive the proposal during
his iminent visit to Hashington and that Belgian Foreip Minister Tindemens
has said that Colosbo's suggestions are exactly in line with his government's
ideas-413113188! editor's note.) )breover, in the recent French-Germ
declaration an entire section is devoted to the need for broader U.S.-
European consultations.

[Question] In what specific form do you envisage the periodic meetings
taking place?

33 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Answer] what I have said indicates that we are moving in the right direction.
But we do not claim to have discovered the solution to the problem. We want
to discuss it. instead of passively watching the deterioration of funda-

mental relations. Of course procedure cannot resolve basic problem. But
the Europeans have already had some experience: In 1970, when a start was
made on altering the system of political cooperation among the sac countries,
there were msny skeptics. Now systematic consultation has created a prac-

tice, almost a conditioned reflex, of s "lo-way" discussion of foreign policy
matters to achieve joint stances in the vast majority of cases. '

[Question] But recently this has not always happened....

[Answer] It is true. 0n the subject of El Salvador the 10 have acted in
open order. This must prompt an honest self-criticism that will lay the
foundations for further improving our unity.

[Question] "by has Italy now made itself spokesman for the proposals for
better consultations among the Atlantic allies?

[Answer] Precisely because they come from Italy-that is, a country which,
despite difficult conditions, demonstrates secure democracy and consistency

in foreign policy and which knows how to shoulder its responsibilities-
these proposals should be examined without suspicions and understood in terms

of the goal that they intend to attain, namely to stimulate a debate without
claiming any ideological exclusiveness or monopoly.
COPYRIGHT: 1982 Bditoriale del "Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.

cso: 3104/136 END

3h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY