FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10601
21 JUNE 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 39/132)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

ml OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications cantain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT IAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
NEST EUROPE REPORT

(POUO 39/82)

Cou'rsurs

ECWOHIC
FEERAL REPIBLIC 0? (EM

lhions Accept necreae in Purchasing Power
(Herc hmy-Besulieu; VABUIS acmuss, 15-21 Mar 82)..... 1

ITALY

Interview Hith Pinmce Minister m’ Fiscal Reform
(Rina Fornica Interview; BMBO. 5 Apr 82)................ 3

POLITICAL
MG

(harsctcristics of PSP Activists Examined
(Roland Cayml, Colette Yet-31; PIDJB'I', my 82)............ 10

menu for (bmission on Planning Reform Examined
(FU'IURIBLBS, Mar 82).... 23

SPAI N

PSCB Acts To Improve Its Standing With Hilitsry
((10810 16, 10 May 82).. 35

(208's Salst lbresees Slow Economic Recovery
(Carlos Ferret Salat Interview; LATITUIE AUJOURD'HUI.

May 82) esoone...Ions-.0000.000oestoo-oeoooec0.00.0000... 38

- a - [III - HE - 150 FOUO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IMHICNWNCJAL.USE(N‘LY

EWMC mum. assume 0? GERMANY

UNIONS ACCEYT DECREASE IN PURCHASING POWER
Paris VALBURS ACTUELLES in French 15-21 Mar 82 p 3b

[Article by Marc Leroy-Beaulieu: "The Krefeld Consensus")

The other Saturday at Krefeld, in the Ruhr, the regional authorities of the IG-
Hetall metallurgy union and the Gesamtnetall employers' federation accepted the
proposal of an arbitration committee which suggested an average salary increase
of b.2 percent for employees in the metallurgical industry in Rhineland-Hest-

phalia. The agreement is valid for 12 months as of last 1 February. The most

optimistic forecasts predict a 5-percent rate of inflation for the current year.
The unions have therefore deliberately accepted a decrease in purchasing power.

Traditionally, the first regional agreement on salary increases in the metallur-
gical industry is used as a standard not just for all of this sector but also
for the rest of Heat German industry.

In fact, 2 days after it was signed, the Krefeld agreement was used by labor
and management in the metallurgical industry, notably in Berlin and Baden-Wurtem-
berg.

At the beginning of negotiations in January, industry owners had proposed a 3.5-
percent increase. IG-Metall loudly and strongly demanded 7.5 percent. Shortly
therefore, it became merely a question of "maintaining the employees' purchasing
power." And even after publication of the government's economic forecasts,
which anticipated a S-percent price increase in 1982, the metallurgical workers'
union was fighting only "for a 4 before the decimal point."

"He got all we were hoping for," said IG-Hetall's directors after concluding the
Krefeld agreement.

The purchasing power of German employees had already decreased in 1981. with an
inflation rate of 5.9 percent, the average salary increase was limited to 5.3
percent. (It is true that at the time of the negotiations, the increase in
prices was estimated at only 5 percent.)

So, despite government forecasts which predict an average increase of between 7

and 9 percent in firms' profits for the current year, the celebrated German
social consensus continues to hold sway.

FOR OITWCJAI.USB(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Two elements should be considered:

"At the beginning of February, the unions received a 12 billion on government
recovery plan designed primarily to subsidize private investments. 'l'his en-

deaVor, which could have a positive effect on the labor market, has undoubtedly
subdued the unions' ravenous appetite.

--‘l'he unions' conbativeness would have been stronger, were there not 2 million

unemployed workers. Although economic stagnation is continuing in the PRC as
elsewhere. the problem of maintaining employment has won out over that of the
purchasing power.

In addition, the Krefeld agreement can help the public employees' union refuse
the l-percent reduction in base salaries of civil servants and state officials
which the administration, as part of its budget reductions, wants to impose be—
fore beginning the annual negotiations on salary increases. Having thus saved
face, the union. through its salary base, could have a decrease in its purchas-

ing power which would benefit the national treasury. This is the "realpolitik"
of labor and management.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "Valeurs Acuuelles"

9720
cso: 3100/537

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

acommc I'M LY

1mm am FINANCE uuxsm on nscn. mm!
Milan EURO?!» in Italian 5 Apr 82 pp 12-116
[Interview with Italian Finance Minister Rim For-ice. by Salvatore Rea]

[mm If he succeeds (and he is deter-ined to succeed).
Rino Porsica. the socialist sinister of finance. will be
resenbered in Italian history as the politician who opened
the safes and files of the banks to the attentive eyes of

the agents of the Internal Revenue Service so that the latter
could audit the accounts of the suspect citizens. Tax
evaders and holders of large bank deposits derived tron
Mafia. Gaaorra or otherwise illicit sour-«s will no longer
enjoy a life of ease.

The sinister‘s initiative. however. is unpalatable to my
people other than those directly concerned, and in particu-
lar to the bankers. entrepreneurs and professionals of the
acre or less secret financial coumity. They see it as a
threat to their busineu operations and as a violation of
their civil and professional rights. 80 the fears (and
objections) are aounting. imaauoh as Earlier-in order to
carry out his purpose-mas chosen the quick expedient of
the decree law rather than that of the draft bill. Ihich
taloes luch longer to get through Penis-eat and (with the
aid of good friends) can be aaended to the point um it is
rendered innocuous.

[Question] Minister Formica, have you decided to press for your legislative
sesame?

[Answer-1 On this point you need have no doubt. Let as begin, however. by
saying that what we are talking about is not a decree law but a "delegated
decree." He intend to follow a course of utilising the power possessed by the
government to issue decrees based on the tax law.

[Questioﬂ The conunists. however. are specifically challenging the torn you
have chosen for your legislative sesame: maely, the decree. Vinicio

Bennrdini. POI representative on the parlisaentary Gossittee of the Thirty
that is considering the latter. was very clear on this point.

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer-1 No. that's not the case. To be sure. powerful interests are going to
be hurt: but Bernardini has explained to as that his objection was based on
principle--so to speakurather than on content. 0n the contrary. he has
assured as that the consunists will naks a significant contribution to the
process of attacking, and solving. the problss of bank semcy.

[Question] Are you convinced that it will really be solved?

[Answer] In short. in our country. whenever the phenossnon of tax evasion :-
encountsred no oneuam I mean no onenraisss his voice in its defeme. On the
contrary. everyone condsans it. There are accordingly two hypotheses: either
everyone is against tax evasion and is even against tax evadsrs (who in Italy
are so nuserous), or else our country is a country of extresely honest tax-
payers where everyone is angry with anyone who cheats the Revenue Service.

[Question] Aren't they all probably hypocrites?

[Answer] No, and I believe that the tax evsders (and there are a great nany of
then) are thsnselves calling for action against tax evasion. ﬂy is this so?
Well. because in Italy no one has ever opposed the principle that tax evasion
should be cosbated. The opposition surfaces the soasnt an attsspt is Id. to
out the principle into practice. At that point various 1'1qu are cited and
protection for those riyzts (often vested rigxts) is invoked. This is a way

of defending one's assets and is the most conservative forsula. Naturally. a
whole series of theories and legal principles are also unshsathed--not. however.
in order to devise ways to catch the evadsrs but rather to erect ispaseablc
road blocks.

[QuestionI Inpassabls for whoa?

[Answer For anyone who intends to conbat tax evasion. Do you know, soreover.
which of the road blocks they are trying to erect is the scat iaportant? It is
the one that would inpsds identification of these sovessnts of fimncial re-
sources. Granted, if we were to say that the bank accounts of our citizens
should be posted on conuunity bulletin boards we would be talking nonsense; but
between that kind of nonsense and the assertion that all transactions passing
through the banking systes enjoy ”mtection" there are Iany internediate
stages.

['Question'l Protection has what?

I'AnswerT The truth is that no one really knows, because there isn’t any law to
protect banking secrecy. It's Just the custom it's Just the practice. nothing
wore.

[Questioﬂ The bankers are the lost relentless protesters these days against
the vistation of banking secrecy. They begin by saying that there is no con-
nection between the institutional activity of the banks and the unlawful prac-
tice of tax evasion.

[Answer] I indeed hope so. for otherwise they would all be sub3sct to criainal
msecution.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] But don't you believe--as has been said-~that there are banks whose
specific function is to launder aoney froa illegal some?

[Answer] If that is the case. then what we are dealing with is criainal be-
havior. If such things are taking place. I would hope it is not being done on
an institutional basis and not with the knowledge of the organs of any bank.
Ihat would be a suicidal way to operate.

[Question] Isn't it possible that eons banks have actmlly been foutlded with
Mafia and Guam loner-that is to say. with the proceeds froa drugs and
kidnapinga?

[Answer] we say this: the Bank of Italy is in a better position than we at
the Ministry of Finance are to have knowledge of an operation of this sort, for
it has an inspection service and is therefore quits well aware of the sou-cs
of these large suns of noney. If it has suspicions, soreover. it should so
infer! the Micial authorities.

[Question] What suspicions do you have?

[Answer] In the fight against organised criae which we are attempting to carry
out. we have identified--in the areas where criae is lost prevalent--a number
of individuals who should be subjected to inves‘igation not only with respect
to their total assets but also with respect to their relations with the banking

systes.
[Question] which are these areas?
[Answer] The well-known areas of the Mafia and the ouom.

[Question] In other words: Sicily, Galabria and Oaspania. Ihe underworld has
also esigrated to the North. however.

[Answer] Naturally, it is able to branch out to other territorial subdivi-
sions. No one is saying that the financial operations of the Mafia are liaited
to certain areas. They are now international in scope.

[Question] The bankers are asking that the new legislative measures contain
precise rules governing audits of bank accounts by the Internal Revenue Service.
will you coaply with this request?

[Amer] In the proposal now under study by the Goa-ittee of the Thirty we
have already established certain principles that are quite strict. In order to
request a bank audit. the Revenue Service should be certain that the taxpayer
in question has failed to declare his incoae or has filed a declaration that
contrasts sharply either with his total assets or with any substantial finan-
cial love-ents of funds totaling sore than 50 aillion lire. Moreover, under
the provisions of Law 159 regarding the export of capital and irregular trans-
actions in foreign exchange. the foreign exchange police group of the Revenue
Service already has access to the banks. This law has been in effect for 5
years and (according to the Bank of Italy) has not occasioned any waste, abuse
of process. or abuse of power. There has been no excessive use of power.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Ihe fears may be of a sosewhat different nature. maely that too
such discretion will be exercised in the process of intervening in the banking
systes and auditing the accounts of individual citizens.

[Answer] No. that is not possible. because a court order is necessary to carry
out the intervention. The aaount of discretion employed is therefore the ease
regardless of whether the order is issued by the judge or whether-at the
request of the Revenue Serviceuit is issued by the chairsan of the tax consis-
sion of primry Jurisdiction. who is always a lsgistrate.

[Question] Couldn't you. the sinister of fimnce, also issue such an order?
At your discretion?

[Answer] No. the sinister oarmot. we don't want to arrogate police powers to
ourselves.

[Question] You say that the sinister cannot order an audit in a bank?

[Answer] The governunt can order an audit. and therefore the order can also
be issued by the appropriate govern-tents]. entity.

[' Question] And therefore also by the sinister?

[Answer] According to our draft legislation. however. authorization to do so
should be given by the chair-an of the tax eouission of primary Jurisdiction.

[Question] You have not answered my question. Can the sinister intervene, or
not?

[Answer] Re can always do so in those cases authorised by law. It's not that
I can call the Revenue Service and order it to audit anyone's bank account. An
individual must be in one of those situations of noncospliance specified in the
decree. If soseons has no declared income but has pm'chased a house for 200
million lire, he must explain where he has obtained the soney. In this case.
access to the bank my be requested for the Revenue Service.

[Question] Does this procedure apply in all cases? If a high official of a
governsent agency or public enterprise purchases a house for 1 billion lire.
what happens? Rhat action do you take?

[Answer] If the official in question has filed a declaration that is congruous
with the purchase. no audit will be necessary. If. however. the declaration is
not congruous with the pun-chase. he should undergo the necessary audits.
[Question] Do you know what the bankers are saying? 'nzey are saying that your
decree against banking secrecy will inpel people to withdraw their soney from
the banks and send it abroad.

[Answer] I think that would be difficult.

[Question] I believe you are rather optisistic.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] looks the existence of banking secrecy has not prevented the export
of tens of trillions of lire. The export of capital is linked to other phenom-
ena: to a lack of confidence in one's own currency. to domestic political
conditions. to the desire to obtain profits in places where they are higher.
and to more lucrative opportunities for speculation. In short. the export of
capital is here a function of the evaluation lads of the general econoaic
situation. Otherwise, no one in the United States-which has an internal
revenue audit system that aaounts to downright persecution--would any longer
have so nuch as a dollar on deposit in a bank, but such is not the case. I an
convinced, however, that in this area it is definitely necessary to proceed by
stages. If we were to decide at this tine to carry out the total abolition of
banking secrecy. it would be a nistake. It is accordingly necessary to begin
by penetrating this secrecy in those situations which are the lost odious to
the civic conscience of our country. I do not believe it is acceptable for the
underworld in Italy to have gross annual receipts of between 15 trillion and
20 trillion lire. The instrumentalities for intervention and auditing should
therefore be increased. The taxpaying conscience of the nation does not
increase in proportion with preachnents.

[Question] .Does the ”penetration" specified in your "delegated decree“ relate
solely to banking secrecy?

[Answer] No; we are also looking at the professional offices. We do not want
do abolish professional confidentiality. but such doculentation of a fiscal
nature is contained in professional offices.

[Question] In other words, the offices of lawyers and notaries?

[Answer] lawyers, notaries. brokers, accountants. 'lhe Revenue Service should
have access to their offices.

[Question] Are you thinking of intervening in the finance companies and the
so-called trust coapanies?

Answer] As minister of finance I have expressed myself in favor of approval--
y the Finance and Treasury Oomittee of the masher of Deputies-~of the bill
by Deputies Ninervini and Spaventa which will authorize the Revenue Service to

penetrate the inner sanctuss of the trust coapanies. This proposal was not
included in the delegated decree concerning banking secrecy. because in the
view of the lawyers it was not included in the powers delegated to the govern-
nent.

[Question] Do you think that Minister of the Treasury Nino Andreatta will go
along with approval of your decree concerning banking secrecy?

[Answer] Andreatta has issued an excellent statenent concerning this problea.
He said that he is not opposed to the decree; that the latter is not absurd:
and that it is proper to deal with the problea while of come establishing
adequate safegmrds. But then I don't believe I an an "adventuist."

[Question] won't your decree provoke a flight of savings froa the banks?

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I don't see any reason for it. On the contrary: we shall soon wit-
ness a strong trend toward settling accounts with the Revenue Service. The
problea itself has arisen because of the failure of the pro-Judicial tax pro-
cedures. What is this "yrs-Judicial" process? Italian law establishes the
criminal norms governing infractions of the tax laws, but the criainal process
cannot be used until all adninistrative procedures before the appropriate tax
conissions have been exhausted. The fact is that in our country the tile
required to reach a decision in a tax case is measured not in years but in
lustruas. and the lore iaportant the case the sore lustruls are required. This
means that the criainal penalties are. in motice. eluded by Virtue of the
yrs-Judicial tax procedures. This question is currently before the Constitu-
tional Court. Imsauch as the pro-judicial process is sanifestly unconstitu-
tional, the Constitutional court will be unable to declare it legitisate. even
regardless of any restrictions placed on its use. At the seas tine. hrlianent
has before it a governaent-sponsored bill that would eliainate this pre-Judicial
process, thereby enabling the crilinal horse to be applied independently of
administrative procedures.

[Question] And the handcuffs will be placed on the m evaders?

[Answefl Yes, indeed. Even in these cases. however. I believe we will see--as
in the case of the decree on banking secrecy--a trend toward settlirg up with
the Revenue Service. In my opinion the effect of these aeasures will be that
we shall have an increase of several trillion lire in tax revenue. There's
only one way to fight tax evasion, and that is to increase the governaent's
power to conduct audits and investigations. Otherwise. the effort will lapse
into hypocritical policies, and the fight against tax evasion will be waged
with words.

[Question] Meaning that the only action will take the fora of verbal "soral-
isn'?

[Answer] Precisely. let us take the daily LA mama. for exalple. It is
always preaching morality. but when word leaked out of our initiative concern-
ing banking secrecy it wrote that an avalanche of criticisa was rushing down
from all sides. Hell. then I say: How is it possible to change anything in
this country if no effort is ads to increase the power to investigate and to
intervene in those sectors that are the natrix of evildoing? I challenge LA
REPUBSLICA to wage a splendid campaign in support of my decree- To judge from
what I have seen. however. it is doing nothing sore than conduct a canpaign to
liquidate Iy initiative.

[Question] Professor Franco Reviglio. your fellow party Ieaber and predecessor
at the Ministry of Finance. had prepared a draft bill which provided for the
introduction of cash registers into consercial enterprises. what becase of
that bill? Is it locked up in a drawer of his desk?

I'Answeﬂ No indeed. We have offered some anendnents to this proposal. in
order to soften the impact of the new regulations on sun businesses. This
measure is now under study by the Finance and Treasury Couittee of the Che-bea-
of Deputies. We have requested that it take precedence over all other legis-
lative mun-u. as soon as the noras for business taxes are approved.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Iniependently of any consideration of a partisan political nature?

[Answer'I Yes. for we have no problels of a partisan political nature. It's a
Iistake to mains that when sonething beneficial to the country as s whole is
being considered, consideration is silultaneously accorded to personal or
partisan interests. Deferﬁing special interests never pays off.

['QuestionT ‘ihat’s the way it should be in a country that is really functioning.

[Answer-1 Quite so. his is. Donover, what separates the retornists fro- the
corporatists. I have never has a proposal of a corporative nature. It is
possible that in certain instances referential tnatlent is granted to a
particular develop-eat policy (or particular sector) instead of another: but
any intent to reward or protect special intmsts to the detriaent of the

collectivity is a suicidal policy.
comm. 1982 3122011 mitore

10992
60. 310M191

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJALIENEONLY

POLITICAL FRANCE

CHARACTERISTICS 0? PS? ACTIVISTS BXAHINED
Paris PROJET in French May 82 pp 572-639

[Article by Roland Cayrol and Colette Yamal: "Members of the PS: Originality
and Diversities"]

[Text] Political party congresses constitute a particularly significant event
for anyone interested in the sociology of militancy. In fact, at a time chosen
by the political culture of the organization. they bring together all leaders
of the party at its different levels of activity: national and local, inter-
mediate cadres and active representatives of the rank and file anxious to
participate in this high point in the life of their political group. a time
when the party line for the months and years ahead is defined, when the new
leadership is chosen, when the image the party wants to project to the outside
and for the media is shaped. The phenomenon is further strengthened in parties
in which the delegates are, on the one hand, "rightful members" (members of

the party's leadership organs, members of Parliament and future members of the
government) and. on the other hand -- and this is an essential-fraction numeri-
cally speaking - representatives elected by the rank-and-file sections. At

a congress, one is thus in contact with the very flesh and blood of the organ-
ization, with those who bring it to life and who act at all levels. That is
the case of the Socialist Party.

A few years ago, we began right here our sociological research into the dele-
gates of the socialist congresses. making it possible to draw an outline of
the PS.1 Since t t time. further investigation has delved more dseply into
the same subject. Within the framework of a European comparison, we have
been able to conduct a new investigation by means of questionaires submitted
to delegates to the last congress of the Socialist Party, which met in Valence
on 23-25 October 1981.4

Slow Progress of Women

The PS remains a predominantly male party, but the percentage of women is
steadily growing. They made up 12 percent of congress delegates in 1973..

15 percent in 1977. 16 percent in 1979 and 20 percent in Valence in 1981.

This presence is visibly linked to the deliberate policy of quotas followed

by the party. Hhile in 1973, only 67 percent of the women held responsibili-
ties (local, federal or national) within the PS -- compared with 81 percent of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rota \Irru Ina. use. UNLI

all men -- the situation is profoundly different tbday: A total of 86 percent
of the women delegates hold such responsibilities, compared with 91 percent of
the men.

The women therefore have a definitely minority position among party members,
but the determination to ensure their advancement guarantees them proportion-

ally easier access to posts of responsibilities at the level of the offices
of local sections and departmental federations.

The growing number of women in militant strata of the PS can be verified in
their more recent-membership. An absolute majority of socialist women attend-
ing the Valence congress joined the PS after 1974. That is the case of 55
percent of them (of which 10 percent joined after 1978), while 39 percent of
the men became members of the PS during that 7-year period (5 percent since
1978). Much more often than in the case of men, these are women who had no

other political experience before joining the PS: 65 percent, compared with
57 percent for the men.

As a result. they have not succeeded in reducing a traditional male/female
disproportion in the political parties. Because they are active women.
because the problem of the women's "double work day" still exists and perhaps
also because they are less willing to attend little meetings or to yield to
militant pressure,_they do not devote as much tune as men do, on the average,
to party activities. Only 15 percent devote over 50 hours a month -- compared
with 31 percent of the men -- and 33 percent devote less than 20 hours, com-
pared with 27 percent of the men.5

Regarding factions,6 the Hitterrand faction turns out. as in 1973, to t: the
one with the most female backing (21 percent), closely followed by the
Rocardian trend (19 percent) and CERES [Center for (Socialist) Studies. Re-
search and Education] (18 percent). The Mauroy faction has only 13 percent
of the socialist women.

0n the whole, while the PS-remains, in terms of members and even militants.

a party of men and while the place of women remains weak with respect to candi-
dacies in legislative elections, especially in the "good" districts,7 the fact
remains that the efforts made by the party in recent years, especially by the
majority group, have begun to bear fruit and the female presence is steadily
developing in militant organs..

Party of Those Between 30 and 50

The evolution in the distribution by age of socialist delegates to the con-
gresses during this decade shows a certain trend:

age (in Z) 1973 1 77 1979 1981
Under 30 31 16 16 8
30 to 39 27 no 62 45
40 to 49 23 26 24 29
50 to 59 12 12 13 11
60 and over ' 7 6 5 7
Total 100 100 100 100
11

FOR(HHHIJAL.USE(MVLY
INJR 0F1WCIAL USEZCNﬁlY

There is definitely no upheaval. The socialist congresses always underrepre-
sent those over 50 and overrepresent the young and the middle-aged. But ther
has been a gradual shift from the category of those under 30 to that of those
between 30-40.which now includes nearly.half of all delegates.

There are several possible explanations for this trend and each'one is probably
partially true. One can see the difficulty of recruiting members among the
very young. but also, while the party is experiencing sensational progress in
elections, the congresses tend to be less open to young representatives of

the rank and file and to appeal rather to more “responsible" militants. Fin-
ally, over the years -- since the "Epinay renewal" in 1971 -- there has

emerged a group of active party members that tends to form the militant central

core of the PS. This core goes from congress to congress and naturally tends
to be a year older each time.

This weight of the generation between the ages of 30 and 60 can be seen in all
factions. which do present some differences. however, although less accentuated
than in 1973. when a young CERES could be pitted against an "old" Hollet fac-

tion and a Mitterrand faction in a central position. Nevertheless. the differ-
ences should be noted.

Distribution of Members by Age (from left to right: under 30; 30 to 39; 40 to
69; SO and over)

Mitterrand Hauroy Rocard CERES
Faction Faction Faction

The above age pyramids showing internal tendencies of the PS show that the
weight of the young remains proportionally greater in the CERES (13 percent

under 30) and that on the other hand, those over 50 are more important in the
Hitterrand (20 percent) and especially Mauroy (22 percent) factions.

12

INDR‘OFIWCJAI.lﬂ5EZ(HULY
tlultﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.USEINVLY

These are the nuances from one faction to another and they are definitely
important. However. one can no longer. when speaking about the PS. point

out a "young" faction and an "old" faction. Hhile the CERES, followed by

the Rocard group. can claim a proportionately higher number of young people.
we are seeing a party in which the age aspect introduces a certain coloration

in the different factions. rather than structural oppositions truly due to
any generation split.

Class Front, Advanced Bourgeoisie and Social Compromise
Continuity rather than change dominates the social recruitment of socialist

members. while minimum variations appear here and there over the years. one
finds a basic structure always founded on the higher wage-earning groups.

 

Professions 1973 1977 ' 1979* 1981
Farmers 1 2 l 2
Industry, commerce employers 3.5 2 2 1.5
Liberal professions _ 9 4 6 5
Engineers and management . .

personnel 19 19 9 17
Professors 19 25 19 25
Teachers 6 12 11 5.5
Intermediate-level personnel 20 _ 16 ‘(32 26
White-collar workers 8 9 5
Blue-collar workers - 3 S 5 5
Students 8 <6 2 l
Inactive 3.5 2 6
Other

(or unspecified) - 1 11 1
Total 100 100 100 100

* The 1979 figures must be considered with caution because the delegates were
not. as in other studies. to clearly indicate their profession - which was
then classified according to INSEB [National Institute of Statistics and
Economic Studies] codes -- but rather. thuy were to classify themselves on

a preceded scale of categories. which perhaps explains the smaller number

of persons in the "management personnel" group.

The three outstanding factors for 1973 are still observable. The lower-income
groups: blue- and white-collar workers, are still as weakly represented.
making up 10 percent of the delegates (11 percent in 1973). Half of those
attending the congress still come from the.more "bourgeois" strata of society:
industry and commerce employers. liberal professions, management personnel.
engineers. teachers in high schools and higher education. Finally. the weight
of the university milieu: professors. teachers and students. continues to
comprise an imposing mass (nearly one-third of the members: 31.5 percent.
with a noteworthy drop in students).

The "proletarianization" of the congresses, which ﬁaul Bacot thonght he dis-
cerned in 1979, putting on his glasses highly tinted with ideology. therefore

13
FOR OFFICIAI.USE1MNLY
FOI'OFIICIAI.lEIE(H‘LY

remains a lure. Moreover, it is most likely outside the scope of the PS, given
the absence of an intense political determination for organization, comparable.
for example, to that relating to the presence of women and which would undoubt-
edly imply, as in Communist parties or other European socialist parties, the
privileged recruitment of party workers among the workers making it possible

for workers in industry to have access to party responsibilities difficult to
reconcile with their way of life.

Hhile they tend to perpetuate themselves, our data on the social rank and file
of socialist members confirm the diagnosis of the'nature of the organization.
The party recruits its leaders and most active members more easily in.the-dif—
ferent strata of the bourgeoisie and middle.classes than among city or rural
workers. As a partisan structure. the P8 is definitely the party of the hour—
geoisie and advanced middle classes politically speaking. Or, if one prefers.
given the profoundly interclass nature of its voters - and therefore, of its
base among the people in the country -- it is the party that achieves an ori-
ginal social compromise between the lower-income categories of French society
and its advanced bourgeoisie, with the latter continuing to hold the reins of
party action. while, on the election level. the PS has managed to achieve its
objective of establishing the party of the "class front" of wage earners. on
the party level, on the other hand, this class front underrepresents white-
and blue-collar workers to the benefit of teachers and upper-level personnel,
who definitely intend-to act "on behalf of the workers," but who have not yet

succeeded in fully integrating them into the militant apparatus of the social-
ist organization. '

Regarding tendencies within the party, according to the following table, the

resemblances are also more important here than the differences. Based on
these figures, one cannot say that internal political splits refer to marked
social distinctions.

 

Profession Factions
Hitterrand Hauroy Rocard CERES
Farmers l l l 3
Industry and commerce employers 2 3 - -
Liberal professions 5 7 5 8
Engineers, management personnel 15 16 22 19
Professors ' 29 21 23 18
Teachers 6 7 6 4
Intermediate-level personnel 23 32 27 28
"bite-collar workers 5 l 5 6
Blue-collar workers 4 S 3 9
Students 1 - 3 -
Inactive 8 7 2 3
Other (or unspecified) 1 - 3 2
100 100 100 100

lb

INJI‘OFIICIAI.IISIIIIULN
FIIICIWWKJAL.USE(MNLY

One can nevertheless pick out a number of significant differences. Hhile no
faction is composed on the basis of recruitment among the truly low-income
groups. it is within CERES that white- and blue-collar workers are the most
numerous (15 percent). And it is in the Hauroy group that, proportionately
speaking, the intermediate-level personnel are the most numerous (32 percent).

Hithin the higher-income groups, an opposition is tending to develop between

the Mitterrand faction, in which recruiting among educators - especially among
professors -- is particularly dominant, and the Rocard faction, in which en-

gineers and upper-level personnel carry more weight than in all other factions.

while on the whole, the roots of members of the P8 are not among the lower-
income groups. on the other hand. the social origin of members is quite often
humble. The following table shows the professions followed by the fathers of
delegates to the Valence congress. Workers make up nearly one-fourth of the
background of congressional delegates and the white-Iblue-collar worker com-
bination makes up 36 percent.

Profession of Fathers Factions
Total Hitterrand Hauroy Rocard CERES

 

 

Farmers 10 10 8 a 12
Industry, commerce employers 12 13 16 ' 8 9
Liberal professions _ 4 6 6 6 3
Engineers, management personnel 1o 10 9 l7 8
Professors 4 h 4 7 5
Teachers 6 5 7 l 9
Intermediate-level personnel 10 ' 12 12 7 7
“hire—collar workers ' 12 12 10 13 11
Blue-collar workers ‘ 24 23 21 31 27
Other (or unspecified) 8 7 9 8 9

100 100 100 100 100

The bourgeois origin (fathers in industry or commerce, among management per-
sonnel or professors) makes up only 26 percent of the background of members.
The Socialist Party therefore appears to be a party. if not of the "sons of the
people," then at least of the sons and daughters of the lower-income groups

and middle classes.

In this connection, new nuances -- but here again, not deep splits -- enable
one to make a distinction between factions of the party. The Mitterrand and
Hauroy factions appear to be central, remaining close to the PS on the whole.
The Rocard group stands out as stemming from a rather curious double pole:
more "worker," on the one hand (eight points more than the Hitterrand group;
ten more than the Mauroy group), more "management personnel." on the other
hand (eight points more than the Hitterrand Hauroy factions). There are defin-
itely fewer “Rncardians" from families in which the father is self-employed:
as a farmer, employer or member of a liberal profession. than is the case with
all other party groups. From the standpoint of social background, this would
appear to be the characteristic of "Rocardism": a milieu deriving from the
wage-earning background. both lower- and higher-income groups.

FOI'OFFKJAI.USE(HVLV
FIIICIWNCJAI.IEHE(HVLY

0n the other hand, CERES appears to be halfway between the members of the
Rocard group and members of the other groups. with this original trait: It
has, proportionately speaking, more sons of teachers and farmers than all
other groups.

On the whole, it is definitely a rising social mobility that constitutes the
mark of socialist militants. If one draws a mobility table from the generation
of fathers of the militants themseLves. one notes that 64 percent of the social-
ist professors, 52'percent of the teachers. 45 percent of the management per-
sonnel. 68 percent of the intermediate-level cadres and even 45 percent of the
white-collar workers come from fathers whose profession was less "privileged“
than theirs. This fact, which has already been typical of socialist deputies8
for over 10 years is undoubtedly one of the characteristics of socialist re-
cruitment: The PS appears first of all as the party of individuals whose pro-
fessional activity translates a progression in terms of intergenerational
social mobility.

That is perhaps what explains the party's ability to play the role cf organizer
of a social compromise between the working class and the advanced wage-earning
bourgeoisie on the social and political leVel. Evolving in a wealthier profes-
sional framework, professing leftist ideas and often coming from modest cir-
cumstances, PS members are well placed to constitute this meeting place. this
place for drafting a political program bringing modernization and structural
reforms, thereby resulting in the alliances of strata around them.

Literary, Legal Background

Considering what has just been said about social background. one will scarcely
be surprised at the levels and training of PS members. A clsar majority of
them: 60 percent. attended institutions of higher learning.

In other words, they are well-educated members. Let us add that their culture
has two poles: literary, on the one hand, and legal-economic. on the other.
Out of 100 members with a higher education. 31 majored in liberal arts and

30 completed their studies in law or political science. Only 12 had scientific
disciplines (including six doctors and five engineers).

The socialists therefore prefer letters to figures; they are persons more
versed in the use of the word than the slide rule. When they are professors,
which is not rare, as we have seen, they either teach French or history rather
than physical sciences or mathematics. Perhaps this is not unrelated to some
of the minor sins of the socialists. to their taste for debate over doctrine
rather than the rigors of financial management, to their ability to express
themselves orally and to somewhat of a gap between the word and action.

In terms of factions, an absolute majority in all groups has completed higher
studies: 58 percent in the Mitterrand group, 61 percent of those who support
Hauroy. 66 percent for the Rocard faction and 66 percent of those in CERES.
The most literary are the Hitterrandists (34 percent. compared with only 22

percent of CERES. which are the least literary). The legally-inclined are
more numerous among the Rocardians (40 percent) and the Mauroy supporters (36

percent). while the latter are also the most scientific (14 percent).

I‘lltlﬂﬂCIAl.lEI!(ﬂdlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is in CERES that one finds the most graduates of schools of engineering
(9 percent). And while political science and the RNA [National School of Ad-
ministration] are the doorway to everything, in the PS, at any rate, these

channels lead rather to the Rocard faction (10 percent, compared with 3 percent
in each of the other groups).

More Christians Among the Rocardians

We know that a certain penetration of Christian circles has since 1971 consti-
tuted one of the traits of the Socialist Party, whose recruiting tended toward
innovation compared with the cultural traditions of the French left. Thus, as
early as the Grenoble congress in 1973, sane 12.5 percent of the delegates

said they were practicing Catholics, CERES having the most practicing Catholics
(17 percent). The situation has little changed, on the whole. 0n the contrary,
the socialist congress tends rather to become less marked by recruiting among
Catholics, but it does express a reclassification with respect to political
trends.

Actually, the Rocard faction has become the group most marked by the Catholic
origins of its nembers.11

 

 

Religion Factions
PS Overall Hitterrand Mauro! Rocard CERES
Practicing Catholics 10 9 9 16 S
Nonpracticing Catholics 25 25 . 22 26 25
Other religions a 4 4 3 3
No religion 59 60 . 65 51 61
No answer 2 2 - A 3
100 100 100 100 100

On the other hand, CERES has lost this originality. Some Catholic members

have gone from this group to the Rocardians (following the route of Gilles
Martinet) and others have reclassified the-selves and no longer participate in

CERES delegations, while some may have left the Socialist Party.

while the Rocard group appears to be the most Christian (besides the 42 percent
Catholics, there are 3 percent Protestants, compared with 2 percent for the
Hitterrand faction, 2 percent in CERES and 3 percent in the Hauroy group also),
the group led by Pierre Mauroy claims to be the most atheist (not by far),
inasmuch as two-thirds of its delegates say they have no religion. However,

while the Rocard faction is, internally speaking, the most practicing Catholic,
the weight of that faction in the party does not authorize one to say that the
practicing Catholics in the PS will necessarily be in that group: On the
contrary, while 22 percent of the practicing Catholic members are Rocardians,
45 percent are Hitterrandists.

Like Father. Like Son?

Another distinction having to do with the socialization of members is that of
the family political environment. We know that the fact of being raised in a

17
INDI10IFICIAI.UEI2(ﬂVLY'
FOIIOFFICIAI.lEﬂE(ﬂNLY

political family increases the statistical chances of children belonging to
a political party in their turn. The Socialist Party illustrates this tradi-
tional fact of political science. Hhile only 2 to 5 percent of the active

French population belongs to a political party, 28 percent of the delegates to
socialist congresses are the sons of political party members. The members

of the Hauroy and Hitterrand groups are the most often political "heirs"

(32 and 31 percent respectively). This is less often the case with CERES
delegates (20 percent) or Rocardians (19 percent). ' '

Even more interesting is the political coloring of the family milieu, which,
for lack of space, we shall illustrate only through the political orientation
of the father.12

Political Orientation of Father Factions
' Overall Hitterrand Hauroz Rocard CERES

 

 

PC 12 13 8 13 10
SFIO [French Section of Workers
International] or PS 33 3 40 21 28
Other leftist group (or un- 48 S3 51 39 41
specified left) 3 6 3 5 3
Radicalism* 6 6 7 8 3
Right 23 17 24 35 29
Unspecified 23 24 -18 18 27
100 100 100 100 100

* We have left radicalism separate because, based on the age of the members,
the radical orientation of their fathers could have a varying political meaning.

In examining the table, one can see that one out of two of our nembers have or
had a father who already tended to the left. while only a fourth were inclined

to the right. This process of political reproduction is particularly clear for
delegates in the Hitterrand and Hauroy groups, with the latter being. more than

any others, deriving from socialist families (60 percent, a particularly high
figure).

0n the other hand. membership in the Rocard and CERES groups generally expresses
the individual itinerary of members from milieu: outside the left. Proportion-
ally speaking. the gains of the P8 in membership over rightist family background
grounds therefore usually come through CERES and even moreso, through the

Rocard group (35 percent of whose members, more than one out of three, have a
rightist father).

Contrasting Political Itineraries

Coming from different social. religious and political milieus, socialists have
themselves followed different political itineraries. With the PS. most of
them experience their first party affiliation. but many have already belonged

to another party, as the following figures show. and the situation is quite
distinct from one group to another.

18
FOIIHNNCIALIENEONLY
ma ommt ustouu

 

Party Affiliation . Factions
Before the PS . PS Overall Hitterrand Haurgz .Rocard CERES
No previous membership 58 60 A7 49 68
PC 2 2 2 - 3
PSU [Unified Socialist Party] 11 . 6 2 39 11
Extreme left 1 1 l 2 3
SPIO 14 13 36 6 9
Convention of Republican

Institutions (CIR) 9 13 8 A 4
Other 1 l 1 - -
Unspecified 4 b 3 - 2

100 100 100 100 100'

Those whom Francois Hitterrand once labeled as "sabras" -- that is, those born
into party life with membership in the PS. have turned out to be particularly
numerous in the Hitterrand group, but even more numerous -- and this may be
surprising - within CERES (where over two-thirds are in this case).

The groups remain rather strongly marked by militant solidarities formed in
the past. The former SPIO members clearly color the Hauroy following, just
as there are many former PSU members in the Rocard group. These two factions

seem to be the most linked to a political experience previous to the affilia-
tion with the current Socialist Party.

Over 7 out of 10 former "Conventioneers" (members of the Convention of Repub-
lican Institutions) are now among those headed by the leader they had already
followed during the time of the CIR, Hitterrand, and this is logical. However,
considering the imposing number of members of the party's majority faction,
they now represent only 13 percent of the Hitterrand group in Valence, no more
than former members of the SPIO who turned to that group.

The length of membership in the PS also reflects the same phenomenon in a way:
While the absolute majority (53 percent) of the members of the Hauroy faction
joined the party in 1971 (or previous to that time), 39 percent of the Hitter-
randists are in that case and only 28 percent of the CERES followers and 21 per-
cent of the Rocardians. It should also be noted that the years of the "great
vintages," as far as recruitment of-the current congress delegates is concerned.
were 1973 (11 percent of the delegates joined that yenr) and 1576 (16 percent,

for a year that was both the year of the presidential election and the meeting
of socialists).

Two Trade Union Poles: the CPDT and the PEN

Socialist militants are now often trade unionists. Cnly 15 percent claim not
to be unionized (one should perhaps add the 5 percent of the delegates who do
not answer the question).13 Practically on an equal footing, the trade unions

best represented are the cm [French Democratic Confederation of Labor] and
the PEN [National Education Federation]. But the figures show a rather wide
diversity of union commitments and here again. significant differences from
one group of the party to another.

19

FOIIOF1ICUULlﬂlltﬂULN
INJI¢OIIICJAI.IISIICH'LV

 

Union Affiliation Factions-
__ PS Overall Hitterrand Mauro! Retard CERES

Not unionized ' 15 15 19 12 7
COT 10 11 a 8 lb
CPDT 28 19 19 66 67
P0 [Workers Force] 6 8 12 2 1
FER 26 33 25 16 15
Other organizations ’ 10 9 13 12 15
Unspecified 5 5 8 6 l

100 100 100 100 100

One will note, in fact. to what extent membership in the PEN is dominant within
the Hitterrand faction (one out of three Hitterrandists belongs to-an PEN trade
union). The CST is mainly influential within the Hitterrand group and even
more, in CERES, and for its part, the CPDT is the dominant trade union in two
factions. CERES and among the Rocardiansg in which it involves one out of two
members. Only one out of five is a member of the CFDT in the other groups.
Inclination toward or reticence regarding the CFDT are not only ideological

within the factions of the PS. They are embodied in specific. contrasting
trade union practices. ‘ '

The P0, which seems to be less and less popular (10 percent of the delegates
at the 1973 congress, 11 percent in 1977, 8 percent in 1979 and 6 percent in
1981). is particularly out of favor with the Rocard and CERES groups and is
mainly influential only within the Hauroy faction because it is less unionized
and it has scarce membership in the COT.

Originality and Diversities

In this investigation. socialist membership turns out to be original in French
society. It is both quite type-cast sociologically speaking: The typical
portrait of the PS member is that of a man in his prime. with a very high level
of education. on the average, a profession in management or education, raised
in a leftist family. not a churchgoer and belonging to a trade union organiza-
tion; but also plays a role as a hinge. a link between various social. philo-
sophical, political and trade union activities. This relatively privileged
individual is often from a humble background. Be is increasingly from a

family background outside the socialist tradition. He frequents Christian

members more than the socialist of days gone by and in his section or his fac-
tion. he finds members from unions other than his own.

This originality and, at the same time. this relative diversity of PS members
is reflected in the existence or diverse "sensitivities" or factions within the

party. Compared with.l973. the sociology and personal experience result in
less opposition between the internal factions. With the aid of party recruit-

ing and a shared political life. the.factions look less different from one
another than they did a few years ago.

20

FilltlﬂﬂCIAl.USEllﬁlY
FOI'OFFHJAI.USE(M§LY

It is certainly not an accident, however. if the Hauroy faction is closer to

a tradition inherited from the SF10, with members on the average a little older
and predominantly male, recruited less from upper-level personnel and more
frequently from a socialistic family and a socialist milieu who usually went

through the SF10 themselves. with an atheist perspective and more sensitive to
the P0 than the.CcT. '

Nor is it any accident if the Rocardians and the members of CERES seen to be
younger, less socialiaed by leftist families, usually graduates of educations
of higher learning, more tempted by the commitment to the CPDT, but having '
differences between then, mainly religious, sometimes social origins and the
political trajector; that led them to the PS (membership in the PSU still
clearly marking the Rocard group).

Nor is it any accident. finally, if the majority Hitterrand faction is in a
central sociological position, generally with figures close to those of the
party average, while being a little higher here and there regarding the pre-

sence of women. for ekanple. liberal arts graduates, teachers or members of the
PEN.

This is so true that if the now dormant'factions that make up the Socialist

Party are theoretically based on political and ideological orientations.
sociology and solidarities born of the nilitant experience help them in turn

to endure and keep going. But is the existence of factions, so dangerous-
elsewhere when it turns into pure personality struggles, not also a means
of diversifying the systems of influence and recruitment of a pluralistic
party?

FOOTNOTES

1. Roland Cayrol: "Members of the Socialist Party: Contribution to a

Sociology," based on a study made at the Grenoble congress of the PS in
June 1973, PROJET, No 88. September- October 1974, pp 929-960.

2. In particular, the IFOP [French Public Opinion Institute] at the Nantes
congress in June 1977. See SONDAGES, Nos 2-3, 1978, pp 97-108, and
Paul Bacot at the Metz congress in April 1979. See UNITE. No 380. 1980
(and the data presented by this researcher to the Socialism Study Group,
French Political Science Association. 6 June 1980).

3. Study on parties from 12 European countries, headed by Karlheinz Reif
(University of Mannheim) and Roland Cayrol.

a. Our questionnaire was filled out by 669 delegates in Valence.

5. Let us note in passing that the rate of militant activity seems down in
the P5. In 1973, 51 percent of the delegates said they devoted over 20
hours a month to party activities. The proportion-was 66 percent in 1981.

6. Theoretically speaking. there were no factions set up on the occasion of
the Valence congress. But we asked delegates to the congress to tell us

21
FOI‘OFFNJAL.USEIHVLY
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

what faction they had chosen at the Hat: congress. For the sake of easy
reading, we shall not designate here the factions of the PS by the letters
corresponding to the Met: motions, but by confining ourselves to the

four main groups, by their customary labels: Hitterrand. Hauroy, Rocard
and CERES.

Honen represented 8 percent of’the PS candidates in the legislative elec-
tions of June 1981. See A. Guede, S. A. Roaenblum: "Candidates in the
Legislative Elections of 1978 and 1981," RBVUE FRANCAISB DB SCIENCE POLI-
TIQUE, Oct-Dec 1981.

See Roland Cayrol, Jean-Luc Parodi, Colette Yamal, "Le-'Depute Francais,"
A. Colin. 1970.

Some 23 percent have a secondary education, 11 percent a technical or
comercial education. 6 percent elementary.

In our questionnaire. the question was thus formulated (in 1981, as in
1973): "No matter what type of education you received, may we ask you if

you now consider yourself as a: practicing Catholic, a nonpracticing
Catholic, of another religion (specify) or having no religion.

It will be remembered that the holding of the Meeting of Socialism, pre-
vious to the entry into'the' P8 of most members of this faction, dates
from October 1974.

Our question was as follows: "When you were a child, did your father
and mother belong to a politicalgroup? If yes, which one? If no,
to what party were they the closest?"

The proportion of nonunion members was 32 percent in 1973.

COPYRIGHT: by CBRAS, 15, rue R.-Harcheron, 92170 Vsnves April 1982

11.664
CSO: 3100/639

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m3 FOR CMSSION 0“ PLANNING REFORM mm

Paris FUTURIBLBS in French Mar 82 pp 59-71

[Article

in FORUM; "Reforn of French Planning")

[Text] A comission for reform of French planning has
Just been set up by the Minister of Planning and National
and Regional Developmnt with a View to developing a draft
law reforning the procedures, nethods and content of

French planning.

In his letter to Mr christian Gout. chairman of that con-
nission, Mr Michel Rocard pointed out six categories of

essential questions for study by six working groups.
These working groups eunine the views of the central con-
nission. which itself should draw up:

-A provisional report (10 March) to be used for prepar-
ing the draft law to be presented to parlianent at the
spring session;

-A final report (end of June) whose proposals will be
used for drawing up the future 5-year plan.

Taking into account Wench planning tradition and in
conformity with the new situation resulting particularly
from decentralization and the extension of the public
sector. the reform under way raises numerous questions
whose importance will not be lost on readers of

FUTURI BLES .

Therefore we publish below a brief introduction to the
subjects which the General Planning Co-iasariat has pro-
posed for study by the reform co-ission. In a future
issue we shall try to give an account of the co-iasion's
conclusions. Until that time, we are sure that our
readers' reactions could usefully contribute to accom—
plishment of a totally essential reform.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Field and Functions of Planning

The first task of the commission is to examine all the conditions which
since 1945 have been peculiar to French planning and to establish the extent
to which these conditions remain valid and how they have been modified by
the structural changes under way (decentralization. nationalisations, work-
ers' rights). It appears that, within current limitations. the require-
ments for drawing up the future 5-year plan are that it be based on the
concept of a national plan in an open economy. its content adapted to a
system of nixed economy. and its character indicative of its great economic
and social objectives.

Considering the international environment and its hazards, and taking into
account the structural changes which have occurred, or will occur, what
should be the area and functions of planning?

One Inst first define how desirable it is for- the plan to aspire to include
all the economic. social and cultural changes which today can be foreseen
or brought about.

The planning project is by its nature inclusive. It tends toward an exhaus-
tive presentation of all the problems confronting a society at a given stage
of its development. It is based on future projections whose purpose is to
identify the long-range changes foreseeable in the most diverse areas of
social and cultural life. A first problem. related to this concern for con-
trolling or orienting long-range developments. is to know what is correctly
to be included in the plan. For example, the real implications of "plan-
ning" cultural development. the sociocultural aspects of daily life or

even of changes in the demand for services. and what does such planning
embrace? Are there not areas which should remain outside the planning proc-
eas although they can be subject to long-range studies? Can long-range
studies. indispensable for identifying the plan's problems and objectives. be
based on. or composed of, long-term projections? Should they give more
place to the systematic study of the changing and permanent aspects of life-
styles, behavior and values? And why? To avoid confusion it seems appro-
priate to set forth three interrelated steps in the planning process: that
of identification of problems. based on long-term considerations and
dependent on the freedom to carry it out in future; that of definition of
the mid-term objectives. which takes place under the control of the political
authority and sets up the content of the plan; and that of choosing means
which the plan can provide or recomend.

This first question about the field of planning and its possible extension
to the whole of social life leads to reflection on the conditions for a
fully democratic concept of planning, even before defining the plan's
objectives. If it is indispensable to assign the roles of parliament. the
social partners, the economic agencies and the decentralized collectivities
equitably, it seems no less necessary to base the dialogue on a joint,
complete, clear and, no doubt. conflicting knowledge of the forecasts,

none of whose methods of establishment. means or results can in future be

an administrative monopoly. This assumes, first, that conditions will be

210

FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established for freer access to the forecasts; then. that the mid-term
forecasts (macroeconomic balances. social indicators) will be discussed
prior to the selection of objectives. Without such a discussion. without
seeking agreement on a prognosis of development. or on certain of its
results. the extended dialogue on which the definition of objectives will
be based would be deprived of some of its significance.

An open discussion of the forecasts-and in general of all the assumptions

on which the plan is based--is the more necessary since their future credi-
bility will be put to the test by a chronic instability of the international
environment. Two problems in particular should be posed in that connection:

--0n the effects on the development of the national plan arising from the
open economy in France. and particularly from its membership in the BBC;

--On the opportuneness and the value of a plan based on assumptions and on
quantified objectives. since the growth rate. the inflation rate. the evolu-
tion of foreign disequilibrium and the exchange rate cannot be forecast

for a period of 5 years with sufficient accuracy.

If it appears that certain economic and social objectives-which ones?--can
and should be expressed numerically. under what conditions should they be
quantified? In which areas. and under what conditions. will it be possible
to plan and quantify the actions chosen to achieve the plan's objectives?

The new conditions for planning also lead to questions about plan duration.
Is a fixed and uniform 5-year framework. covering an identical period of
development for all the sectors and for all the planning elements. still
suitable? Some of the choices made in the interim plan. and its recent
development. tend to call into question a single framework for fixing simul-
taneously attainable objectives.

The 5-year framework for fixing objectives is not appropriate in certain
areas--in particular those of energy. defense and research. The develop-
ment strategies to be conceived. and their implementation, require the
definition of long-term objectives whose coordination with the plan should
be defined under different conditions.

In other areas--particu1arly all those directly concerned with the imple-
mentation of economic and social strategy-—the 5-year framework for fixing
objectives. matched with a fixed term. has become an uncertain. or not
easily usable. reference point. When changes on the world scene put the
initial forecasts into question. that leads to either the objectives. or
their terms and fulfillment deadlines. being brought into question during
the period of execution. They can be adapted. either by using a floating
plan. or by including floating programs in a "fixed" plan. or by estab-
lishing a formal procedure for revision during the course of plan imple-
mentation.

In any hypothesis. if it is wished for the future plan to leave nothing out
in examining and coordinating national sectoral policies (with variable

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

terms) and regional plane. it is important for it to be able to join together
flexibly different or variable time frames. the 5-year plan thus being
thought of more as a conventional reference for forecast and coordination
than as having an inviolable period of implementation.

Strengthened in its function of coordinating and establishing a canon
project by expanding the dialogue and by defining the procedures for con-
tractual execution. should the plan furthermore be strengthened in its
juridical scope, or'more exactly, given the force of law by the adoption of
a legislative mechanism separate from the report itself? That possibility
ought to be examined in connection with the effects of decentralization and
the consequences of developing the system of plan contracts.

The law on the rights and liberties of comunes. departments and regions has
already provided that the measures of the policy for national and regional
development which regulate economic intervention by territorial collectivi-
ties would be included in the law approving the plan. Articles 3 and 6 of
the law approving the intermediate plan anticipate such an arrangement.
Should not. or could not, legal means be provided to make the measures which
col-it the state and the contractual and decentralized planning powers--
but not those involving the state itself-obligatory, and hence susceptible
to legal sanction?

Such a juridical evolution and the conditions under which it will or will not
integrate regional plans--possibly infraregional ones—perhaps even all the
contractual provisions for inplementation with collectivities and public
enterprises should be contained in the plan itself. The problem of the
juridical scope of the plan should have different solutions, depending on
whether the "plan" will be a single national plan, or a codination of all
the national. regional and local plans, or a coobination of all the plans
and joint co-Litments.

Public Administration and the Plan

There are two aspects to the problem of relations between public administra-
tions and the plan. 0n the one hand. there is the problem of the ministries
adopting real internal planning which is a precmdition to coordinating a
national plan. 0n the other hand, there is the problem of whether provisions
of the plan, voted by parliament, can be opposed by these same administra-
tions.

This problem is posed under new conditions. just mentioned, resulting from
the development of decentralized planning and plan contracts. In practice.
in more operative conditions it will arise especially if the conditions of
the plan's development and the strengthening of parliament's role in con-
trolling its execution and follow through work toward guaranteeing respect
for the original measures in the context of annual budgeting.

Without calling for lengthy exposition in the immediate future. it is inor-
tsnt to recall the few major questions which require profound study.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first of the major questions concerns the priority tasks of the state in
democratic, contractual and decentralized planning. It is up to the state
to define, first. the conditions for macroeconomic coordination and to set
the priorities to be followed in the matter of collective functions and
social contributions. It will also be incumbent on the state to see to it
that there is Iutual compatibility inthe provisions of the regional plans
and that they are compatible with the national plan. The state is also
responsible for securing respect for its own counitments as regards collec-
tivitiee and public enterprises as well as the social partners. "hat means
should it use. to which procedures should it have recourse. on what institu-
tions should it be based? This is the first series of problems.

A second question concerns the areas and conditions in which certain provi-
sions of the plan can in fact apply to the government services responsible
for their execution. Can the plan contain. or provide for. annual commit-
ments for expenditures for ainisterial departments? Under what conditions
should the laws on projects be subordinate to the provisions of the [local]
plan? In applying the plan. can one prescribe the execution of the adminis-
trations' contractual engagements? Can the plan include norns for region-
alization of the use of budgetary resources. either in conformity with the
space the plan devotes to each objective or in applying the priorities of
the national policy for national and regional development? Hhat procedures
will be available to ensure that the development of social contributions and
their financing conforms to the objectives of the plan?

Finally. a third. more basic. question concerns the specific role of the
Ministry of Planning and National and Regional Develop-eat in developing
and implementing the finance law. particularly concerning financing contracts

and the regional division of credits. It is mentioned here to put it on
record.

Decentralization and Planning

Decentralization cannot be reduced to a transfer of executive power to the
departments and regions. nor to a transfer of authority between state and
territorial collectivities. nor to a new way of dividing public resources,
nor even to a combination of these three kinds of administrative change.

It is a dynamic process which may perhaps cause a new developmental logic

to be brought into play. This dynanic finds its clearest expression and best
application in infraregional. regional and national planning; in the integra-
tion of projects created by a multiplicity of decision-aking centers.

Although still an unfinished creation. decentralization will profoundly
change the conditions for drawing up and implementing the national plan.
Its being brought into play, and its being taken into consideration. in

the planning process at once raises six orders of problems of which.
beginning this year. a number should find a clear institutional solution in
the law on planning reform.

First. there is the question of defining the conditions of dialogue between
state and regions in preparing the national plan. whatever its nature.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lJSl-Z ONLY

Regional consultation obviously cannot be assured by means of a simple
questionnaire combined with the inclusion of a limited number of regional
leaders in the preparation and execution of the national plan. It must be
carried out by the regions themselves. in direct contact with the officials
responsible for preparing and implementing the regional plans. There are
thus grounds for foreseeing and defining the procedures for a national
decentralized consultation, and one might wonder if that consultation should
not be mutual. involving. in return for the views of the regions. an
evaluation by the state of the consequences of the choices made in regional
planning. Because of the very strong connection which can exist between
the execution of the national plan and all the regional plans. one can also
wonder if after their deliberations the regional leaders should not express
an overall view on the hoped-for orientations of the national plan.

There is also the matter of asking oneself about the conditions for defining
and putting into operation the national policy for national and territorial
development. whose normative and stimulative content will be profoundly
changed—-outside the minimum body of its permanent principles-by putting
regional plans into operation. In fact. because they will differ in the
volume of resources mobilized, in their content and in their quality.
regional plans could bring about new forms of uneven regional development
which. should such a thing happen. it would be desirable to correct by new
means.

A third uncertainty stems from the nature of regional plans. which can vary
independently of the conditions of development stipulated by law. Hill

they be simple programs for investment and localization of activities.
setting forth in a multiyear framework the terms for the use of domestic

or external resources to finance projects falling under the direct authority
of the regions?

Beyond this limited concept. will they be real developmental strategies?
Furthermore. what will betheprocedures for associating the departments or
groupings of collectivities with the drawing up of regional plans? Will,

or will not. these plans integrate the operations programmed in the outlines
of city planning, in the plans for rural development, and. in general. in
all the documents for physical planning which apply to any part of national
territory? If there is such integration. according to what procedures?
These are some of the basic questions raised by regional plans, an important
further question being whether they will be obligatory or optional.

The development of infraregional planning is a new. important source of
innovations. No doubt it can be taken as certain that this planning. based
on [local] initiative, will be optional. Under such conditions, should it
develop within the framework of permanent zoning (scientifically necessary
for a number of considerations) or. on the contrary. can it be based on
voluntary or temporary zonings. according to specific forms of spatial
organization? when infraregional planning does take place, will it be
obligatory for the regions to take it into consideration? Or. to the con-
trary. may it call for direct dialogue and direct contracting with the state?

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

Still. in effectively decentralized planning. relations between the national
plan and the regional plans are the most difficult problem to handle. what-
ever their nature, regional plans will influence the definition of the
national plan and it would not be consistent with the nature of the plan to
aIlow autonomous regional plans to develop at the outset without enlightening
their leaders about the chances for effective implementation of their objec-
tives. It is therefore necessary to define the conditions under which the
state can ensure the compatibility of all the regional plans:

—-Hith the macroeconomic consistency of the national plan;
--ﬂith the priorities of national sectoral policies;

--Uith the national policy for regional and national development (see
above).

If regional plans require state arbitration of their contractual inplementa-
tion. under what conditions will such arbitration take place? In fact. it
is important that. without resorting to any form whatsoever of direct or
indirect administrative supervision. the state should be able to: temper
the effects of the competition in which regional efforts may become'involved;
guarantee the joint and simultaneous achievement of regional plans; ensure
the conformity of regional aims with the objectives of national sectoral
policies; and define as well as possible the field of contractual action
between state and regions. This new function. whose resources it remains

to define. is the key to the success of decentralized planning.

it remains to define the type and content of the plant contract which state
and decentralised planning authorities will be led to negotiate and sign.

In this connection. is it necessary to set forth a juridical formula which
limits possibilities or which permits a great number of them to coexist?

Just for a start. there is a wide variety of possibilities. One might think
that plan contracts could be signed with intarregional groupings. with regions
or with the microplanning authorities. They could bear on all the regional
territory. or on certain zones of the latter; they could be content with
defining objectives or they cauld designate common resources; they could

be implemented within variable time limits (from 1 to 10 years); or they
could be bilateral or interministerial. Supposing it were necessary (and
possible) to organize this diversity, what would be the best way to proceed?
Is some authority for ratifying all these contracts necessary. making it
possible to verify the conformity of their provisions with the national plan
and with regional plans? Is it possible that, after consultations with all
the regional leaders. the national plan should fix the priority, or exclusive
areas. for contractual implementation of regional plans? These are some of
the methodological questions posed by the contractual implementation of

plans in relation to territorial collectivities.

Planning and Productive Activities

The association of productive activities with future planning and their
consideration in national. regional and local plans is based on new

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

procedures for associating the working sector with the development of these
plans. with the emergence of a more favorable environment for enterprises
and with the development of contractual formulas for execution. The new
provisions organize a dialogue at the different planning levels and seek an
effective link between collective negotiations and the plan's provisions

to serve as a reference point and to contribute to securing the introduction
of productive activities, their strategy and their objectives into the whole
process of planning under the best conditions and the planning of these
activities at the sectoral. branch or enterprise levels.

This project requires an inprovement in economic and technical information
about the production apparatus and effective dissemination of this informa-
tion to all the planning partners. The definition of new conditions and the
role of economic information is an important basis for intervention of
productive activities in the planning process.

It is a responsibility of the plan to define the general conditions of the
enterprises' activities and their environment. In this regard one wonders
if, fortheimplementation period. its role will include defining the regula-
tions governing aid to productive activities (investments. local development.
exports. consolidation of sectors in difficulty).

The future plan will not have the purpose nor the objective of planning all
productive activities. In this area, planning intervention should remain
selective. and be applied according to the individual case. to branches. to
types of enterprise. or. in a manner at the same time most general and

most precise. to technologies. The role oftheaunisterisl departments con-
cerned is. in consultation with the planning and coordinating authorities.
to identify the sectors. enterprises or technologies where specific inter-
vention is justified in terms of national objectives. For all that. state
intervention can be general or it can be specific. It can be integrated
into an overall developmental strategy of activities in such and such a
sector. or contribute to the achievement of specific objectives of modern-
ization. of conversion. or of starting up new products for export. Selec-
tion of areas for intervention and definition of specific procedures for
assistance is a task for each plan. It is to be hoped that it is based on
new methods of coordination. The formula of tripartite branch committees
provided for in the interim plan could serve as a model in that regard.

It would be appropriate to ascertain. through trial, that it is best suited
to collective drawing up of national sectoral policy proposals for produc-
tive activities.

There remains the question of plan contracts. First. one should ask what
will be the content and the basis for contract reciprocity that the
stockholder-state will conclude with public sector enterprises. Hill the
provisions of the contracts be final or subject to revision. exhaustive

or selective. indicative or mandatory? Under what conditions will indepen-
dent management of contracting enterprises be reconciled with adherence to
the plan's objectives? Hhat will be the legal and financial consequences
of their possible nonfulfillment?

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore. and aside from the problem of plan contracts. there is the ques-
tion of the contractual relations the state nay form with private enter-
prises. Should. and could. there be such contracts? With reference to the
plan's objectives. what would be the content of such contracts?

Finally. seaming a rapid extension of decentralized planning to the develop-
ment of productive activities. under what conditions should the regions be
involved in the conclusion of plan contracts with enterprises or take the
initiative in contractual relations with enterprises within their area of
responsibility?

The Financial Instruments for Implementing the Plan

The definition and use of financial instruments for implementation of the
plan should be emined. taking into account three factors of change which
apply equally to inlenentation of future national and regional plans.

First. in financing the economy full advantage should be taken of the conse-
quences of nationalization of credit which have thus far been touched on
only in a general way. Then. account should be taken of developments in
the thinking on reforn of financing networks. Finally. consideration should
be given to the refora plans under discussion concerning possible region-
alization of financing of productive investnents. even of the collective
plants nentioned during the discussion of the draft law on decentralization.
Three major questions should be examined in relation to these anticipated
or planned develop-ents:

-The first concerns the financing of productive activities: One mst know
to what extent and under what conditions the plan could fix rules for the
allocation of financial resources among the major sectors of activity.

even among contracting and noncontracting enterprises in order to guarantee
the latter nondiscriminatory access to the outside resources they need.

"The second concerns the financing of public investments in collective
plants. whose planning will be an important part of the financial cot-lit-
nents of the national plan and. above all. of regional plans. In this con-
nection- it is desirable to know whether the plan can guarantee access of
territorial collectivities to specialized loans needed for the financing of
regional or local plans. and. if so. under what conditions.

"The third concerns the eventual delineation of arbitration procedures as
a condition for attribution of these resources. if the latter are found to
be insufficient for the financial needs of the enterprises and territorial
collectivities.

Planning Partners
The theme of denocratization of the plan transcends all others. It is
expressed. first. by an extension of procedures for dialogue in the regions.

in the urban areas. in the countryside or enployuent centers. in the produc-
tive activities at the level of branches as well as at the workplaces

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thenselves. and. therefore. by the appearance of a new network of partners.
The plan's priority task will be to register and compare the suggestions.
and organise nutual exchange of informtion.

Reference has already been nade several tines to this needed appearance of
new proceedings for dialogue, requiring new partners. In this connection
the following can be cited:

-'l'he necessity for open debate on the forecasts. based on a mltiplicity
of sources and on free access of the groupings of territorial and depart-
nental collectivities in the developnent of regional plans;

”Inclusion of the regions in preparing the national plan under conditions
differing fro. previous consultative procedures;

«Consultation with all the territorial collectivities (deliberative and
consultative bodies) on the options concerning national and regional
develop-ant;

“The preparation of sectoral political choices in productive activities
within branch tripartite co—ittees. or cowarable bodies;

-Developnsnt of contracting procedures between: state-regions; state-
territorial collectivities; state-enterprises;

«Necessary coordination of collective negotiations with the plan's objec-
tives and provisions.

All these new provisions in the-selves constitute a new sharing of power
which secures more influence in the whole planning process for the decen-
tralized planning agents and the social partners. This should result in the
state having strengthened neans of execution. arbitration and follow-through
at its disposition. Institutional procedures and adjustments should be
created. taking into account the increase in the master of partners and the
diversity of their possible intervention. giving full expression to the
democratization of the plan. Several questions should be raised in this
connection.

--The first concerns the process of preparing the plan: Should the princi-
ple of a two-phase preparation be naintained. and if so. how can the dialogue
between state and regions be organised under the best circumstances? should
regional plans the-selves be prepared in two phases so that a better coordi-
nation with the national plan can be secured on the initiative of the
regions?

"what should be the functional relations between the consultative authori-
ties for regional planning and the national omission (or comissions)?
met the law define for all the regions nsndatory procedures for associating
the social partners in the preparation of regional plans?

-Can the preparation of the national plan be based on ad hoc and tenporary
structures as in the former systen of couittees and coniesions? Or, on

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the contrary. should it be taken over by a permanent agency. for example
the Economic and Social Council and its sections. whose composition and
powers could be amended?

-—Hill the structures for dialogue: national. sectoral. regional or local
be actively associated only with the preparation of the plan or. on the
contrary. with the whole of its execution and follow-through? In the latter
circumstances. and by way of illustration:

-Hhat would be the bases and the authority for a periodic dialogue between

the social partners and the public authorities concerning the observed and
contemplated developments in prices?

-Undar what conditions could the trade union organisations be present in
the negotiation of plan contracts and be social partners in the regions.
associated with the preparation of state-region contracts?

In the same spirit and whatever may be the form of organization of dialogue
on the national plan. should not the preparers of the plan be associated
with its follow-through?

It remains to clarify the role of parliament in a process which. in advance
of the legislative debate. calls for thoroughgoing consultation between the
elected representatives. the social partners and the economic agents. In
this regard it may be feared that the preeminence accorded parliament by the
final vote on the plan may become rather ceremonial if. according to its
role and objective. the plan effectively integrates a number of suggestions
from the consultative authorities and decentralized decisions. It may be
that parliament will participate directly in the preparation of the plan
prior to the debate on ratification of decisions and the vote on the law.
It is appropriate. moreover. to reflect on the means for an effective
parliamentary control over the execution of the plan. The interim plan
outlined some solutions in this direction. Can these be considered satis-
factory and thus transferable to the future plan?

[Box 1]

Extract from the letter from Mr Michel Rocard. Minister of Planning and
National and Regional Development. to Mr Christian Goux. President of the
Commission for Reform of Planning:

"The Government considers the reform of planning as an essential element in
the structural changes on which. during the next few years. a pervasive
transformation of French society will be founded.

"The plan should be the instrument for the needed mastery of the national
economy. It is indispensable for the good management of a mixed system of
economy having a broad and innovative public sector. The market cannot
suffice to determine the desirable thrust and directions for the future.

"Such a plan. the elaboration of which will be based on the broadest par-
ticipation of the elected representatives. the social partners and the

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprises. will be wholly democratic. It will guarantee freedoms against
bureaucratic encroachnents. It will stimlate the initiative of local
collectivities as well as the spirit of enterprise.

"It will also be a cohesive agent in assuring the joint and conpatible
elaboration and execution of regional and local plans. and fixing the
framework of contractual relations between the state and the large enter-
prises.

"Based on social dialogue. it will transforn fatalistic denial and resigna-
tion in the face of a crisis and its senseless effects.

"To respond to all these rsquirensnts. we should think again about the
nethods as well as the neans of planning.

"The interi- plan. approved by parliament. has already defined new methods
of implementation and follow-through. The strengthening of the role of
parliansnt. the widening of dialogue. the extension of contracting prac-
tices. and the economic intervention of territorial collectivities will
give the plan an effective role and influence in inplementing the economic.
social and cultural policy of the government.

"The future 5-year plan will be based on the changes which decentralization,
extension of the public. banking and productive sector. and the extension of
workers' rights will introduce into national life. In its concept. it should
be better adapted to an open economic situation and take advantage of all

the consequences of the development of real regional and local planning.

That is the reason why the government will sub-it to parliament in the spring
of 1982 a draft law fixing the objectives and method of planning. particularly
in its realtions with the planning of enterprises and local collectivities.

"This reform requires extensive preparatory work. with the close cooperation
of planning experts and leaders in social. econonic and cultural life. I
thus hope to install near me a Con-ission for reform of planning. whose
work and proposals will assist as in preparing the new law and clarify the
conditions for applying it."

[Box 2]

Extract from the speech by Michel Rocard. Minister of State. Minister of
Planning and Rational and Territorial Develop-ant. to the National Assenbly
during the presentation of the interim plan. 11 Decenber 1981:

"He want the plan to regain its capacity and its role of stilulator of
imaginations. wills and energies around a great national ambition. It
should again become the expression of a grand design that the country takes
upon itself. He shall accord it this outstanding place when political.
econonic and social decisions cease to be the concern of a few ministers
and their offices but are understood. recognized and taken over by the vital
forces and elected representatives of the nation."

COPYRIGHT: Association Internationale Puturibles 1982

9772

080: 3100/5105 3,.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

P803 ACTS TO IMPROVE ITS STANDING "In! RILITARY

Madrid cmem 16 in Spanish 10 May 82 pp 35-36

[Text] The keys to defense policy and funding for the armed forces have started
a national debate. with a confrontation between the government and the opposi-
tion. although the possibility of success in the upcoming general elections
mderates the position of the Spanish Socialist Horkers Party [P803].

It is the military cowromise for the next 8 years.

The beginning of parliamentary discussions on the arsed forces funding plan

for the next 8 years and the presentation of the defense policy by Defense Minister
Alberto Oliart have brought about a fundamental political debate between the
government and the opposition, teqered by the 2.3-? trial of the coup leaders.

Following a meeting held by Minister Oliart and the president of the Council

of the Chiefs of Staff. (PRUUJEH) Alvaro Lacalle Leloup. with P803 leader Felipe
Gonzalez and some of his collaborators. the socialists maintain their opposition
to the budget bill on funding for investments and support for the arned forces.
but they neither presented an amendment to the total. nor did they support the
existing funding.

The opposition's disagreement with the government's bill is primarily centered
in the uncertainty on where and how the 2.15 trillion pesetas will be spent
through 1990, in which armed forces personnel costs apparently are not included.
but are treated separately.

From the ranks of the Right. in cautious language. there is talk of a lack of
true parliamentary control over the development of such a long program of these
dimensions for national ife.

The P808. with expectations of coming to power in the near future. is under-

going a process of strengthening its ties with the actual powers. This curbs
more radical opposition. which could be interpreted in military circles as an
attitude critical of the armed forces.

Hith the outlook for coming to power in the next general elections. however,
the socialists have become convinced that the existence of a bill such as this
covering 8 years, if passed now by parliament. would greatly facilitate their
relations with the armed forces.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘VA UL‘A‘LVU‘I‘J UDD UNI-l

The government and the military commands claim security reasons and long-term

planning in order to justify the absence of specificity in the bill that will
now begin to be debated in parliamentary procedure.

The bill presented by the government, which includes 10 articles and 3 final
dispositions, is thus defined in its presentation: "It indicates the minimum
budgetary appropriations that will be available to the Defense Ministry from
1982 to 1990, in order to make the most urgent investments. as well as for all
sorts of acquisitions and expenses intended for the support of the armed forces."

The document further adds that the indicated figures may be increased "as circum-
stances permit."

But aside from purely economic considerations, the utilization of this bill
is inserted within the general outline of the defense policy that Minister Oliart,

accompanied by three generals. presented to parliamentarians of the Defense
Commission last week.

A defense policy with a clear Atlantic orientation. described as follows by

the minister in the situation analysis: "Today the Western world is threated

by the Warsaw Pact. and. in the face of this threat. we see its defense in the
framework of the Atlantic Alliance. because only the survival of a free Europe
can guarantee Spain's survival within the model of life under democratic freedom
that has been chosen by the Spanish people."

In regard to the importance of our geostrategic position. this analysis calls

for "Spain to assume a strategic role of worldwide importance. because the zone
is of worldwide importance."

The document developed by Oliart's cabinet makes specific reference to the deli-
cate situation with the Hassan regime in Morocco, and the concern that the Spanish
garrisons in North Africa, Ceuta and Helilla. could be the objects of armed

aggression. This is a priority defense objective on armed forces charts, where
aggression is considered most likely.

indicating North Africa, Oliart says: "We are concerned about the instability
of some political regimes. The indirect strategy of the USSR could endanger
our territorial integrity. to a considerable degree exploiting possible states
of tension in that geographic zone."

The defense policy foreseen by the Spanish Government puts special emphasis

on the need to "guarantee control of the axis Balearic Islands-Gibraltar-Canary
Islands."

"A military force established on this axis," according to the analysis. "pro-
duces the following direct effects:

--It makes Spain assume a strategic role of worldwide importance, because the
zone is of worldwide importance.

-—It tends to guarantee national territorial integrity.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-It facilitates the recovery of Gibraltar through negotiation.

-Aad it prepares us to face the inevitable implications of a generalized conflict."

In order to develop defense and military policy, there is a need to modernise
and strengthen our arlies in all areas from personnel to materiel. with highly
sophisticated arms. operative systems, etc.

Altogether. these elements suppose. in fact. the beginning of a great national
debate on technology and Spanish defense. on the reorganization and capacity

of the armed forces now nuddled by the 23-? trial of the coup leaders. In some
respects this event detracts from the debate and its natural contours. As a
consequence. it deaands greater effort by the government. the political parties
and the armed forces themselves to regain a normality that would permit the
modernization of one of Spain's neediest sectors.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Infornacion y Revistas. S.A.

9746
CSO: 3110/161

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITICAL
POL SHIN

CBOE'S SAIAT PMSRBS SW ECOMHIC RECOVERY

Paris IATITUDE AUJOURD'HUI in French May 82 p lo
[Interview with Carlos Pcrrer Salat, president of the 0308]

[Text] [Question] How do you view Spain's forthcoming membership h the
Comon lbrket?

[Answer] The CEO]! is in favor of its membership, but not at any price. An
agreement acceptable to the two parties mat be found. The negotiations are

undergoing some difficulties at present, largely because of the 330's inter-
nal problems.

The current crisis is probably responsible for the fact that the community
has adopted an equivocal position and one that is thus unacceptable to Spain.

As for becoming part of the comunity industrially-~an area in which it is
much stronger than Spainnthe comnity would like to see a rapid integration,
in 2 to 3 yearsufor instance, by lifting customs duties and providing for
free circulation of industrial goods. In the agricultural field, however,

the community is asking for a period of 10 years before spain is fully in-
corporated, since it views Spanish products as a problem. The third important
point involves the circulation of labor under the Treaty of Roma. Here, too,
the connnmity is asking for 10 or more years. Finally, on the subject of
taxes and application of the value-added tax (VAT), which takes 12 years to

put into practice, the comunity is demanding that Spain put it into effect
from the very beginning.

Naturally, this position would be damaging not only to Spain but to Europe as

well. I think that it is in Europe's interest to have new members in a
health condition! -

We believe that there should be a single timtable for industrial, agricultural
and fiscal membership, over a period of 10 years.

Ibreover. it is our view that the period required for incorporation into the

comunity in the area of labor could be reduced. The free circulation of
labor is more a theoretical than a practical danger for the EEC countries.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Is Spanish industry cunpetitive with its future European partners?

[Answer] Spain's problem is that its system of industrial production and
business in general has been founded, set up and developed exclusively on

the basis of the domestic market, unlike British industry, for example.
Also, for Spain to adapt to its new situation, it will have to overcome the
economic crisis--as will the other European countries, as well--and complete-
ly change its production system.

Ptoductivity of Spanish firms in the 70's amounted to about 40 percent of
that of the comunity countries, on the basis of production per worker. The
situation has improved, but now we are only up to 70 percent of the European
average. Productivity cannot be computed on the basis of averages, of
course. There are export sectors that are competitive. In any event, this
70 percent of productivity is only a numerical response to the question of
our competitive capacity. In the industrial area, one factor is important,
and that is technology. Spain made an effort to modernize the entire system
to reach the 70-percent figure.

Now we have to make a major effort to adapt. Another aspect of the problem
is that Spain had a highly closed production system for 40 years, with [gov-
ernment] intervention in all areas: labor was immobilized, the financial
system was imobilized, etc. Another basic objective is to loosen the mech-
anisms of government intervention.

[Question] How would you describe Spain's current economic situation?

[Answer] Spain's situation differs in several ways from that of the Western
countries. Spain shares the crisis in the fields of oil and energy, but
there are two factors that differentiate our country from the rest of
Europe. 0n the one hand, Spain had to adjust to a change in its political
and social system, to shift from the previous authoritarian regime to demo-
cracy, and that entailed an extra mental effort and also a period of uncer-
tainties that lasted for quite a whileuthe time needed to adjust to new ways,
new social forces, labor unions, the new political regime, etc. These are
problems that the rest of Europe faced imediately following World War II.
Moreover, our economy had to undergo a complete change from a closed to an
open system.

[Question] What are your short- and medium-term economic forecasts?

[Answer] We are predicting a slightly better year in 1982 than in 1981.
Inflation is slowing down and the national product is slightly on the rise--
growing at about 2 percent. Farming is also improving sanewhat, as are con-
struction, tourism and exports. The important issue, however, is unemploy-
ment. Theoretically, there are 1.8 million unemployed workers at present,
although in fact the figure is lower. Employment will probably decline
slightly this year but not by as much as last year. My forecast, therefore,
is moderately positive in comparison with 1981.

39

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] What is your opinion of the Spanish Governmnt‘s current economic
policy?

[Answer] It has positive and negative aspects. The government is doing
pretty well in its effort to increase productivity. The most serious prob-
lem, however, is probably government spending. Spending by government and
social security in Spain has increased appallingly. This public spending has
involved primarily consuption and not investment expenditures. The public
debt, therefore. has increased substantially, and this means that the re-
sources that private enterprise could have used for investment and the
creation of jobs are seriously reduced. Reform of government administration
is a critical issue that the govermnent should tackle more decisively.

[Question] How do you view a possible socialist victory in the upcoming
legislative elections?

[Answer] First of all, we think it would be detrimental to the Spanish
economy if the socialists were to win. The policy would be to increase
government spending, which is against all logic. Interventionism would
also increase, and that would have a bad effect on Spain's economic and un-
employment problems.

However, our attitude as businessmen would be to respect the outcome of

the elections. Our organization has greatly defended and supported the
advent and strengthening of democracy in Spain. This is why we would estab-
lish the appropriate relations beaveen business organizations and the govern-
ment of the socialists, should they come to power.

COPYRIGHT: Latitude SARL: lo trimestre, 1981.

9305
cso: 3100/615 m,

100

POI OFFIOAI. USE ONLY