APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00860R0001000400364
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040035-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.vus L/8399
15 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040035-8
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials tron foreign-language
sources are translated: those fro- Bnglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or (Excerpt) in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was susnarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion snark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ite- originate with the source. tines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING mnsmr OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
0? THIS PURLIQTION BB RESTRICTED MOWICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8399
16 April 19

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 5/79)

Comams

INTERNATIGML

Moscow Journal Dincuelee Reletione Hith Turkey
(V. Alenlk; HEZRDUNARODNAYA ZIIIZN, No 3. 1979). . . . . . . . . . . .

Soviet look Denla With 0.8. Senate. Foreign Policy
(MERIMNSKIY SWAT 1 WESIINYAYA POLITIKA. l978)..........

NATIONAL

Soviet People Like Novel About Ukrainian Jew
(Anetoliy Rybnkov Interviev; u STAIN. 2 Mar 79).........

Soviet Gemn Village in Siberia Visited
(Norbert Kuchinke; STEM, 22 Feb 79)......................
FUR dPFlCIAL USE ONIJ

INTERNATIONAL

"0860" JOURNAL IHSCUSSRS RELATIONS HIT" TURKEY

Moscow HEZHOUNARODNAYA zuizs in Russian No 3. 1979 signed to press
20 Feb 79 pp 16-21

[Article by V. Alanik: "fruits of Good-Neighborly Policy: Soviet-Turkish
Relations at the Current Stage"]

[Text] The strengthening of Soviet-Turkish ties since the 25th CPSU Congress
is one proof of the success of the land of the soviete' foreign policy aimed
at developing equal friendly relations with neighboring states regardless of
their social systen.

As is known. relations between the Soviet Union and Turkey have a rich and
highly instructive past. The very geographical position of the two coun-
tries and their peoples' common interests in maintaining and strengthening
peace and security in the region are factors conditioning the need to develop
relations of friendship, good-neighborliness and lutually beneficial coopera-
tion. And when forces which have no interest in such a development of Soviet-
Turkish relations succeed in clouding then. it is precisely those forces
which profit rather than the peoples of the two countries. It is no secret

to anybody that the positive development of Soviet-Turkish relations does not
suit western imperialist circles. since such development hinders the imple-
mentation of the North Atlantic bloc bosses' plans for using Turkey's military
and economic potential and its territory against the Soviet Union. Hith good
relations with the USSR those circles find it much sore complicated to secure
Iroa lurkey restrictions of its sovereignty to the benefit of NATO interests
and to encroach upon its right to an independent and self-sufficient foreign
policy.

That talented and farsighted politician and creator of the Turkish republic.
Renal Ataturk. saw and understood well the imperialist nature of the Heat's
policy toward Turkey. he clearly recognized the danger of that policy for
Turkey. In the (ace of such danger. he noted, Turkish policy must be based
on principles providing for a nationwide struggle by the entire Turkish peo-
ple against inperiaiism, which is striving to destroy their national
existence.[ll

1
9031 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The eutente powers. K. taturk stressed in August 1920. in striving to
insure for themselves continued possession of the east and the opportunity
to exploit are attempting all out to destroy and crush us and. moreover.
with their wealth and might. are attempting to hinder the Bolsheviks. who
are accomplishing the liberation of all oppressed mankind and extending the
hand of friendship to our oppressed nation.[21

The events taking place in the near and Middle East region in our time
testify to the topicality of those words even today. K. Ataturk also under-
stood clearly that Turkey's security and independence and its econolic
development largely depend on the nature and level of relations with neigh-
boring states. not least the Soviet Union. That is precisely why the idea
of independence and the great benefit to Turkey of friendship and good-
neighborly cooperation with Our country runs through all his statements on
Turkey‘s relations with the Soviet Union.

A substantial path has been covered in the development of soviet-Turkish
relations since Ataturk's time. despite a certain period of coolness to
which they were subjected. to recent years particularly major changes have
been ohserved in them. thanks to efforts undertaken by both sides.

L. l. Brezhnev stressed in his report at the 25th CPSU Congress that Soviet-
Turkish cooperation “from the chiefly economic sphere is spreading gradually
to economic questions also."[3l

The steady upward development observed recently in Soviet-Turkish relations
has finally led to major changes in them. However. sign; of such changes
have been noted sore or less clearly even before. The now traditional con-
tacts and meetings between the two countries' leaders have played an in-
valuable role here. Back in 1967 a joint communique on the results of
Turkish Prime Minister S. Demirel's visit to the soviet Union and the soviet
leaders' talks with him stressed that "in relations between the Soviet Union
and Turkey there are no questions that would lead to a clash of their funda-
mental interests."

The 1972 declaration “on the principles of good-neighborly relations between
the USSR and Turkey" was an important landmark in the development of relations
primarily in the political field. The document stressed the two countries'
desire to develop ties and cooperation in accordance with the traditions of
peace. friendship and good-neighborliness established by V. I. Lenin and

K. Ataturk.

Usherlnn In extensive new opportunities for expanding all-round. mutually
beneficial Soviet-Turkish cooperation based on mutual understanding and
trust. the declaration at the same time exposed the falsity and unsoundaess
of assertions made by some circles both inside and outside Turkey casting
doubt on the sincerity of the Soviet Union's Leninist course of developing
genuinely good-neighhorly relations with the Turkish republic. This document

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFIC|AL USE ONLY

eloquently testlfics that Turkey can only see a readiness for friendship and
mutually beneficial cooperation on the part of its northern neighbor. The
sides mutually believe that the 1972 Soviet-Turkish declaration is an
important document insuring the strengthening of good-neighborliness, mutual
understanding. good will and cooperation. It fully accords with the main
aims of the final act of the conference on security and cooperation in EurOpe
and in acquiring new and broader significance in light of this document.l‘]
It is highly indicative that this lofty appraisal of the declaration was made
by the two sides 5 years after its approval and publication.

The positive onward development of political. trade. economic. cultural and
sports ties has naturally led to the need to introduce new elements into the
two countries' relations which would stimulate the further expansion and
deepening of cooperation. its spread to new areas and the establishment of
this cooperation on a more durable and long-term legal basis. Appropriate
accords to this effect were achieved by the two countries during the December
1975 official visit to Turkey by A. N. Kosygin. chairman of the USSR Council
of Ministers.

The sides' intention--enshrined in the Joint communique-~to prepare a politi-
cal document on the principles of good-neighborly and friendly cooperation
between the USSR and Turkey and to sign it in the immediate future at the
next summit meeting was of great significance.

In accordance with the above accords on agreement on developing economic
cooperation on a long-term basis. an agreement on scientific and technical
cooperation and an agreement on cooperation in preventing the hijacking of
civilian aircraft were signed in March 1977 during Turkish Foreign Minister
I.s. Caglaynngil’s visit to the Soviet Union. At the same time the sides
affirmed their intention to prepare and sign a political document..

Economic ties. of which there are long-standing and good traditions, have
played a substantial role in creating an atmosphere of good-neighborlineas
and friendship in Soviet-1 "h relations. Back in the prewar years textile
combines were constructed in tne cities of Kayseri and Nasilli with Soviet
technical and financial collaboration.

However. economic ties have gained really wide scope since an agreement on
constructing a number of major industrial enterprises in Turkey with soviet
collaboration was signed in March 1967. The commitments made by the soviet
side under this agreement have been met in full. Such major industrial
enterprises as the Iskenderun Metallurgical Combine. the Izmir Oil Refinery.
the Seydinhchir Aluminum Plant. the Bandirma Sulfuric Acid Plant and the
Artvin Plant for producing woodpulp fiber boards have been constructed and
commissioned in Turkey with soviet collaboration. Some other industrial
enterprises and projects have also been constructed.

New agreements and contracts on cooperation in expanding the metallurgical
combine. the aluminum plant and the oil refinery and also in constructing a

3
Fun urFICIAL use untr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ’_,.

number of major new industrial enterprises in Turkey have recently been

concluded between the Soviet Union and Turkey and are being successfully
inpleeented.

The construction of a den end reservoir on the Akhuryen (Arpa-Chei) border
river--projecte which will make it possible to irrigate large areas of lend
on both eidee of the border--hee been underway for eeverel years new. A
particular feature of that construction work is that the den and reservoir
not only are being constructed by combined efforts in a joint understanding
[as pnyekh] but also will be the first jointly cuneieeioned project end a
eyebol of good-neighborlineee.

The redrawing of were then 600 kl of the Soviet-Turkish lend border. which

was carried out in a spirit of coeplete mutual understanding. played a sub-
stentiel role in creating. developing end strengthening the eteoephere of
good-neighborlineee in relations between the Soviet Union end Turkey. The
work of deeerceting the Soviet-Turkish eee border end the border in the flooded
section of the Akhuryan reservoir is currently proceeding eucceeefully.
Naturally. the existence of a stable. precisely plotted border between two
neighboring states end the absence of any kind of claies on each other can-

not but have a favorable effect on their political end other relations.

Contacts end tiee elong military lines are also developing. As is known.

for a long tiee Turkish ruling circles dared not go against the NATO leader-
ship's directives and held beck free establishing similar ties with the

Soviet Union. however. the growing sense of realise finally prevailed.

Army general K. Evren. Turkish deputy chief of general staff. paid an offi-
ciel visit to the Soviet Union in spring 1976. N. G. Ogerkov. USSR first
deputy defense einieter end chief of general staff of the Soviet arsed forces.
paid a visit to Turkey 2 yeere later. It is extremely important that the
continuation end expansion of contacts and ties were advocated during the
eeetinge end talks of the two countriee' eilitary couendere. General K. Bvren,
now Turkish Chief of General Staff. has been invited to pay a return visit to
the Soviet Union.

In Novenber-Decenbor 1978 warships exchanged visits for the first tiee in
the history of Soviet-Turkish relations. A detachment of Soviet veeeele
vielted the Port of Steeboul. '"The Soviet vessels." the journal (YURYUYUSﬂ)
[as translitereted] wrote. "symbolize the USSR'e peeceloving policy toward
Turkey pureued since the first days of the October revolution." Turkish
warships in turn visited Odessa for eeverel days.

The aforementioned contacts have demonstrated the usefulness of extending
good-neighborly relations to such spheres es the military sphere and have
enabled the Turkish high con-end to see for itself that the Soviet army.
standing guard over its people'e peaceful labor. threatens nobody and.
poseesslnn as it does tremendous eight. is en ieporteat factor in eaintain—
lug and strengthening international peace. The contacts along eilitery

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lines have contributed to further strengthening the belief asong broad sec-
tions of the Turkish population that there is no danger to Turkey from the
Soviet Union, despite the lying assertions of some western circles.

The results of Turkish Prime Minister 3. Sesvit's June 1978 official visit
to the Soviet Union are evidence of the further strengthening and expansion
of Soviet-Turkish relations and their filling with more weighty substance.

In Turkey itself. right up to the tine the visit took place, an atmosphere
favorable to the Soviet Union was created and this is accounted for by many
reasons: Primarily recognition by the broadest sections of the Turkish
public that the Soviet Union's efforts are beneficial in consolidating peace.
security and cooperation for the peoples in the near and Middle East region
and also understanding the sincerity and friendliness of soviet policy. It
is indicative that a refusal to accept some false ideas and concepts has
also been observed in Turkish ruling circles. This has been confirmed by
official public statements that Turkey does not see a threat to itself from
the Soviet Union and has no intention of being a NATO outpost and spearhead
on its southeast flank. The increasingly loud voice of the progressive
democratic movement in Turkey calling persistently for Turkey's more resolute
departure from a prowsstern orientation and for further rapprochement with
the Soviet Union and other socialist cos-unity countries in all areas of
solutions has also been of important significance.

3. Bcevit's visit to the Soviet Union, his talks with L. I. Brezhnev and the
fruitful talks in the Kremlin were of cardinal significance from the view-
point of further developing relations between the two countries. Speaking at
a dinner in honor of the distinguished Turkish guest. A. N. Kosygin stressed
that the Turkish prise minister's visit continues and further develops the
beneficial process of spreading Soviet-Turkish cooperation from the mainly
economic sphere to include political questions. "Such a development,"

A. N. Kosygin noted, "is lawhgoverned. since political relations as a rule
becone more durable and more stable through the expansion of practical,
businesslike-like ties and contacts and they. in turn. have a stimulating
effect on the course of economic and other cooperation aaong states."

The signing of the political document on the principles of good-neighborly

and rrlendly cooperation between the USSR and Turkey as a result of the
Moscow talks essentially marks the beginning of a higher stage in the develop-
ment of Soviet-Turkish relations.

Embracing as it does virtually all areas of cooperation between the two
neighboring states, the document sues up what was already achieved in the
relations between our countries and it stipulates clearly the tasks, ways
and trends of further stimulating and expanding cooperation in the foresee-
able future. The document. whose content fully accords with the spirit and
letter of the final act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe, stresses primarily--and quite understandably-the political aspects
of Soviet-Turkish relations. It is difficult to overrste the significance

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the sides deteralnation enshrined in it to develop relations of good-
nelghborliness and cooperation on the basis of respect for each other'a
sovereignty. equality. way of life. social systea and territorial integrity
and noninterference in internal affairs. Mutual security and benefits and
also their determination to maintain both countries' borders as borders of
good-neighborliness and friendly cooperation. The aidea' pledged carefully
to observe the principles of nonuse of force or the threat of force in their
mutual relations and also to refrain from allowing their territory to be used
for con-itting aggression and subversive acts against other states are par-
ticularly meaningful. The docuasnt provides for cooperation between the
sides in international organizations and conferences, the expansion of opinion
exchanges and cooperation in deepening the process of detente and spreading it
to all regions of the world and also in questions of disarmament end the
struggle against imperialism, colonialism end racial discrimination.

The part of the document relating to the development of economic. trade,
scientific and technical cooperation and cultural. art. scientific end sports
exchanges is also extremely important.

The overwhelming majority of the Turkish public has welcomed the results of
the visit. Along with the political document. the signing of the soviet-
Turklsh agreement on demercating the continental shelf in the Black Sea and
also the accord achieved in Moscow on further substantial expansion of trade
and economic cooperation has caused great satisfaction in Turkey. The coun-
try's political opposition parties also gave a generally positive assessment
to the visit and the Moscow telke-a fact which confirms that the course of
developing and strengthening friendly. good-neighborly cooperation with the
Soviet Union has sost widespread support in Turkey.

The Turkish newspaper POLITIKA mounted a poll to elicit the attitude of the
country's population to this visit and the development of cooperation with
the USSR as a whole. Here are some of the comments made. Guner. a worker.
said "we are gladdened by economic and political cooperation and positive
mutual relations between Turkey and the Soviet Union. The peoples of Turkey
and the Soviet Union want fraternity and friendship." Gunaydyn. a student.
said "the visit is undoubtedly very important and useful to our people.

we know that the Soviet Union helped our country during the National Libera-
tion war without imposing any terms." Tuna. a housewife, said "I think that
Bcevit'a visit will be useful for developing relations between our country
and the Soviet Union." Chakyr, an official. said "the tireless struggle
waged by the Soviet Union to halt the arms race and insure peace and friend-
ship among the peoples frustrates the plans of those engaged in instigating
war in our region."

The broad positive reaction among all sections of Turkey's population to the
results of the visit attests, above all. that a kind of profound psychologi-

cal breakthrough has on the whole been accomplished in favor of the broad
development and strengthening of multifaceted ties and cooperation with the

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR O??ICMI. USE ONLY

USSR. In other words. the conviction that the Soviet Union is Turkey's
good neighbor and profitable partner has become the predominant conviction
among tl 1 Turkish public.

Soviet-Turkish relations have recently been developing actively in accordance
with the agremnts reached. Suffice it to say that in the ascend half of
1978 alone six 'Nrkish cabinet ministers paid business tripe to the Soviet
Union. For the first time in the history of Soviet-Turkish relations a 3-
year trade agreement was signed in November which will insure severalfold
growth in comaodity turnover between the two countries in the period 1979-
1981. As a result. trade will take its proper place in the complex of
relations between the two countries.

The third session of the Soviet-Turkish Mixed Intergovernmental Commission
on Economic Cooperation held in Moscow in October 1978 ended with positive
results. It discussed questions of considerably enlarging a metallurgical
and an aluminum plant and an oil refinery and constructing two large thermal
electric power stations, a hydrogen peroxide plant and certain other enter-
prises. as well as cooperation in other sphres, including totally new ones.

Considerable progress has recently been noted in the development of cultural
and sporting ties. Contacts in these spheres are being transformed increas-
ingly actively into mutually advantageous cooperation which. in addition to
the traditional exchange of artistes. figures in the arts and sciences and
sportsmen. manifests itself in forms such as melting a joint feature movie
and inviting Soviet choreographers, conductors. sports coaches and so forth
to work in Turkey.

Thus the policy aimed at developing friendship and good-neighborliness is
benefiting the peoples of both Turkey and the Soviet Union. At the same
time. despite the results achieved, there are brosd-unutilised opportunities
for further strengthening mutually advantageous multifaceted cooperation and
extending it to more new spheres. Success in realizing the above-mentioned
opportunities largely depends on the mutual desire to further expand rela-
tions in the various directions envisaged in the political document. And
careful and unserving fulfillment of the obligations imposed on each side
in accordance with the provisions of that document assumes special signifi-
cance in this context.

FOOTNOTES

1. K. Ataturk. "Selected Speeches and Statements." "Progress" Publishing
House. Moscow 1966, p 182.

2. lbid., p 101.
3. Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress, Political Publishing House. 1976 p 15.
6. See PRAVDA. 19 March 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Obshchestve "ZNANIYE", "HBZHDUNARODNAYA ZliIZN". 1977

7

cso: 180° roe orncmt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IﬂTBRNATIONAL

SOVIET 800K DEALS "118 ".8. SENATE, P083163 POLICY

Moscow AHERIKANSKIY SBNAT I VNESHRYAYA POLITIKA (The Alericen Senate and
;°;.:$ Policy) in Russian 1978 signed to press 13 Feb 78 pp 1-2, 232.
1 -

[Title, publication date, annotation, description. table of contents and
conclusion from book by Ya. I. Popova]

[Text]

pp 1-2

"Anerikenskiy senst i vneabnyaya politilts 1969-1976” [The A-erican Senate“
Foreign Policy, 1969-1971.]. Ye. I. Popovs. Institute of the USA and

Canada. USSR Acade of Sciences. lzdstel'stvo "Necks." Moscow, 1978.
Signed to press 13 Pebruery 1978, ‘300 copies. 232 pp.

p2

The book amines the role played by the 0.8. tsnate in the developeent of
11.8} foreign policy in the late 1960's and early 1970's, when Washington
began to reorganize its foreign-policy course es a result of the overall
warning in the international clilete. The book indicates the participation
of the Senate in that reorganization. the struggle in Congress concerning
such questions as ares linitation and the turning point in the relations
with the USSR, the NATO crisis and nethods of overconing it. and the
detest in Vietnan and the search for nev versions of a policy in Asia.

The book is intended for scientific vorkers, historians, and anyone with
an interest in 0.8. foreign policy.

p 232
TABLE. or camu'rs
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter II -- The Senate and the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty 67
The content of the treaty. The attitude of the goverment
and Congress to it ’08
Opponents of the treaty 53
The moderate group 63
Adherenta of the treaty 68
Debate results 81
Chapter III - The Question of Strategic Arms Limitation 86
The Senate and the 1972 Hoscow agreements 88
The 1973-1976 discussions 111
Chapter IV - Alternstive Policies in Asia 137
The turning point in the 0.8. China policy 137
Vietnam, 1969-1972: Leave or resain? 169
1973-1976: Cambodia and questions of military and
econaic aid to the Indochina goverment 163
The American military presence in Asia 186
Chapter V - Problus of European Policy in the 0.8. Senote 192
The reduction of American armed forces in Europe and
the Vienna negotiations 193
Relations with NATO allies 206
Conclusion 217
Index of names 228
pp 217-227
CONCLUSION

In 1969-1976 the Senate exerted a substantial influence upon the formation
of 11.5. foreign policy. That influence followed basically three direc-
tions - legislative activity, propaganda, and the development of a
foreign-policy course on the basis of feedback. that is. the assimilation
of the lessons provided by the preceding period and the consideration of the
new situation. both within the country and throughout the world.

The Senate's legislative effect became more intensified in all areas of
foreign policy, and that inevitably meant an invasion into the sphere of
actions of the executive authority. That led to an expansion in the
conflict between the two branches of authority. to the aggravation of

the “Congress vs. the President" problem. Congress set definite limits
to the president's powers in the field of foreign policy. in particular
by the adoption in July 1973 of a special decision that limited the presi-
dent's right to begin and to wage a war without Congressional sanction,
and the Hetergate scandal ended the struggle of the early 1970's with the
complete defeat of R. Nixon.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Senate's propaganda activities also increased. The foreign-policy
discussions were acconpanied by an appeal to the public. In the
statements nade by senators over television and in the press. and
sonatimes at Congressional neotings (for axe-ple. those agath the Vietnam
War). and in the agitational activities of various public organisations
linked with various blocs in the Senate. propaganda battles were waged on
questions involving relations with the 0583. the nilitary budget. the
Pentagon’s influence. etc. In this struggle. all the groupings that were
fighting one another attnptad. with each grouping using its own sethods.
to raise washington's shaken prestige in the country's public opinion.

As a result of the fact that the late 1960's and early 1970‘s were a period
of Washington's re-exanination of its foreign policy. there was an
especially strong manifestation of that important Congressional function
which official Merican historiography calls "representation of the
interests of the people." but which the literature of the radical-critical
trend calls representation of the interests of various groups of the
bourgeoisie. and which could more correctly be defined as the function of
feedback in the interests of protecting cspitaliua as a whole.

In executing this function. the Senate. in the course of its hearings

and debates. ascertained those conditions which were unfavorable for
American imparialisn. and set down sathods for adapting to the changing
situation. That process did not go in a snooth or autonstic nanner. It
evolved in the struggle of different versions of a foreign-policy course.
which were backed up both by the interests of individual bourgeois groups.
and also by the att-pt to unit all the versions by the canon task of
adapting the foreign policy to the new ratio of world forces.

The increase in the role of Congress. which had previously been observed
periodically in ".3. history. confirmed that parliamentariani- fulfills
a function that is beneficial for capitalism. by participating in the
re-exuination and correction of the political course, and thus. fros tine
to time. it acts as a deterrent on the tendency to the intensification of
the executive authority. As in the past. the increase in the activity of
the Senate and of Congress as a whole was closely linked with the upsurge
of sass novuents. by the heightening of the atmosphere of discontent.

and by the fall in the country's authority on the international scene.

All these phenolaena pointed out the necessity to take definite changes

in the country's foreign policy. and the Senate played the role of an
important link in that reorganisation. which occurred against a background
of conditions that were changing to the detriment of imperialist.

The internal placement of the forces in the Senate was detenined by the
presence there of three groupings that have not been formalised. but

which constantly sprang up there - the conservatives. liberals. and
moderates. the numbers of whom varied by years and depending upon the
nature of the question being discussed. The foreign policy was re-examined
in the struggle -ong these groupings. and discussions. with the weighing of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all the pros and cons. and that led to the develop-eat of an alternative
foreign-policy course.

The conservatives. who in 1969-1974 counted in their ranks approximately
to or. at times. somewhat more than (0. senators. predoninantly Republicans
and Southern nuotrsts. played the role of the defenders of the old
course. supporting its successivenass. The grouping defended the slowest.
and only the extremely necessary. adaptation to the new requiransnts of
life. the minimal concessions to the idea of datente. to the needs of
public opinion. and to tho gradual course of the national-liberation

movements. It usually prevailed in the Senate and forced its specific
decisions upon it.

The liberals. the amber of whom varied around the total of 30-35 (basically
Northern Democrats). acted as critics of the obsolete policy of the Cold
war. and spolte out in favor of a realistic recognition of the fact

that the 0.8. positions had been‘weakanad; they demanded that attention be
directed to the urgent necessity of improving the internal state of

the "sick society.“ and to reinforce the foundations of the regime. In
their specific proposals they were defeated more frequently than they
were victorious. but after a definite mount of time had elepsed. those
proposals found recognition and. albeit partially. were implemented in
governmental policy. By playing this role of preliminary planners. the
liberals. however. even in this function of theirs. manifested lack of
consistency. and their class limitation. Their position was characterized
by concessions to the rightists. by constant shiftings of various Ismbers
of the grouping to the right. to the camp of the moderates. but neverthe-
less their criticel stst-ents violated the nonopoly of the official views
that had formcd and contributed to the re-examination of the previous
policy of inflexible imperialin.

The moderates most frequently avoided any platform stat-seats or formulating
of principles. preferring practical arguments in each specific instance
and striving to find a "middle line" between the conservatives and the
liberals. That was promoted by the indefinitenees of its boundaries.

by its frequent division into the rightist moderates (the moderate
conservatives) and the leftist moderates (the moderate liberals). However.
its role was very substantial. inasmuch as the 'hiddle line" proposed by
it usually meant that very course that the government had adopted. end it
is not by accident that one of the basic parameters pertaining to the
moderates was their support of the president, which was shaken only by
Hatergate.

Thus. the Senate's activities reflected the fact that the 0.8. ruling
circles were not acting as a single. monolithic whole. Against a background
of the transition "from confrontation to negotiations" there arose serious
differences" of opinion in questions concerning the relations with the USSR.
the changing of methods as a result of the defeats suffered by the previous
policy. and the priority of domestic needs. Events have shown that the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Senate is not a "do-nothing collection of speechifiars." a purely

propaganda forun. but. instead. occupies a definite place in the nechn-
nisn of developing the country's foreign policy. by advancing and substanti-
ating possible alternatives in that policy.

The alternatives in the foreign-policy course which were proposed in the
Senate were of a rather stable nature.

The conservatives' program, at the basis of which lay the attelpt.

factually speaking, to preserve the Cold Uar. end the lack of desire to

lake any serious reconsideration of the old course. nanifested itself

as early as 1969 in connection with the "“1“! MI. “MDTOMEOMUOR TN“?-
when 16 conservatives spoke out against the ratification of the treaty

in general. end the najority oi the renaining ones voted in favor of
onenchente concerning the opportunity for the United States to transfer
nuclear am to its NATO allies. to annul the treaty unilaterally. etc.

In connection with the subsequent negotiations concerning arms limitation. ‘
the position of the rightists wee characterized by their enphasis upon drag-
ging out the agreement with the USSR. in forcing upon the USSR unjust
terns which would assure the superiority of the United States. The 1972
Jackson Anendnent. the acceleration of the Trident program in 1973. the
approval of the appropriations for the latest "ARV maneuvering Antircdar Ve-
hiclelsyutea. the attacks upon the Vladivostok Accord us being "unilaterally
profitable for the Russians” - all these reflected sufficiently clearly the
interests of the unitary-industrial conplex. The rightiste' line is
typified by the playing upon the chauvinietic enotions. incited by
statements about “losing." "capitulation." "the conversion of the United
States into a ascend-rate country." etc.

The policy proposed by the conservatives for Asia also had anti-Sovieti-
as its initial point. Rapprochenent with China was justified by the hostile
position of the liaoist leadership withrespect to the USSR. Although the
extreme rightists B. Goldwater. J. buckley. 1!. Long. etc. continued to

be afraid of "Red China.” speaking out against its inclusion in the
United Nations and in favor of retaining the reliance upon Taiwan. cost
of the conservatives became nore and nore finly resolved in their hopes
concerning the "coincidence of interests" with Peking. They defended
until the last opportunity any direct nilitary intervention in the
countries of Indochina and supported all the appropriations for aggression
in Vietnam. with the basic argueent of the rightists being the ”national
interests" of the United States in SOutheast Asia. which were interpreted
as the "containment of co-aunisn" and leadership in the ”defense of the
free world." than nest of the conservatives, as early as 1973. were
forced to agree to the banning of operations in Cambodia and Loan. as
well as to the limitation of the president's nilitary powers. the group
of extreme conservatives still voted against those proposals; afterwards.
eons of the rightists put their hopes. albeit short-lived ones. upon
uneconomic "aid” levers. which. it was proposed. could naintein the
bourgeois. pro-Aperican tendencies in the further develop-eat of the

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 08F. ONLY

countries of Indochina. The conservatives unanimously arose against any

curtailment of the American troops deployed in the Asian region of the
Pacific Ocean.

with regard to Europe. the conservatives took a course of overcoeing the
crisis of Atlantis. with the aid of the coeplete reinforcement of NATO.
which would have neant the actual continuation of the eilitary confronta-
tion with the Warsaw Pact countries and the dragging out of the Vienna
negotiations. which would have been inevitable. inasnuch as it was
proposed to conduct then free a "position of strength." The supremacy
and adeinistretion of the United States in Europe was openly opposed in
this conservative progr-I to the influence of the USSR and was accompanied
by a require-ant of exerting pressure upon the allies with the sin of

forcing th- to increase their nonetary contributions to the cause of
"Joint defense."

As a whole. it was a course aiaed at the area race. nilitery pressure.

and interference in the affairs of other countries. and aiaed at leadership
on the basis of force -- in the interests of defending and reinforcing

the positions of American iapsrialisa.

In principle. the liberals pursued the sane final goal, defending. in

the struggle against aocialiu. the bourgeois system and international
leadership of the United States. However. they proposed operating with

a greater consideration of the real-life ratio of world forces. They
proposed acknowledging. in a mber of instances. the insolvency of

the methods of exerting direct nilitery interference and dictates. and
remanded proceeding free the inevitability of coexistence with socialist
states. They spoke out against the idea of the "world polio-an."

feeling that that idea was beyond Usahington's capabilities. although
they did not reject the role of the United States as a "world leader."
The detenining factor in their position was not only the lore sober
evaluation of the place-cut of forces on the international scene. but also
the attempt to resolve. in the interests of social stability. the nest
acute donestic problems. that is. the idea of the priority of doaestic
tasks. which idea had foreed under the influence of the large-scale sass
protest aovoaents in the United States in the second half of the 1960's
and the early 1970's.

A peculiarity of the liberal argueentation was the constant aoralieing,
the pacificistic phraseolosy. in which the United States was depicted
as a traditionally peace-loving state. and the chief task of Anerican
foreign policy was declared to be its noral leadership. the salvation of
unkind frets nuclear catastrophe. etc.

An i-portant place in the liberals' prograa was assigned to the probl- of

area liaitation. which problee was in the center of the reorganization
of the international relations.

13

FOR OWICXAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1969 the entire liberal grouping. except for two senators. supported
the Nuclear Arse Nonproliferation Treaty and voted in favor of its
ratification without any stipulations or asandncnte. After organising
an active opposition to the expensive plans for the Sentinel and Safeguard
antinissilo defense systns. the liberals aphasited that the rejection
of those systess. or at least their suspension. would be an incentive for
achieving a state of accord with the USSR. The liberal grouping spoke
out against the rightista‘ attempts to add onto the resolution concerning
the ratification of the 1972 Moscow agrossenta certain amendments that
confirmed the unequal approach to tho further Soviet-Anerican negotiations
concerning strategic arms linitation. and the principle of Alerican
supra-soy. That grouping expressed a positive attitude toward the 19740
Vladivostok Accord and. in a 17 January 1975 resolution proposed by

2. Kennedy. U. Mondale. and C. Matthias. cane out in favor of adopting
at the Soviet-herican negotiations the principle of equality in both
the quantitative and qualitative upsets of araanents. The liberal
alternative also included a certain reduction of the appropriations for
various types of strategic weapons (Trident. B-l. etc.). and it was
indicated that the forced development of arms was not only reducing the
donestic social programs. but was also incompatible with detente.
Horeover. it could not serve as a "trump card at the negotiations.“

however. the liberals' opposition was not profound. Instead. it was
purely verbal and did not go beyond the confines of changing the eethods
of conducting successful foreign policy. In defending tho principle of
equality at the negotiations with the USSR. the liberals advanced the
idea of "reciprocal vulnerability." or "equilibriul of terror." which
could not be a genuine basis for reducing anuent. After suffering a
defeat in their aosndaents to the appropriations for military programs.
they usually voted unanimously for the military budget without those
mend-ants. in its entire volume. ”aging propaganda against the extras
aanifestations of oilitarin and the excessive influence of the Pentagon.
they acted in col-plate conaolidarity with all the reactionary forces in
”censoring" the Soviet actions involved in protecting the gains of
socialiua and the national-liberation covenants.

The liberal alternative of the policy in Asia was also of a dual nature.
It stipulated a positive attitude toward rapprochelent with China --
with appeals for a gradual approach. caution. the development of chiefly
economic ties. so as not to undermine the detentc. Reacting to the
profound domestic crisis caused byU.s. aggression in Vietnan. and
expressing acute uneasiness as a result of the lack of promises in the
war and the unreliability of putting one‘s hopes on the corrupt regimes
in Indochina. the liberals developed the thesis that the United States
do not have any major "strategic." "national" interests in that region or
any circulstances for Iilitary intervention. Under the influence of the
broad anti-Soviet aovnent in the country. they extended a cupaign of
criticising the goverment's actions. lads epproximstsly 30 proposals
concerning the ds-escalation of the war. and achieved the adoption of a

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resolution concerning the limitation of the president's military powers.
Many of the liberals came out in favor of the reduction of the 0.9.
military presence in the Asian region as s whole (the l97b discussion).
although the question of the actual nonintervention or withdrawal was

not posed: the subjects that were brought to the foreground were the
econoeic methods. the reinforcement of the alliance with Japan. etc.

The amend-ants introduced by the liberals were insignificant in nature
and. as a rule. were rejected.

The policy in Europe which was proposed by the liberals differed from

the conservatives' version in the requirement to reduce the U.8. military
presence in that region. The liberals emphasized the danger of a
confrontation that was capable, at any moment. to develop into a war:

the necessity to take into consideration the increased weight of the
European “center of power." and. in general. to overcome the numbness
that was typical of the “Cold war knights": the lack in Europe of any
"threat to the national security of the United States"; and, finally.

as in other questions. the priority of the domestic needs - the
opportunity. by reducing military expenses in Europe. to save approximately
$1-l.$ billion and to reduce unemployment in the country by creating

jobs not at foreign bases. but "right here at home."

Behind these arguments that were brought to the foreground by the liberals
were such concrete. "business-like" motivations as references to the
worsening state of the economy. especially the increase in inflation

and the instability of the dollar because of the gold drain for roreign
military expenses (the 1974 discussion was carried out during a period of
increased economic crisis in the United States); the appeal for the
reinforcement of the "political institutions" that had been undermined

by the lack of resolution of the acute problems pertaining to the cities.
education. poverty in the midst of abundance. which problems were

causing mass discontent and threatening the social stability; and
indications of the possibility of transferring a larger share of the
burden of NATO expenses to 0.8. allies.

Thus. the subject at hand was not some kind of profound re-exsminstion

of the fundamentals of the imperialistic policy of the United States in
Europe. but only limitations evolving fro- the reduction in the proportion
and influence of the United States. The demand to reduce military
presence aesns not the renunciation of the reliance upon NATO as the

chief bulwark in Europe. but only the reduction of the direct military
dictate. with the expansion of military-economic cooperation with the
allies (the "redistribution of the burden"). The liberals came out in
favor of the continuation of negotiations with the Warsaw Pact countries
that had been begun in Vienna. the rapid completion of which. incidentally.
they were not counting on.

The lack of any profound. fundamental differences between the conservative
program and the liberal one manifested itself in the minimal nature of

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

those practical steps which were advanced by the liberals. They

proposed reducing only the "permanent. worldwide. ground-forces" military
presence of the United States -- the most mobile air and naval forces
were not affected. The requiroaant to reduce the American Army of
300,000 men in Europe became increasingly indecisive with every passing
year: by 50 percent (1971). by 40 percent (1973). or by 23 percent (1976).
with some of the liberals agreeing to the reduction only outside of
Europe or only as a result of excess support services.

As a result. what was important was not so much the concrete proposals made
by the liberals (especially since those proposals were usually not
accepted by the Congress). as the overall approach embodied in them.

the approach to a zuropean policy that proclaimed a more realistic evalua-
tion of the U.s. capabilities than the conservatives had made. That
approach facilitated the implementation of the slogan "from confrontation
to negotiations." and the statements that were directed against the
excesses of the militaristic demands of the Pentagon, which had been
uuilding up people's fear of the mythical "Soviet threat." contributed to
a certain restraining of the military-industrial complex. exerting a
definite influence also upon public opinion both within the United States
and outside its confines.

The moderates' alternative was characterized by the attempt to find a
compromise solution between the necessity of adapting to the new conditions
and the maintaining of the command positions of the United States. and
hence. by a pragmatic approach to each concrete situation.

In the question of limiting strategic arms. the moderates' program

was summed up as the recognition of the necessity of negotiations and.

at the same time. the retention of all the Pentagon's military programs
(although. unlike the conservatives' course. without their excessively
forced development). The moderate senators voted in favor of the Nuclear
Arms Nonproliferation Treaty (seven with stipulations; ten without any
conditions). During the ratification of the 1972 Provisional Agreement.

a considerable number of them supported the Jackson Amendment. but many of
the moderates attempted to weaken its formulation and voted against the
Pentagon's demand, which was advanced as a condition for the "recognition"
of the Hoscow agreements. to appropriate additional amounts for the Trident.
the 8-1. and other "exotic systems." In connection with the further
negotiations for strategic arms limitation (SALT-ll). the moderates'
position was characterized by statements concerning the "dramatic change
in the world" which one would have to take into consideration. by the
demand that the negotiations not be disrupted. by verbal consent to the
principle of equality. and. simultaneously. by the attempt to haggle a

bit more. using as the "trump card at the negotiations" the development

of new military programs. The approval by the moderates of the

accord that had been achieved in Vladivoniok was accompanied by their
vote in favor of accelerating underground tests. However. in all the
instances that were mentioned, there was a manifestation of the tendency

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ON!”

on the Part of tho moderates to limit the Pentagon's appetites somewhat
(the i973 HcIntyre Amendment against the acceleration of the Trident
programz the attempt to postpone certain nppropriationsfor a counterforce

weapon in view of the possible attainment of agreement with the USSR in
1974). .

In connection with questions of Asian and European policy. the moderate
group expressed sufficiently clearly the goal of the maximum retention

by the United States of its leading role in those regions. the continua-
tion of interference in their internal affairs, speaking about the danger
of falling into isolationism. of creating by U.S. withdrawal various
vaccuns which "would inevitably be filled by the USSR." as well as the
“vital. longoterm interests" of the United States both in Asia and in
Europe. however. the noderate course differed from the conservative
course by its greater flexibility and. in the face of foreign-policy
defeats. stipulated certain departures from the previous global claims.

Rapprochement with Maoist China. which had begun at the beginning of the
1970's. was viewed by the moderates as a counterbalance to Soviet influ-
ence and the liberating struggle of the peoples of Indochina. but at

the same time there was developed the idea of a "half-turn," of supporting
a balance between the USSR and Chinese People's Republic (a "balanced
policy"), unhurriedneas in the carrying out of that course in general.
particularly the preservation for a definite amount of time of "two

Chinns" (although mention was also made of returning Taiwan to China in
the future).

In Indochina the moderate position meant the attempt to drag out the de-
escalation of the war so as to achieve, if not an "honorable peace." than at
least the preservation of a support in South Vietnam. They hoped to
achieve this not by an expansion of the military offensive (the moderates
did not approve the extension of military actions to Cambodia and Laos;
proposed. for the most part. the concentration only upon air actions; etc.).
but by means of diplomatic negotiations in Paris or with the aid of the
United Nations, the convoking of an Asian international conference. They
allowed renunciation of direct military interference by the United States
and the gradual reduction of the aid to puppet regimes. but only in the
indefinite future. Thus. that course was reduced to the slogan. "leave.
but not immediately." and only after reinforcing pro-American regimes as
base points for the further U.S. policy in the Asian region.

After the final collapse in Vietnam. the moderate version retained the
requirement for American military presence in Asia, but the tasks that
were brought to the foreground were those pertaining to the European
policy (especially in connection with the economic difficulties and the
political crises of 197A). The moderate program with respect to Europe,
having as its initial point the very same idea of the leading role of the
United States. which was allegedly protecting "its security" oversees,
included the nonconsent to any considerable reduction in the American

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military forces or NATO. and only some of the aoderate senators voted
in 1974 for the reduction of 75.000 men, which was depicted as a
”trump card at the negotiations" in Vienna. but the reconsideration of
that position was considered to be possible when the Atlantic ties are
reinforced.

All three foreign-policy courses that were proposed in the Senate in
l969-l97b. as has been noted. were somewhat altered under the influence
of events. but, with regard to their basic direction. remained stable:
the conservatives gravitated toward a policy of the past. the liberals
came forward as initiators of a tactical re-examination, and the
moderates attempted in a pragmatic manner to unite both views. adapting
to the current conditions. In the struggle among the alternatives,
therS- position on the considered international questions was formed.
That struggle was one of the essential factors that determined the
fluctuations and zigzegs in Hashington's tactics. Without changing the
imperialistic essence of the 0.8. foreign policy. that struggle was
nevertheless of importance. undermining the course of monopoly imperialism
and revealing certain additional opportunities for the struggle waged by
the progressive forces for the peaceful coexistence of states with
opposing social systems.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Hanks." Moscow 1978.

5075
080: 1800

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

SOVIET PEOPLE LIKE NOVEL ABOUT UKRAINIAN JEHS
Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 2 Mar 79 p 3

[Interview with Anatoliy Rybakov. author of novel on Soviet Jews, "Heavy
Sand." by Livio Zanotti]

[Text] Moscow. The season's literary event is. above all, political.
The novel "‘l‘jagelij pisok." which in Italian would sound like “Sabbia
pesante" [Heavy Sand]. is 200 pages long. It gets inside a Jewish saga
in s northwest Ukrainian village from the beginning of the century to the
Nazi occupation during world War II. This subject has been taboo in the
Soviet Union. The author, Anatoliy Rybskov, 67. is himself a Jew. his
real name is Aronov. However, he is unknown to most readers. he is a
realist. a social reporter more than an investigator of the soul. He is
also a solitary person, shy. in conflict with ambitions and disturbing
ideas that are sometimes contradictory.

no participates passionately in the Jewishness of his characters, and he
reaffirms their racial identity even before, if not against. the fact that
they are Soviets. Nonetheless. some critics close to the "dissent" deny
that he has the right to represent the traditions of Israel in Russia.
They question his ability to do this, criticizing him for having allowed
himself to be assimilated by the regime. They recall his remissive and
comfortable coexistence with Staliniam. Furthermore. it was the nagsrine
OKTIABR. old bulwark of Slavophile nationalism, that published "heavy Send.“
The magazine is anything but free of suspicions of anti-Semitism. However
it is not just any publication. These are the reasons for the uproar
caused by the novel, a best seller already sold out.

To borrow the three issues of the magazine with the Rybakov novel from the
Lenin Library it is necessary to get on a list and wait for months before
obtaining them. The black narket price of the book at Kuznetskij is more
than 20 times the cover price. 60 rubles. equivalent to almost 65.000
lire. For some classics. Bulgakov or Hajakovskij, and the protagonists

of the literary fringe. Okudjava. Baranskaja. Trifonov. this is normal.
But this never happened to a well-alined author who was brought up in the
shelter of the writer's union.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What sakes hundreds of readers write to Rybakov? For weeks the eailnan
has been making two trips a day with a full sack at the attractive wooden
dasha, in which he has lived for 15 years with is wife just outside

Peredelkino. the village 25 kilometers from Moscow where Pasternak lived
and is buried. -

"Many [letters], but not all, are free Jews. They say different things:
the pride of seeing testimony to the courage of the Jews in war after so
nany have told only about their resignation; curiosity about the characters.
of the novel which sone consider autobiographical and therefore peopled '“
with persons who really existed. Altogether. they are an expression of
solidarity for the people who fight and suffer."

He is not tell but robust. He wears a heavy sweater to protect hiIaelf

from the 20 degrees below zero during these days of Russian winter when the
heating system does not entirely keep the cold out of the house. The
writer sinks his hands into the boxes full of envelopes and scattered sheets
of paper. He pulls some out randomly. he glances at the signatures that
are by engineers. farners. students. Ian and woeen. nest of them free the
western regions of the USSR.

True Story
[Question] how do you explain so ouch interest?

[Answer] I do not know. Perhaps because I have been the first to deal
with s delicate and tragic story of this kind. Perhaps because there are
nany people who are waiting to recognize the-selves by finding their own
past.

[Question] Hhat led you to write "Heavy Sand" and why now?

[Answer] The eaterial is authentic. I simply reworked it. These Jews.

who pass froe the Czarist ghettos in the difficult years of the Bolshevik
Revolution and the Civil Har--and found the strength to love each other and
to live peacefully before taking up arms against the Nazis--ere the relatives
of an acquaintance. He told as about their joys and sacrifices. their
nobility and weaknesses. I transferred all this into the town of Iy parents
because I knew it well. In 3 years I wrote and rewrote. I had entitled

it Rachel, the name of the Iain protagonist, then I preferred "heavy Sand."
recalling that in that part of the Ukraine the earth is soft and sandy,

while for the Jews in my story it was so heavy that they were buried in it.

[Question] Is it by chance that you wrote it now?
[Answer] I thought it was the right tine. There nay have been other
noaente in the past and perhaps there will be others in the future. The idea,

the need to do it, case to me now. I believe it was necessary. It is diffi-
cult for me to give any further explanation.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] "Heavy Sand" has aroused interest, but also consternation.
They say that its Jews are not always authentic. They say that you came to
know them after having never met them for a long time.

[Answer] They say I won a Stalin prize...
[Question] Yes, they also say that.

[Answer] When I received the price, we wrote about other things, the
grand buildings. the great abnegations.... I had always worked as an
engineer in the automobile transportation sector. I was anong truck
drivers and I described their lives. It was honest work. Hhen they
published then I was 50 years old. I felt that I was little more than a
boy, with an entire life before me and all the time to do everything I may
have desired. I began to write “Heavy Sand" more than 20 years later, with
the wounds of war and diseased lungs that reminded me every day about my
old age. and it was no longer life that was before me, but death. It is
a time when one can no longer write just anything, to waste the little
remaining energy. I decided to write the essentials of what I feel and

what interests me.

[Question] The magazine you chose to publish it was also disoriented.
The fame of OKTIABR contradicts what it appears the spirit of the novel

was to be.

[Answer] I made no choice. In fact, another magazine, whose editor
finally gave up on it, was supposed to publish it. So I went to OKTIABR.
Its label as a conservative organ was well known to me. I had contributed
to it years ago. But that reputation was made for it by Vsevolod Kocetov.
The new editor, Aleksei Ananiev, wants to change it and I believe my novel
helped him. I thank him very much. He has behaved with courage and

dignity.
Racism
[Question] Who are these Jews in "Heavy Sand"?

[Answer] I still remember the old man who said to me: "He are Jews not
because of the blood that flows in our veins but because of what spills
out of our veins."

[Question] There are those who say that after the Holotov-Ribbentrop pact
the Soviet press began. for diplomatic reasons, very cautiously to give
out information on the anti-Semitic policy of Hitler's Germany. The Jewish
population of the USSR thus was supposed to have been caught in many cases
unprepared for the Nazi invasion. Hhat did the Soviet Jews know about

the German race theories?

[Answer] I personally knew about them. When in 1933 Hitler seized power.
our press explained what fascism, racism, Hitlerism was. We all knew it very

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wcll. Certainly we could not imagine that the solution of the Jewish
question for Hitler meant extermination. the uprooting of the entire people
of Israel. Nobody could have imagined this. because it was beyond human
imagination. The Jews. however. knew about racism. what it was. Tor this
reason most of then evacuated toward the east as the arsdes of the Third _.
Reich advanced. The protagonist of my novel. Rachel. was among those whoa
did not want to believe it. she had been in Switzerland, had known the
Germans; said they were a magnificent. civil. cultured nation; it could

not be true that they would assassinate children and old people. She
remained. inducing many others to stay with her; and she dies resisting

in the ghetto-another victim of the illusion of the enlightenment.

[Question] Does Rachel. her husband Jacob. and their children have any
political education?

[Answer] No. they are not party sembers--if that is the question. Neither
an I. I wanted to write about a proud and courageous people, the Jewish
people. of their feelings and national dignity. which do not prevent them
from living peacefully with other people: Byelorussians. Ukrainians.
Russians. live and die together with the Jews. I told about a people who.
like all the others. has its saints and criminals. its honest and dishonest
people. But since in every ghetto there was resistance--at Warsaw, at
Minsk. at Vilnius--as a writer I believed I had the right to present my
characters as undefeated men and women. He must affirm mutual respect

along peoples and among individuals. "Heavy Sand" is intended to contribute
to this.

[Question] Does a Jewish'condition exist today in the Soviet Union?
[Answer] Personally, I do not feel it. In what sense do you mean?
[Question] But the Jews are not just any people anywhere in the world--
because they are a people who are dispersed. who live therefore in a special
situation, forced to assimilate the culture of other peoples. The old man
said it: "The Jews are the blood they have spilled." .[end of interview]
Rybakov is also Aronov. "heavy Sand" is not a novel about the Soviet

Jews, however. nor is it their history. Perhaps it is only an attempt to

present them as a people: enough to arouse interest and polemics beyond
the ordinary, another sign of their existence.

COPYRIGHT: 1979. Bditr LA STAHPA S.P.A

6036
6505 3106

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL ‘

SOVIET GERMAN VILLAGE IN SIBBRIA VISITED
Hamburg STERN in German 22 Feb 79 Special Supplement pp 1-7
[Article by Norbert Kuchinke: "Little Germany in Siberia"t

[Text] Podsosnovo was founded in tserist times. deay,
the village of 2.000 people. with its Schneiders.
Schmidts or Raisers, is a model kolkho: with huge
yields ('mm are wallowing in plenty"). STERN reporter
Kuchinke visited these "Soviet citizens of German
nationality."

The breakfast table has been laid. There is vodka and wine. meet, ham,
tomatoes. cucumbers. “Frost" [your healthll. says Friedrich Friedrichovich
Schneider; "be our guest." We raise and clink our glasses. "Naadrovya."
In a German village. In Podsosnovo--which means "under the pine trees."

We had arrived a couple of hours before, at 6 in the morning. It took 6
hours by jet from Moscow to Novosibirsk, and then half an hour by small
plane to Barnaul. There we boarded a train for Slavgorod. Another 8 hours.
and then a bumpy 2-hour ride by car into the Alta Mountains, to Podsosnovo.
We have reached the end-~the end of the world--6,000 ice-cold kilometers
east of Moscow.

Pricdrich Priedrichovich Schneider is the boss here. He is responsible for
the 2.000 "Soviet citizens of German nationality" (their official designa-

tion) living in Podsosnovo, responsible for the "eases. the Haimbuchs. the

Schmidts, the Kaisers--and the Schneiders, who alone make up 20 percent of

the population.

After our arrival, Schneider, whose houseguests we will be for 5 days,
allows us 3 hours' sleep. Then the village program for the Heat German
guests begins. In the kindergarten. the neatly lined up little ones sing
German and Russian folksongs and recite poems. Then. for 3 hours, youths
perform on the piano. the violin and the accordion. After that an exhibi-
tion game by the local volleyball team, followed by a Western-Eastern pop
concert of the local youth band.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The village is fetlng us. its cousins fron the SRO. as if we were on a state
visit. A show for the caaeras? Produced in order to divert attention froa
the difficult situation of other Soviet Screens who went to. but are not
allowed. to go to the Heat?

Podsosnovo ls Along the Richest Kolhhoecs of the Soviet Union

The cordiality. the hospitality in Podaoanovo is genuine. The pleasure at
being able to welcoae Ger-ans is as noticeable as the pride in being able to
display ane's life's work.

Podaosnovo is a kolkhos. an agricultural production collective. In contrast
with most kolkhosea in the USSR. which do not attain the production prescrib-
ed by Moscow--either because they are poorly administered or because their
members lack true activation of perforaance--this holkhor does well.

It does so well. in fact. that it is aaong the richest in the Soviet Union.
And this despite the fact the steppe country is not exactly fertile. But
the settlers have built sophisticated irrigation systems here and planted
trees to protect the harvest free sandstoraa.

0f the 7.000 sheep. the 1.300 head of cattle. the 660 arctic foxes. the 120
horaes--snd aillions of bees and the grain they grow--the kolkhosnihs. accord-
ing to Schneider. "wallow in plenty."

The annual turnover of the people of Podaosnovo is 3 aillion rubles (9
aillion deutsche parka). After deducting costs. there rcaains aore than 3
million deutsche asrks. "hat is to be done with the "profit" is decided
collectively. the villages deciding theaaelves whether to buy grain or cattle.
erect new agricultural preaises or pour out increased bonuses.

Ninety-five percent of families have their own house-sonetiaas with acre
than seven rooaa. Their own hoaes stand on land of 5.000 square aeters

made available to than by the kolkhos for an annual rent of 66 deutsche
marks. A house, built without the benefit of an architect. costs the
settler about 15.000 deutsche Iarks. of this aaount 3.000 to 6.000 deutsche
marks are loaned by the kolkhozes to their aeabers without interest over
periods of 10 years or longer.

The steppe Ger-ans of Podsosnovo live such better today than aost other
Soviet citizens. But that has not always been so. Three hundred years ago.
Catherine 11 fetched their ancestors to Russia in order that they eight
colonize the unpopulated expanses. Many settled on the Volga. others

later eoved on to Siberia. There. each of than was allowed to take as

such land as he was able to work. But the work was rugged as can be. with
temperatures of ‘0 below Celsius in the winter and 60 above in the auaaer.

in 1902. Volga Ger-ans founded Podsosnovo. At that tile they dwelt in tents
or snail log cabins and hardly had anything to eat-only what they could

get fro- nsture. They went fishing and hunting. But gradually they aanaged
to aaintain the-selves as farmers.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After Ultlur'u invasion of the Soviet Union. the "Autonomous Socialist Soviet
Republic of Volga Germans" founded under Lenin was dissolved. with its
population being deported to Siberia and Kazakhstan. Many took refuge in
Podsosnovo. Moving in with relatives or disappearing among people with the
same name. they contributed to the well-being of the kolkhoz.

ﬂie beat known citizen of Podsosnovo and one of the most influential people
among the 2 million Germans living in the Soviet Union today is the trained
agronomist Friedrich Friedrichovich Schneider. our host. his parents case
(to: the Volga. from the village of Tennhof. &. not even Schneider knows
where his ancestors lived in Germany. his slight Swabian accent indicates
Swabia as the original homeland. He talks a German-Russian hotchpotch.
"The Shofiera (chauffeurs) drove me" or "Dogovorilis (agreed). we will neat
at noon tomorrow." The "comrades" meet in the street. when they want to
buy plane tickets. they babble: "I want tickets on a Samolet." To relax on
a couch at home and watch television sounds like this: "last i do at hose.
on a divnn. when I take a look in televlzor."

Schneider is the undisputed boss in Podsosnovo. Shepherd Jakob Jakoblevich
lgs says jokingly about his comrade who is the head of the village: "There
is a god in the world. and one here in the village." The kolkhosniks also
occasionally call their village "Schneiderland."

The hero of Labor is Better Off than lvan. the Normal consumer

1he 52-year-old kolkhoz chairman Schneider has accomplished something only
few people in the Soviet Union can ever accomplish. He is deputy of the
Supreme Soviet and has been awarded the highest decoration of the worker-
and-peasani stnte--"hero of socialist labor.” The German faraers' leader
got the high order. of pure gold. for "outstanding building efforts. plan
fulfillment and pioneer work." A rise in the standard of living goes along
with the honor. Once a year he can travel gratis by plane. ship or train
to any vacation spot in the Soviet Union. he can use all municipal trans-
port gratis and pays less for housing than Ivan. the normal consumer.

Sixty Years of Atbelsn-But the Bible is Also Still Right

in contrast with other ethnic minorities of the Soviet Union. Schneider's
knlkhozniks do not haVe a German school. The language of instruction in
Russian. But from the second grade on. German is taught as a second
language 4 hours a week. and from the sixth grade on 5 hours a week.
Schneider is optimistic: "No one forgets the dialect here; only now we
also try to learn standard German." Classrooss are decorated with quota-
tions from great German writers suitable for a communist-ruled village-
like Schiller's "i embrace you. millions" or Goethe's "Only one who has
worked his whole life with body and soul can say. 'l have lived.'”

Even Halter Ulbricht. meanwhile also forgotten in the 60R. still gets his

due in the Cernan village: "Be bold in your thinking. purposeful in your
work and carefree in your play."

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVVICIAL USE ONLY

1here is no church in the village. although neny inhabitants are still
baptised Lutherans or Catholics. "The little old women.“ confesses a
Lutheran." nevertheless have their church service-oat hone." Despite 60
years of official atheisn. the bible in still the nest widely read publi-
cation among the old people.

Regardless of their faith. the Gernana in Podsoenovo stick together. but
they no longer have any contact with Gerneny. ”My nether tongue ls Gernan.
but the language of ny country is Russian." says Johann Diesendorf. 62.
who fought against the Gernans. and was wounded. in the Red Arny.

Ror young arctic fox breeder Friedrich Gustavovich Heiser. 31. who likewise
has served in the Red Arny. in Tashkent. Germany neans hardly nore than
"Angliya" or "Pranteiya" (Ragland or France). though he narrled a Miss
Keller iron the village. loss Schneider graphically explains where one

feels at hone. saying: "A rabbit feels at hone wherever it has its food.”
While the nilknaid Schneider would rather visit Gornany than. say. Italy
("after all. I know the language"). no one wants to nigrate to the FRO.
because,there are neither friends nor relatives in the Rest. Says Schneider:
"Our Germany is here."

when the people of Podsosnovo build houses. they help their ”cunrades" on
weekends. Next to the houses. there are stables everywhere in which sheep.
cattle. chickens and pigs are kept privately. ln snall greenhouses there
grow "private" cucumbers. tomatoes and lettuce.

nose Schneider Hay Check Any Private Savings Account

But the socialist state sees to it that in Podeosnovo too there is a linit
to everything and that the industrious farners do not get too rich. Private
holdings of cattle are carefully regulated: no fanily can have nore than
20 sheep. 3 pigs and l cow. Chickens. geese. bees and rabbits are not in-
cluded in the state count. however.

Meat. skins and honey nay be sold by the kolkhosniks at so-called free
kulkhos narkets. where. as in the Rest. prices are regulated by supply and
denand. And what they get is two or three tines as nuch as at state pur-
chasing esteblishnents. Thus the self-suppliers get fenily incones of up
to 3.000 deutsche narks--a proud sun by Soviet standards.

1he well-to-do inhabitant of Podsosnovo is also notarized above average.
with 70 privately owned rars--”Hoskoviches" or "Zhigulis”--negotiating
highways and ice roads. "I think that if we got faster delivery of cars.
every fanlly here would have one." says Johannes ﬂeinrichovich Beinbuch.

boss Schneider. who has the right to check any of the savings accounts.
with his nonthly incone of not quuie 700 rubles plus loo rublee' deputy's

per dien. in not by any neans the richest nan in the village. Nor does
he own hie own hone. his sole luxury in a nediun-site Volga car.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
POI OFFKCIAL USE ONLY

Politico ore of little concern to the villngere. Dieputee are rare. and
minor oifenaee ere punished by collective ceurte with email finer. The
court of Jurisdiction ia located in the neareet town. Schneider eeye: "But
in our whole history. none of on has ever nppenred before the court."

On their deyo off the people of rodeoanovo generally work on their houae or
in the garden or tend to their private cattle.

Big ceiebretione generally take place only on Soviet holldeye. euch ae Hey
boy or the anniversary of the October Revolution. 0n thoae occeeione the

eultipurpeee hell need for sports. cultural eventa and enterteineent. with
its more than 1.000 neete. ie coepletely filled.

Particularly during the long winter evening; the kolkhoenike eit together

in their parlors. drinking vodka and wine (ae yet there ie no beer. a
brewery being only in the planning ntege). eating pork and beef neotbelle
dripping with fat and einging their favorite song. "our hymn": "0 beautiful
Podeoenovo lend. who knows if we will eeet again. And when we look. when
we look over the gate. over the gate. we aee Pedoosnovo land. and when we
peep and peep through the holea. the holea. we see Podeonnovo lend.”

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Gruner--Jnhn as 5 Co

8790
680: 1826 END

27

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY