FOR ()FFN‘IM. “SI". ONLY

JPRS L/10029
5 October 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 742

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERLALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
CONGO

Briefs
Eighth AGPAOC Conference
UNDP. FAO Agrements
Lumber Fair's Program
Brezhnev Message
Petrobras in Hydrocarbon Exploration
French Financing Agreements

GAMBIA

Ways To Establish Sane-Gambia Union Examined
(Thomas a. Kanzs; mum: AFRIQUE, 19-26 Aug 81)

GUINEA-BISSAU

No Solutions Seen for Troubled Economy
(Hugues Viol; MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS,
6 Sep 81) ..........................................
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: CIA-RDP82-00850R0004000600066

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER
BCEAO Report on Recent Factors in Economic Situation
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 21 Aug 81
Briefs
Elimination of Epidemics, Endemica
NIGERIA
Plans for New Capital of Abuja Described
(Robert Walsh; NEH AFRICAN, Aug 81) ...........
Plans for New Port in Lagos Detailed
(NEH AFRICAN. Aug 81) .........................
Briefs
Border Fence
SENEGAL
Briefs ‘

cissoko on French Relations

RND Support of Senegambia
SAR Expansion

Laying of ISRA Foundation Stone

SIERRA LEONE

Looting, Violence Reported in Makeni
(RENTER, 19 Sep 81)

aoooooooilooooltollooiooool

UGANDA

0A" Urged To Review Its Own Charter, End Country's Terr
(Editorial; NEW AFRICAN, Aug 81) .

noose-cocoa.-

ZAMBIA

Briefs
Coal Deposits
Purchase of Railroad Cara

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060006-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

ETHIOPIAN AIR TRANSPORT AGREEMENT-Niger and Ethiopia recently concluded an air
transport agreement at Niamey whereby, as of next October, Ethiopian Airlines will
open a route linking Addis Ababa, Khartoum, Kano, Niamey, Bamako and Dakar. At
the same time, Air Africa, the international company of which Niger is a member,
will inaugurate a Dakar-chddah link. [Jug [Paris means ‘rkomcwx ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 21637 EOPYRIGIT: Rene Horeux et

Cie Paris l98_1_7 9434

C80: 4719/349

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISl‘I ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

OPPOSITION LEADBR'S DEBTS-A record of the debts contracted by the Central African
opposition leader Ange Patasse with some banks and companies was sent to Paris

in late August by a French colonel attached to the Bangui branch of the Center for
the Exploitation of Military Intelligence [CERH]. According to this record, the
leader of the Central African People's Liberation Movement [HLPC] reportedly owes
nearly 250 million CPA francs to the Central Investment Bank in Bangui and nearly

13 million to the Franco-Central African Tobacco Company [FCAT]. The latter, of
whose board of directors Patasse was chairman, is a joint company with the partic-
ipation of the French Service for the Industrial Exploitation of Tobacco and Hatches
[SEITA]. [Text] [Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1078, 2 Sep 81 p 62] [COPYRIGRT:

Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981]

CSO: 4719/401

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

KAMOUGUE REPORTS ARMY HUTINIES
JN142145 London REUTER in English 2125 GMT 14 Sep 81
[Report by Stephen Powell]

[Text] Moundou, Chad, 14 Sep (REUTER)--A series of army mutinies has rocked the
south of Chad this month and the country's vice-president says he suspected Libya
of fomenting the uprisings.

Libyan troops have been stationed in the northern half of strife-torn Chad since
late last year but have not so far penetrated to the non-Muslim south.

Vice-president Nodal Abdel Kader Kamougue, a southerner, told REUTERS in an inter-
view in Houndou yesterday that he suspected Libya of having a hand in a wave of
army pay revolts. But he stopped short of accusing Tripoli of being behind the
revolts. The soldiers have not received a regular salary since civil war broke
out in the capital. Ndjamena, in February 1979.

Over the last 2 weeks, mutinies have hit the southern towns of Houndou, Doba, Seth
and Koumra. Colonel Kamougue acknowledged that the authorities had been powerless
to quell the uprisings. He said the soldiers had seized government funds, detained
army officers and government officials and in some instances assaulted them.

Colonel Kamougue denied that he himself had been detained in Moundou earlier this
month. Informed church sources, in direct contact with members of the gendarmerie,
said the vice-president had spent one night in prison at the beginning of the month
and several days afterwards under house arrest.

The most spectacular revolt broke out on 9 September when truckloads of soldiers,
firing automatic rifles and bazookas into the air, took over the southern town of
Sarh, the third largest in Chad. They seized government officials, army officers
and requisitioned government funds.

Colonel Kamougue said no deaths had been reported anywhere in the south, but he
added that the situation remained delicate. "It is delicate. He must find a
solution. The soldiers must understand that there is no money."

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Libya recently signed an agreement to lend Chad money to pay the salaries of civil
servants for 1 month, he said. But no provision was made to pay a full salary
to the troops.

Colonel Kamougue said he could not put a figure on the amount of money the troops
had taken. Informed sources said the troops had seized 37 million CPA francs
($130,000) from the government treasury in Sarh, 39 million francs ($138,000)

in Koumra and at least 22 million francs ($78,000) in Houndou.

The revolts, which began in Moundou at the beginning of September, were accompanied
by reports circulating among residents that the government of the southern zone,
the 12-man permanent committee. had embezzled public funds. Colonel Kamougue said
"some bizarre situations" had arisen in the region's finances and that there had
been some embezzlement.

Southern Chad has so far remained relatively sheltered from the devastating effects

of the recent civil war. The zone has set up its own de facto administration,
the permanent committee, which runs the five southern prefectures.

(ISO: [0700/517

u
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

BRIEFS

EIGHTH AGPAOC CONFERENCE--The eighth conference of the Management Association of
the Ports of West and Central Africa [AGPAOC], which concluded on 7 September in
Pointe-Noire. was in particular devoted to the development of maritime transport,
the adaptation of port installations to new traffic conditions and the problems
of transport of the exports and imports of the member countries of the associa-
tion. It should be noted. in another connection, that the traffic of the seaport
of Pointe-Noire totaled 7,052,000 tons for 1980, the director general of the port
announced. He stated that studies will be undertaken in 1982 to permit the spe"
cialization of the port in three sectors (commercial, industrial. and petroleum
export area). [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No
1870 ll Sep 81 p 2338] [COPYRIGRTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981]

UNDP, FAO AGREEMENTs--The Congo. on the one side. the UN Development Program

[UNDP] and the Food and Agriculture Organization [FAO]. on the other side. signed
on 2 September in Brazzaville an agreement providing assistance to the Coffee and
Cacao Office [OCC] in organizing support and staffing services. It should be
called to mind moreover that four agreements totaling $301,000 were signed recently
in Brazzaville by the Congo on the one side and the UNDP and FAQ on the other side.
These agreements deal with the study of the question of food self-sufficiency.
prevention of post harvest losses. establishment of a national soil service. and
training in the biological struggle against cochineal insects. [Text] [Paris
MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1870 11 Sep 81 p 2338] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981]

LUMBER FAIR'S PROGRAM-~ln October. unless there are last minute changes. the
Lumber Fair organized by the Congolese Lumber Office 13-17 October will take

place as follows: -13 October 1981: Opening of Forestry and Lumber Days at
Loubomo (Fun Fair). -l&, 15 October 1981: Tslke on tropical lumber in Brazzaville.
-16 October 1981: Seminar on the classification of African sawn timber in
Brazzaville. -17 October I981: Overflight by aircraft (Fokker 28) of the immense
forest reserves of Likoula and Sangha (northern Congo) regions. -Cloaing of the
event. This fair is to be participated in by all the national lumber federations
of the UCBT [expansion unknown]. operators (manufacturers. businessmen). importers
of tropical lumber. countries producing tropical lumber in Africa and the African
Lumber Organization [0A8]. [Text] [Paris MARCRES TROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANBBNS

in French No 1870 11 Sep 81 p 2338] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981]

5
son OFFICIAL usr. ONLY
FOR (WI-“1!“. USE ONLY

BREZHNEV MESSAG£-—Colonel Denis Sassou Nguesso, chief of the Congolese state,
presided over a people's parade held on the occasion of the 18th anniversary of
the August 1963 Congolese revolution. On that occasion, leonid Brezhnev sent a
message expressing his satisfaction with the relations of "solidarity and close
cooperation" that unite the two countries and that are "in accordance with the
vital interests" of the Soviet Union and the Congo. The message also stated that
the recent signature of the Soviet-Congolese treaty of friendship and cooperation
should make it possible to develop many-sided contacts between the two countries.
LIexﬁT Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1867 21 Aug 81

p 217; [COPYRIGiTz Rene Moreux et Cie Iaris 19817 91.31.

PETROBRAS IN HYDROCARBON EXPLORATION--The Federal Republic of Brazil and the Congo
just signed at Brazzaville. on 1h August. a protocol of agreement regarding the
participation of Petrobras (a Brazilian semipublic company) in the search for
liquid and gas hydrocarbons in the Congo. £1ex§7 Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 2171 IEOPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et

Cic Paris l98£7 9&36

FRENCH FINANCING ACREEMENTS-—Three financing conventions, totaling 550 million CPA
francs, were signed between France and the Congo, it was announced at Brazzaville
on 14 August. They deal with the development of small-scale agricultural mechaniza-

tion. a seed program and the acquisition of a passenger boat to service the Congolese
basin in the north of the country. [Teng7 [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS

in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 21727 ZCOPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 19817 9434

C50: 4719/349

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WAYS TO ESTABLISH SENE-CAHBIAN UNION EXAMINED
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1076-1077. 19-26 Aug 81 pp 22-23
[Article by Thomas R. Kanza: "On Sene—Gambia"]

[Text] in principle, the return of Sir Dawda Jawara to Banjul (Gambia) marks the
failure of the coup d'etat authored by the gendarmes of that country.

By the force of circumstances. the Gambian president has become obligated to the
Senegalese Government. Henceforth, the mutual defense agreement of 1966 between
the two neighboring countries will be invoked every times domestic event in Gambia
threatens the security and vital interests of Senegal.

Is this the beginning of an effective, lasting dependency? In the case of the
Gambian president, how can he get out of it honorably? The recovery of his power
thanks to Senegalese military assistance certainly involved conditions. Any
support of this kind that ends up by putting a political leader in power or restor-
ing one has to be paid for, sooner or later, in one way or another. This is and
remains true throughout the world, even in Africa.

Resettled in his presidential residence in Banjul but scarcely recovered from the
strong emotions of the abortive coup, Sir Jawara has every interest in seriously

rethinking the application of a proposal he talked with us about 18 years ago.

Flashback

It was in 1963. Sir Jawarn was Mr Jawara, prime minister of Gambia. I was min-
ister plenipotentiary of the Congo (Kinshasa) (Zaire) in London. My Senegalese
colleague at that time, Boissier-Palun, received Jawara at his residence on

Portman Square. The conversation turned to the "fictitious" nation of Sene-Gambia.
Would it be a confederation or a union of Senegal and Gambia?

Jawara, in full form, was convinced that he embodied his people's hope for libera-
tion. He recognized the insurmountable difficulties in keeping Gambia truly inde-
pendent of Senegal.

Not yet completely intoxicated by power, the honors, money and glory, he willingly

agreed on a discussion -- theoretical and academic -- of a possible, even probable,
Senc-Gambian federation, confederation or union. Before envisaging any political

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

union whatsoever, it seemed to me desirable to consider the bilateral application
of four principles: the free circulation of goods, capital, persons and services.
That was my contribution, a modest one, but it was based on my 2-year experience
at the headquarters of the European Common Market in Brussels.

Eighteen years later, Sir Jawara and the Gambian people will not be angry with us
if we suggest that the creation of the Sene-Gambian nation "by phases" would be

the best response to the brutal and tragic warning of the authors of the 30 July
1981 coup. It is not too late, but it is past time.

Guided Democracy

Gambia is a tiny nation 11,295 kilometers square with fewer than 600,000 inhali-
tants. It is enough to look at a map to see that the country is bounded in the
north by Senegal, in the east by Senegal, in the south by Senegal, and in the
west by the Atlantic Ocean.

The very existence of Gambia results from the historical rivalry between France
and Great Britain.

In power since 1962 -- that is, 3 years before his country's independence --
Sir Jawara is certainly tired.

all foreign observers agree that he is not a dictator. At any rate, he practices

a "guided democracy" that is a mixture of paternalism, theoretical liberalism,
tolerated corruption and parliamentary multipartyism.

In short, in Gambia as in most African nations, President Jawara practices the
policy of survival that is scarcely recommended for avoiding the repetition of the
tragic events of the beginning of August 1981.

The events obviously prove a deep discontent in the country. That the authors of
the coup could get weapons, money, even a mobile radio transmitter, shows that
they have substantial support in the country and perhaps abroad.

Their failure is essentially explained by the blunder they committed in presenting
themselves as "Marxist-Leninists." "revolutionary socialists."the"creators of the
dictatorship of the proletariat." This blunder indicates that the members of the
ephemeral National Revolutionary Council and its leader, Kukli Samba Sanyang, are
ill acquainted with the current international circumstances and, what is worse,

do not know the geopolitical and diplomatic realities of the region. Moreover. they
acted with haste, rushing the execution of their plan in order to take advantage

of the departure of President Jawara for London.

Away from the presidential office for 4 days, from 29 July to 2 August, Sir Jawara
regained power thanks to the Senegalese Army and the aid of a few Gambian police
officers and gendarmes who remained loyal. Has he been careful to discuss future
relations between the "saved" and the "saviors"? If not, he will soon discover
that the aid he received is not pure brotherly charity. Brotherhood exists only
between peoples; between governments, only interest counts.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Has he been foresighted enough to talk with the Senegalese about a form of partner-
ship that will spare both countries another drama?

Model

Each of the three formulas} federation, confederation or constitutional union.
presents the advantage of being negotiable between two sovereign and independent
states. If none is chosen, there remains one possibility: the annexation of

Gambit by Senegal in order to safeguard the vital interests of the two countries
and the two brother peoples.

Men mukc history. Who then is in a better position than Sir Jawara and President

Dinul to make the historic decisions that could serve as a model and a precedent
:ur the rest of Africa?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

:l.364

C50: 4719/360

I)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm ()FHI'MI. l'Sl-I ()‘JIA

CUINEA—BISSAU

N0 SOLUTIONS SEEN FOR TROUBLED ECONOMY
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 4 Sep 81 pp 2257-2258
[Article by Hugues Viel: "Guinea—Bissau: Problematic Development"]

[Excerpts] With a foreign debt amounting to $28 million-two-and-a-half times
the amount of export earnings-—to which must be added "arrears of a commercial
nature" of $7.5 million, it is easy to see that Guinea-Bissau is undergoing

a nifficult period. it should be added that foreign exchange reserves have
been exhausted and that possible donors are reluctant to replenish the state's
coffers. In the meantime, the Guinea-Bissau bank manufactures some money and
inflation goes galloping. As for the leaders, they do not explain the situation,
but submit to it and turn to international organisms. Indeed, as a UN official
said about Guinea-Bissau. "this country is a typical example of the inadequate
response of the state services to a difficult economic situation." It could not
be expressed in better terms.

It is true that at the time of independence, in September 1974, the country emerged
very weakened from 10 years of guerrilla warfare. Of course, in the areas held

by the rebels during the struggle, Amilcar Cabral had undertaken a series of

efforts at development: hospitals had been established, elementary education had
been reorganized and food crops had been encouraged. But the PAICC leader was
murdered in 1973 in Conakry by one of his followers. Perhaps this is the underlying,
if not the immediate, cause for the bad turn the economy took at that time. This

is possible. but it does not explain everything, and at any rate, it does not
justify the blundering and simultaneously frantic collectivism that was established:
creation of 3,600 "tabancas," or semi-communal villages regrouping practically all
of the rural population; the establishment of "people's stores,“ of which it could
be said, as in certain countries of the Eastern Bloc, that they were empty of goods
and filled with employees In sell them; and finally the organization of a powerful
state apparatus distributing incomprehensible and threatening directives to peasants
thirsting for peace after 10 years of insecurity.

In reviewing the state budget, it can be seen that 75.6 percent of operating
expenses are devoted to civil servants. who constitute a veritable army. and to
the army proper which numbers 7,000 men equipped, it is true, by the Soviet Union
which, in exchange, has established a base in the Bissagos Islands.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY

The country of "rivers," as Guinea-Bissau has been called, does not lack agricul-

tural resources: rice, peanuts, oil palms and a prosperous livestock industry

on the slopes of the Fouta-Djalon. On top of that, there are 200 kms of coast-

line rich in fishing resources. Nevertheless, the 800,000 inhabitants must

receive annually substantial assistance to avoid malnutrition. In 1980, 45,000 tons
of cereal were offloaded in Bissau....

The oft—occurring drought does not explain everything. There are two reasons for
decreased productivity.

The first: in the face of the attitude of the central power, plethoric in numbers,
inefficient in results and irritating in its interventions, a large part of
agricultural products has "fled" the country in the direction, mainly, of Senegal.
When the leaders speak about a return to a subsistence economy, they should refer
to the "economy diluted by smuggling."

The second reason:. the total inability of the state services to manage investment
programs. And yet, large credits had been allocated for operations aimed at
increasing agricultural production. Rice production only amounts to 920 kgs per
hectare. Hell, these credits have vanished and in 1978, for instance, for obscure
reasons agriculture only received 6 percent of total investments.... The Guinean
leaders are unable to expend the amounts allocated which had been duly scheduled
for a particular operation.

in 1978, 54.6 percent of these amounts were used, while in 1981 the percentage fell

to 51 percent. Curiously enough, it is Bissau-—the capital--and the surrounding

area, or, in other words, the state, that benefited the most from the 51 percent,
resulting in a significant increase of the tertiary sector to the detriment of the
primary one. Industry should not even be mentioned, since it has remained practically
nonexistent.

It is undeniable that the crying need for competent cadres in budgetary management
prevents the proper carrying out of the most elementary accounting procedures.
This, in turn, results in the clogging of the weak "absorption capacity" of the
Guinea-Bissau economy.

Contrary to the practice of other countries, the Guinea-Bissau leaders have not
established a 10-year plan that includes a certain number of projects. To be sure,
they do mention projects-—or rather prospects that have been viewed fof many years
but have never been translated into figures--without having set up a program. On
the other hand, the financing needed by the state in order to survive is duly
specified for the next 5 years. What is really of concern in the attitude of this
countrv's leaders is not so much the fact that they have overlooked the establish-
ment of a long list of proiects, but that they actually do not know what in-depth
action to undertake to emerge from the rut.

To say, for instance. that "the PAIGC is a party of considerable international
prestige," which, moreover, is "able to stimulate the people in relation to a
process aimed at development" is not necessarily an advantage to pull the country
out of the doldrums.... To refer to Amilcar Cabral's work--he had wanted to favor

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NL\

agriculture and related Industries to make them into a pilot sector--is undoubtedly
a deserved homage for the man who created the "Guinean nationality," but it will
not solve the problem of the distribution network, among others.

Deplorably. one could search in vain for simple and clear ideas in the "10-year
attitude“ of the Coinea—Bissauan planners. Let us, therefore, only translate
into numbers the expression of a certain confusion, if not of a certain disarray.

And first, the urgently needed assistance for the present year. It has been
estimated at $34 million and can be broken down as follows:

Direct aid to the balance of payments, 25 million: late financing, 7.5 million;
recompositlon of reserves, 11.5 million; financing the servicing of the public debt,
6 million; security stockpiling (rice), 9 million.

As for assistance during the period 1982-1985, it has been estimated at $437 million.
62 percent of which will be devoted to the financing of a number of projects.

it should be noted that a sugar refinery project had been envisaged (60,000 tons
per year). However, this project has been shelved for the time being. A modern
fish canning complex is supposed to be built by the Soviets, who should also
contribute to the modernization of the Bissau port. And of course, there is talk
about the bauxite in the Boe hills (reserves are estimated at 200 to 300 million
tons) that would be brought by railroad to the (future) port of Bubs, but not much
credence is attributed to this project.

Beyond these financial problems, the leaders of Guinea—Bissau still think of a
linkage with Cape Verde. Talks are continuing, but this archipelago is also
embroiled in serious difficulties and union seems to be far-off.

The new regime in power since last November points accusingly to the preceding
one. This is the rule. But for a true recovery, the present leaders should re-
solva to act as reasonable managers rather than irrational ideologues.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreaux et Cie Paris 1981

C80: 5719/402

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BCEAO REPORT ON RECENT FACTORS IN ECONOMIC SITUATION
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HtDITERRANEENS in French No 1867, 41 Aug 81 p 2164

[Texg7 One of the latest economic and monetary statistics bulletins of the Central
Bank of the West African States (BCEAO) was devoted to Niger.

The major agricultural crops marketed in the 1979-1980 campaign amounted to a total
of 129,000 tons of food products (millet, beans and sorghum), an increase of 40,000
tons over the previous campaign, 3,428 tons of cottonseed (a decrease of 943 tons)
and 2,172 tons of shelled peanuts (a decrease of 6,716 tons), representing a value
of 5.4 billion CPA francs for food products (an increase of 2.1 billion), 0.2
billion for cottonseed and 0.2 billion for peanuts.

At the beginning of the current 1980-1981 campaign, the purchase price to the
producer was raised from 40 to 50 CPA francs per kilo for millet 4nd sorghum.

On 20 March 1981, peanut purchases in the 1980-1981 campaign totaled 1,543 tons of
shelled peanuts (a decrease in comparison with the previous campaign).

For 1980, Somair and Cominak's uranium ore production amounted to 4,129 tons (an
increase of 589 tons over I979), sales amounting to about 3,205 tons.

During the first 8 months of 1980, Niamey's international airport recorded the
movement of 3,503 commercial airplanes and passenger traffic involving the arrival
and departure of 76,400 travelers.

During 1980, traffic on the Joint Benin-Niger Railroad and Transport Organization,
as far as Niger was concerned, amounted to 124,000 tons (largely hydrocarbons)
going up and 5,200 tons going down.

The commodity turnover index of the major commercial enterprises was established

at 479 at the end of September 1980 as against 318.2 a year before (on the base
of 100 determined as the average for the year 1970).

At the end of March 1981, the general consumer price index for the African family
came out to 306.5 as against 263.8 at the end of March 1979 (the base of 100

retained for the year 1970). The increase was noticeable on local food products
and on imported goods.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The budget for the October 1980-September 1981 fiscal year was balanced at 80.6
billion CPA francs, an increase of 8.5 billion over the previous one). In receipts,
taxes collected accounted for 59.5 billion CPA francs. Expenditures consisted of
26 billion in funds for equipment (no change), 19.1 billion for staff expenses

(an increase of 0.8 billion) and 3.7 billion for debt servicing (an increase of
4.5 billion).

At the end of September 1980, duties and taxes levied by the customs service
totaled 18.8 billion CPA francs, of which nearly 88 percent was frmn haports.

Foreign exchange statistics provided by the Nigerian administration go back to
1977, a year in which there was a trade balance deficit of 8.9 billion CPA francs
(48.2 billion in imports and 39.3 billion in exports).

At the end of December 1980, the outstanding foreign debt had an exchange value of
86.4 billion CPA francs (an increase of 31.5 billion over the year). The available
margin on funds obtained amounting to 90.1 billion (an increase of 37 billion over
the end of 1979). In 1980, debt servicing--interest and amortization-~abaorbed

8.1 billion CPA francs (3.1 billion in 1979).

At the end of February 1981, notes and currency in circulation amounted to 35
billion CPA francs (an increase of 5.3 billion in a 12-month period). At the end
of November 1980 the volume of current-account and fixed-term deposits in the
banks and in Girocheques amounted to 45.1 billion CPA francs as against 37.2
billion at the end of December 1979.

In comparison, savings funds totaled 81.2 billion CPA francs (an increase of 23.7
billion over December 1979); two-thirds were used by the private sector and one-
third by public undertakings.

In any event, at tne end of November 1980, the Nigerien Treasury's net credit
position at the local level was 6.1 billion CPA francs, 10.4 billion francs less
than at the end of November 1979. As to the net position of the monetary institu-
tions' foreign holdings, the excess in commitments, with an exchange value of 2.4
billion CPA francs at the end of November 1980, should be compared with assets of
13.6 billion CPA francs more at the end of December 1979. The imbalance comes
essentially from the banks, which resorted to foreign assistance, while the Central
Bank's holdings at the end of December 1980 represented additional assets of 21.6
billion CPA francs.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux ct Cie Paris 1981.

9434
C50: 4719/369

11:
ron omuAL use ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K'Ml. USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

ELIMINATION OF EPIDEHICS, ENDEMICS--According to a study of the governmental journal
SAHEL HEBDO, devoted to the "health revolution" in Niger, this country is no longer
experiencing epidemics of cholera or smallpox. Although some diseases. like measles,
still make their appearance sporadically, the study indicates that they are "on the
way to complete eradication." Endemic diseases, like Guinea worm, malaria and
schistosomiasis, which during some periods of the year incapacitate tens of thousands
of persons in the country. are also on the way to being overcome. These successes
have been attained as a result of the setting up of considerable medical infrastruc-
ture throughout the country and large-scale vaccination campaigns. [Excerpt] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1869, 4 Sep 81 p 2278] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981]

cso: 4719/389

15
ron omcw. use ONLY
PLANS FOR NE“ CAPITAL 0F ABUJA DESCRIBED

Paris NEH AFRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 p 78

[Article by Robert Welsh:

[Text]

ally becoming a reality.
next year.

lN DECEMBER 1975 e commission
under the chsirmsnship of Mr Jusltioe
Aguds. whidi hed been eppointed see
then six months before to sdv'ns on e
loader: to mlsce Legos es the Fedsrsl
cspitsl of Niger-is. delivered its report to
the Federal Militsry Government.

A few months leter the government
ennounced its decision. The new Federal
cspitsl territory would comprise some
3.000 square miles slmest in the middle
of Nigerie - 'oentrslity" hsd been the
most importsnt single fetter-just south
of the Emirete town oi‘Abu'p. funded in
1828 by Abu'p (Abu the Red). son of the
lest Hebe Emir oi'Zsris.

Hence the neme Abuis hes been ﬁrmly
ettsched to the new eepitsl. which is
expected to house some l.8«inillion peo-
ple by the your 2000. end ultimetely
32-mlllion.

Recognised

The Resident hes declered his inten-
tion of moving to the new cepitel next
yeer - it iscertsin thst Insny residents of
Lagos will move with him —snd the 1983
genersl election is to be run from there.

his emphesises the weed with which
construction work hes to be completed
though it is recognised thst it will tslle up
to 20 yesrs to complete the city es
plenned. Some of the contrsctors on site
heve esteblished fully developed end
sen/iced stell' camnde for up to 200
families for the: technical end supervise
ory steﬂ‘s.

"Abuja:

Nigeria's new Federal capital. at the fork
President Shehu Shageri 1
Robert Reich reports on progress.

16
FOR ornmu USE ONLY

Making: of Africa's host Beautiful Capital"]

of the Niger and Benue, is gradu-
ntends moving there from Lagos

The unsurplen forAbqis.spproved in
1979. enviseges the city es besicslly
crescent-sheped. with the residentisl
erees fenning out from ‘1”!th centre.
The prisewinning design or s new
city wee presented by the distinguished
Jspenese enhilect Kenso Tsnge.

The centrsl sres will contein the
Netionsl Assembly. Fedsrsl end civic
government emcee. the ofﬁces of other
nstionsl institutions. the principel corn-
msrcisl sres of the city end msior
recrestionsl fecilities. There is else to be
en erboretum. the trees of which will
heighten the besuty of the city end
complement Ase Hill.

Surrounding both thecentrsl end the
residentisl erses olAbuie use series of
hills. end to some extent they hsve
diotstedtheshspeol‘thecity.80meofthe
hills aeste distinct bounderies. These. it

is hoped. will "wuss netursl bud'ers
egsinst unoon end undesireble
development ’ the
ﬁxture

In the new cepitel will be e series of
perks end open moss. telring sdvsntege
of the existing river vellsys - the
territory is well wntered — complete with
tree-lined slopes.

The dense vegetation slong the river
chsnnels is being kept both
scene feeture end else to help to prevent
soil erosion. Greet cent is being tslten in
loo-ting roed crossings scrose the vel-
leys. end else in sligning sewersge end
dreinsge pipes slongside the rivers to
reduce dsmsge to the yegetstion.
run Uri-tutu. Ubr. ONLY

Ab“). in being built In a nurnber of
pheeee. The lirag includes Federal Gov-
ernment buildinge and other city centre
facilities. together with the reeidentiel
arena immediately to the north end
eouth. These will have a total population
of about 230.000.

Developing the new capital in going to
be both lengthy and expeneive. For
example. there are some 50 kilotnetree of
eepreeeweye to be built at well an many
kilomeme of local roads. Some 300
buildings of verioue type have yet to he
built in the central area alone.

To give eoIne eon ofllevour of the ecele
of the operation. the next reeidentiel
aectortobedeveloped inAbuja iegoingto
need eomething like 400 kilornetree of
drainage pipee to cope with rain. which
an raiee dream levele by nine feet in 30
minutiae

Big investments

So far the unalleu contrect awarded
wee worth NGO-Inillion. Juet recently.
the Britieh coneultent engineering piec-
tioe Scott Wileon Fitzpatrick and Part-
nen wee awarded a contract for the final
engineering deeign for the central area
with a capital coet ofN300-Inillion.

Operationeon thieeortol'ecale willnot
only demand big inveetrnente from the
ﬁnne involved. but will require new
linkegee between contractora ofell eortt.
a whole new range of joint vemuree and

tune eophiuioeted new approach. to
financing.

zines Limited

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060008-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PLANS FOR NEW PORT IN LAGOS DETAILED

Paris NEH AFRICAN in English No 167. Aug 81 pp 68, 72

[Text]

rock-herd in ehipe' holde during the
three-month weit to enter porte.
Nigerien hueineeemen mewindled by
crooks edventege of the oheoe.
end they were forced to pey heevy
demurrege fee to ehipmen.
Congenion peeked in 1976-1977. But
by then e huge port eepeneion edieine
wee underwey. The pe¢ four yeere heve
seen e treneformetion in ell pone. hon:
Apepe in Legoe end Port Hercourt to the
aneller porte of Werri. Sepele. Ogunu
end Koko. All heve undergone ooneider-
eble enleuelnent end modernhtion.
Legoe hee now e eeoond port - ‘l‘ln Cen
lelend - which ie on e per with not
In 1981. the NPA wee hoping the: ice
ponewouldeeeethrouah-putofebom
40-million tone e yeer. In preotlce.
however. thie now loch optiminie. By
1978 the NPA hee beeten the ion
problem. And in December ofthet you
my denser of it returning for eerne time
weeﬁrrnly knockedontheh-dbythe
govemment’e introduction of 'M" tonne.
The pink pieoee of peper were e neet
wey ofincreeeing thered tepe involved in
getting coode into the country. With ”M"
fame end e preahipinent cergo inepec-
tion scheme. oruenieed by the Swiee-
beeed Societe Generale do Surveillenee.
importe dropped drexneticelly for moot of
1979.1'hie weejun whet the government
wented. lt wee pen of e generel policy to
sq) the econornybeootning overh-ted.
Even thie summer trede hee etill not
got heck wand-1918 levele. end with the
drop in world oil demand now settled in.
the chencee of Nicerien trede picking up
in the ehort-to-rnedium tenn look slim.

18
mn orrtrm. usr. ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0004000600066
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02J09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0004000600066

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But Whﬂl the upturn douoecur. u it
manly will. the NPA will have a urine of
modern porn m not the upsurge.
including. it is hoped. tho new caper
pan.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 IC Magazines Limited

080: l0700/1082

19
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060006-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

BORDER PENCE--Nigeria is now proceeding to put in a system to reinforce its borders
by means of an impenetrable fence 5 meters high all along than. [Text] [Paris
MRCHES TROPICAUX z‘r HEDITERRANEENS in French 4 Sep 81 p 2279] COPYRICET: Rene

Moreux er Cie Paris 1981.

cso: 4719/3

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

CISSOKO 0N FRENCH RELATIONS-~Renegotiation of the Franco-Senegalese cooperation
agreements and evacuation of the French military bases in Senegal were demanded
by Seydou Cissoko, secretary general of the Independence and Labor Party (PIT,
Harxist-Leninist, pro-Soviet), following the constituent congress of that party
which took place in Dakar at the beginning of August. Hr. Cissoko, who returned
from the Soviet Union where he had been undergoing treatment for 7 years, felt
that a renegotiation of the Franco-Senegalese agreements was now possible with the
participation of Communist ministers in the French Socialist Government. PIT,
which is one of Senegal's 10 legal political parties, was the result of a split
within the former African Independence Party (PAI, established in 1957). Another
party, which also claims to be inspired by "scientific agcialisg," and which was
set up by Majmouth Diop, continues to bear this name. [Iexg/ Paris HARCHBS
TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 2158 [GOPYklcﬂtz

Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 19817 9434

RND SUPPORT OF SENEGAHBIA--A second Senegalese opposition party has just spoken

in favor of union with Gambia. Indeed, following the Senegalese Republican Hove-
ment (see HTM of 14 August 1981, p 2105), the Democratic National Rally (RND)
indicated, on 13 August, that ”the future of Gambia lies in a federation with
Senegal on the basis of free determination." This point of view was developed by
its secretary general, Sheik Anta Diop, during a press conference, the first since
the recognition of the party on last 18 June. Hr Diop, whose party condemned the
intervention of Senegalese troops in Gambia in a cmnnunique, but without signing a
joint statement by seven Senegalese opposition parties on the events in Banjul,
stated that RND condemned the use of force in any form whatsoever. [Text7 [Paris
MARCRES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 2158] ZﬁbPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981/ 9434

SAR EXPANSION--The African Refining Company has just entrusted Heurtey Industries
with the expansion of the M'Bao refining plant near Dakar. This contract, calling
for turnkey construction, which is the outcome of sustained competition and a
basic study carried out by Heurtey Industries, includes studies. supplies, con-
struction and assistance in starting up operations. It includes the following
installations: extension of atmospheric distillation units (increase in capacity
from 900,000 tons to 1,380,000 tons per year, in catalytic reforming and hydro-
treating (increase in capacity from 14 m /h to 19 m3/h); modification of storage
facilities, auxiliary and general services; diesel oil desulphurization unit. IFP
[expansion unknown] process (capacity 210,000 tons per year); kerosene-based Merox

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unit. U0? prpansion unknougl process (capacity 215,000 tons per_yea£)._ The
deadline for completion of the plant as a whole is 23 months. iIextl Paris
MARCHES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS in Fregch lo 186'] 21 Aug 81 9 215g
LﬁOPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 195;]

LAYING 0F ISRA FOUNDATION STONE--0n 8 August at Saint-Louis, Jacques Diouf, the
Senegalese secretary of state for scientific and technical research, laid the first
stone of the future headquarters of the Senegalese Agricultural Research Institute
(ISRA), which will be transferred from Dakar to the river region's chief town.
According to Jacques Diouf, this transfer, which is a result of the government's
wish to revive Saint-Louis, will make it possible, starting with the Diama and
Manatali dams, to establish agricultural development on solid scientific bases.

It will also facilitate interaction between 1885 and Gaston Berger University's
Faculty of Economic and Juridical Sciences. In his speech, the minister praised

the outlays agreed to for execution of the project by the Senegalese state in its
equipment budget and out of ISRA'a own funds, as well as those of countries friendly

to Senegal, such as the United States of America. through USALP, gheJUnited Nations
Interim Fund for Science and Technology, and lastly France. Text] [Paris HARCHES

TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French N0 1867 21 Aug 81 p 2152 ZEbPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux ct Cic Paris l9§£7 9534

080: 4719/348

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIERRA LEONE

LOOTING, VIOLENCE REPORTED IN MAKER!
ABl91210 London REUTBR in English 0903 GMT 19 Sep 81

{Text} Freetown, Sierra Leone. 19 Sep (REUTER)-—Looting and violence broke out in
the northern provincial capital of Hakeni after a visit by President Siaka Stevens,
travellers arriving from the area said today.

Hundreds of workers and teachers rampaged through the streets of the town of
45,000 people yesterday. Shops were looted and all local services brought to a
halt.

The town could not be reached by telephone and it was not clear early today
whether order had been restored.

The travellers said a senior official who went to the area was unable to enter
the town and turned back after rioters ripped the flag staff off his official car.

There was no word of casualties or arrests and police in the capital declined to
comment on the situation.

Travellers said the teachers were protesting at the decision by the Northern
Provinces Teachers Association not to have anything to do with a general strike
called on September 1.

The Sierra Leone Labour Congress called its 250,000 members out on strike to
press demands for economic reforms, including food price cuts and better housing.

050: 6700/51]

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OAU URGED TO REVIEW ITS OWN GIARTBR, END COUNTRY'S TERROR

Paris m AFRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 p S

[Editor-1&1:

[Text]

"Uganda in Torment :

The wave ol'violence swam. in whichthe m of
low end order hoe thrown the country mteneer-
anarchy. demode immediete remedial eaion. It re now
eeven monthe eince Dr Milton Ohote eeenmed power we
on election still thouaht. in eorne drnlee et eny rote. to
hove been riﬂed.

Aeiethewontofmeaenewedminieu'etiomOhote
returned on e tforrn pence end unity. He extended
eentimente necondlietron to hie riv whom he
invited to help re-huild the notion honored e decode
by one celemty me: another.

Buttheeerlyprormee‘ of willtoellrneneoonfeded.
‘ ' 'on quart to violence. The fledgling
Jude Netsonel heretlon Ann (UNLA). 1n concert
ththe‘l‘enzenien peecekeeplna oroe.wermedtothelr
took. Reporte eterted ﬁltering out of the eoldiere’
exoeeeee. perticulerly ofthe ill-ruined UNLA. Govern-
ment money weeehortnolne Unndeneoldierewerenot
peidforweekeonendendmrmdtouekeuptheirpey
withecempeignoflootlnaﬁedrnotionend intiznidetson,
leeving in rte woke hundrede d civilien deed.

Oneechoold‘thooghthelieveethetOhouiehimeelfe
rieoner of the nnnitintinc circnnutenoee being
genduthethecendonothinahnt"eteyinline'while
turn: thepmerhielhllndeyetotheuceeeeeofthe
army. r.thet0hotecenrennineecnrein power
onlyifhedoeenotirrltetehhreel werheee-theenny.
It tenouworth thetthe enewPerliunenthee
twomilitery re.

Whatever the righte end wronae of thie eeeeeernent. it
ie cleer thet deopr'te government knowledge of well.
documentedecteofehneeofpowerbytheemy. Ohote
hoe only admitted e m of “mlehehevionr’ on their
pert. -

' ltwould.ofmune.hemieleedinftomm¢thetthe

lender-ehip ie reeponeihle or ell prohlerne
ecinc Uganda coda. We ere reminded of the
unhaenteddeepotl'AminDedmwhoduringhie
nine-yeer rein of terror reduced Usendefe economy to

21:
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY

A lie-Think Necessary If It‘s To Be Healed"]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁ'

chaoo.Iro ‘ .it ' tho "
"liboratol’ of Jpndanumpoopliﬁgoueu’ndedmomu 'a
tompeauouo ﬂu proddoncy. .

ItiaeodthotthopmblolnaofUinndadidnotfeamn
during the recent summit of tho Organisation
AfrianUnitywAlDinKanya. Wemofcoune
W the explanation of thin. Cmodiano of the
organiution’oehamhavqovortheyoamhoonquickto
pant out that ito principloa calm-1y forbid member-
datoomholn intortotin‘ in tho moot-no! aﬂoiro of othor
morn .

But. iftho OAUcould nooanopinion-toaayno
nioro - on Chad. whole ro wao a atronc foreign
involvolnont (Libyan? Punch?) in the faction fighting,
could thoy not havodonooo in Uganda'ocaaoﬂathorenot
an urgent nood to and tho low-range terror campaicnof

Amin. colductod from in. W refuge Ina
Saudioo-roligionim? m“

. ltionogoodforthoOAUtoahyawa fromauchcrucial
iaouooinAh'icaJntho ouch ‘ ncohaohodtho
otTectof 'ng our lomatoforo' oﬂon Weatorn
powero. thianotthonoo-colonialhn organioationia
ouppooodtoﬁght?

‘l'ho‘nouoioofaochimnooim rtanoo,wofool that
aggtpmnmsﬁqormoag. wwwe
nia intandem. vo manna n
moveawa mmmwmw.mm.
thou-a thoindopendoncoomhoria'ofthelatelﬂoo
and1900ohaalon¢panod.

loarly thoChartor’o prina' 'ploo. largely roproaontao
Ctivooftho intionool‘thattimemowfailtoraﬂoa
thonewniood Afrianthi ‘ TholatoAlnorican
civil rightoleader, Martin Lnthor ' Jr.uoodtoar¢no
thatamndiooat36.ifatthata¢o coaaoaatopoto
bolievoin. roconeiloandﬁdxtforhioptina oa.ovon
thoughholivaoontohodOyoanolthoOA willhavo
died twelyatlayoaroit‘itianotmandtowme
top withroalitieonow. '

MllthointroductionolanAfricanpoaookoo inc
foruo would have hoontheboﬁohortotenn oolutnonw do
thopolitidamoonadomthomwefoolthatthe
muchainnanouhttotakonpthemauor.

PorthoirmthoanthoritiaoinUganda muathoooen
tomakoagonuinooﬂorttootampomthorampantabme
dpowor-whfiﬁhaa porculatodthnfat echoloné‘g
sow-rnlnmt.' y'hoootor-slhl coniihns:
pooplo.Mo¢im::-tantiothosovordnont'acontrolofthe
amodﬁirmw toverthohannda

Msintaining law and order will bounce even more
f “mm“.dwmmw iww W
or o I!“ one in country.
Tho the o‘viono economic burden moot feature
yinthodochionofProaidentNyoronof
amnhtopuumahonfoelthatthe'l‘anoanianano

lonwwamtoboidontiﬁodwiththoexceooood‘tho
Ugandan ooldiur.

.

25
won OFFICIAL use ONLY
COPYRIGHT :

[thwmmthuthopnbkmnfa Uganda
m Also Rein} may other African mumnmdfough not
Mb lb.mm¢ni¢nde.Aphnmustbe
doviud for a coiled" solution Africa an no longer
thhinkinpmoudulkinvom

1981 Ic Hagazinn United
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

BRIEFS

COAL DEPOSITS--The zambian minister of mines, Hufaya Humbana, stated on 30 July
that the discovery of a large coal deposit near the Kafue national park was inni-
nent. He stated that the Zambian geological research department was at that time

in the process of verifying the exist_e_nce_of_a deposit extending from Lalafuta in
the north to Hachili in the south. [text] LParis NAMES TROPICAUX B'l‘ EDITEREANEBNS

in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 21757 LCOPYRIGIT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 198_1_/ 91034

PURCHASE OF RAILRM CARS--'rhe Zambian minister of transport and coununications,
Rajah Kunda, stated at the beginning of August that Zambia intended to buy, in

Zimbabwe, 235 freight cars which would be used on behalf of Zambia on the Benguela
railroad which links Zambia with the port of Lobito through Angolan territory.

The funds that will be used to buy the}; freight cars will be provided by the
European Economic Connunity. [text LParis HARGIES TROPICAUX B‘l‘ HBDI'l'BRRANBBNﬁ

in French No 1867 21 Aug 81 p 2173; [COPYRIGﬂ'l'z Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981/
9436

080: (9719/3108 END

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY