FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10554

28 May 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 774

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NIB

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

FOUO No. 774

CONTENTS

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Patasse'a Role in Abortive Coup Described
(AFRIQUB-ASIB. Mar - 11 Apr 82) .

Briefs
French Financing Agreements

CHAD

Acyl Ahmat: Chadians Alone Can Resolve Their Problems
(AFRIQUB-ASIE, 29 Mar - 11 Apr 82)..

Actions of OAU Permanent Committee Denounced
(Ginette Cot; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 29 Mar - 11 Apr 82)

Briefs
Closing of Chadian Refugee Camp

ETHIOP IA

Briefs
Cuban Trade Mission Activities

GABON

Mining Inventory Agreement Signed With France
(HARCHES TROPICAUX E’l‘ HEMTERRANEBNS. 26 Plat 82)

Canadian Interest in Providing Financial Aid
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEBNS, 26 Mar 82) nu. ..
ﬂIGER

Strengthening of Saudi Cooperation Described
(HARCHES TBDPICAUX ET HEDITERBANEENS. 26 Mar 82) .....

Military Regime Can Boast of Good Results
(Siradiou Diallo; JEUNE AFRIQUE, 21 Apr 82) ..........

Briefs
Economic Impact of Market Fire

NIGERIA

Briefs
Inflation in 1981
Favorable Balance for France

Crude Oil Prices. Sales
Lokoja Hydroelectric Project

More on Ojukuu Pardon
Shagari Considers Ojukwu Pardon

SENEGAL

Senegal's Policy Toward Saharan Republic Rapped
(AFRIQUE-ASIB. 29 Mar - 11 Apr 82) .. ..... .... ........

BCEAO Issues Economic. Monetary Statistics
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS, 26 Mar 82) .....

Opposition Said To Be Largely Discredited
(David Sharp; JBUNE AFRIQUB. 21 Apr 82) .............

UGANDA

Briefs
U.S. Journalists Arrested. Lashed

ZAIRE

Amnesty International Official Lists Rights Violations
(POURQUOI PAS?. 18 Mar 82) ..... ...... ...............

'Manifesto' Blames Situation on Corrupt. Bourgeois Leaders
(Mariam Sysle; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 26 Apr — 9 May 82) .....

'Hanifesto' Examines Role of Catholic Church
(APRIQUE-ASIE, 26 Apr - 9 May 82) . ........ . ....... ..

Companies Handed Over to Private Owners
(HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEEN‘. 19 Mar 82) ....
PATASSE'S ROLE IN ABORTIVE COUP DESCRIBED
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 262, Hat-ll Apr 82 p 65

[Text] For months. particularly since the withdrawal of David Dacko and the
accession of Gen Andre Kolingba's government, Ange Pataase, Bokassa's former
minister and prime minister, who went over to the "resistance" at the last
minute, when the emperor's fall appeared inevitable, hasn't stopped proclaim-
ing, with might and Iain, that power in Central Africa is rightfully his.

The leader of the KLPC (Central African People's Liberation Movement) was
basing his claim on the significant vote (38 percent) which he garnered during

the rigged election of March 1980, when Central Africa was under the yoke
of Giscard's French protectorate.

As the days passed, Patasse's impatience grew and his ambitions became focused.
Recently, he confided to whoever would listen that he would reach his goal by
any means, including force. Given these circumstances, one can understand
that the denials--after the fact--by his supporters. claiming that Patasse

was not involved in the abortive 3 March coup, and presenting the head of the
MLPC as the victim of a plot, are hardly convincing and weren't believed

by anyone. It seems evident that a scant few days after his return to Bangui--
where he had "exiled" nimself following Dacko's fall--Ange Patasse crossed

the Rubico1 with the cor peration of his supporters on the Military Committee
of National Recovery (former generals Hbaikoua and Bozize, who were, respec-
tively, the ministers of justice and information. and who are now on the run).

The manner in which the attempted coup was led would have appeared ludicrous
if it hadn't caused clashes, produced casualties (between 3 and 12 dead,
according to official sources. and 30 wounded), and led to the arrest of
several dozen persons--and above all else if Central Africa didn't so desper-
ately need a minimum of stability to catch its breath after years of a de-
structive and ferocious dictatorship which led the country to ruin.

However, the insolent fashion in which the coup attempt was led, and the
great presumptuousness show by Bokassa's former prime minister, can only
add to the suspicions that Ange Patasse was encouraged or manipulated by
hidden interests (certain business circules, remnants of the former Poccartian
organizations...) who are making every effort to attack the new French Govern-

ment by putting it in explosive and -barrassing situations in those African
regions that are under its sphere of influence.

nos OFFICIAL USE WIN
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

We know how much Ange Patasse has further added to the confusion by taking
refuge in the French Embassy in Bangui (knowing full well that it had to offer
hu- asylum) and by improperly claiming the backing of Lionel Jospin. a French
Socialist Party leader. All this very nearly provoked a serious crisis between
Paris and Bangui. But if it seems at this point that things have calmed
downua compromise could be found concerning the fate of Pataase--it will be
more difficult to completely clear up the misunderstandings and doubts main-
tained, if not created, by the media. which in this affair. as in the one in
Chad at the end of last October. have too often been lacking in discretion,

at the least.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9939
030: 4719/1300

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

FRENCH FINANCING AGREDIEN'l‘S—On 17 March in Bangui, France and the Central
African Republic signed three financing agreements totaling 780 billion CPA
francs concerning the infrastructure and agriculture sectors: work going on
since 1973 on the Nola-Berberati-cadroula and Berberati-Carmt-Baoro main
roads. that is, nore than 400 kilometers of roads, maintenance of the Bangui—
Caneroon nain road (Bossensbele-Garoua—Boulai sector); grants to agriculture
(financing of the 1982 agricultural calpaign and cull-scale developments in
rural areas). [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French
No 1898. 26 liar 82 p 857] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9634

C50: 4719/801

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ACYL AHHAT: CHADIANS ALONE CAN RESOLVB THEIR PROBLEMS
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French No 262, 29 Mar-ll Apr 82 pp 18, 19

lText] While in Ndjsmena efforts are being made to regroup and reorganize
the fighting forces in order to crush the rebellion of hissein Habre, the
GUNT (Transitional National Union Government], which for too long a time in
the past has left the field wide open for propagandists of the PAN [Northern
Armed Forces], is making a concerted effort to make its position known abroad.

It is in this context that several CUNT officials have appeared before the
Paris press--among them, during hta briefing mission to French officials on
2 March, Chadian Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation Acyl Ahmat.

He reaffirmed the grounds for the rejection by his government of the resolu-
tions taken last February in Nairobi by a group of African states set up as
a "permanent committee" on Chad--resolutions which run counter to those
adopted by the last summit conference of the 50 African nations.

Responding to the question as to whether Ndjamena foresees another call for
Libyan troops or for those of another friendly country to help the CUNT crush
the aggression of the FAN, the minister for foreign affairs confirmed that
for the time being. his government intends to take its chances with the CAD.
Acyl Ahmat declared: "He'll give the GAO time to get hold of itself and to
find, with the agreement of the GUNT, a solution to the Chadian problem";

he noted that by OAU he meant all the member nations. and not a club of
reactionary heads of state who do not honor the agreements of their peers

and who are driven by the wish to bring Habre back onto the Chadian political
stage.

Questioned as to whether he considered the decision to demand that Libyan
forces withdraw from Chad a "mistake," the GUNT minister for foreign affairs
took the opportunity to "put into perspective," with a good deal of humor,
the distorted image created of him in the past by Radio France International
and other Western media. "Time and again I was called a Libyan agent by
Radio France International, which made such too much fuss about me and caused
a good deal of trouble for the Chadian people. In some respects they de-
naturalized me, wanting to make me more of a Libyan than a Chadian.... Knowb
ing my country, knowing its internal contradictions, I am against the occupa-
tion of Chad by another power, no matter who it is. But I am very realistic.
Libya is a brother country which helped us at the most difficult moment, and
put out the fire that had been burning for 17 years.... In fact, I expressed

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR UPPILIAI. USP. "NIX

opinion at the time that it wasn't opportune to demand the Libyan withdrawal

when we were not sure of the promises made by others and were not ready to
protect ourselves...."

Asked about France's position with regard to the CUNT and to the Chadian
problem in general, Acyl Ahmat. who met Jean Pierre Cot, French minister for
cooperation and development, and Guy Penne. presidential adviser for African
affairs. in Paris at the beginning of March, was anxious to put an end to
the criticism of Francois Hitterrand's government in this affair.

"First of all, I must eliminate a source of confusion," emphasized Acyl

Ahmat. "I was with President Coukouni during his meeting with President
Francois Hitterrand and French Minister for External Relations Claude Cheys-
son. Certainly we will never know exactly what occurred behind the scenes,

but in my opinion things were clear. Basically, Francois Hitterrand told the
president of the GUNT: 'There is no question of France's asking the impossible
of you, demanding that you make the Libyans leave as long as you are not
certain of your own security.‘ That is what I heard from the mouth of Francois
Hitterrand. Therefore you shouldn't come and tell us that France's most
authoritative voice pressured Chadian officials."

Concerning his meeting with the French minister for cooperation and develop-
ment at the beginning of March, Acyl Ahmat stated: "Our position is clear.
As for France, after the Socialist government came to power, it promised to
assist the legitimate government of Chad. Now, if certain radio and press
agencies are to be believed, France would have us reconciled with hissein
Habre. Yesterday (4 March), I told Jean Pierre Cot: 'There is no way France
will get us to sit down at the negotiating table with Hissein Habre. We are
in the midst of fighting, of stamping out the factional divisions that have
killed the country. We aren't doing this so that we'll be obliged to recreate
them or multiply them tomorrow.‘ The position of the CUNT therefore is
clear, and Jean Pierre Cot's response seemed to me to be constructive. In

my opinion, France hasn't changed its position."

As for the type of aid promised by Paris, the Chadian minister for foreign
affairs limited himself to saying: "What I can tell you is that France has
asserted, through its minister for cooperation, that it will continue to
assist Chad."

Finally. pressed by questions about the intrigues of foreign intervention in
Chad, Acyl Ahmat was led to answer: "The Chadian problem is above all a
national problem. The disorganization for which the cunt has been reproached
is certainly not entirely foreign to the current situation. But I believe
that Chadians have learned a lesson from this; they understand that their
problems cannot be dealt with except by their own will. Whether it's France,
the United States, or any other country, or even the OAU, no one can find

a solution that excludes the Chadians. The problem is. above all, national.
He are very aware of that, and the consensus is that everything must be done
to pull Chad completely out of the deadlock and out of the war."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9939
(30: 4719/800

51,3 OFFICJAJ.II5510BHUY
FOR¢Nﬂﬂtﬂhd.USElﬂNLY

ACTIONS 0F OAU PERMANENT COMMITTEE DENOUNCED
Paris APNIQUE-ASIE in French No 262, 29 Mar-11 Apr 82 pp 17-19
[Article by Ginette Cot: "After the Decree of Nairobi 111"]

[Excerpts] Numerous voices have since been raised on
the African continent to denounce the actions of the
so-called "permanent committee:"

The affair is too scandalous and the "strong-arm ploy" too obvious for the
resolution—decree on Chad, pretentiously adopted in Nairobi on 11 February

by a small group of OAU representatives and African states, not to be quickly
and widely considered null and void, and to finally sink into oblivion. Since
then, numerous voices have been raised on the continent denouncing the actions
of this group-baptized without right or reason the GAO "permanent committee"
for Chad--whose conclusions run counter to the decisions reached by the last
general conference of African heads of state, which met last June in the
Kenyan capital.

But without a doubt the decisive elements in the situation are the reactions
and the spectacular mobilization registered in Chad even after the decree of
the OAU "permanent committee"-~which ordered the GUNT [Transitional National
Union Government] to conclude a cease-fire and to begin negotiations with
Hissein Habre, arbitrarily established a calendar for organizing elections and
putting definitive institutions into place, and. finally, matched all this
with the threat of withdrawal of the pan-African force. This should bring

the pan-African organization to its senses and nip in the bud the "plot" of
those who use its name or act in its name, the better to betray its decisions.

Those who counted on possible defeatist reactions from a people crushed by
war and eager for peace wasted their time. Far from spreading the division
and dismay hoped for by their instigators, the Nairobi decisions were greeted
across the country as an insult and a challenge to the dignity, pride, and
sovereignty of an entire people. They resulted in a closing of the ranks of
the GUNT, a strengthening of its support. a stiffening of the population's
resolve to accept the challenge, and a revival of the courage and will of the
combatants, who had been thought to be worn out after a short year of un-
certain respite.

FOR‘DFFICIAl.lﬂﬂB¢NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That is the significance of the popular demonstrations of anger against the
OAU and of support for the GUNT which occurred for several days in Ndjamena
and the countryside. as well as of the more organized and determined military
offensive launched against the PAN [Northern Armed Forces] by the combatants
of all the former factions united in the GUNT.

Indirectly, the Nairobi decree served to reveal several characteristic aspects
of the Chadian situation that some people had preferred to ignore. They have
been able to see how much the possibility of Hissein Habre's return to the
political scene was feared by all Chadian peoples. They have been able to
see that, far from being a "creation" of the OAU, as some experts claimed.
the GUNT, at its beginning the fruit of a compromise expressive of the parti-
cular relations of forces on the spot, was truly representative of a national
consensus. Finally. and above all, they could see the extent to which the
hopes represented in the struggle led by the FROLINAT--even a FROLINAI long
divided into factions--had spread. to the point of becoming an irreversible
moral attainment.

True Friends

Also, the Chadian National Liberation Front, whose political reunification
has been a fact since last May, has appeared these past weeks to be a force
to be reckoned with-capable, as has been seen in the latest trial undergone

by the GUNT, of turning Chadian politics in a more fundamental and progressive
direction.

In any case, it should be expected that lessons will be drawn from the events
occurring between the departure of the Libyan troops and the "treachery of
the OAU." As President Goukouni Oueddei pointed out in a press conference

in Ndjamena: "All this has let us know who our true friends were and who
our enemies were."

For its part. in a motion read during a public meeting in the Chadian capital
on 16 February. FROLINAT condemned the resolutions of the "permanent committee"
'of the OAU and supported the GUNT. notably stressing: "We affirm the right and
duty of the Chadian people, and of them alone. to deal with their problems in
the way they see fit. We have no lessons in democracy to learn from regimes
installed by coups d'etat, nor from those created by rigged elections... ."

In conclusion, the resolution added: "Recent political developments confirm
our basic position. which is that the answer for the Chadian people lies in

the search for an anti-imperialist. anticapitalist road."

As can be seen. we are far from the simple question of a power struggle or of
an implacable hatred between two men. to which the Western medias have too
often wanted to reduce the Chadian conflict.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9939
cso: 4719/800

FOR OFIWCIA1.1ENE(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CLOSING 0F CHADIAN REFUGEE CAMP-~80” days ago, Cameroonian police took steps
to ensure the final closing of the Chadian refugee can: in Kousseri opposite
Ndjamena on the left bank of the Cheri River. The some 20,000 Chadian refu-
gees who were staying in the camp had a choice between returning to Ndjanens
or being transferred to the P011 region, about 500 kilometers inside Cameroon-
ian territory. Nearly 5,000 refugees accepted repatriation, while 2,500 were
moved by road to Poli. Other refugees succeeded in going to Nigeria where a
camp had been fixed up some months ago not far from the border, west of
Kousseri. The Kousseri camp sheltered, it is believed, numerous supporters
of Hissein Hsbre. This camp had been opened in 1980. Nearly 100,000 inhabi-
tants of the Chadian capital, fleeing the fighting, had then crossed the
Cheri RiVer by canoe to find refuge there. Since the cease-fire in Ndjsmena.
some 80.000 refugees have returned to their country. But nearly 20,000 refu-
gees have obstinately refused to do so. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICADX Er
HEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1898, 26 Her 82 p 857] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux
et Cie Paris 1982.] 9434

C80: 6719/801

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ETHIOPIA

BRIEFS

CUBAN TRADE MISSION ACTIVITIES--Addis Ababa 13 Hay (PL)--The Ethiopian minister
of foreign trade, Hollie Chekol, received here a Cuban trade mission which held
conversations with 18 Ethiopian trade organizations. In the meeting, attended
by the Cuban ambassador in Addis Abeba, Buenaventura Reyes, they talked about
the results of the work of the Cuban trade mission, headed by Octavio Martinez
Hernandez, official of the department of Subsaharan Africa of the Cuban Minis-
try of Foreign Trade. They also dealt with future concrete working lines and
trade prospects between Cuba and Ethiopia, and with the possibility of an
Ethiopian trade mission visiting Cuba in the near future. The meeting between
the Ethiopian minister and the Cuban delegation took place shortly after the
signing of a memorandum on activities carried out by the Cuban mission which
has been in Addis Abnba since 12 April and will also visit Mozambique. [Text]
[PA131717 Havana PRELA in English 1239 GMT 13 May 82]

C50: 4700/1230

FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

GABON

MINING INVMORY AGRED‘IENT SIGNED H111! FRANCE
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1898, 26 liar 82 p 858

[Text] The Gabonese second deputy prime minister in charge of mines and
petroleum, Etienne-Guy Houvagha-Tchioba, and Robert Cantoni, Prench ambassador
to Libreville, signed an agreement on 10 March in Libreville concerning the
mining inventory along the Transgabonese Railroad.

This agreement, which involves the amount of 110 million CPA francs, is part
of a vast program of air surveying, airborne geophysical reconnaissance and
soil prospecting, spread out over some 10 years, at a total cost of 10 billion
CPA francs. Besides France, the program will have the assistance of the EDP
(European Development Fund).

The Cabonese deputy prime minister stressed. at the conclusion of the signing
ceremony, the constant support given by the French Government to Gabon's eco-
nomic development efforts.

The mining inventory program concerned by this agreement consists of three
phases: the first is radar mapping of the entire territory carried out by
Aeroservice Corporation (United States). The air survey operation has been
completed and utilization of the results is in progress. For this program,
financing by the Gabonese state amounts to some 1 billion CPA francs. Super-
vision of the work is entrusted to the conpany Sodeteg [expansion unknown].

The second phase involves an airborne geophysical reconnaissance. Work is
anticipated for this year. The financing for this program totals 2 billion
CPA francs, divided between the Gabonese state, 1 billion, and the EDB, 1
billion. As is the case for the first phase, supervision of the work will be
provided by Sodeteg.

The third phase will especially concern soil prospecting. Three independent
teams of geologists will be set up to cover 15,000 square kilometers per year.
The National Geological Service, as indicated by the Ministry of Mines and
Petroleun, will form one of these teams. Also, the support of the French

PAC (Aid and Cooperation Fund) will permit the operation of a team from the
Geological and Mineral Prospecting Office [BRGM], and Gabon will assule respon-
sibility for setting up the third independent team of geologists.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The agreement also states that the Directorate General of Mines and Geology

will coordinate the work as a whole with the support of a nucleus of geologists
financed by the PAC.

The total of the ground work amounts to some 10 billion CPA francs spread out
over 10 years or so and covering half the national territory. The agreement
signed at Libreville covers in part the 1981 BRGH campaign in Gabon and st

the same time permits setting up the support nucleus in the Directorate General
of Mines.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.

94 314
C50: lo 719/801

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

CANADIAN INTEREST IN PROVIDING FINANCIAL AID
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1898, 26 Mar 82 p 858

[Text] In our issue of 12 March 1982 p 763, we pointed out that Georges Rawiri,
first deputy prime minister and Gabonese minister of transport, recently
visited Canada.

The results of this visit made it possible to strengthen economicrelations
between Gabon and Canada. Let us state today that, according to the official
report of the visit, both parties "showed their interest in seeing Canadian
firms take part in different projects in Gabon" and, in particular, in the
construction of the Transgabonese railroad, as well as in the supply of equip-
ment and services. Both parties welcomed the advanced state of negotiations
concerning the electrification and water supply project in the rural areas of
Gabon, as well as the project concerning the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation building. Both parties reaffirmed the very special meaning that
they attach to the forthcoming completion of these two important projects.

It was mutually agreed that a trade mission of Canadian businessmen would go
to Gabon in the near future.

Mr de Bane. Canadian external relations minister, reiterated the Canadian
Government's interest in providing financial support to Canadian businessmen
wishing to set themselves up in Gabon as part of the industrial cooperation
program of the Canadian International Development Agency [CIDA]. This agency
is ready to assist in financing part of the rural electrification and water
supply project, concurrently with the Association for the Expansion of Cana-
dian Exports.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9434
C80: 6719/801

12

INNIIMNNCIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

A'l'l'BMP’l' 1‘0 ASSASSINATB PRESIDENT—[Editorial Report] Paris JBUNB AFRIQUB in
French 5 May 1982 carries on pages 22-21; a 1,600-word Sennen Andrlanirado
"exclusive" article in which he alleges that an assassination atte-pt was
aade against Guinea President Sekou Tours on either 8 or 15 April by an
art-ed nan who entered the presidential palace, killed a guard and injured
several others and who claimed to be trying.” avenge fomr Guinean Ptblic
Works Minister Kabassan Keita. The article goes on to say that Keita was
sacked in “arch for alleged unappropristion otfunds but claims that action
was taken against Keita became he had accused others of misappropriation.
Andrianirado claim that when seating with "representatives of international
creditors who had come to investigate the way in which their noney was being
used" in early 1982, Keita had told then "You are asking me for a report on
the work! But nothing has been done! I have not seen much of your aid."
Andrianirado concludes his report by discussing previous attempts on Sekou

Toure ' a life .

(:80: 4719/9313

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

STRENGTHENING 0F SAUDI COOPERATION DESCRIBED
Paris MARCHES TROPICADX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1898. 26 Ha! 82 p 851

[Text] Assessing his 4-day visit to Saudi Arabia on his arrival in Niamey on
17 March, President Kountche recalled that Saudi Arabia had promised Niger a
contribution of some 19 billion CPA francs under the National Investment Fund
[FNI] heading of the 1982 budget. This contribution will make possible the

successful completion of equipment projects in the social field, such as vil-

lage hydraulic work, health and educational equipment or the inport of
fertilizers.

Colonel Kountche stressed the role which Saudi Arabia is playing in Niger's
construction of highway connections to other countries, in particular, in the
financing, for 11 billion CPA francs, of the Niamey-Pilingue highway. These
contributions, President Kountche repeated, fall within the framework of
"strengthening solidarity" and "strengthening a shared destiny" in the Islamic
faith. The chief of state, who met the director of the Islamic Development
Bank [IDB], Ahmad Muhammad, in Jiddah, remarked that this institution is
interested in the development of Niger's highway network, in particular, the
north-south trans-Saharan main road, two important sections of which remain

to be asphalted (Zinder to Agadez and Arlit to the Algerian border).

The Nigerian chief of state indicated that the Inn intends to intensify its
efforts to import cement and petroleum products into Niger and is studying its
participation in the construction of a cement plant with a 250,000 to 300,000
ton capacity.

President Kountche also studied, with King Khalid and with the secretary
general of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (01c). Nabib Chatti,
the preparation for the Islamic organization's forthcoming ministerial con-
ference. It was agreed that this would be held in Niamey 6 to 12 June.

Lastly, President Kountche indicated that the difficulties encountered during
the construction of the Islamic University at Say (50 kilometers south of
Niamey) had been overcome. A draft agreement for the completion of the

third section of this university was to be signed on 17 Narch in Jiddah.

It is also noted moreover that besides the ministers of plan and of foreign
affairs and cooperation, who accompanied President Kountche, the ministers
of commerce, Hamid Algabit. and of mines and industries, Annou Nahsmane,

lb

F0R1OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

visited Saudi Arabia in the last few nontha. During this same period, it is
noted. Niamey appointed a new ambassador to Jiddah, Salifou Somaila, the

former ambassador to Algeria.

For his part, the Saudi Development Fund's vice president, mhanad al-Qusayt,
signed an agreement in Niamey for a nulti-annual loan to finance construction

of. .the Nialey-Pilingue highway.

On that occasion he announced that his country was studying the possibility
of participating in the financing of the Kandadji dam.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

94310
(:50: 6719/801

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MILITARY REGIME CAN ROAST OF GOOD RESULTS
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French No 1111, 21 Apr 82 pp 34-36
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "The Discreet Charm of the Military")

[Text] After the six other departmental capitals in the country, it is now
the turn of Agadez, the old caravan city built at the gateway to the desert
and the high place of Touareg country, to host this year's festivities marking
the army's coming to power (15 April 1976). Hith its prestigious sultan's
palace and its labyrinth of mud houses overlooked by the minaret of a famous
mosque dating from the 16th century, the capital of Air will be the capital

of Niger for a day. Artists. musicians and athletes from the four corners of
the land will be pitted against one another in single combat witnessed, among
other spectators, by the entire leadership which will come from Niamey for the
occasion.

It will also be the time to draw up the balance sheet of 8 years under the
military regime, a balance sheet of which a visitor landing at the Niamey
airport will soon have a glimpse, beginning with the nearly completed highway
taking him to the city. While one large international-class hotel. the Gaweye,
has opened its doors a few months ago, a number of other projects are being
completed: the Palace of Congresses. ministries, ONAREH (National Office of
Mineral Resources), and so on. The frantic construction has reached such a
point that the International Monetary Fund recently advised the government to
exercise moderation. Nevertheless, without the drop in the price of uranium,
the main export product. many other building projects would already have been
undertaken.

The authorities are all the more determined to give the capital modern infra-
structures because it had practically none. Ten years ago, Niamey looked more
like a big village than a capital. But "those who set the prices, the mighty,"
the chief of state sighs with bitterness showing in his eyes, "deliberately
broke our streak." Nor was the ambition of the Supreme Military Council (048).
which ousted Hamani Diori, limited to embellishing Niamey. First and foremost,
it wanted to rehabilitate the difficult economic situation inherited from the
old regime. The officers wanted to put politics on the back burner and turn

to what. in their eyes, is essential: development.

One can now say that in the main, they won their bet. Thanks to strict manage—
ment and not hesitating to come down hard on all those who confuse public and

16 ‘

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢HVLY
tvn vrrayuu. use. 00‘s.!

personal finances, President Seyni Kountche succeeded in stabilizing the eco-
nomic situation. In agriculture. for example, the food shortage was limited.
Furthermore, national production during certain years actually covered all
grain needs. an increasingly rare phenomenon in the Sahel. This result was

due to a systematic policy of agricultural water projects, coordinated with
action aimed at increasing the productivity of the soil.

Regarding livestock raising, the nation's herds, decimated during the great
drought of 1972-1973, have been rebuilt. For certain species, the 1968 level

has even been surpassed, thanks to a sustained effort on behalf of the develop-
ment of pasture land.

Major sacrifices have also been made to modernize the road system. "Correcting
the country's isolation is the top priority," we were told by President Seyni
Kountche as he pointed to the huge map in his office. The fact is that Niger
is totally dependent on its neighbors for its exports and imports. He there-
fore intends to cooperate with them in order to build acceaswaya both to the
Atlantic Coast, through Nigeria,-Benin and Togo, and the Mediterranean, through
Algeria. A hub of the major overland ways destined to serve as a bridge

between Black Africa and Mediterranean Africa through the Sahara, Niger has
taken its role very seriously.

With the completion a year ago of the famous “uranium road" linking Tahoua and
Arlit. one can say that in their Nigerien portion. the branches of the Trans-
African (Algiers-Mombasa) and of the Trans-Saharan (Algiers-Lagos) took a major
leap forward. Likewise. in the east-west direction, from the border of Mali

to the shores of Lake Chad via Niamey, Maradi. Zinder and Diffs. there remain
only a few short sections that are not paved.

So many achievements in the area of infrastructures were possible only because

of the resources derived from uranium. This tells the strategic role of this
product in the country's economic development. as well as the impact of the

drop in prices on the budget and financial balance. It was beginning in
January 1980 that the world market collapsed. but Niger, which negotiates the

sale price of the ore for the following year with its foreign partners each
year. did not feel the effect immediately. At the end of 1979, the price

set for 1980 with the 16 Western companies representing the nine countries
involved in uranium mining was 26,560 CPA francs a kilogram.

For 1981, the world price fell to 16,500 CPA francs a kilogram. Great persua-
sive efforts were needed on the part of France, the majority partner, to make
the others agree to raise it to 20,000 francs. Por Niger, this still meant a
loss of 8 billion CPA francs (160 million French francs). The price for 1982

recovered somewhat. moving to 24,000 CPA francs a kilogram, slightly under
the 1980 level. Consequently, the investment budget for 1982 is only 26 bil-

lion CPA francs, the same sum as in 1981. compared with the 35 billion origin-
ally planned.

How can uranium prices be stabilized? That is the major question haunting
all Nigerien leaders. While they are told that :he fluctuations linked to the

famous law of supply and demand are inevitable in a market economy, they agree
out of courtesy, but without being convinced. They rather tend to think that

17

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY-
the drop in prices results from a deliberate policy. that it is a matter of

intimidating, if not punishing. a small country like Niger which refuses to
give in to the dictates of the mighty.

Despite the many pressures used by diplomats and other special envoys from
Western countries in Niamey. in fact, Col Seyni Kountche has not hesitated to
sell his uranium to countries such as Libya. Pakistan and Iraq. In 1931.
Qadhdhafi was even the second customer for Nigerien uranium after France. Tri-
poli bought 1,212 tons and Paris 2,293.3. To what uses are such purchases

put by Libya, Pakistan and Iraq? "That is not our problem." the Nigerien chief
of state immediately retorts, and he adds: "We are determined to sell our
uranium to anyone who wants to buy it. just like our peanuts or early vegeta-

bles. provided they go along with the provisions of the International Atomic
Energy Agency in Vienna!"

And if one brings up the risk of proliferation of the atomic boms, Colonel
Kountche replies: "We sell only uranium metal. which is not what is used to
make bombs. It is those who have the processing plants and the necessary tech-
nology who should be told not to sell. They are the danger. not us."

Likewise. the obstinacy of the Nigerien leaders in wanting to bring Kuwait

into the capital of the latest uranium company encountered strong resistance

on the part of the French partners. In October 1980, Colonel Kountche had

to get angry and pound on the table in order for his interlocutors. led by
Peckeur. head of the Atomic Energy Commission. Georges Besse, general director
of COGEMA (General Nuclear Materials Company). and Panouillot, chairman of

the board of directors of the Tassa-Ntagalgue Mining Company (SHTT). to agree --

probably against their will -- to allow Kuwait a share in the capital of the
SMTT.

Precisely what is the policy of Niger's partners on uranium? Are they willing
to find a price stabilization agreement? How do they set the prices? Is

Niger to make agreements only with the companies, or with their home countries
as well? These are questions of concern to Nigerien leaders, questions which
Col Seyni Kountche will undoubtedly not fail to bring up with Francois Hitter-
rand at the time of the official visit which the French president is planning
to make to Niamey in May. The Nigerien chief of state will also take advantage
of the opportunity to ask for France's support in completing two major projects
which the regime deems to have priority.

One of these projects is working of the SHTT deposit destined to produce

1.500 tons of uranium metal a year. With the construction of the ore process-
ing plant. an electrical power plant and a mining compound that will be inte-
grated into the city of Akokan. the undertaking represents an investment on
the order of 100 billion CFA francs (2 billion French francs).

The Nigerien chief of state could also plead the case of the usefulness of the
Kandsndji Dam on the Niger River to his French colleague. This project would

irrigate nearly 100,000 hectares of arable land. while producing 200 megawatts
of electricity. Nigerien leaders attach all the more importance to the project

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
because the Niamey region, supplied by the Kaindji Dam (Nigeria). suffers from
a severe energy shortage. Furthermore, the country's oil bill is some 18 bil-
lion CPA francs. But given the high cost of the operation (over 100 billion
CPA francs), certain backers, such as the PRC, are reticent.

Under such conditions and considering the country's poor economic situation at
the present time, other projects like the Parakou-Niamey railroad will remain
filed away. Awaiting the recovery which, for Niger, is closely linked to the
relaunching of plans to develop nuclear energy in the Western world, the Su-
preme Military Council is concerned about the political situation, even though
8 years after his accession to power. Colonel Kountche seems to have the situa-
tion well in hand. Nor does he have anything more to fear from his predeces-
sors. Released now, most officials from the old regime have turned to business,
although a number of them were recently assigned to house arrest in their vil-
lages. Has this arbitrary? Not at all, the chief of state told us. "I have
my reasons," state reasons difficult to explain.

As for former President Hanani Diori, he is still under house arrest in the
villa occupied by the former president of the National Assembly, Boubou Rama,
who died at the end of January in Niamey at the age of 73. Having totally
regained his sight following an operation for cataracts 2 years ago, Diori
reads. writes and listens to the radio, when not talking with his near rela-
tives, the only persons authorized to visit him. But everything would seem
to indicate that he will not be long in regaining full freedom of movement.
“That would already have been the case, if it were not for the subversive
action of Abdoulaye Diori." Colonel Kountche told us, before explaining that
the eldest son of the former president is constantly in touch with Qadhdhafi
in order to destabilize the regime in Niamey. Abdoulaye Diori, who vehemently
denies this. is reportedly setting up commando operations from Libya in order
to free his father.

In other words. despite the recent restoration of diplomatic relations between
Niamey and Tripoli interrupted at the beginning of 1981, confidence is not
total. Proof of this is the campaign of discredit now waged by Colonel Qadhd-
hart throughout the Gulf countries. a campaign according to which the Nigerien
chief of state reportedly belongs to a non-Muslim ethnic group which persecutes
the followers of Muhammad! Consequently, no more aid must be given to him.

But the leaders of the Gulf countries know what they are dealing with.

Nevertheless, in politics. the major concern at the moment revolves around the
establishment of the development company, an original institution which. in the
absence of a political party since the army's accession to power, is aimed at

obtaining the effective, voluntary participation of the people in the task
of national construction and whose two driving forces are the traditional

youth organizations, the Samariya, and the cooperatives. What real power would
the development company have? Could it not play the role of a parliament in
which the needs. interests and aspirations of the people would be reflected.
Certain official statements would indicate this.

But whether it be a question of this project or any others being put together
in Niamey. things must be approached cautiously. for if, in 8 years. the face

19

FOR OFIHCJAL USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Niger has changed. Col Seyni Kountche has not really changed his methods
that much, still governing with a heavy dose of mystery. As a good staff offi-
cer. he prefers to surprise rather than to reveal his tactics and positions.

Nevertheless. the Nigeriena'are the rare Africans to enjoy the discreet chem
of the military.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11.464
CSO: “19/858

20

MWLUSEONLY
BRIEFS

ECONOHIC IMPACT OF MARKET FIRE-~If you have not seen the Niamey market, it is
too late! On the night of 30-31 March, those hectares of wooden and corrugated
metal huts built in the heart of the capital were ravaged by a huge fire. An
initial estimate placed the damage to goods and facilities devastated by the
flames at over 5 billion CPA francs (including the road terminal). In other
words. even if there were no casualties. the fire meant total ruin for thou-
sands of families. "hat is worse, the country's commercial circuits will be
disorganized for a long time to come because, as one Nigerien official ex-
plained. "when the Niamey market had a cold, all trade in the country sneezed.
Now there is nothing left of it." To understand this, one has to have seen
the hordes of jobbers and low-level government employees who would invade

the market at 1800 hours on the nose,‘turning it into a restaurant. For

100 CFA francs, they could eat and learn where the goods smuggled in from
neighboring Nigeria could be found. From live monkeys to tape recorders, one
could find everyting at the big Niamey market. .A little of everything is .
right: Amidst the dusty bric-a—brac and an infernal amount of noise, Haoussa,
Djerma. Peul and Songhai vendors served a motley crew. One would think that
all the merchants in West Africa had agreed to met for a daily fair. Of all
that, nothing is left. [By M. K. N.) [Text] [Paris JEUNB AIRIQUB in ?rench
No 1111. 21 Apr 82 p 35] [COPYRIGNT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982] 11,664

CSO: 4719/858

21

IN)! OFINCIAI.USII(MVLY
FOI:OF?WCJAI.USE|JNLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

INFIATION IN 1981-~According to the BUSIHBSS TIMES of 22 March, referring to
the latest figures published by the Central Bank, the rate of inflation in
Nigeria for the first 9 months of 1981 was 21.9 percent. However, this rate
could have diminished during the last quarter, as inflation is generally
weaker at this time of the year, especially compared to the first quarter.
The paper also indicated that for the same period, imports amounted to 8.3
billion naira (approximately $13 billion). Sugar leads the imported food
products, at more than $550 million, followed by rice (approxinately $400
million). The final figures for 1981 will not be lmom for several months.
[Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX BT HBDITBRRANBENS in French No 1898, 26
Mar 82 p 853] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 969‘

FAVORABLB BALANCE FOR FRANCE-~The French-Nigerian trade balance for the 12
months of 1981 is clearly in France's favor for the first time since 1962.

In fact, out of a total of Pr 17.6 billion in trade (Fr 843 million less

than in 1980), France's sales amounted to Fr 9.263 billion, compared to 5.717
billion in 1980 (+ 62 percent), and its purchases to 8.357 billion, compared
to 12.726 billion (-35 percent). Thus, while France had a deficit of 7.009
billion in 1980, its surplus in 1981 was Pr 886 million. This situation,
whose development could be noted regularly throughout the year, results largely
from the numerous contracts concluded by France that have increased its sales
of machinery and equipment. It is also explained by a significant decrease
in its purchases of petroleum. In fact, in 1981 they amounted to only 5.4
million barrels, at an average price of Pr 1,523 per barrel, while in 1980
they amounted to 10.9 million barrels, at an average price per barrel which
was 37 percent lower, or Fr 1,112. This increase in the price per barrel
explains why, although French purchases declined 50 percent in volume, they
decreased only 35 percent in value from one year to the next. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS in French No 1893, 26 Mar 32 p 853]
[COPYRIGBT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

CRUDE OIL PRICES, SALns--In conformance with the decisions adopted at the
special OPEC conference in Vienna on 19 and 20 March, Nigeria's petroleum
production must be limited to 1.3 million barrels per day, and the reference
price must be decreased from {36.52 to $35.62, effective immediately. The
production ceiling is slightly higher than February's production, estimated

at between 1.1 and 1.2 million barrels per day. As for the price, Bonny
Light's principal competitor is North Sea petroleum, whose price Great britain

22

IIHRCHHHKJA1.USE(IVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

lowered to $31 several months ago. There therefore remains a price differen-
tial of $6.52 per barrel to Nigeria's disadvantage, which may turn away
buyers of Nigerian petroleum in a market characterized by surplus production.
[Text] [Paris 'MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1898, 26

Mar 82 p 853] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

LOKOJA HYDROELECTRIC PROJECT--we know that, partly because of the problem of
supplying the future steelmsking complexes at Ajaokata, the giant Lokoja
hydroelectric project decided on in September 1979 by General Obaaanjo's
military regime and then abandoned in 1980 by President Shogsri's civilian
regime has surfaced again, with its completion receiving priority from the
National Electric Power Authority (NEPA) over other smaller projects--especia1-
ly those presented by ICHP (Central Hydraulic Laboratory of France) (NARCRES
TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS 26 Feb p 621). The federal minister of mines and
power, Alhaji Mohammad Ibrahim Hassan, spoke of it recently himself, and the
governor of Kwara, Alhaji Adama Atta, mentioned it in a discussion with the
head of state on 22 February. Two years ago the project, located at the con-
fluence of the Niger and the Benne in Kwara State, was estimated at some 2.5
billion naira. or approximately $5 billion. Nith 2.000 M" of power, it was
supposed to be one of thelargest in the country and was to be added to the
Kainjli, the first plant built, and to the Jebba and Shiroro plants, still in
progress, as well as to various other thermal projects, for the production of
electricity. The country's requirements are such (see MAKCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANBENS, 12 Feb p 372) that Minister Ibrahim Hassan has also announced
a new 1 billion naira hydroelectric project with a 1250 MN capacity, which
would be located in Gemba, in Congola State. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX
ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1898, 26 Mar 82 p 853] (COPYRIGHT: Rene
Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

MORE ON OJUKNU PARDON--Lagos, 18 May (NAN)--President Shehu Shagari today
got_the approval of the National Council of State to grant pardon to

Mr Chukwuemeka Ojukwu. A statement this evening from the executive office
of the president, in Lagos, said that the exercise was in fulfilment of

an undertaking given last year by the president to review the case of

Mr Ojukwu. The statement said that the president had directed the police

to issue a notice in the Gazette to nullify the taint of criminality on

Mr Ojukwu's image by its wanted fugitive offenders notice. Earlier today,
at the end of the meeting of the Council of State. Governor Abubakar Rimi

of Kano had told the News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) that the precident's
proposal to grant pardon to Mr Ojukwu met no obstacles whatsoever.

Mr Ojukwu went into self exile at the close of the Nigerian Civil War in 1970.
He was military governor of the former eastern region and one of the leaders
of the rebellion that led to the civil war which raged from 1967 to 1970.

He was stripped of his military rank and dismissed from the Nigerian Army

by the Cowon administration. [Text] [ABI81824 Lagos NAN in English

1302 cm 18 May 82]

SNAGARI CONSIDERS OJUKHU PARDON—-Lagos, 18 Hay (NAN)--President Shehu Shagari
today to Logan submitted a memorandum to the National Council of States on
the granting of pardon to Mr Chukwuemeka Ojukwu in respect of any federal
offence he might have committed in relation to the civil war. Addressing a
meeting of the council, President Shagari explained that it seemed prudent

23

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR'OFFKJALIEEZONLN

SENEGAL

SENEGAL'S POLICY TOWARD SAHARAN REPUBLIC RAPPED
Paris APRIQUB-ASIE in French No 262, 29 Mar-ll Apr 82 p 26

[Text] The conference devoted to the creation of a Pan-African press agency
(PANA) will have been the first incident in a series which cannot avoid
stirring up all those whose aim is to paralyze the OAU's activities. This
incident, while foreseeable, was nonetheless surprising. In effect, by
deciding to bar the Saharan delegation, led by Information Hinister Mohammad
Ould Salek, the officials in Dakar must have known they were jeopardizing the
holding of the conference, whose importance, underscored by the Senegalese
prime minister, needs no further proof. Neither could they be unaware that
their undiplonatic gesture would sweep away the solidarity of the other
African delegations present at this conference. This decision--which follows
the direction desired by those who are working for the destruction of the
continental organization-«threatens to jeopardize the overtures Senegal has
made toward certain African countries.

Begun by President Abdou Diouf, this policy had already enjoyed a certain
amount of success and was looked on favorably by many countries, becasue it
allowed Senegal not only to renew ties with countries like Angola and Algeria,
but also once again to begin the inter-African dialogue on essential problems
concerning the continent. The problem of the Sahara had, in principle, been
partially settled by the decision to formally admit the SDAR [Saharan Demo-
cratic Arab Republic] to the OAU. To lose sight of this fact, or to want to
completely deny it by trying to breathe life into the policies of the King

of Morocco, whose negative performance is known in more than one African
country, doesn't help either the OAU or Senegal!

COPYRITHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

9939
CSO: 4719/800

24

ETHICNNHCIAI.USEIORHA!
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONLY

SENEGAL

BCEAO ISSUES BCONCMIC, MONETARY STATISTICS
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEIIS in French No 1898, 26 Mar 82 p 8107

[TeXt] One of the latest economic and monetary statistics bulletins of the
Central Bank of the West African States IBCBAO] was devoted to Senegal.

0n the basis of the purchase price to producers for the 1980-1981 agricultural
campaign, the value of the peanut harvest represented 9.6 billion ORA francs
(a decrease of 8.2 billion), cottonseed came to 1.3 billion crA francs (a
decrease of 0.2 billion). and paddy to 2.5 billion CPA francs (a decrease of
2.5 billion). '

At the beginning of the 1981-1982 campaign now in progress, purchase prices
were raised, per kilogram and in CPA francs, from 50 to 70 francs for oil-mill
peanuts, from 60 to 68 francs for cottonseed, and from 61.50 to 51.50 francs
for paddy; the purchase price for food products--corn, millet-sorghum and
beans-a1so having been increased.

The small amount of seed supplied to the oil mills is reflected in the drop
in oil exports: 10,350 tons for the first 9 months of 1981 and 25,419 tons
of oilcakes.

Exports of calcium phosphates in the first three quarters of 1981 reached
907,000 tons (as against 1 million tons for the corresponding quarters of 1980).

For the first 11 months of 1981. tuna fishing produced 10,118 tons delivered
to local canneries.

During the first three quarters of 1981. Dakar international airport recorded
10.074 commercial airplane flights and passenger traffic involving the arri-
val and departure of 633,600 travelers.

At the end of June 1981, the general co-odity turnover index of the major
commercial enterprises was established at 202.5 as against 208.4 a year be-
fore, on the base of 100 determined for the year 1970.

On 30 September 1981, the general consumer price index for the African family
was placed at 286.7, as against 263 at the end of September 1980; the increase

was particularly noticeable concerning foodstuffs and maintenance products
(on the base of 100 defined for the year 1970).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The budget for fiscal year July 1981-June 1982 was fixed at 181.1 billion CPA
francs (an increase of 53.5 billion over the preceding one); receipts include
55.1 billion CPA francs in foreign contributions (an increase of 37.1 billion)
allocated to procurement costs fixed at 55.6 billion (an increase of 33.6
billion). On 31 October 1981. duties and taxes collected by the customs
service totaled 66.8 billion CPA francs, of which 98 percent was from imports.

Foreign trade statistics go back to 1979, a year in which imports amounted to
198 billion CPA francs, as compared with 113.9 billion francs in exports; the
deficit of 84.1 billion francs was appreciably higher than that of 1978 (68.9
billion).

At the end of December 1980. the outstanding foreign debt represented the
equivalent of 187 billion CPA francs (an increase of 33.9 billion during the
year); the ayailable margin not yet deducted from funds obtained amounted to
132.9 billion CPA francs (an increase of 33.9 billion). During 1980. debt
servicing (amortization and interest) required 32.6 billion CPA francs (an
increase of 10.1 billion over 1979).

On 30 September 1981, notes and currency in circulation totaled $1.9 billion
CPA francs (an increase of 8 billion at the end of September 1979). On the
same date, demand deposits and fixed-term deposits in banks were registered at
121.7 billion CPA francs (a decrease of 4.5 billion). In comparison, savings
funds represented 287 billion CPA francs (an increase of 32.5 billion), with
public corporations accounting for some 54 percent of their use.

Also, on 30 September 1981, the Senegalese Treasury found itself in debt at
the local level to the extent of 39.3 billion CPA francs (of which 23.9 bil-
lion were overdrafts from the issuing institute), as against a debit position
of 23.8 billion a year before.

Over the year, the netforeign holdings situation had again strongly deterio-
rated. At the end of September 1981, the Central Bank and commercial banks
found themselves with a foreign debt equivalent to 136.7 billion CPA francs,
an increase of 50.3 billion over September 1980.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9436
C50: 4719/801

26

FOR‘0FF“JAI.USE(NVLY
OPPOSITION SAID TO BE LARGELY DISCRBDITED
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1111. 21 Apr 82 pp 36-35
[Article by David Sharp: "Jawara Persists and Signs"]

[Text] The graffiti are still on the wall in downtown Banjul: "He have been
playing dead for 15 years. Wake up!" Since the first "disturbances" in
October 1980. no one has taken the trouble to remove them. a symbol. according
to some, of the "passiveness of the authorities, who never react in time."
Scarcely 9 months ago, on 30 July 1981. the awakening was cruel. costing at
least 500 persons their lives and dealing a very harsh blow to the economy

and the political traditions of this tiny nation (600.000 inhabitants).

Gambian journalist Rudolph Allen speaks of a "rebellion" as poorly organized
as it was tragic and which was sometimes even almost unreal: "One day," he
says. "I found myself facing a young thief who was threatening me with a play
pistol he had probably stolen from a toy store."

with the exception of the British and Swedish tourists who rarely venture far
from their luxury hotels (and whose number has dropped 46 percent since the
"events"), everyone still lives with the memory of those nightmarish days,
particularly the some 1,000 persons incarcerated after the abortive coup on
31 July. Many have been released. but there have been 84 sentencings so far,
16 involving the death penalty. In the list of conspirators are many members

of the police Field Force. Some say the government can now count on no more
than about 50 officers (out of 400).

The trials, all public, are far from over. They take place in the Law Courts
which. like most administrative buildings in Banjul - except for the Central
Bank. which is air-conditioned and which has five floors -- are tiny and which
have obviously known better days. On 25 March. a day like any other in

Court 2, seven of the presumed instigators of the uprising appear at the same
time. under the vigilant guard of Senegalese soldiers. Slumped in their seats
in a corner of the dark room. manifestly bewildered by what is happening to
them. they truly do not look like dangerous terrorists or agents of Tripoli
(according to two witnesses, four Libyans reportedly participated twice in
meetings held to plan for the abortive coup. meetings beginning in January
1981). These young people resemble much more the unemployed from the slums

of Banjul and its environs, whose numbers are steadily increasing and who seem
far more mobilized by Nigerian marihuana than by the works of Marx and Lenin.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
One remarkable fact: The judges and attorneys at these special courts are all
foreigners. mainly Ghanaians, Sierra Leoneans and Nigerians for the most part.
"A fine lesson taught by this African government! Without worrying about the
price. it has called in totally independent magistrates to judge people who
would have been sumarily executed in other countries." The author of this
praise, Attorney General Gyeke Dako (chief special prosecutor) knows what he
is talking about: Attorney general of the Republic of Ghana between 1970 and
1978, he headed the trials of at least five groups of unfortunate plotters in
his country. He points out one curious detail: The 16 convictions for trea-
son handed down so far were based on a law inherited fron British legislation
and going back to 1351! This same law was just invoked against former vice
president Cherif Diba, leader and one of the five deputies of the main opposi-
tion group in Parliament, the National Convention Party (NGP).

Are the special prosecutors subjected to pressure from the government? Abso-
lutely not. claims Gyeke Dako, who underlines the "purely technical" nature
of his intervention. Nevertheless. a rapid solution of the "Diba affair"
(which could end in the death penalty for the accused) would help President

Dawda Jawara and his People's Progressive Party (PPP). which holds 29 of the
3S elective seats in Parliament.

Presidential and legislative elections are in fact to be held on 4-5 May.
While the state of emergency and the curfew remain in effect. the blue flags

of the PPP are already waving nearly everywhere in rural areas. while the white
flags of the "C? are conspicuous by their absence. ”He wonder whether. under
the current conditions, the opposition will dare raise its head," we were told
by one student in Brikama. an immense conglomeration of hovels with corrugated
metal roofing in southern-Banjul. Our interlocutor calls himself a "conserva-
tive. which means totally opposed to the government." Like many of his com-

rades. he approves of the objectives. but not the strategy, of the authors of
the 30 July 1981 coup. "Many of us learned from it. Next time, we will be
better prepared."

It is a very different tune heard from the venerable ssgto (leader) Bl-ﬂadji
Abu Khan, who for 65 years has presided over the destiny of the tiny village

of Kuntair on the northern bank of the Gambia River. "No one here will vote
(or the opposition. All those who before did not want to hear about the PPP

have been on the side of President Jawara since July." If this is the case.
one wonders why Dr Hamadou Hanneh, minister of planning and industrial devel-
opment. feels obliged to tour the countryside not only flanked by an armed
police officer, but carrying an impressive hunting rifle himself.

This is proof that the Gambian democracy. modeled after that of Great Britain.
experienced a rude blow on 30 July 1981. However. one must add that the way
in which the voting is conducted makes rigging very difficult and that the
NC? seemed determined to present candidates in most districts. But the elec-

tions of é-S Hay will not thereby resolve the problems that caused many Gam-
bians to kill one another nearly 9 months ago.

Facing a largely discredited opposition. Sir Dawda Jawara will very certainly
emerge from the 4 Hay voting. the first since the official birth of Senegambia

28

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
e v“ v. . Isn‘t. van. Vl‘l‘l

on 1 February, the victor. But. in office since independence (17 years), has
he not watched his power dwindle? "111 he have the energy and determination
to undertake the essential changes?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

11.1064
080: 6719/858

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

U.S. JOURNALIS'I‘S ARRESTED, LAM—Kampala. May 19 (AFP)--Uganda soldiers
locked up two U.S. journalists for 108 hours and gave each of them 12 lashes
before releasing then from a barracks north of Kampala. the two men said
here today. The journalists, Chuck Powers of the LOS ANGELES TIMES and
Robert Rosenthal of THE PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER. said they were detained

on Monday when they went to interview the commanding officer of a barracks
at Bombo. north of Kampala. They said they had introduced themelves with
their press accreditations at the barracks' gates and were allowed inside
only to find themselves arrested. They were subsequently accused of
"infiltrating" the barracks and were locked up in a cell. Their driver
was also detained. [Text] [0191327 Paris AFP in Baglish 1228 CHI 19 May 82]

C50: [0700/1 250

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”88‘“ INTERNATIONAL OFFICIAL LISTS RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

Brussels

[Articlez

Appalling—that is the word which Mike Dottridge, head of the Central African
of Amesty International's world secretariat in London, uses to sun

division

POURQUOI PAS? in French 18 Her 82 pp 53-56
"The Crocodiles Are Living Hell")

[Text] Annesty International's action can be conpared
to that of an antibiotic which acts specifically against
certain viruses but encourages the resistance of other
virus strains. Similarly, an Annesty International
campaign is able to noderate or terninate certain vio-
lations of Ina-an rights, but it prompts totalitarian or
authoritarian governments to adopt new methods of re-
pression.

This is the case in Zaire. The records published by
Amnesty International, the mission of hessrs Stephen and
Dottridge to Kinshasa. and the dialog initiated with
President Ho'utu have certainly led to an improvement-
although alighto-in the treatnent of prisoners in offi-
cial prisons. 0n the other hand. torture and poor treat-
nent are continuing in detention centers and cases of
"disappearances" are sultiplying. Opponents of the
regime, or those clained to be, are thrown from heli-
copters in the sky or fed to the crocodiles.

up the violations of humn rights in Zaire.

The 28-year-old Bnglistnan. who launched the Bolussa affair and contributed
to the fall of the Central African tyrant, lists the "glaring and flagrant"

abuses conitted by the Hobutu regime:

-Detention of claimed opponents for months, indeed years, without charges or

trial, especially in centers run by security forces.

-Banishaent, in other words internal exile. of opponents or claimed opponents.
of all civil and political rights, they are assigned to a village to

Deprived
live.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UIHLIAL use UNLI

-Incarceration of prisoners of conscience, following unfair trials.
-"Disappearance" of political prisoners.
-Application of the death penalty.

Hike Dottridge supplies the following details on the numerous Zairian security
forces who have excessive power to arrest and imprison their fellow citizens
and who consider incarceration a means of stifling internal opposition.

l) The CNRI [expansion unknown] (former CND [National Documentation Centerl).
Responsible for domestic security, this civil department has detention centers
in Bukavu, Kinshasa, and Lubumbashi, as well as offices and branches through-
out the country.

2) The $81 [expansion unknown]. This national investigation division is
responsible for foreign security and monitors groups of opponents in exile.
Its headquarters are in Kinshasa, but on occasion it uses the CNRI's deten-
tion centers.

3) The 3838 [Special Investigation and Surveillance Brigade] and the 82, a
branch of the national security forces, have units throughout Zaire. Their
prisons, located in a building on Avenue Dracaena (the Gombe district),
enjoy a sinister renown.

a) 62 is the military division responsible for matters of intelligence and
military security.

5) The Special Presidential Brigade, based in Camp Tshatshi in Kinshasa,
runs the DAB '2 detention center, in other words, the OAD's second center.

6) In "areas of operation," the FAZ [Zairian Armed Forces] have local security
divisions, called 52's.

Into the nets cast by all these dubious fisherman sometimes fall political
opponents, or rebels, but most often suspects. In Hobutu‘s Zaire, participat-
ing in a demonstration on a university campus, going on strike, granting an
interview, criticising the regime, or reading a political tract is enough

to make a citizen a prisoner. Thus, a doctor from Rwanda, Inkaka Sebera,

was arrested in Bukavu and held in secret for a long time for having criticised
the new law on nationality.

The treatment in detention centers and camps is deplorable. The cells are
overcrowded and infested with insects and rats. The prisoners receive one
meal per day at most: a gruel made of cassava leaves. There is one bottle

of water for 12 prisoners.

when the families manage to find "their" prisoners and bring them food, it is
almost always stolen by the jailers.

The Amnesty International representative describes the poor treatment in-
flicted on prisoners:

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"In most prisons and detention centers in Kinshasa, they use beating and
starvation. The prisoners are regularly beaten about the face, the ears,

and the chest. Many must wear tight shackles called 'krakras.' Torture
techniques vary depending on the detention center. In some places they whip
with ropes, in others they use electric torture; or they burn them with red—hot
irons or beat the prisoner while he is hanging upside down or submerged in
water for prolonged periods. The Zairian authorities deny the accusations of
torture. But Amnesty International doctors have examined many freed prisoners
who still bear the scars. Despite the promises of the government and the
President, prison conditions in Zaire are such and remain such that about

100 prisoners die each year. In 1980 and 1981, efforts to improve the treat-
ment in official prisons were agreed to, but living conditions in the canps
and detention centers are still atrocious. There they die of starvation,
sickness, poor treatment."

Hike Dottridge confirms this: "Meaty-eight prisoners accused of theft from
stores belonging to the presidential family have been left without food for
6 months. It is their fellow prisoners who, by sharing their meager rations,
have enabled these 27 skeletons to stay alive."

The Zairian regime is not content merely to imprison its opponents or claimed
opponents. It also locks up their wives and parents.

Amnesty International cites many cases of wives, brothers, sons, or uncles
incarcerated for no reason. Thus, Kibassa Haliba, the NPR [Popular Movement
of the Revolution] Politburo member who drafted the "open letter" sent to
President Hobutu by 13 nenbers of Parliament, was thrown out of the single
party, deprived of his civil and political rights, and imprisoned. He saw
his brother Hbinga and his servant arrested and held in prison for months
without charges or a trial.

On 25 Septmber 1981, in the village of Abumbe near Ngovi-Swima, Kapokela
Sango was arrested because of his connections with an armed opposition group.
His aunt and uncle who came to visit him at Camp Hulimbi were imprisoned in
turn and had to pay a ransom to recover their freedom.

The same thing happened to citizen Namulunga from Kamanyola. She was locked
up in prison her husband had just escaped from. As for Zairian citizen

Pinzi, she was imprisoned in the 00A 02 detention center with her ll-month-old
baby. Her crime: being the wife of an African People's Party sympathizer
from Kikunga.

A peasant named Simwami from South Kivu was apprehended by the security forces
instead of his son Lwangila.

Lujo, the son of Zablon Rubsruba, one of the leaders of the F121 Bareka
guerilla group, is still in prison; he claims, however, to have no connection
with these rebels.

These "blunders" occur not only in distant areas, where the Zairian Government's
power is weak, but sometimes within several kilometers of the residence of

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0F11(]AI.USEZ(HVLY

the head of state. His military headquarters is close to the 00A #2 deten-
tion center. and the President's special adviser for security matters is
kept informed of persons who are being held by the CNRI.

“In addition to these violations of human rights," says Hike Dottridge, "the
increase in the number of 'disappesrances' must be pointed out. Zsirisns are
thrown from helicopters or into rivers where crocodiles are plentiful--a
method which leaves no traces. In Zaire we are not faced with primitive
barbarian but with a premeditated system.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Pourquoi Pas?

9693
680: 4719/793

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USEGNULY
'MANIFESTO' BLAHBS SITUATION 0N CORRUPT. BOURGEOIS LEADERS
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 266, 26 Apr-9 May 82 pp 18-20
[Article by Marian Sysle: "The Prison“)

[Text] For the past few weeks, a document from a sector of the
Zairian opposition has been secretly circulated in Kinshasa. It
is believed that one or more of its presumed authors may have
been apprehended during the recent waves of arrests.

Entitled "Manifesto of Congolese Patriots" and drafted, on be-
half of the provisional committee of the Patriotic Front of the
Congo, by active militants. the document makes a detailed anal-
ysis of the country's economic. social. political and cultural
situation. It points up the underlying causes of Zaire's
stagnation and emphasizes the overwhelming responsibility for
the state of affairs of the parasitic group heading the country.
At the same time, it warns against the elements of this privi-
leged caste that rebel against the totalitarianism of the
Mobutu regime. which gives them but little room, and whose ob-
jective is to gain control of the people's discontent and revo-
lutionary struggle in order to gain power without changing
anything in the neocolonial status quo.

At a time when Mobutu -- whom the West see-s to have decided to
accommodate, for the time being, at least -- believes to have
regained a solid reputation, after his trips to Washington.
Paris and London and after the escapade of his soldiers in Chad;

and at a time, also, when the dictator is getting ready to organ-
ize, in the months ahead, another election farce which he hopes
will make his people forget that his country continues to be a
prison in which all dissent is stifled, it seemed to us fitting to
to publish long excerpts from that manifesto. An interpreter for
the discontent, suffering and disillusionment of a people, the
document allows us to hear a voice scarcely heeded in the foreign
ministries and it demonstrates that despite the organizational
splintering of the opposition, a concrete, courageous struggle

is being waged in the field.

35

FINI¢HHHC1AI.USE‘ONLY
a «as us a swans. van. Ul‘ul

“...The Congo, our country. is going through the most difficult period in its
history. A profound crisis has hit all classes of the population. touching
all aspects of life. The political class (in power) is now at the end of its
rope. The discontent of the masses has reached its peak. At all levels,
change is awaited. Economically speaking, bankruptcy is total." The 'Mani-
festo of the Congolese Patriots' emphasizes the failure of all plans of're—
covery implemented under the International Monetary Fund and Western capitals
and enumerates the main manifestations of this crisis (increase in the foreign
debt. deficit in the trade balance and negative balance of payments). "There
is no price policy, no wage policy. The Congo is now nothing more than a
field for speculation, a paradise for adventurers of all kinds who bring in
and take out any kind of goods and set tariffs at will. Fraud is a legalized
practice. inasmuch as its beneficiaries are in power (...)."

"In the face of declining living conditions,1 the workers shirk their jobs and
increasingly engage in strikes, thereby paralyzing the production structure.
The workers' purchasing power has declined to such an extent that it poses a
threat to the very physical health of the mass of wage earners. Led by pup-
pets in the pay of Hobutu, the union can no longer contain the anger of the
workers. For their part, the peasants engage in subsistence farming. This is
a consequence of the 'policy' of low prices paid to agricultural producers.

All this causes a rural exodus that is draining our rural areas of the young.
The resulting drop in farm production makes it necessary to import basic food
products (...).

"Crisis in production, financial crisis, commercial crisis and a crisis in
food crops: This is the result of the country's dependency on other countries
and its economic exploitation by imperialism. But all this is aggravated

by the effects of a systematically inefficient nanagement aimed at making

the Zairian bourgeoisie richer, for its role is to maintain and promote the
best conditions for imperialist exploitation in the country. The policy of
looting could not have a better price (...).

"The world situation. semi-isolation. the fluctuations in prices of raw mater-

ials. the war in Angola and who knows what else: None of this can explain a
situation that has lasted for 21 years(...). The Congo is, in fact, a country

with vast resources, but it is less well off than many poor countries in the
dominated world. Furthermore, the permanent nature of the Zairian crisis ~-

it covers the entire postcolonial history -- shows the inadequacy of circum-
stantial explanations."

Two Main Classes

The document then analyzes the social makeup of the nation today and the tri-
balist policies of the government.

"Based on a grouping of tribes aimed at setting up a state with colonial

purposes, our society, which originally had no social classes, gradually be-
came divided into two major classes (...)." the manifesto states. "At the top

of the pyramid are the foreigners, representing the international upper bour-
geoisie. and the comprador bourgeoisie. (....) The class of exploiters that

36

FOR 0f?1€1Al.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we call the comprador bourgeoisie is itself made up of two main strata. The
first, the presidential court, is made up of about 10 members of the family
and clan of the president-dictator Mobutu Sese Seko. In addition to these are
a few advisers, often from outside the family, clan and even region of the
president. The second strata is the reigning brotherhood, which includes the
members of the president's tribe, the elite from the neighboring regions (Upper
Zaire and North-Bandundu), as well as a few prominent persons from the rest of
the country, recruited for their competence or representativeness and who owe
their 'professional' stability to their political allegiance, in exchange for
the corrupting advantages of power. These two strata constitute the central
core of the comprador bourgeoisie. thus labeled because it lives off the
government apparatus and the services it renders to imperialism. Corruption

and tribal relationships constitute the criteria for selection of the members
of this bourgeoisie (...).

"At the bottom of the pyramid are the masses, whose vital force is made up of
the working world, workers and the poor and average peasants. Soldiers,

teachers, low-level government employees and health personnel are also part of
the-working world. In addition, there are in this strata related groups:
those without jobs, artisans, the unemployed and young hoods, called ballados.

"Between these two poles is the national bourgeoisie, still emerging and estab-
lishing itself in opposition to the comprador bourgeoisie (...).

"This new stratum is made up of persons of note from the world of business
(commerce, transport, the hotel trade, and so on). and their funds generally
come from their past association with posts of responsibility in the govern-
ment. This category of persons owing their rise in society to their competence
or popularity is often checked in its ascent by the competition of monopolies
and foreign trusts which hold the reins of the country's economy, as well as

by the poor management of the Zairian economy and the tribalist policy of
the government.

"All this explains the political opposition of this new national bourgeoisie
to the presidential court. But it is a hesitant and tortured opposition,
insofar as it aspires to become part of that court itself! These two strata

(comprador bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie) have profound ramifications
in society (...)."

Corrosive Movement

"This division of society into social classes with tribal affiliations at the
highest level does not serve the country; rather, it only destroys and ruins

it. Regarding the management of the country's different institutions, their
officials, who generally benefit from corruption and their tribal affinities,
enjoy one privilege: impunity, which grows as one comes closer to the dictator.
Consequently. honest, competent citizens are excluded from management, or

forced to 'degrade themselves' if they want to remain there. State management
is impregnated with the doctrine of the Popular Movement of the Revolution
(Mobutu's NPR), which embodies the negation of national values. Consequently,
professors at the National University of Zaire meeting in Nsele on the occasion

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vrrILIAI. var. URL!

of a session of the Makanda-Kabobi Institute, labeled the NPR as a corrosive
movement. (....)" ~

The document draws up a list of the afflictions from which the country suffers,
pointing up the bankruptcy of education, which goes hand in hand with the in-

adequate health facilities, and describes the social and cultural climate
reigning in Hobutu's kingdom.

"In public departments. officials desert their offices and make people pay for
their services. Justice depends on who the client is and the press has become
an agency reporting the statements of authorities. Authenticity has become a
Zairian way of living Western culture in its most negative aspects. Far from
promoting the country. the authors of authenticity cultivate the lower instincts
and destroy the few values that were able to survive colonization.

"The power of money has a negative effect, even on family relationships. It
kills all feelings and.tends to make those relationships benefit certain indi-
viduals. those who have money. naturally. The value of the Zairian woman.
hypocritically called 'Mommy,‘ is steadily degraded to the benefit of prosti-
tution. (....) The trade union was unified. not to serve the working class.

but to more effectively stifle its claims. The same is true of the objectives
of the NPR youth organizations set up among students. (....)

"With respect to culture. there is total failure. Authenticity has been re-
duced to a rejection of borrowed names. the performance of folk dances. (....)
Of our traditions. nothing has been retained but a few outward forms. lacking
in original substance. (....) This is the result of the practice of laisser-
faire and a total in competence. now erected into a principle of resignation
by government officials. resignation expressed in this governmental slogan:
'Moco na moto abongisa' (Improving the situation is the business of every
citizen). The government is not providence. (....)

"Politically speaking." the Manifesto continues, "there is a complete impasse.

After the war in Angola. in which Zairian troops were broken up. and following
the two wars in Shaba, which exposed the internal contradictions in Hobutu's

army and the country. an effort was made to democratize the country through

the establishment of a parliament whose members were elected. But the dictator
did not take long to go back on a whole series of acts: refusal to authorize
the formation of other political parties; sentencing of 13 people's commis-
sioners. whose position was perfectly in keeping with the stand'rds of the NPR,
however; rejection of the principle of election to the NPR Political Bureau;
and the creation of a Central Committee whose members are named and revoked

by a decision made by Hobutu.

“Furthermore. the bloody repression continues in the underground dungeons
in Binza and elsewhere. Hundreds of persons are rotting in the jails of the
so-called national gendarmerie or those of several other security services."

NATO Intervention

"The country's entire policy is based on imperialist concerns. No coherent,
systematic policy is possible under such conditions. if there is no filling

38

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the holes so indispensable to a regime in constant crisis. What we are

experiencing today is not a crisis. but the death throes of a system of
looting."

The Manifesto of the Congolese Patriots also recalls the hard fight of the

people of Congo-Kinshasa, first at the time of the Hestern conquest and thro
throughout the colonial occupation. then after independence.

Beginning in 1955. the resistance which up to that time had mainly been ex-
pressed in peasant revolts, mutinies or fairly spontaneous strikes. assumed
an organized political form. the document states. "Many political parties
were created, leading to the imposition of independence on the colonizer.
However, the assassination of Patrice Lumumba, a leader of the people's
nationalist movement. and of his comrades in arms brought the objectives of
the struggle into question and created the bloodiest conflict in our history.
The resistance, mainly led by the leaders of the Congolese National Movement.
founded by Patrice Lumumba. and the African Socialist Party (PSA), united
with other revolutionary organizations in the National Liberation Committee
(CNL). spread throughout the territory. It was a declared war on the lackeya
of imperialism. successively represented by Kasa-Vubu, Ileo. Adoula. Tschombe
and Mobutu. The resistance movement, strengthened by the vigorous action of
patriot Pierre Mulele in Kwilou. won three-fourths of the country. The reac-
tionary forces owed their salvation to the intervention. in 196b, of NATO
troops headed by Belgium. with the logistical support of the United States.
Between 1965 and 1967. the last elements of the CNL disappeared. surviving

through the People‘s Revolution Party (PR?) of Kabila, in the jungle in the
eastern part of the country."

Effective Struggle

For a decade, from 1965 to 1975. the Zairian people endured the dictatorship
of the MPR without any organized, significant national resistance emerging.
Nevertheless, the period was marked by peasant revolts. workers' strikes and
student dissent movements. With the last two wars in Shaba waged by the Na-
tional Liberation Front of the Congo (PLNC), the resistance regained its
former strength. urging our fellow countrymen to show greater solidarity.

"But unlike the period of the preceding decade (1955-1965). the resistance

turned out to be politically weak." the Manifesto states. going on to recall
how the NATO forces renewed their "feat" of 1964 to save Mobutu twice from

a certain end. in 1977 and 1978, at the time of the last wars in Shaba.

In conclusion. the authors of the Manifesto. who declare themselves to be
"greatly concerned by the country's future." call on all the honest forces of
the Congo (Kinshasa) to "become involved in the national liberation struggle.
together with the mass organizations."

"The purpose of the National Front is to concretely organize our people in

order to wage an effective fight against the comprador bourgeoisie and imper-

ialism. its backer. The triumph of that struggle will lead to the establish-
ment of a democratic, national government."

39

FOR.OFFNJAL.USE(MVLY
l.

mu UH'ILIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

The decline in the workers' purchasing power brings us back to the crisis
situation in 1929. the Manifesto states. Underemployment went from 50 to
80 percent of the adult population and the level of real wages went from
a base figure of 100 in 1958 to under 17 in 1978.

Other sources claim it would be necessary to work for 50 years without
interruption in order to bring Zaire back up to the level of economic
development it had achieved by 1960.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11.464

CSO:

6719/886

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'HANIFESTO' BXAHINBS ROLE OF CATHOLIC CHURCH
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 265. 26 Apr-9 Hay 82 p 19

[Text] The Catholic Church. which is very powerful in Zaire, also attracts
the attention of the authors of the "Manifesto of the Congolese Patriots."

"He cannot ignore the role played by religious organizations in the country,
or more precisely. by the most powerful one among them: the Catholic Church
of Zaire. During colonization. the latter was conspicuous by its unswerving
support for colonialism, both material and spiritual. Consequently. it joined
in a common cause with the trusts and colonial administration and in exchange.
it enjoyed. in addition to the monopoly over education and the freedom to '
impose its religious training. solid material support. The Church was thus
able to require taxes. requisition provisions and labor and recruit orphans
for the church farms. It also served as the best agent for paternalism in
the worker camps of the mining cities. (....)

"It was also entrusted with the entire ideological function of colonization
and after 1960, that of neocolonization. It was and still remains the cham-
pion of the fight against nationalists. In the 1920's and throughout the
colonial period. it constantly supported the fight against the messianisms
from the Lower Congo and the eastern region of the country. This was the
point of departure for the antinationalist struggle begun by the Church. for
Kimbagu Simon died in prison. not for being an enemy of Christ. but of the

colonial order. (....)

"Using the excuse of preventing communist influence in the Congo. the Catholic
Church established a Christian union at the beginning of the 1950's. (....)
The formation of lay schools during the same period gave rise to a noisy cam-
paign against alleged communism by the Church, a campaign without precedent

in the country's history."

Despite the statement favorable to decolonisation made by the bishops of
Belgian Africa on 29 June 1956 -- in so doing. the bishops were preparing for

their future —- and the support expressed by the Church for the manifesto of
African awareness which appeared that sane year. the attitude of this religious

institution was not to change fundamentally, the Manifesto says in substance.

bl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UPfILIAL U33. ONLY

An anticommunist campaign was thus launched against nationalistic political
parties. presenting in their programs the proposal of establishing a lay repub-
lic. "Patrice Lumumba was a victim. along with a number of his comrades in
arms: Mpolo, Okito. Hbuyi. Nzuji. Hassena. Tshimanga and Hulele, of this
anticommunist fight. Another anticomunist campaign was begun in 1966 against
the General Union of Congolese Students. But ironically enough. this campaign
resulted in a ban on all other youth organizations -- including those of the
Catholic Church -- and their replacement by the JHPR (Youth of the Popular
Movement of the Revolution of Hobutu). (....)" Later, "the armed forces of
the FNLC (National Liberation Front of the Congo) were in turn accused of
being agents of communism in the pay of Cuba. (....) In the final analysis,“
the Manifesto concludes. "anticonmunism on the part of the Church has no other
objective than to prevent the Congolese people's fight against their oppres-
sors. (....) It has been recently observed that the Catholic Church increas-
ingly seeks to set itself apart from the government and even makes harsh
criticisms of it. Unfortunately. these criticisms do not denounce foreign
domination or exploitation. (....) As in 1956. the Church tries to gain
control of the mass movement in order to divert it from the real fight against
their exploiters."

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11.466
C80: 6719/886

42

FOIIOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
COMPANIES HANDED OVER TO PRIVATE OWNERS
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX 8T mums in French No 1897, 19 Her 82 p 801
[Text] Thirty—Bight Companies Transferred to Private Ownership

In our 19 February issue (page 568), we mentioned the decision of the Zairian
Executive Council to transfer 38 public companies to private ownership. We
have just received the listof these companies and are reprinting the. as
follows:
To Be Placed Under Private Management:

1) Cacaoea (Zaire Oocao Plantations)

2) Panacea (Zaire Palm Groves)

3) Butuhe plant and plantation

a) Ngueahe plant and plantation
To Be Privately Held:

5) sax [Kisenge Mining Company] (Shaba)

6) Bolunbuloko Farm (Bquateur)

7) Kabulultu Para (Kasai-Occidental)

8) Hetehi-Ndjadi Fern (Kasai-Oriental)

9) Hueoka-‘l'anda Fara (Sheba)

10) Huene-Djanba Fara (Sheba)

ll) Keyenbe-Huluulu Fara (Sheba)

12) Haj ilaj ila (Bandundu)

13) former Haterne Fara (Baa-Zaire)

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
svn vasavsew vvas VAC“.

1’.) Ndjili Poultry Farm

15) Ngungu-Katuka Par- (Bandundu)

16) Bela Pam (Baa-Zaire)

l7) ‘l'shinbane Plantations and Plant (Bandundu)
19) Punuputu HPK [expansion unknown] (Bandundu)
20) Zaire Cotton (Bquateur)

21) Ndana Saunill (Bandundu)

22) Bone Printing Company (us-2.1:.)

23) Dona llotel (Baa-Zaire)

26) be Plateau Printing Conpany (Kinshasa)

25) Bergato-Pofukin (Kinshas'aO

26) Nicaise Bakery and Pastry Company (Kinshasa)
27) People's Bcononat

28) Solidua

29) Haluku Iron and Steel

30) ACA [expansion unknown]

31) Pigier School

32) (NP [National Fishing Office]

33) SONBCA [National Editors and Upesetters Company]
36) Editions noble

35) Green Belts

To Be Privately Held and/or Managed:

36) srx [Kinshasa Transport Company] (Kinshasa)
37) OTCZ [Zaire Joint Transportation Office]

To Be Privately ﬁeld According to the Terms of the International Cooperative
Agreenent:

38) Fonscon (Bandundu)

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9693

cso: «719/791. 3“”

«'06
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY