l-OR OFFKIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10330
17 February 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 762

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .

JPRS 13/1032
17 Februar:

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

POUO NO. 762

Coureurs

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

'AFRIQUE-ASIE' hport on 0.8.. Insola hlks
(AFRIQUE-ASIE, 1-1‘ hb 82)osaoosoooooasooocoosoooeoososaaoco

. ANGOLA

Angolan Massador Surveys National Situation
(NAMES momma: ET DEDITBRRANEBNS, 1 Jan 82)..............

Briefs
New Opposition Grouﬁ's Claim

mam

Technical, Occupational Training Examined
(mains TROPICAUX 3r mmmmmms, 25 me 81.

1 Jan 82)oasoosssosooaooa.so.asoassoooooosoooossosooooooosss

cum

Social hasurss Included in 1982 Budgct
(NAMES TROPICAUX ET IBDI‘BRRAN’BBNS. 18 Ike 81)............

Favorable Trade Balance Shown for 1980
(mass IMPICAUX ET DEDITBRRANBENS. 25 Dcc 81)............

Briefs
Increased Oil Production Prospects

GUINEA-B ISSAU

Brie-fa
Increased French Cooperation Diseased
ma OFFICIAL USP ONI \’

MONIQUE

Spectrum of Cooperation With Prawn hviowad
(moms TROPICAUX ET rem-mam. 25 me 81).............

Briefs
Parasol-EEC mnneccion Viewed
Steel Salvage Project Planned

8A0 m AND PRINCIPE

BADBA loan Will Help '1!) Double Energy Production
(mass 1'10le 3‘: HEDI‘ERMNBERS, 18 Doc 81)............

800111 AFRICA

South African Foreign Minister on Man lbdia Inquiry
(mmel Homby; m “ms. 5 hb 82)OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FKMRCMWHCIAL USIZCNVLY

INTERPAFRICAN AIVAIRS

'AFRIQUE-ASIE' REPORT ON U.S., ANGOLA TALKS
PM111221 Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French l-lb Feb 82 pp 7-10

[Simon Halley "exclusive" report: "The Secrets of the Paris Heeting"--passagea
between slantlinea are printed in italics]

[Text] Everything had been perfectly orchestrated. On 29 December, 3 days before
the leadership of the 0.8. Congress [presumably, House of Representatives] decided
to examine. in its turn, the Reagan Administration's request for the lifting of the
Clark amendment--which has banned any aid to the Angolan counterrevolutionary forces
since l976-a request already approved by the Senate 30 September last year,
[National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)] Jonas Savimbi arrived
in New York at the invitation of "Freedom Rouse" (note 1) (extreme rightwing in-
stitute financed by bodies linked to the CIA and maintaining close ties with South
Africa). "In our view there is no doubt that Savimbi's visit is directly connected
with the campaign mounted by the "hits House to have that amendment auppressed...."
Howard Hblpe, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee's African subcommittee.
immediately stated.

Indeed, as soon as he arrived in'Hashington Savimbi was received at the State De-
partment, the White House, the pentagon, the CIA and Congress in turn. Over a
16-day period he met with dozens of prominent officials and private individuals,
while the media were pressed by the powerful "Freedom House" "lobby" and by South
Africa to have interviews with the UNITA leader or to hold press conferences for him.
But the action supporting him was not isolated. As if by chance (I), Zairian Presi-
dent Joseph Desire Hobutu [as published] was quick to follow him to the American
capital. accompanied by his brother-in—lav Roberto Holden and his accomplices from
the National Front for the Liberation of Angola [FNLA] who, with the blessing of
some secret services-especially the American, Moroccan, South African, Egyptian,
Gabonese and Zairisn secret services-have formed the military committee of the
Angolan resistance. Thus the Kinshasa dictator, who had vowed to the late President
Agostinho Neto and then to his successor Jose Eduardo dos Santos never to have any
further direct or indirect relations with the Angolan counterrevolutionaries,
received Jonas Ssvimbi and his accomplices at Blair House, where he was staying.

He met with them three times. Two of those meetings took place in the presence of
American "experts and specialists." what took place in those meetings between the
Americans and their interlocutors?

FOR OFFHJA1.USE¢DNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The best-informed sources in the American capital provided us with some particularly
significant elements. Let us not dwell on the positions adopted by Jonas Savimbi,
which have been repeated by him on many occasions, especially when talking with rep-
resentatives of the imperialist powers and their allies: professions of anti-
communism, anti-Sovietism and anti-Cubanism: assertions that UNITA controls half

or even two-thirds of the Angolan population, that if free elections were held it
would win 60 percent of the votes, that most of its arms come from the PRC (550 tons
in 1979!), from Morocco, where hundreds of officers are training, from Saudi Arabia,
Egypt and some African countries like Senegal, the Ivory Coast, Zaire and Sudan:
claims abOut the size of its forces, which allegedly already amount to 15 battallions
equipped with sophisticated weapons [AK-47 automatic weapons, SAM-7 missiles, armor-
ed vehicles and helicopters]. and about the possibility of turning his guerrilla war
into a conventional war. with cities being occupied....

However. what should be noted in the positions expressed by this self-confessed
agent of the CIA and the former International and State Defense Police [PIDB] (note
2) (Portuguese secret service in the colonial period) is the care he takes in force-

fully expounding the arguments and ideas of the Pretoria racist authorities on the
settlement of the Namibian question:

1--The vital need to link Namibia's independence to the withdrawal of Cuban troops
from Angola: "Without such a withdrawal," Savimbi stressed to Secretary of State
Haig and Chester Cracker, his assistant for African affairs, "not only would Namibia
be turned into a Marxist-Leninist state or be forced to unite with the People's
Republic of Angola [PRA] but it would also become a base for aggression from which
the security and independence of the neighboring countries would be threatened and

a hotbed of agitation and constant destabilization for the whole of Southern Africa."

2--The only way of preventing "this plan by international communist strategy" is to
give UNITA a share in a national union government in Luanda, and consequently to
insist on a "national reconciliation" between the popular Movement for the Liberation
of Angola [HPLA] and UNITA. It is these two objectives which American diplomacy
should try to attain.

Savimbi's line of argument coincides--could this be any suprise?--with that used by
the South African leaders during their talks with Chester Cracker in Spring 1981 and
then by the latter to the House Foreign Affairs Committee's Africa subcommittee 17
June 1981. But the Angolan puppet went even further. In reply to the American
secretary of state, who asked him 9 December whether he thought it was possible that
the MPLA leadership might agree to a reconciliation with UNITA, "which we recognize
as a legitimate political forca which should be taken into account," Savimbi said
that, although it was true that UNITA was prepared to open exploratory talks with
the Luanda regime with a view to forming a coalition government which would not be
very different from the one now existing in Zimbabwe, he did not think that the
majority of existing HPLA leadership members would be prepared to envisage such a
solution; "that is why I think that the American Government should play for time,
allowing the discussions on Namibia and on any normalization with the present
Angolan regime to drag on. For I am convinced that the state of war which exists
today is bound sooner or later to lead to a deterioration in the internal situation
which would facilitate both the overthrow of the regime and the departure of the
Cuban troops. And if the latter leave Angola, INITA will seize power within 6
months at the most.... "hat I know is that the differences of opinion prevailing
within the HPLA leadership team on ways of reaching a settlement in the Namibian

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I“. (MN! '\| |QI~ NV! \

Affair and on a reconciliation with our movement will ultimately prove us right.

This is our only hope of bringing Angola back among the nations of the free
world...."

Of course, the Zairian president' positions were not substantially different from
those expressed by Savimbi. His hopes for a positive evolution in Angolan policy
after President Neto‘s death have largely been dashed, he said. ”However," he told
President Ronald Reagan who was accompanied by the secretary of state, the defense
secretary, the "bosses" of the National Security Council and the CIA and by the
chief of general staff [as published; presumably the joint chiefs of staff], "the
reports reaching me from Luanda are particularly worrying. The communists are
planning new attacks on Zaire's independence. using as proxies Angolans and the
Zairians who have found refuge, support and military training in the PRA. The
Angolan military forces, the Angolan People's Liberation Armed Forces [FAPLA]. have
built a whole series of military bases on their northern border in which thousands
of Zairian nppositionists are trained night and day by Soviet, Cuban. East German
and Angolan rfficers. For those countries know that as long as Zaire is independent

and anticommunist it will form an insuperable barrier to Soviet penetration into
southern Africa."

"And what suggestions can you make. Mr President?" the American Government chief
asked.

[Answer] The political, economic psychological and military pressure of all the
free world's forces--including those of South Africa which are. why not admit it,
our objective allies--on Angola's Harxist-Leninist Government should now be stepped
up. Granting independence ot Namibia in the present situation would be handling
Southern Africa over to the Soviet imperialists and their agents. No solution to
the Namibian affair should be envisaged before the last Cuban soldier has left
Angola. And nothing could serve that objective better than to push for Angolan
national reconciliation in order to ensure the restoration of a sense of security
in all that coutry'a neighbors.... [Hobutu ends]

After painting this background picture. it is easier to understand the significance
and scope of the talks which took place in Paris Friday 15 and Saturday 16 December
between PRA Foreign Minister Paulo Jorge-brillisnt1y supported by Angolan ambassa-
dor to Paris Luis de Almeida--and Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs
Chester Crocker. For more than 13 hours. and virtually without interruption, the
two statesmen had a tough debate on two of Southern Africa's thorniest problems;
Namibia's independence and relations between the PRA and the United States in the
context of the war being waged by Pretoria against the progressive states of
Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean.

It was the first time in the tense and explosive history of relations between the
two countries that such a frank. blunt and incisive-and long--meeting had taken
place, one in which the Angolan foreign minister's well-known coolness. calm and
sense of humor contrasted with the clumsy attempts at education made to the PRA
envoys by the "brain" of the Reagan Administration's African policy.

How did that come about? In fact everything began last September when General
naig, the American secretary of state, was received, at his own request, by Paulo

Jorge at his hotel. the United Nations Plaza in New York. It was their first

FORiOFFﬂJAl.USELONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

official meeting and, since it was taking place on General Baig's initiative, the
two ministers spent more than 2 hours together. Although the discussions, despite
their length, did not produce any practical results, the head of American diplomacy
expressed this Angolan counterpart his government's wish to resume these bilateral
talks not only in order to review Southern Africa's problems together but also to
tackle the problems of normalizing relations between the two countries. That was
a direct and apparently unambiguous appeal.

Some 3 months later. 10 December to be precise, speaking at Cabinda on the 25th
anniversary of the HPLA's formation, President Jose Eduardo dos Santos gave a
positive reply to General Haig's appeal, while violently condemning American inter-
ference in Angola's internal affairs and asking the currrnt OAU chairman and secre-
tary general to lodge a vehement protest with the American Government, which "is
having an official meeting with a group of Angolan puppets."

It was, therefore, at the American Government's initiative that the Paris meeting
was held. In keeping with normal practice the Angolan Government planned to send
to thos talks an official of the same rank as Chester Cracker. But as President
Jose Eduardo dos Santos has decided to send Paulo Jorge to hand an important
message to President Francois Mitterrand, it was decided that he would head the
Angolan ministerial delegation in person.

It was at the hotel intercontinental that the two delegations began their discus-
sions Friday, 15 December at 1400 hours. They were to be resumed Saturday and to
last all morning and evening. And to avoid having to continue them into Sunday,
the two delegations even lunched together.

Although discretion was the rule on both sides, diplomatic sources close to the two
delegations have enabled us to draw a general picture of the proposals which
Chester Crocker put to the Angolan delegation. These proposals show that the
American leaders do not seem to have changed their state of mind or behavior. Still
less their sense of the oujective realities of the national, regional and inter-
national situation.

How does Washington’envissage the normalization of its relations with Angola and
Namibia's independence? How does it view the rastoration of regional security,

an end to South African attacks on Angola and the other "frontiine" countries?

How does it plan to open a new era in relations among the Southern African coun-
tries? To discover that you just have to reread first the view expressed by its
main agents in the region, Joseph Desire Mobutu and Jonas Savimbi, which we report-
ed in the first part of this article. Second, you have to refer to all the state-
ments made by "PIK" Baths and the other members of the Pretoria Government. But
that is not all. We would not be doing full justice to the strategy of Ronald
Reagan's African policy unless we cited the substance of what Chester Crocker said
to his Angolan interlocutors. Those statements deserve the greatest attention.

[He Americans want to move quickly. very quickly, very quickly/, Chester Crocker
stressed. /If you accept our suggestions, things can be settled in a few weeks.

For instance by the end of March Namibia could be well on the way to independence,
with the implementation of the process of South African withdrawal and our relations
with the PRA restored and normalized. Not rendered commonplace, but normalized and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
um “l'Ht I“ I'Sl. UNI \

developed. Together Nashington and Luanda can upset the whole geopolitical NAP of
Southern Africa. We are prepared to cooperate closely on your national rebuilding,
to organize a conference of Western and other donors to guarantee you billions, no
tens of billions, [of dollars]. We are prepared to give you real guarantees of our
sincerity and our sincere desire to restore peace, and security in the region.
But/--because, of course, there is a "but" with a capital B-/for peace to be re-
stored there must first be confidence between us and among all the states in the
region. Now that confidence does not exist at present. Zaire is worried because
you have bases directed against it (note 3) (Chester Crocker produced maps showing
alleged Zairian oppositionist bases in Angola). Zambia is destabilized by internal
difficulties. The Congo is uneasy. South Africa is under attack from the South-
west African people's organization and the African national congress. which you and
other countries support(l)./

why is there insecurity? The Angolans asked. Because South Africa is attacking.
assaulting, killing, massacring and violating the territorial integrity of inde-
pendent countries. sending its commandos and mercenaries here. there and everywhere,
even to the Indian Ocean to sow terror and destruction. Because it is illegally
occupying Namibia despite 1.001 UN. OAU. Arab League and nonaligned movement resolu-
tions.

/No! It is quite simply,/ Chester Cracker asserted brazenly, [because there is
internal instability in Angola caused by internal dissension and the presence of
UNITA, a legitimate movement. which you must take into account and with which yoa
must be reconsiled and must include in the government. And it is because Cuban
troops are still in Angola. You say this is to help you defend yourselves against
the South Africans? Come on, now! They are there basically to protect you against
UNITA. to ensure your internal security.... Let them withdraw and y0u will see how
quickly peace will be restored./

The peace of the graveyard, Hr Cracker?

But is Chester Crocker's position not at variance with that of the other countries
belonging to the contact group? And is it not inconsistent with the assurances
given by Secretary of State Haig to the Angolan minister of foreign affairs in
September 1981? Have President Francois Hitterrand. British Foreign Secretary

Lord Carrington and German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt not stated and restated to
Paulo Jorge and Luis de Almeida that they were opposed to establishing any linkage
at all between the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola and Namibia's independence?
Have they not said that even though they would like to see the Cubans withdraw from
the PRA, they recognized that their presence falls exclusively within the province
of the two states' sovereignty and that no state, no organization and no authority
should interfere in order to dictate to Luanda what attitude it should adopt?

/0f course,/ Chester Cracker asserts. [we do not wish to interfere in your domestic
affairs. But we know that the South Africans will not withdraw from Namibia unless
Cuban troops simultaneously withdraw in accordance with a mutually agreed timetable...
if we want to reach the third phase of the Namibian plan--that of disengagement--
before the end of March. the disengagement of the Cuban troops seems to us of funda-
mental importance..../

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'S}? ONLY

A dialogue of the deaf? An attempt to gain time with a view to continuing to de-
stabilize Angola and its allies? And making it possible to strengthen the counter-
revolutionary movements and countries subservient to imperialist powers in the
region, like Zaire, in order to perpetrate new aggressive acts and seek to overthrow
Luanda's people's regime? Undoubtedly. In any case, this is the view which now
prevails in Luanda, where the Zairian and American allegations about bases contain-
ing members of the Zairian opposition in the PRA are seen as obvious attempts to
divert the Zairian people‘s attention from their serious domestic problems.

The report prepared by Paulo Jorge after his return to the Angolan capital has sur-
prised neither President Jose Eduardo dos Santos nor his colleagues because they
know they can expect nothing from an American administration which sees South Africa
as its privileged ally in Africa. And the views of the Angolan Government were
clearly explained in a presidential message conveyed to French President Franco's
Mitterrand last Thursday, 16 December:

First, the government of the People's Republic of Angola rejects any suggestion that
any concommitant linkage be established between any settlement of the Namibian
question and the presence of Cuban troops in Angola.

Second, under no circumstances will the government of the People‘s Republic of
Angola agree to enter into negotiations with UNITA, a movement of traitors in the

pay of foreign powers.

Third. relations between the People's Republic of Angola and the Republic of Cuba
fall exclusively within the competence of these two independent and sovereign
states.

Feurth, Once Namibia becomes independent, aggressive acts by South Africa cease and
guarantees are given that the territorial integrity of the People's Republic of
Angola will be respected, the Angolan Government will enter into discussions with
a veiw to determining a timetable for the withdrawal of Cuban troops from the

country.

Nothing could be more precise and clear. And even though the message from the
Angolan head of state was received "very favorably" at the Elysee. it has been
hinted within the entourage of the French head of state that "the American obses-
sion about the Cuban troops in Angola could well lead to an unnecessary deteriora-
tion of the explosive situation which already prevails in Southern Africa." For,
as the Angolan foreign minister has so clearly explained. as soon as South Africa
ceases to support UNITA and Namibia becomes independent, that counterrevolutionary
movement, which has solely been created to serve neocolonialist interests. will
collapse like all such movements before it has collapsed. Furthermore, what mental
aberration has prompted some people to draw at all costs a parallel between the
independence of Namibia, a territory under international mandate from which Pre-
toria refuses to withdraw, and the sovereign rights of an independent state like
the PRA? Raising the question of a timetable for a simultaneous withdrawal of
South African and Cuban troops is tantamount to equating in a familiar manner the

aggressor and the victim of aggression.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1."

So how can you explain Chester Crocker’s insistence on organizing more meetings
either in Paris or elsewhere in February and March? "This is understandable,"
they say in Paris; "the isolation from African opinion and even from some important
areas of Western opinion in which they have shut themselves up has induced the
Americans to test the Angolans' resistance on the one hand and to seek to acquire
a clear conscience by showing that they are continuing their efforts, on the other.
They hope to silence their critics in this way...."

When do they expect to mislead again? In any case, certainly neither the HPLA

revolutionary militant nor the l-‘APLA combatants. Nor is it among them that they
can hope to find gullible people. accomplices or traitors.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie.

C80: (019/537

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USEZCHNLY

ANGOLA

ANGOLAN AMBASSADOR SURVEYS NATIONAL SITUATION
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 44

[Report of press conference of Mr Luis de Almeida, Angolan ambassador to France, on
22 December 1981: "1981 was a Hard Year; 1982 Looks Better"]

[Excerpts] The year just cnding has been difficult, but the outlook is better for
1982, said Mr Luis de Almeida, Angolan ambassador to Paris, on 22 December at a press
conference in which he surveyed broadly the economic and political situation of Angola.

"Keep on Making Friends Unexclusively"

Naturally, Luanda would like to establish normal relations with the U.S. government
on the model of its relations with American multinational companies operating in
Angola, especially in theareasof oil productionv-in Cabinda, where President Dos
Santos paid a visit on 10 December--banking, and aeronautics. Angola's foreign
policy has not changed. It was set by former President Neto and consists in contin-
ually "making friends unexclusively."

Thus, even though Angola thinks the time has come to establish bilateral relations
with the United States, it would be inaccurate, Mr de Almeida explained, to speak
of a "diplomatic offensive."

Closer Relations Desired with France

The Angolan authorities wish to welcome the French president on a state visit to
Luanda and have already invited the French minister of Foreign Relations, Mr Claude
Chcysson, and of Cooperation and Development, Mr Jean-Pierre Cot. The Angolan gov-
ernment wishes to "institutionalize"'its relations with France by signing a framework
agreement for cooperation, which is now being negotiated between the two countries.

Among other things, it expects to diminish the cost of French personnel, which seems
quite excessive. For example. Mr de Almeida explained that, qualifications being
equal, a Portuguese costs three times less than a Frenchman. There are considerable
areas in which French cooperation might increase, as Angola's needs are also consider-
able, especially in health, industry, construction, agriculture, research, and oil
production. Some French companies are already doing a large business in Angola,

:uch as Renault, El-Aquitaine and the French Oil Company, as well as specialized
institutes in coffee and cotton. There is room for these businesses to grow and for
other French companies to move in. Angola has already become an important customer

8
INJR OFTWCIAL USIZCNVLY
NM \II’I‘I‘ IAI. H3? (l-Vl.‘

for France, whose exports reached Fr 180 billion as opposed to only Fr 395 million
in 1980. On the other hand, French imports of Angolan products are very low, between
Fr 3-5 million in 1981.

Measured Optimism for the Economic Outlook

Economically, the southern part of Angola and other provinces suffered an exceptional
drought in 1981, and this seriously affected the country's agricultural production.
Angola has also had its oil prices go down, and these account for 75-80 percent of
exports. As a consequence, its imports of capital equipment and food have been
reduced.

The outlook for 1982 seems to be distinctly better. Better-distributed rainfall
promises better harvests of coffee, cotton, corn and maniac. The authorities have
undertaken to reorganize distribution pragmatically the better to meet the popula-
tion's food needs.

The Angolan government is placing great hopes on the discovery of new oil deposits.
The French Oil Company is evaluating offshore oil reserves, which may come to 50-100
million metric tons. Foreign-currency income from gas production could start in 1982.
Exports of iron and diamonds should also show improvement in 1982, and the government
is eager to exploit the mineral deposits abounding in Angola.

The Angolan ambassador still did not hide the constraints that temper his optimism:
the lack of managers and technicians, the threat of the South African army, and the
difficulties inherent in the Luanda government’s learning the ropes of administration.
After all, Mr de Almeida noted, Angola has just celebrated its 6th birthday!
COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie, Paris 1982

8782
C50: 4719/4159

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

NEW OPPOSITION GROUPS CLAW-A new opposition group in Angola, the Canter of
Democratic Independence (CID), has claimed responsibility for the sabotage of the
PB‘I’RANGOL [Angolan Petroleua Comany] refinery in Luanda saying that this was its
"first operation" against the entrant regime of Luanda. Responsibility for the
sabotage of the refinery, an action attributed to South Africa by the Angolan
regime. had already been clained by Jonas Savinhi, leader of WT“ [National
Union for the Total Independence of Angola], the main opposition nova-ant in
Angola. The attack, which according to the Angolan Ministry of Petroleum, did
not damage the refining facilities, was condemned by the African-Arab Solidarity
Conference held in Luanda. [Text] [Paris moans THREAD! 3'! mums

in French No 1884, 18 Dec 81 p 3382] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horaux et Cie Paris 1981.)
8796

080: 6719/391

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI1DHHCIALIEE20NLY

CAMEROON

mumxm, OCCUPATIONAL TRAINING BXAHINBD

Paris MARCIIES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1885, 25 Dec 81;
No 1886, 1 Jim 82

[25 Dec 81 pp 3&35-3436]

[Texﬁ7 In this study which is based on several official reports and
some personal statements, we will present first the different levels
of this teaching and then we will summarize some fundamental problems.

'1) The Different Levels

Technical and occupational training in Cameroon has four levels: the
post primary, the first stage of secondary, the second stage of secon-
dary and higher education.

A) The 0st primary level--It involves the SAR [Fural Craft Sectiog7
and SM omestic Section7 whose aim is to contain the rural exodus
and help young people to adjust to their original environment, while
helping to improve it. In the SAR's, they teach carpentry, masonry,
maintenance mechanics, basket making, weaving and leather and wood-
working. A general education is given,as well as an introduction to
bookkeeping and organization. Studies last 2 years. The SM's repre-
sent for girls what the SAR's do for boys.

In 1978-79, there were 70 SAR's and 40 SH's which had about 4,000
students. These institutions are more numerous in the provinces of
the Center-South (22) and North (14) than in the others, where it is
true they are less extensive.

when we know the difficulties for schools and secondary schools in
equipping themselves, to operate and have enough good students, we
can imagine the problem of the SAR's and the SM's, in spite of their
insignificant demands. In addition, these institutions have been
blamed for not providing a certificate (it was desired) and conse-
quently not allowing a continuation of studies, and especially of not
encouraging the area's deve10pment, by only concentrating on young

people.

11

FORCWFKJALUBE(NHN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is possible from now on to omit the BAR and SN in the GET [Techni-
cal Training School7 provided you are not over 16 years old and you
have passed an entrance exam.

8) The CET's-Their purpose is "to train the skilled workers and

employees necessary for the country's economic life." This training
is confirmed by the CAP [Uccupational Aptitude Certificatg7.

Consequently entrance is by competitive exam for candidates 16 years
old at the most, who hold the CEPE [Certificate of Basic Primary
Studie§7 or recently a SAR or SM certificate. Studies last 4 years,
including a year of introduction and 3 years of specialization. In
1977-1978, the following number of students were recorded:

Commercial Industrial Domestic Total
Public 1,235 3,684 603 5,522
Private 17,982 4,796 2,310 25,088
Total 19,217 8,480 2,913 30,610

Growth is indicated by the fact that the total number of students were
1 ,400 in 1970, 19 761 [3197 and 21,063 in 1974-1975. The CETI
6%xpansion unknown is the school which is solely industrial; the

ETIC [expansion unknowg7 also has a commercial branch; the CBTIP
[expansion unknown7 is a domestic training school for girls.

Private denominational education has played a leading role, for ex-
ample, the School of the Holy Ghost at Douala for girls. The quality
of its teaching is generally superior to the private secular institu-
tions. The public schools have 66.7 percent of their students in
industrial training, compared with 19.1 percent only for all private
schools. An official commentator can say: “This heavy concentration
(of private education) in the commercial sector is explained by the
not very expensive investment in equipment and in buildings in the
creation of a school of this type."

In 1976-1977 there were 44 CET's, of which 13 were public and 31 pri-
vate; among the latter 8 Catholic, 7 protestant and 17 secular; 10
CET's are on the coast and 10 in the Center-South, that is to say in
the most industrialized provinces.

The specialities taught are the following: industrial training: me-
chanics, automobiles, building and TP [fublic Workg7, electricity,
electronics, woodworking, textiles, chemistry, telecommunications;
commercial education: accounting, office-secretarial; domestic train-

ing: sewing, domestic science.

On this technical secondary level, a loss of students because of drop-
outs is to be deplored, especially in the first 2 years. However,

12 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the loss is smaller than in general secondary: 49.5 percent in techni-
cal (first stage) compared with 65 percent in general secondary.

The quality of the teaching staff is thus judged, often with amazing
statements such as: I'80 to 90 percent of the teaching staff lacks any
teacher training“ or moreover: "in one case out of two, the teacher
has no practical experience in the trade he is teaching; in one case
out of three, the teacher has a standard of training which does not
exceed the CAP." There are frequent complaints about the teachers‘
lack of motivation.

These teachers numbered 1,688 in 1977-1978 or 18.1 students per
teacher. The ratio is better for public education: 13.1 students per
teacher.

As regards material facilities, it is especiall the CETI's which
lack quarters, equipment and adequate grants. ether there are
enough shops or not, there are too many students per shop, besides
the Cameroonian standards are below the French standards: mechanics:
8.8 square meters per pupil, compared with 9.4 in France; building:
7.5 square meters per pupil compared with 25.2 in France. Moreover
these standards are not respected.

"0n the level of investments, it appears that mechanics only has 21
percent of the necessary equipment, while for building, they have
only 4 percent of what would be necessary, in adopting foreign stand—
ards." The defects are sometimes dramatic: the GET in Bangangte re-
portedly "operated” for 5 years without electricity. The machines,
when there are any, are sometimes very old: lathes 20-25 years old;
it is still necessary for devoted and competent teachers to maintain
and repair them after working hours!

Grants for operations are insufficient and late and this is true also
for the technical secondary schools. The head of an auto mechanics
shop told us in November 1981 that he had an o erational credit of
600,000 CPA francs for 50 students, or 12,000 A francs per pupil;
he had just bought 60,000 CPA francs of soap (2 kilograms per pupil
for a year) and 4 batteries for 14,000 CPA francs; he must also buy
gasoline, oil, rags, Spare parts etc. Consequently this shortage
limits shop work.

Until recently, technical training schools were able to enjoy subsi-
dies from enterprises, deductible by the latter from the apprentice-
ship tax. Since these subsidies went more to some private schools,
the government eliminated this convenience: it collects the appren-
ticeship tax and then provides subsidies, depending on the merit and
importance of the schools.

These schools would also have the Opportunity of doing outside work,
but in the case of public schools, they must return the amounts

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

received to the treasury. Some have gotten around the problem by
bartering: "I will make some wheelbarrows for you, you will give me
some working material."

The percentage of success in 1977-1978 was 25.8 percent for the indus-
trial CAP's and 7 percent for the commercial and administrative CAP's.
We again find the same percentage of 7 percent in 1981 for the commer-
cial and administrative CAP’s in the coastal examination center. Thus
the efficiency of the industrial CET's is higher and the percentage

of success in the public schools is better. The public school has

one passing student for three candidates, the private school, one
passing student for four. To these two sources are added the free
candidates (a third of the candidates), often the failures of previ-
ous years. Nevertheless, a private school such as the CETI de la
Selle in Douala stands out: from 1956 to 1975 out of 1,175 candidates
who took exams, 749 passed or 63.7 percent.

Do the CET's train enough skilled workers for the occupations in-
volved? In 1978, the ratio of skilled workers to the working popula-
tion was about 0.3 percent for woodworking trades, textiles, sewing,
mechanics, electricity, radio repairmen, automobile and transport and
0.6 percent for building and zero for tanneries and boot and shoe
manufacture. To appreciate these percentages at their true value, we
point out that some of these branches e loy very little and that some
CET(s have had to close their building-- P section or their woodwork-
ing section. Nevertheless, a study of the Ministry of National Educa-
tion makes the following interesting observation: "With an average
annual share of 0.4 percent of skilled workers, the average level of
technical development cannot rise. It would be necessary to increase
the number of skilled workers tenfold to observe a noticeable effect."

Another finding: companies are not very enthusiastic about GAP hold-
ers: "50 percent of companies do not employ them and 88 percent of
those who employ them are not satisfied: the GET graduates are re-
proached for lack of efficiency', poor quality of work, their demands
and their lack of initiative...

0n the other hand, the students of some schools like the CETI de la

Salle in Douala are in demand and have no trouble in finding a job,

at least until 1980. At the close of the 1981 examinations, out of

the 64 graduates of this CETI, it was possible to trace 57 of them:

16 found a job; 21 are continuing in technical secondary schools and
general educational schools; 20 are not working yet (5 months after

the examinations).

Consequently, we observe two innovations: the existence of a rela-
tionship between the CET's and the secondary schools, which is very

recent; a phenomenon of unemployment which corresponds, according to
school leaders, to a decline in the labor market and consequently to

a slowing down of expansion.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preparation for the vocational license takes place mainly through
evening courses given to CAP holders, who have a job. Training is
both technical and general and it suffers from the same defects as
the rest of technical training; let us add to that the fact that the

not very striking; in the examinations for the vocational license in
1980 on the coast, 23 candidates out of 134 passed, or 17.6 percent.

0) The purpose of the LTS‘s [Iechnical Secondary Schoolg7 is dual:
"to provide for the training of skilled technical personnel and pre-
pare the best students for higher technical and industrial studies.“

There now exists at least one LE per province: coast: Douala LT
founded in 1948, (industrial and commercial courses); Bonaberi
Multipurpose Secondary School founded in 1973 (by Canada); it includes
both general education and industrial courses: Center-South: Yaounde
LT founded in 1963; it is now a mixed secondary school with adminis-
trative and commercial and nonindustrial courses; North: Garoua LT

founded in 1977: industrial and economic courses.

Since 1978, some CET's have been converted into LT's: in the Vest at
Bafoussam; in the Southwest at Kumba; in the Northwest at Bamenda; in
the East at Bertoua; this with the assistance of the World Bank.

Students with the BEPC [Elementary Certificate for the First Stagg7
are recruited by competitive examination; in fact, the best go into
general education. A LT headmaster tells us: ”Our students come from
private schools of all types." Besides the low standard of the stu-
dents, there is a second handicap, which has now been reduced, since
the CAP holders can participate in the competitive entrance examina-
tion. ”It is regrettable that the old rule which allowed the begin-
ning of technical studies as early as the first form has been elimina-
ted. In fact, the 3 years at the present time do not allow compen—
sating for the lack of a technical background and acquiring sufficient
knowledge,“ an official report says. Another excuse: technological
training has become compulsory in the first stage of general educa-
tion, but since it is superimposed on many other subjects and it ex—
periences the same problems as technical training (equipment, teach-
ers' qualifications and motivations), its theoretical aspect is more

developed than the practical applications and it is resented by many
students as a useless imposition.

‘here were 2,126 LT students in 1974-1975 compared with 1,502 in pri—
vate education (mainly commercial and administrative courses) and

2,733 for public schools in 1977-1978. One finds similar situations
to those on the GET level: more students in commercial and adminis-
trative courses; the industrial courses are especially represented

15 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

in public education, with a few exceptions like the denominational
industrial schools of Ndoungue (near Nkongsamba) and Bali (near
Bamenda).

Consequently we take note of the industrial courses of the others.

The economic courses include: 61, administrative methods; G2, quanti-
tative management methods; 03, commercial methods. Studies in these
three courses are authorized by qualifying examination (end of the
sixth form) and the bachelor's degree, as in general education. We
also find here the economic course B, classified here under technical
training, because bookkeeping has more of a place here than in France.
Finally various levels of accounting studies: the examination for

the DEC [expansion unknovg7, the certificate for senior accounting
technician (see below).

Then the industrial courses. Studies in the E course and the P1 and
P5 courses are also authorized by qualifying examination and the
bachelor's degree: E, mathematics and technical (level 0 for mathe—
matics); Pl, technician in mechanical construction; 92, electronic
technician; P3, technician in electrotechnology; F4, technician in
civil engineering and building; P5, refrigeration technician.

In the following courses, the studies end with the qualifying exami-
nation, then a technician certificate: MA, automechanics; MB, vood-
vorking trades; CH, boilermaking; GT, geometry-topography.

To the credit of the leaders in technical education, let us note the
diversity of the courses: by way of example, the examinations last
2 whole months each year in the examination centers.

As regards results, on the level of the secondary technical schools
alone in 1977-1978, the percentages of success were the following
(qualifying examination and bachelor's degree): economic courses:
27.75 percent in 01, 35.6 percent in 62, 46.75 percent in G3 or an
average of 34 percent; industrial courses: 20.8 percent in E, 10.64
percent in P1, 58.4 percent in P2, 40.9 percent in P3, 66.6 percent
in P4, 41.6 percent in P5 or an average of 41 percent.

The results indicate that, on the whole, relatively few are

called and even less are selected, especially on the level of the in-
dustrial courses: 89 passed out of 217 candidates (41 percent). In
Cameroon, there is a great disproportion between the bachelors of the
general courses and those of industrial training; it is even truer in
higher education: hundreds of graduates in economy, lav, letters,come
out of the universities every year compared with a few dozen senior
technicians. The first are finding a job more and more difficult.
The relatively low rate of success in technical training leads not a
few students to repeat, which burdensthe educational system.

16

F0R4OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
me OFfICIAI. USE ONLY

As regards the adjustment of those who passed, a study made in 1976-77
showed that, out of 108 students who passed courses GI and 62 (conse-

uently economic): only 21 went to work; 45 are continuing the BTS
2§enior Technician Certificatg7 (which is also an assigned goal of
technical training); 38 joined the faculty at a secondary teachers'
training college or in a business school; one went into computer tech-
nology; two are unemployed; one is not mentioned.

Consequently there exists for 39 of them (faculty plus computer tech-
nology) ”a forward movement, pursuit of s university type diploma,"
and this hemorrhage deprives the country of the best students it had
trained in the technical field." The study referred to sees two main
causes for it: a poor understanding of the purpose of technical
studies (they are considered as a roundabout way to rejoin general
education); the fear of starting on a job, either because of a feeling
of inadequacy or because of lack of knowledge of vocational fields.

In order to limit this hemorrhage,since 1980, these graduates can no
longer join faculties; the measure was resented as a persecution, for
they have many large schools available after the technical bachelor's

degree.

We do not have any facts for the industrial courses,but only a few
findings.

The technicians (MA, P5 etc.) do not find employment easily in their
branch, for according to Cameroon law, they should be hired first in
the eighth category, while they do not have any occupational experi-
ence, which would place them above persons with proven experience;
under these circumstances team work would be impossible.

Second fact, technicians and bachelors in industrial courses are em-
ployed by oil companies for specialties other than their own, and at
high salaries. A professor declares: ”They are paid as much as us,
while they are only probationers. Once they are confirmed in their
position, they are paid twice as much, at least."

Let us sum up the position of enterprises. Many of them train their
personnel and complain about the certificate holders hired: lack of
efficiency, inadequate quality of work, too theoretical knowledge,
adaptation too long, exaggerated demands and lack of morality. The
enterprises prefer those leaving the occupational training centers,
who, unfortunately are still not very numerous.

An official document makes the following observation: "Vhen the enter-
prises are not directly involved with the educational process, they

underestimate the training given." This situation is the reflection
of a lack of cooperation in the country. At Yaounde, they prepare

17-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

programs in the dark without the presence of industrialists;they

attempt to reproduce foreign programs, without taking into account
enough the need of the country.

(DP'YRIGIT: Rene breau et Cie Paris 1981

liJan 82, pp 31-32]

 

 

[Texj7 Ve are rendering below the second part of the article on tech-
nical and vocational training in Cameroon, whose first part can be
read in MTH [KARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBN§7 of 25 December 1981
pages 3435 and 3436.

I) The Different Levels (continuation)

D) The higher leve1--we are presentinﬁﬂgere the institutions less
known by the public at lar e, namely, ET [Secondary Technical
Teachers Training College ,the certificates of senior technicians and
the National School of 'echnology. It is no doubt unnecessary to
mention the National Higher Polytechnical Institute.

1) ENSET has been detached from the Secondary Teachers Training Col-
lege in Yaounde, but it still has not had its own buildings since
1971; at present, it is installed in one of the CETI buildings in
Bassa, where CENAPOP ational Vocational Training Centeg7, founded
with the help of the L0, is also located.

ENSET has two stages: one,which lasts 3 years,trains the GET student-
teachers; the other,which lasts 5 years,trains the LT student-
teachers. Each of these two stages includes two divisions: division
of industrial methods and division of auxiliary methods for adminis-
tration and the economy. It is recognized there that these two
divisions correspond to the two important branches of technical train-
ing. The third year of the first stage includes teaching courses;
likewise, the third to fifth years of the second stage.

This school has suffered and still suffers from a lack of suitable
space and equipment of its own; it has been hampered by a lack of
teachers; thus it has not been possible to create a ”school spirit."
Recruitment of GET student-teachers, division of industrial methods
has been limited by the small number of bachelors in the P courses.

It is a fact that this school has not attracted students from the
beginning, perhaps because of living conditions, which were considered
inadequate by the teaching staff,on the whole. The number of students
entering rose from 6 in 1971-1972 to 34 in 1977-1978.

Another objection, no doubt connected with the lack of its own equip-
ment: theoretical studies have been extended to a high level and
teacher training reportedly has been neglected.

2) There are two types of BTS: the BTS for the management secretor-
iat, which is offered in the Yaounde LT and which attracts mainly

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

girls: the BTS for accounting and enterprise management, which is
offered in the LT's in Douala and Yaounde and which attracts mainly
boys. The studies last 2 years.

In 1980-1981, the BTS management secretariat had 25 students in the
first year and 17 in the second year; there were almost as many for
the bilingual option. As for the students in the BTS for accounting
in Yaounde, there were 24 each year. There are 16 in the second year
in 1981-1982 at Douala. We note that these two BTS are connected

with the GI and 62 courses; there is, moreover, a question of creating
a BTS distribution which would extend the 63 courses. According to
the leaders, the holders of accounting certificates find openings in
private industry fairly easily.

3) ENAT [National Institute of Technologi7 in Yaounde is responsible
for"the training, improvement, retrainﬁg and specialization of the
staffs of land registration survey, rural engineering, civil engineer-
ing and city planning." Stage B trains senior technicians who are

the direct assistants of engineers. Stage C trains technical repre-
sentatives. This school works mainly for public administration. In
1980-1981 it was in the process of reorganization and had 344 stu-
dents, including 6 girls.

After this inventory, we will summarize some problems common to the
various levels of technical training.

II) A Few Main Problems

1) The students--They face a not very favorable opinion about tech-
nical training which is considered as inferior and reserved for the
less gifted; technical studies are making their debut under the sign
of failure and rejection. If the openings are sufficient and the
salaries suitable, this image can be corrected. To tell the truth,
we have found that the entrepreneurs distrust these certificate hold—
ers; new rejection! In addition, life in the shop or factory is less
secure than office work: we have observed that the certificate holder
can fear going to work and turn towards university teaching. Is this
situation not the cause of the resignation, lack of initiative and
responsibility of which the students are sometimes accused? A LT
headmaster sees another cause for it: the young people are taken care
of too long by their families, he tells me,thus a lack of responsi-
bility. It is possible to see another cause in the students' lack of
motivation: they are not attracted by a trade, but rather by a social
status; consequently they are not ready for everything to master

this trade.
Then the acceptance of the technical world is the result of a type of
conversion which requires several generations. For not a few of the

peoples of the Third world, technology is more a "magic of the whites"
than the product of great effort. The African cities and countryside

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

still present a picture of technological deterioration: the roads,
buildings, vehicles, machines are not regularly maintained. Repairs
and improvements are done sporadically and often come from outside

or a foreign enterprise. This environment certainly affects the stu-
dents. A breakdown is not disastrous because it is the return to

the traditional life which is not without charm.

Similarly, the young African does not live in an atmosphere saturated
with technology; rare are those who have played with erector sets,
Legos or electric trains; rate are those who have learned to take

care of their bicycles. Contrary to a young European, the Cameroonian
of the same age who attends the LT does not have the money to buy
parts to build himself a quartz alarm clock or a transistor device:

he does not have pocket money and the necessary parts are rare and
expensive here. This fact and the environment cause the student to be
slow in his studies: a teacher of electronics says that to do all the
program he would need 50 hours besides.

2) The teachers--National education is making efforts to improve the
competence of technical education teachers; these efforts are not
eliminating the dissatisfaction of the teaching staff and results
which proceed from it: irresponsibility, absenteeism, resignations.

Thus, when ENSET still only had the stage of GET student-teachers,
Canada (ACDI [Expansion unknown7) trained 35 LT Cameroonian student
teachers, often former teachers. After 5 or 6 years, 24 of these
teachers moved into private enterprises and only 11 remain on the
job. One of them declares: "I am still here, for I have been waiting
for 6 years to be reclassified in accordance with my certificates;
then I would not remain, unless I am satisfied; if not, I will seek
employment elsewhere." This situation is not unusual in Cameroon:
officials wait years to be reclassified and they must be absent from
their work for 15 days, several times, to go to Yaounde to speed up
their file. Many official reports mention excessive administrative
delays.

There is a growing diSparity in Cameroon between the standard of
living of professional workers in the private sector and that of pro-
fessional workers in administration, particularly those in teaching
whose work is demanding. This disparity favors the administration‘s
corruption and inertia. The salary of a secondary school teacher at
the beginning of his career is about 120,000 CPA francs per month

and that of a technical teacher still at the beginning of his career
is about 80,000 CPA francs; to these amounts is added a lodging allow-
ance equal to 20 percent of the salary. Just as bonuses have been
granted in secondary teaching, it has been proposed that a system of
bonuses be established for technical teaching and, at the present
time we do not know if it has been approved.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us emphasize here the considerable assistance provided by French
cooperation workers to Cameroon technical training.

3) Material facilities-~A LT headmaster admitted that with the rapid
development of technical training, it is difficult to increase sig-
nificantly the credit for each school. Overall, technical training's
resources have developed faster than the number of students trained,
except for the investment budget which has declined from 1971 to
1973; moreover, this budget rose to 15 million CPA francs in 1973 for
all public technical training, which made it possible quite appro-
priately to buy a system of some importance. The total equi ment
budget for all technical and vocational training during the ourth
Plan (1976-1981)-including agriculture, the national civic service
for participation in development etc.--provided for 15 billion CPA
francs in buildings and equipment.

Two problems often recur in reports and conversations: the age and
backwardness of some installations, administrative delays in releasing
moderate c redi ts .

Age and backwardness. The equipment is old and prevents instruction
of students in recent technologies. Thus in MA [Auto Mechanicg7,

they do not have an electronic inspection system, so that the students
learn understandably to be jacks-of-all-trades like in the "neighbor—
hood garages.” In mechanics, a milling machine with a cubic cycle

and pneumatic controls is a laboratory curiosity. There is talk about
establishing television in Cameroon, but the electronics teacher says
he would need an additional year to initiate the students. A profes-
sor of electrotechnology told me that Cameroon is 20 years behind and
he adds: "The gap is widening with Europe; and, nevertheless, they
are building modern plants here. Well, each time we are forced to
bring in foreign technicians." That is not quite exact, for in the
case of Sonara (petroleum refinery), the future Cameroonian operators
were trained in Europe for 2 years, as well as other technicians.

Administrative delays and lack of coordination. Here are a few facts:
"At the Douala LT, four milling machines out of seven were broken
down because of lack of parts, which did not cost over 200,000 CPA
francs. In June 1978, the suppliers had not been paid for the raw
material used for the bachelor's degree examinations in June 1977."

Examples of lack of coordination: "In connection with a grant of
credit by the Vorld Bank for the physics laboratories of the Douala
LT, the arbitrary elimination of some items by administrative services
makes some equipment delivered unusable. For the Bonaberi secondary
school, some of the equipment delivered is not usable (60 Hertz oscil-
lonruph) or shortages of equipment make all training impossible (no
engine in the MA section)J

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HIII Ofl'lt'lAl. USE. (INI.\

But the responsibilities are not only on the part of the central ad-
ministration; we could mention such a school where school equipment
has not been maintained (numbers of tables and chairs were allowed
to deteriorate in the sun and the rain) and where the students them-
selves are assessed to buy a padlock to prevent their property from
being stolen.

Conclusion
This summary shows some positive aspects and indicates some solutions.

0n the government level, we find a real desire to encourage technical
training although this desire is slow to be realized and an interest
in clarity. To go further in this field, the National Ministry of
Education has established a standing committee for the development
of technical training.

Students in secondary technical definitely increased, rising from
4,400 in 1960 to 57,000 in 1980, compared with 8,500 and 180,000 for
secondary general on the same dates. Nevertheless, the increase of
secondary general has been more rapid, since technical which was

51.7 percent of secondary general in 1960, was no more than 31.6 per-
cent in 1980. Certainly, the government would like for technology
to increase more rapidly.

There is no simple solution in such a complex field. It would even
be deceptive to believe that there where qualified and valuable
people are necessary, as well as considerable funds, the atmosphere
of technical training can be rapidly changed. The problems will con-
tinue for many years.

It will be necessary to increase expenditures for equipment to reno-
vate the schools and augment their stock of tools; also necessary to
increase operating expenses to provide more opportunity for practical
shop training; necessary finally to reevaluate the teacher's function.

It is desirable to improve cooperation between the teacher and the
enterprises; it has been discussed for years in France; in Cameroon,
the fact that many enterprises are still managed by foreigners should
no longer be an obstacle to this cooperation, for there are many
enterprises managed by nationals. If we want the enterprises to hire
certificate holders, it is advisable to interest them more in train-
ing, by consulting them about programs and goals; the employers'
association could have some influence in the creation and development
of vocational schools; it would be necessary to moderate wage legis-
lation; it would be possible to expedite the transfer of some equip-
ment from enterprises to schools; finally, if it is desired to spread
the practice of training courses, it is necessary to consult the
enterprises.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982-

8490

cso: 4719/4624 22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

SOCIAL MEASURES INCLUDED IN 1982 BUDGET

Paris MARCEBS TROPICAUX 81' mums in French No 1884, 18 Dec 81. p 3375

[Text] An official com-unique, issued after a meeting of the Gaboneee Council
of Hinisters on 5 December (see m of 11 December 1981 p 3313), gives the following
details about Gabon'e budget for 1982 which amounts to 653.5 billion CPA francs.

The budget, 10 percent higher than the 1981 budget, is broken down as follows:
public debt, 120 billion CPA francs; operating expenditures, 132.1 billion;
transfers and operations 18.6 billion; investments, 182.8 billion.

In the development budget, special emphasis is given to social, educational and
health expenditures as well as to agriculture and infrastructures.

The various chapters of the development budget are: vocational training: 1.71
billion CPA francs (7.9 percent increase comared to 1981); national education and
higher education: 11.24 billion (up by 7.1 percent); health, 6.010 billion (up by
2.6 percent); social affairs, 850 million (up by 0.5 percent); subsidized housing,
7.08 billion (up by 6.5 percent); agriculture, 12.5 billion (up by 7.8 percent);
energy. 15.13 billion (up by 8.9 percent); roads and bridges, 29.26 billion (up
by 18.6 percent).

Social Policy

Since the purpose of the govern-cat's social policy is to improve the living
standard of all social strata, in the course of the Council of Hinistere' meeting
the head of state ordered the minister of economy and finance to seek additional

funds to accelerate the implementation of the national housing program.

Also, in an effort to lessen some of the social burdens of the Gabonese people,
the government has decided:

(1) Starting next year, to grant family subsidies to the poor; the method of pay-
ment will be announced at a future date.

(2) Starting on 1 January 1982 and applicable to the entire national-territory,
the rates for ordinary medium voltage electricity will remain frozen at the
level of 31 December 1981.

23

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I0" "I.“ I." l'ﬁl‘. 0ND \

"This measure consolidates the decision made by the president of the Republic

in July 1980, which is now in effect, to freeze all charges for low voltage
electricity throughout the country and the water rates in towns other than
Libreville and Port-Gentil. These neasures...are mainly intended to lighten the
burden of the Gaboneee people's family budget and to encourage smell and medium-
size businesses."

(3) To study the possibility of. having SOTRAVIL (Libreville Transport Company)
purchase an additional batch of buses for the urban transport services.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et cie Paris 1981.

8796
080: 4719/1391

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

FAVORABLE TRADE BALANCE SHOWN FOR 1980
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1885, 25 Dec 81 p 3438
[Article: "Balance of Payments Surplus in 1980"]

[Text] Gabon's Balance of Payments Committee met recently in Libreville and noted

a surplus of 20.3 billion francs CFA [African Financial Coumnnﬁty] for the 1980 fiscal-
year, as opposed to a deficit of 3.5 billion CFA in 1979, according to the account
given by the Gabonese daily L'UNION.

The volume of balance of payments transactions reached the record level of 800 billion
francs CFA in 1980 (up 30 percent over 1979).

These quite favorable results were achieved despite large expenditures (232.5 billion
CFA for the operating budget and 102.4 billion CPA for the development budget), as
well as payback on the national debt. The surplus is due mainly to increased income
from oil production.

Despite a production drop of 900,000 metric tons [mt], receipts rose from 273 billion
CPA in 1979 to 413 billion CFA in 1980 because of the combined effect of an increase
in the price per barrel on the international market and the great strength of the
dollar at the end of the year following spectacular increases in value.

The amount of the paid, direct and guaranteed Gabonese national debt on 31 December
1980 still came to 406.8 billion CFA. The 1981 budget allocates 270 billion CFA to
partial retirement of the national debt.

Gabonese exports other than oil (manganese, uranium and wood) had some trouble in
1980 because of the international economic situation. Still, the trade surplus
reached a record level at 390 billion CFA in 1980 as opposed to 263 billion CFA in
1979. This increase largely made up for service expenses, which are still large,
wheareas the overall positive balance of goods and services cane to 202 billion CFA
as opposed to 72 billion in 1979.

Free loans removed a deficit of 26 billion CFA caused by foreign workers' sending
their wages home. The deficit in the balance of services increased concurrently
with increased expenditures due to oil prospecting and development.

25

IN3R1OFFICJAL.USEICMQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he deficit in long- and short-tern capital was much greater (up 152 billion CPA)

mainly because of payments on foreign debt and especially commercial credit to
finance increased exports.

The connittee also noted that the 1981 balance of payments is expected to show
another large surplus.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie, Paris 1981

8782
C80: 4719/439

26

Ft”!(”ﬂﬂ(1Al.USEIDNLY
FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(MHLY

GABON

BRIEFS

INCREASED OIL PRODUCTION PROSPECT$--Gabon now produces 7.5 million metric tons [mt]
of oil a year and could, "with time," bring production up to 10 million mt a year,
said the 2nd vice-prime minister of Gabon, the minister of Mines and Oil, Mr Etienne
Buy Mouvagha-Tchioba, in the journal PETROLE ET GAZ ARABES. The Gabonese minister
minister explained that recent discoveries have doubled Gabon's known oil reserves
but that the government has not yet decided on the production level to be reached.
Mr Mouvagha-Tchioba admitted that Gabon had had "some trouble" in selling its oil

at $35 a barrel. Since 1 November the price of Gabonese crude has fallen to $34,
and Mr Mouvagha-Tchioba thinks it is still too early to say whether this decrease
"has been enough for customers to increase their orders." As for relations with
foreign oil companies operating in Gabon, the minister revealed that the Gabonese
government's objective is to increase its share in their capital from 25 percent

to a 35-41 percent portion. Negotiations have been undertaken with ELF [Gasoline
and Lubricants Company of France], which accounts for most of Gabon's production,
and Shell. The Gabonese minister hopes to reach an agreement before the end of 1982.

[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1885, 25 Dec 81 p 3438]
8782

C80: 4719/439

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 GUINEA-BISSAU

BRTEFS

INCREASED FRENCH COOPERATION DISCUSSEDcheneral Joao Bernardo Vieira, president of
Guinea-Bissau, discussed increased cooperation between Paris and Bissau with Mr Fran-
cois Mitterrand in a 3/4-hour conversation in Paris on 17 December. After the dis-
cussion, General Vieira, who was meeting the president of France for the first tine,
mentioned that he had brought up with Mr Francois Mitterrand the possibility of "tri-
angular cooperation" between France, Portugal and Portuguese-language African countries.
This theme had been stressed by Mr Francois Mitterrand during his visit to Portugal
last week. As concerns bilateral cooperation, the Aid and Cooperation Fund (PAC)
'provided 13.7 million French francs in subsidies in 1980 and directs its efforts
mainly toward restoring peanut production, which is Guinea-Bissau's main source of
foreign currency. The FAC is also participating in developing the country's hydro-
electric resources and in taking a mineral resources inventory (especially in pros-
pecting for phosphates), as well as aiding fisheries. About 40 Guinea-Bissau citizens
hold French scholarships, while about 30 French technical assistants are presently in
Guinea-Bissau. France has been giving Guinea-Bissau wheat and corn in food aid annually
since 1977. In 1980, this aid amounted to 1.5100 netric tons [at] of wheat flour and
1,000 at of corn. The Central Fund for Economic Cooperation (CCCE) has been aiding
Guinea-Bissau with loans since 1976. Loans amounted to Fr 8.4 million in 1980. The
3rd meeting of the joint France-Guinea-Bissau commission was held in Paris in March
1981. {Excerpt} [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1885, 25

Dec 81 p 3426] 8782

C50: 4719/439

28

FOR 0FFN]A1.USE10NL¥
FOR 0FiﬂC]Al.USElDNLN

MOZAMBIQUE

SPECTRUM 0F COOPERATION HITH FRANCE REVIEWED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1885, 25 Dec 81 p 3449
[Article: "Franco-Mozambican Financial and Economic Relations"]

[Text] The following is a summary of France's financial and economic relations with
Mozambique as of the date of Mr Jean-Pierre Cot's visit to that country and the signing
of a general cooperation agreement.

(A) Public and private financing: On 23 April 1977 a group of French banks,including
the General Company and lndoSuez, and the Bank of Mozambique concluded a purchasing
credit framework agreement. This agreement was made for 2 years and included a Fr 50
million credit ceiling that was later raised to Fr 75 million and Fr 125 million.

This agreement was renewed in April 1981 for a maximum of Fr 175 million in credit
usable till April 1983.

Also, financial agreements were concluded in Paris on 18 March 1980. They included
a Fr ll7-million contract (mixed loan) for buying 15 shrimp boats from France,
opening a Fr loo-million line of credit for miscellaneous purchases in France.

a Fr SO-million to buy various food and agricultural products from France, and
financing for two large contracts in the energy sector.

At present these various lines of credit have been exhausted, and the framework of
financial relations between France and Mozambique consists of the aforementioned
interbank agreement and the balance of the mixed loan.

Negotiations were undertaken between the governments of the two countries to set up
a new cooperation agreement, which was signed in Maputo recently on the occasion of
the visit by Mr J.-P. Cot (mentioned above).

(8) Operations and investment: The development of economic and commercial relations
between France and the People's Republic of Mozambique goes back to 1979-80. It is,

then. recent in date and has so far been implemented by large sales of semi-finished

products, agricultural and food products and equipment. I

(a) In engineering, nothing concrete has been achieved, but contacts and studies have
involved the energy sector, transports and communications, civil aviation, telecommu~
nications, industry and agriculture.

(b) Equipment is being supplied and installed by the group CGEE [General Electrical
Equipment Company]- -Alsthom for the Cabora Bassa dam (2. 250 megawatts) and, jointly

: ... talian company SAE [expansion unknown] it has been building the electric
line linking this dam with the Center and ﬁgfth regions of Mozambique. It has also
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been participating in building the Mavusi hydroelectric plant. The Campenon-Bernard
Company has been taking part in constructing a bridge on the Zambezi.

(c) In industrial construction, the group Renault Industrial Vehicles has been
closely involved in repair operations on Berliet heavy vehicles. The Cifal coapany

has contracted to build a 15,000-metric ton [mt] capacity refrigerator warehouse in
Maputo to receive potatoes and onions.

(C) Mining and oil production: The BRGM [Bureau of Geological and Mining Exploration]
and the General Geophysical Company are doing geophysical and photogeological studies
for mineral prospecting in the North and West regions of the country. No mining is
being done at present by French companies, as this sector is the object of close
cooperation between Mozambique and the GDR. However, some projects in this sector
have been discussed by the Mozambican coal autorities and the French. Similarly,

the national hydrocarbon authorities would like to bring France into seismic gas
exploration. French companies have not done any oil exploration in Mozambique since
the country became independent in 1975.

(0) Trade: In 1979, France's trade with Mozambique came to Fr 137 million of exports
from France and Fr 53 million of imports to France. France was then the 8th largest
supplier to Mozambique (4.1 percent of imports to Mozambique) and its 7th largest
customer (3.1 percent of imports from Mozambique). The financial agreements concluded
on 18 March in Paris between the two countries as complemented by the credit agreement
of 21 May 1980 on various agricultural food products, as well as excellent use made of
the framework agreement on purchase credit signed 12 April 1979 have all contributed
much toward improving the French position on the Mozambican market.

Indeed, French sales had reached Fr 215 million or an increase of 56.93 percent. This
increase was due largely to capital equipment, as French purchases declined by 16.98
percent, amounting to only Fr 44 million.

At the end of the first 7 months of 1981, French exports to Mozambique are considerably
more than Fr 231 million, and imports amount to Fr 29 million.

French exports are made up mainly of 3 main groups, which are all up: semi-finished
products and intermediate goods, 53.06 percent of the total; agricultural and food
products, 21.59 percent; capital equipment, 18.4 percent.

Mozambican exports also fall into 3 main groups: agricultural and food products, 48.42
percent; consumer goods, 30.9 percent; and raw materials, 18 percent.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie, Paris 1981

8782
C50: 4719/439

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

PORTUGAL-EEC CONNECTION VIENED--According to Mr Prakash Ratilal, vice—governor of the
Bank of Mozambique, Portugal's eventual entry into the EEC could favor increased eco-
nomic cooperation between Lisbon and Maputo. Mr Ratllal sees Portugal's access to

EEC finance sources as possibly helping Portuguese industrialists overcome their
investment problems, which are preventing them from putting into effect several eco-
nomic development projects in Mozambique. Mr Ratilal says that Portugal's cooperation
should involve particularly the sectors of light and heavy industry, petrochemicals,
cattle raising, shipyards, and the pharmaceutical industry. [Text] [Paris MARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 43] 8782

STEEL SALVAGE PROJECT PLANNED--Some Frenchmen may remember the slogan popular in 1939—
40: "We shall forge scrap metal into the steel of victory." This is what Mozambique
intends to do now. The CIFEL [expansion unknown], in Maputo, has set up a project
that should start about the middle of the current decade and eventually produce about
50,000 metric tons of steel a year. CIFEL plans to use as raw material old, scrap
ship hulls purchased abroad. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in
French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 43] 8782

C50: 4919/439

31

l!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lHﬂE(NVLY
IN)! 0FF1C1AL USEZCNNLY

SAO TOME AND PRINCIPE

BADEA LOAN HILL HELP TO DOUBLB ENERGY PRODUCTION
Paris HARCRBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1880, 18 Dec 81 p 3373

[Text] The Arab Bank for African Economic Development (BADEA) decided, at the end
of October, to extend to the kepublic of Sao Tome and Principe a $5 million loan
to help that country launch a project to increase its production of electricity.

This is the first time that the BADEA is participating in a project in that country
which, however, received assistance from the PASA (Special Arab Fund for Africa)

on 2 occasions ($10 million to finance several small investment projects and $500,000
to help with its balance of payments) and several other contributions from Arab
sources.

The power project, partly financed by the BADBA loan, represents a total invest-
ment of $12.85 million and its other financial backers are the IDA [International
Development Association] with $5.1 million, the Portuguese Government with $2.2
million and the Government of Sao‘Tbme and Principe with 8550.000.

Currently the country has an installed capacity of 6,270 kilowatts generated by
public (81 percent) and private (19 percent) facilities. Out of that total, 2,358
kilowatts are produced at hydraulic power plants and the rest at thermal power
plants. The total amount of electricity needed is estimated to be 5,600 kilowatts
which means that there is a supply deficit of 1,330 kilowatts. This deficit. caused
by a 10 percent rate of growth in the demand. will be as high as 3,500 kilowatts

in 1983 which is why the government urgently must rectify the situation and why it
has worked out the current plan. The various aspects of the plan involve building,
in the industrial zone of Sao Tome and Principe, a new power station equipped

with two diesel generators capable of generating 2,000 kilowatts each; carrying

out the necessary civil engineering works; building tanks which can hold 380 cubic
meters of fuel and oil; training technical personnel for the power station, supplying
various electrical equipments; giving technical assistance to and training staff

for the Electricity and Water Company.

When this project is completed, the result will be a significant increase (almost
100 percent) in electricity generation to meet domestic and industrial demand.
This project is the first answer to the problem of limited hydroelectrical power
generation in the islands (particularly during the dry season and when the volume
of the river flow goes down) and to the need to turn to thermal power. The
problem will have an indirect effect on the national economy and will enable the
government keep the same rates as in 1978 for electricity and water supplied for
household use.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the construction billbook, the project which will be supervised by
the Electricity and Water Company (attached to the Ministry of Construction. Housing
and Industry), is scheduled to be conpleted in August 1983.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moraux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
080: 6719/391

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOUTH AFRICA

SOU'IH AFRICAN FOREICN MINISTER (ll MASS MEDIA INQUIRY
P14051259 London THE TIMES in English 5 Feb 82 p 8
[Article by Michael Barnaby: "Hostility to Press Plan Rejected as Hysterical"]

[Text] Cape Town, lo Feb—Hr R. P. Botha, the South African foreign minister. today
described as hysterical and premature the hotile press reaction here and abroad to
the proposals of the Steyn Co-ission of inquiry into the mass media.

In an interview with THE TIMES, Hr Botha mintained that the press coverage of the
Steyn report had been deliberately "dished up in such a fashion as to give the
impression to the reader abroad that the government intends to kill press freedom
in this country",

"Some papers here obviously expected the government to react imediately. and to
clamp down on the press, and the government did exactly the opposite". Hr Botha
mintained. "The present hysterical outburst is apparently based on frustration
that the government did not react as expected".

The Steyn report. accompanied by draft bills embodying its proposals, was tabled
in parliament earlier this week. If implemented. the draft laws would, among other
things. require all journalists to be licensed by a statutory board of controls.
This has been widely condemned as a means of imposing political conformity.

The prime minister's response in parliament to the Steyn report had been "very,
very categorical and clearly stated", Mr Botha declared.

"He said that the government could not give a conclusive 'yes' or 'no', that it
was s voluminous report. that it required study and that negotiations would take
place with the press. Now what more reasonable attitude can any government adopt?"

It was impossible, Hr Boths insisted. for the government to indicate that its
final position might be when it was still only "at the beginning of discussion with
the press". Nor could he be able to express any personal view on the Steyn pro- u
posals until he knew what the outcome of these negotiations were.

Hr Botha's col-sent will do little to calm the fears of editors and journalists here
who question the motives of the government in conissioning the Steyn report in the

first place and are alarmed that the government should be prepared even to consider
a measure like the compulsory registration of journalists.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The foreign minister's remarks tend to confirm the view gaining ground here that
the government's initial strategy will be to try and persuade the press to exercise

self-censorship while holding over its head the threat of legislation as a weapon
of last resort.

The government's main target is the influential English-language press, which is
by far the freest in Africa and keeps up a constant nagging assault on the policy
of apartheid. Pretoria would dearly love to see this criticism muffled.

In response, newspaper owners and editors have set up a conittee to draw up a plan

for remodelling the existing, though largely ineffectual. South African Press
Council.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982

CSO: 4700/6610 END

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY