APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 20°7IOZIOI: CIA-RDPCZ-OOCCOROOOI000300‘0-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030046-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8343

20 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 9/79)

A

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030048-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was suumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the bcdy of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT HHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING (MNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
uocnrmco n |~ MM No. 3. laclp' w A N .
ms __
. use an «e .eratue
TMNSIATIONS 0N NEAR FAST AND NORTH AFRICA, (P000 9/79) 20 March 1979
No.
. Petiounia‘ Omen-sauce Nun and “Just )0. Proktt/Tssl/I‘o'l Win No.
Joint Publications Research Service

 
  
 
  

1000 North Glebo Rose ll. Cesium/Gnu Ye
Arlington, Virginie 22201
H. Spousal»; Oussisnioa Nsoe and Menu
Coveted
As above

N.

Is. Supple-aunt] Nous

It. A - suscts

The serial report contains information on socio-economic, government, political,
end technical developments in the countries of the Near East end North Africa.

 

l . Key fouls sad Dermal Analysis. 0- Descriptors

Political Science _x__lnter-Arsb Affairs _X_l.ibys __Sultsnate
Sociology Lﬂorth African Lﬂeuritsnia of Oman
economics Affairs _x_liorocco _Syria
Culture (Social Sciences) __Af3hsnistan __P0091¢'s Deno- X__‘runisie
Ethnology __x_ Algeria - cratic Republic __United Arab
Geography __Bahrain of Yemen Beirates
Technological _Egypt _Peraian Gulf __vestern
hilitary Sciences _Iran Area Schara

_Iraq ___Qater __Ye-en Arab

I18 “cu“k'olcm-ldd WI- _lsreel _Ssudi Arabia Republic

_Jordan _8psnish North

_Kuvsit Africa

_l.ebsnon _.8uda|. .

m. COSA‘I’lﬂdJ/Gup so. so. SK, 15

ll. Annual." Statement 2!. So. on Pas"
For Official Use Only. m 59
Limited Nunber of Copies Available From HRS. m m

""“""’ ' "a" “" nus roan ear or ntvsooucco wee-woe mwm
mu orncim. use ONLY

JPRS L/E
20 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(rouo 9/79)
CONTENTS

Jim-ARAB AFFAIRS

Reﬂections on Arab Tradition and Modernity
(mu anariyn; TEE momma QMMY, No 10, 1979)

mm! AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Algerian President New [shim in Saharan war
(Abdelaziz Damn mm: APRIQUE, 1h Feb 79)

AIDERIA

Selection of Algerian President Discussed
(mun marque, 1h Feb 79)

Role of Algerian Am Viewed
(JEUNB mucus, 1h Feb 79)

Poliaario Front Announces 'Derection' or Moroccan Deputy
(moms moment»: er NEWS, 9 m 79)

Industrial Develoment of Algeria Doee Preeident
Bounediene Honor
(NARCHES mOPICAUX m HEBREW, 9 Feb 79).....

M11 BendJedid Called Energetic, Realistic
(moans TROPICAW 31' MD #35553, 9 Feb 79) ....

Briers
SIB-Nippon Agreement
31 Mountakbal nan
Daimler-Benz Vehicles
Equipment for Steel Complex
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)
mu

Briefs
Libyan Nuclear Roma
weapons Deliveries

MAWIA

Details on 8ND! Reorganization Noted
(Abdelazia mhmni; ma fJRIQUB, 1h Feb 79)

Agricultural Situation Appears To Be Critical
(”CHIS TROPICAID! E'l' ms, 9 Ebb 79)....

Briers
neutenant's House Arrest
Japanese Fishing Center

MOROCCO

Economic Performance, 1978-1980 Pun Detailed
(mm moucwx in' mm, 26 Jan 79) ..

mm

Report on Industrial Activity wring First Ralf of 1
(means momma: m momma, 9 m: 79

Trade Deficit Increases in 1978
(means noncwX x: mm, 2 Feb 79)

Briers
Kuwaiti Loan
New Railway Station Switch
BBC Aid to Cities
Japanese Electronic Aid
Aid Prom am
one Aid for Phoephetes

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“HER-ARAB Mums

mmxons on ARAB TRADITION AND MDERNIT!
Jerusalem THE mm WHEEL! in English No 10, Winter 1979 pp 77-83
[Etude by m Zomiyg

Eexg The Egyptien writer leﬂq el-lleltlm hos mode the perceptive
distinction between I 'becltwerd' and e 1ouging' society. The
former has never been It the spearhead of progress while the letter
once led the convoy of civilizetion. but fell behind when its pece
slocltened or stopped completely. Al-Heidrn thus endeavoured to
deﬁne the relationship between cultural development end the
dimension oi’tirne, notebly the reletionship between pest end
present A legging society tends to be pest-oriented. looking with
noeteigleetdtegoodolddeyswhenitcerricdthetmdtofprom
ApﬁmexempleofmcbesocietyistheArebworld.Any
discussionofthissodetyshouid tekeesltspointofdepenurethet
specie] relationship between pest end present.

in Arebculture, thepestconfmtsthepreoentmtsenentity
whichisiinltcdtoendintegretedwithlenetlwmhepestoctsrtsen
independent force amending with thepresent. defending its own
privilegesegeinstltendstr‘ivingtotekelts'pleoe.lnbrief.ocr
ettimdetowerdsthepeetisehistoricelmisislnoontnstwlththe
historicel attitude which pieces the pest in e reeiistic enema.
examining it (born I reletivistic viewpointes ebygone phesewhlcb
diseppoered into successive pheeesol‘bnmen evolution leedingto
thopresent. tnehistoricslepproecbthepestdoeenotcornpete
with thepresmtend therecenneverbeequeetionofoonmtityior
leeitol‘itlbetween therml‘orthopreeentcerriestheseedsol‘thepest
ondthepestcreetesthepreoattevenesltexpiresendis
superseded by it. tnArehculttumboweverﬁtepestwtsoa‘its
relotloruhip with history, loses to reletivistic cherecter end

' r. mmhnwmwumumnmmxy.
Mbemhuwwdummhd-MW

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

becomes an ever present force. lntiependent of the framework of
time. it is thus bound to clash ineluctahly with the present. Past
and prestmt thus emerge as two distinct entities, and not as they
are in fact: part and parcel ofone force whose character changes
with the passage of time. This ehistorical approach is responsible.
to a large extent. for the backwardness of the Arab world and for
the confusion which bedevils Arab culture.

one: of Mdition

The best illustration for tltls confusion is the ongoing debate on
tradition vs. modernity.

On one side ofthis debate stand the c:itics of tradition. who single
out the defects of our cultural heritage and call for them to be
drastically remedied. The author agrees with their claims. yet
rejects their conclusions. The cities find our tradition to be replete
with irrational elements: superstitions. mysticism. mythological
modes of thinking. This is undoubtedly tree up to a mint. but there
is no reason to conclude - as the critics do - that our tradition is ut-
terly defective. Let us remember that the some irrational elements
did not impede the progress of European thought. European
mmiiaeval thought was no doubt obscurantist and mystical- prone.
and even modern Europe maintains a measure of irrational
elements. which permeate its scientiﬁc activity as well. Until the
lath century. electricity and magnetism were seen as mystical
forces. and chemists spoke of masculine and feminine minerals. Up
to Descartes’ time. animals were considered to be more bistro-
ments. devoid of consciousness and feeling ahlte. The mentally ill
were sometimes hunted alive in order to banish the evil spirits
dominating them.

Nevertheless. Europe was the spearhead of progress in the
modern era. If these factors did not block the way to modernity irt
the West why should they be deemed impediments to progress in
the Arab world? One could even make thecase. assome European
thinkers do. that these intellectual errors may be a necessary phase
on the way to discovering the truth. Science. they argue. is not so
much a cluster of truths reached one by one. as a cluster of errors

progressively overcome. Superstition and mystical belief can thus
bedeemedstagesen the road toknowledge.providedother- -end
better- stages evolve and supersede them. From a historical
viewpoint. irrational thoughtandsuperstitionspersecannotbe the
cause of beckwardness. Whether they become so, is determined
only by later developments.

The same holds cue for the accusation that the Arab heritage is
fraught with tyranny and repression. Dr. Zeiti Nnjib Mubamad in
his Regeneration of Arab Thought [in Arabic) claimed that this
tyranny lay etthe root ofour backwardaeas But isnot the history
efEuropeanthooﬂrtrepletewithcasesoftlbeniesrepreesod'l

A

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pilli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without having to delve far back into medieevel history or into the
intolerance of the Reformation. cannot one find In modern history
a legion of exntnples ofpersecutlon of intellectuals In the name of
religion? Giordano lintno was burned alive, Galileo was put on
trial and almost executed. The same fate menoced Descartes,
while Spinoza had to resort to an apparently theological style In
order to hide hisessentially nationalistic approach. intellectual tar-
rorby the religious atahlishrnentisthus notthe domain oftltedarlt
ages of Arab traditional culture alone. The West. however, has
found its way beyond that phase. Into the era ofenlightenment and
freedom of expression. Thus, while the defects In our tradition
should certainly be overcome. they cannot be considered solely
responsible for our intellectual backwardness One should rather
Investigate later. post medlaevel, developments in the Arab world
in order to ﬁnd the source ofour malaise.

Those who heap all the blame for today's hadtwardness on
mediacval factors apparently expected tradition to be a sulllcient
basis for solving the problems of the present. They \ ere bitterly
disappointed to find that it does not fulfil this ‘Ztaslr The very
ferocity of criticism levelled at tradition denotes that the latter is
being unconsciously cemperedtothe present. ‘Ihe pestis perceived
as a living force which should be overcome.

Proponents of ‘n-editien

The same son of comparison. but with an opposite Intention.
underlies the approach of the defenders of tree-Jon. Theirs Is the
obverse of the same coin: they exaggerate the real Il.e.. historical)
significance of our tradition. The traditionalist; claim that we are
backward because we have forsaken our heritage and only when
we cerne haclt to it can we achieve progress. Some traditionalist:
aslt usonlytobe'inspired'byourtradition. tvhileotherseeekto
resumed. the entire heritage. They ergo: that deliverance will
corneonly through anintensive search fora recreationofthepast.
evendowntosuchdetaikasdmi‘iuchappealsforareinstate-
mentofthepastcanmtbefound today Irtothercultures;theyare
unique to the Arab world.

There are traditimaliste who oflcn depict our heritage as
encompassing all human knowledge. past and present. thus
precludingthenecdteoverreachitsbeunds£mtainauthorsstrive
topmvethatallnewscientilicdiscoveriesareanticipatedand
foreshadowed h the verses of the Koran. Nuclear adence is
supposed tohaveitsoriynstherebecausethereareverseewhich
contain the tar-radium lateral. ln anotherphilologieal sleight-of-
hend theyelaimthatrnodern biologyispretlgured inversesebout
Allah'acraatingall Iivingbeings from water. Othmetillrnayview
the verse about Muhammad's ascension to heaven as anticipating
space travel. True enough. there are out-and-out traditionalist

3
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

le.g.. illnt al-Shntil who reject interpretations in this vein and
refuse to make the Koran into a treatise on the natural sciences or
space technology. They argue that the ttciy Scriptures en
designedtnenlighten usonthe realm of the spiritand notonthatol‘
matter. There are also lraditionaiists who reject the above-
mentioned exegesis as depreciating the value of our heritage.
Human reason. they argue. has circumscribed capacities and man
should know that all his scientiﬁc knowledge will always remain
intrinsically limited and of secondary knowledge.

Another tendency claims that Arab scientiﬁc and intellectual
achievements during the islamic Golden Era are the source of
many modern discoveries and innovations. Such a claim iscertain-
ly better borne out by accepted historical facts. yet is steeped in
exaggeration: it takes Arab scientific heritage out of its historical
context and - in a manner reminiscent of the first tendency -
bestowa upon it an absolute value. valid for all times. it is quite
common, for instance, to ﬁnd Arab thinkers who exert themselves
to prove that the most up-to-date scientiﬁc discoveries were
known to the mediaevai Arabs. One such 'expert' claimed that al-
Blnlnl i973 - I053l was the father of the Theory of Relativity.

This ahistorical attitude to our heritage refuses to deal we“ the
present according to its own speciﬁc logic and applies instead the
logicofa bygone period. however glorious it may have been. in the
ﬁnal analysis, however, such an approach is counterproductive.
By attributing to inediaeval Arab scholars many or the
achievements of modern science one intends to prove that the
Arabs preceded the West in these ﬁelds. but in fact such claims do
nothing but glorify Western thought. Western achievements serve
as the yardstick for measuring the status of Arab thinkers. Only if
an Arab preceded Einstein, Kant or Hume is he acknowledged to
have been great. Had we really believed in the greatness of ottr
mediaeval scientists and thinkers we should have persuaded
humanity of their claim to greatness in their own right. indeed. did
the West ever glorify an outstanding personality because he
preeededanArabthinkerinarrivingatacenaindiscoveryor
because he succeeded in developing or interpreting an idea
launched by an Arab?

That is the diﬂ'erence between a self-conﬁdent culture, using
itselfasitsewn criterion andaculture which hastocornpareitsell’
to others. trying to outdo them.

Moreover, the shiston'cal approach assumes that our tradition is
aliving force capable ofsolvhgallproblernsinthe present. Someot‘
its more extremist proponents would go so far as to claim that any
setback we stiller. be it even a military one. ismrnehow related to
our attitude towards tradition It is thus that many thinkers
attributed our defeat in theJune 1967 war to the ignorance of our
notaiincludingour religious roots). whileourbetter performance
h l973 wasclaimed tobeduetoacertainreturntotraditiort.1‘lttis

h
FOR orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the post becomes the only element liable to deliver its from the
hardships of the present. Such an ehistotiul and reactionary ap-
pronch is surely no great help in facing up to the problems of the

present

Nature of Arab Heritage

Our heritage must certainly have some special characteristics
which inspire the above-quoted views of critics and proponents
elilte. For. one might ask. why did not Irrational factors and
repression of free thought in the West produce the same results as
they did in thu Arab world? Why did the West succeed in shaking
oil these impediments and moving forward. while in limb society
they blocked progress? What is it which compels the proponents of
tradition to cling to their reactionary concepts and look for the
sources of modern science in the Holy Scriptures and classical
literature? In brief. why do we remain past-oriented and bogged
down?

The Arab cultural heritage contains a phenomenon which i dull
refer u' as 'cuiturol discontinuity'. it is the lack ol’ continuity
between our past and present, which explains why we pin im-
poulble expectations on our heritage or lay at its door un-
warranted blame.

in their golden age. Arab science and philosophy attained the
highest degree of progress achievable in the Middle Ages The
Arabs were the mentors of world civilization. Yet thisera elapsed
and the development of Arab thought stopped completely. in the
late 19th century there began an Arab movement of renaissance
include. or awakening]. basing itself upon this tradition of
mediaeval thought which had been so unpressive in itsown time. it
disregarded the fact that humanity had already evolved far
beyond that stage. and the Arabs lagged tnsuchanemtthatthoy
could not compensate by simply putting the train of progress in
motion from the very point where it had stopped so long ago.

Cultural discontinuity thus means that Arab science and
philosophy do notconstitute an unbroken tradition extending from
itsheydaytoourown times: weratherhavcbet‘orousacoldenara
followed by long Dark Ages. As the Golden Era had no real con-
tinuity. there was no opportunity for it to be integrated into the in-
tellectual make.upofrnaninthembwodd.5denceand
philosophy were insulated from the general society. remaining the
prescrwol’atinyelita.1heirprinciples had neverbeenabaorbed
into the intellectual baggage of the common man.

Take, in contrast.the caseoi'copernicus. Inhisowncanturytew
scientbts shared his views. but the continuity of the Copernican
tradition anddieeﬂorumnedtowardsitsconsolidatioomadeit
intoabasicingredieotofdtegenaalctiluue.1hesameismieof
other major Western scientiﬁc discover-ks. such a tho‘l‘heoryol'

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Evolution or the emergence or psychoanalysis. These were the
conceptions of a few individuals. but they filtered from the elite
downwards. thanks to the continuity of sclentiiic thought. Arab
mentality and daily behaviour, however. were not aﬂectad by
Arabscientii'tc and philosophical tradition. One cannot say tltetthe
Arabls imbued with it as. for instance. the Frenchman can basaid
to be Cartesian It is ironical that tho most enthusiastic proponents
ofAreb tradition present itas a manifestation oi’ elements that ‘one
could not have conceivably expected' to ﬁnd in the Arab world and
of individual thinltetsol' whom it is said: 'the common man would
be astonished to find how enlightened they were'. This very
astonishment proves tltat the heritage of these thinkers has not
been integrated into our being. What is much more dangerous is
thatthe very signiﬁcance of the Arab heritage sull‘etsi’rom cultural
discontinuity and is In need of reassessment “we can be two
approaches to a historical heritage. one liable to foster progress
and the other, backwardness. The first approach perceives the
heritage as developing in a continuous manner. each phase
surpassing and absorbing its predecessor. Tradition grows in a
living and developing organism. The second approach tries to
resuscitate discontinued traditions without considering whether
they are relevant to the new conditions. in the ﬁrst case. the
tradition lives within its own death: in the second. it dies within its
life. for it is resuscitated artiﬁcially and transplanted as an alien
bodyintounew agewhich Bboundtoreiectit.

Lessons qftlte arropran Renaissance

The modern Arab's attitude towards his scientiﬁc and
philosophical heritage is that of a hoarder and not ofa user. Those
who actually used our heritage and proﬁted from it were the
Europeans of the Renaissance era. Arab achievements were added
to their body of knowledge and set into motion a proces of
development which was to continue without stop. it is Europe
which has actually preserved Arab culture in a true manner. even
though one cannot point out today a direct present of Arab
tradition in European culture. it would also be dillicuit for you to
detect in your physiognoaty the traits of your ancestor of ten
generations ago, even though you are able to trace your genealogy
to him.

The Arab should thus ponder the lessons of the Renaissance in
order to ﬁnd out what enabled the West to developso much more
titan us, although their point of departure was lower than ours.

The major lesson is that the Europeans did nothesitate to rejects
whole cultural tradition. namely the Aristotelian philosophy which
dominated the Middle Ages. They even went so far as to malts
Aristotle shoulder the responsibility for take commentaries
attributed to him in the Middle Ages. Scientists lilte Galileobegan
with the premise that one should liberate thought from the hold of

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Ancients ie.g.. Aristotle! and tum directly to nature in order to
understand the laws of the universe. This rejection of claedcal
tradition was due to its discontinuity. Its accomplishments were
glorious in Antiquity but it from in the Middle Ages. unable toab-
each new elements and evolve further. Hence the rejection and the
Renaissance claim that one should begin ab initio. Later on. when
the classical heritage was no longer a real competitor. the
Europeans took a much more balanced View. placing it within the
appropriate historical perspective. The classical heritage could be
acknowledged as a force which had been ofgreut value in its time.
even though later developments far surpassed it. The historical ap-
proach does away with the contradiction between glorifying the
heritage and the admission that it is unsuited to the present.

Reiection and total challenge of tradition is. hence. necessary in
the ﬁrst phase of renaissance. the historical approach being
adopted only in the second phase.

Alienation and Westerniootiat

Our cultural lag leads to a situation ol‘helplessncss vir-d vir present
problems. coupled with tho impossibility of ignoring them. The
major manifestation of this dilemma is a sort of Wastemiution
whichdoeenotpreparetheterrainforanewdeparture.Tltis
Westernizetion. ironically. is self-imposed and not imposed from
the outside.

One ltindol'thisWestemizetioncanbafoundamong Arab
disciples of foreign culture: those who tend to complete with the
help of foreign words what they cannot express irt their own
language. importing from far away lands their life-style. dress.
even facial expressions and body language. Theirs is a
mnphical alienation Their body is still in an Arab counuy. but
their mind is elsewhere.

The critics of this Westernixation are also alienated.however. in a
much more latent. hence dangerous. manner. Being proponents of
tradition. they are chronologically alienated: alien to the problems
or their own times and ﬁnding solace and refuge in bygone times.
seeking in our ancient vocabulary the expresion of new meanings.
in our ancient philosophy an answer to contemporary ethical
problems and in our ancient warfare a guide to modern strategy.
Yetthepmentimposesitsdi’upon manovenwhenhetriestollee
it.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Whlch Mullen ls wom? The 30091le dlmelulon lends Io
be command nowudoyo. Technology n-ducu dlﬂorcnou
between local cullum and foam unlfomlly; I world dvllknllon
lslnlhomokinanlhcdlnmlonofm.0wmluyllm.m
Mum between two gencuuom many I: much like that
human loo senor-Um ln put centuries. Clmloglcnl
Illmulm-hmduponn outleoomupdonofum-mm
moment; a your danger. It {mun mlhlng ht ult-dcluslon.

T: The Middle mot Institute, Jerusalem

20

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFlCIM. USE ONLY

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ALGERIAN PRESIDENT NEH ENIGMA IN SAliARAN UAR
l’ariu JEUNF. AFRIQUE in French lb Feb 79 pp 30.31
[Article by Abdelaziz thnsni: "Orphan POLl$ARl07"]

[Text] The Saharan affair entered a new phase with the election of a new
Algerian president on 7 February. For now. the game "spheres of influence"
is done. with Houari Bouncdienne. the POLISARIO Front could count on the
unaquivical support or the Algerian head of state. Sosa went so far as to
say the Saharan affair was Sou-edienne's private preserve.

This had allowed POLISARIO to reinforce its niliLary and diplomatic position
since 1975 to the point of causing serious probless to Morocco and Mauritania.
so strong seemed the cannon purpose of Algeria and its proteges. Hith
Bounedienne the POLISARIO lost its principal protector and no one can pre-
dict itu future with any certainty. even should Algerian leaders swear to
continue the policies of the deceased president.

he one could be more sensitive than the FOLISARIO to the dangers of a
possible change in Algeria. And to keep from weakening. to reassure their
troops. who felt the death of Bounedienne keenly. the Saharana launched
their most murderous offensives to date on Moroccan positions. in the past
few weeks.

They took advantage of the preparation for and the holding of the FIR
[National Liberation Front] Congress on 27-31 January. of the withdrawal to
Algiers of their political and military councilors. to launch large-scale
operations. The Saharans even annOunced "700 Moroccan soldiers dead" and
extensive damage from one operation at Leaaeid in the neighborhood of El
Aioan. before threatening Morocco with a "ailitary solution.”

Psychological warfare

The most spectacular operation was 28 January against the Moroccan town of
Tan-Tan. We can affirm that there was a great deal of damage and aany

deaths on both sides. The FOLISARIO. playing on surprise. partially occu-
pied the town and caused serious damage. They took aany woaen and soldiers

9
son orncw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as hostages. But while falling back they were forced into asking a stand and
in turn left dozens of dead.

This operation against Tan-Tan. as audacious as the attack against Nouahchott
in June 1976 occurred while the FLN congress was in full swing. when it was
announced. the majority of the 3.000 participants applauded vigorously. The
less enthusiastic were mostly military and moderates.

For the military. the attack on Tan-Tan could have been the prelude to war
between Algeria and Morocco. Some lstaqlal and US" [Socialist Union of
People's Forces] leaders spoke to deeply felt Moroccan bitterness using such
terms as "national disaster" adding that the threahhold of the "intolerable"
had been crossed.

At Algiers a number of moderates saw in this operation unwarranted interfer-
ence with the conference's work and a preference for the hardlinera, those
wanting to make Morocco responsible for basic Algerian problems. Abdelasis
Bouteflika. minister of foreign affairs. doubtless felt hiaaelf to be a
special target and was particularly virulent about Morocco.

In a way. this is the revenge of POLISARIO against those. who are numerous.
who would label them as ”only an Algerian satellite." And new they seen to
want to make their protector play their game! Mas POL'SARIG staked its all
on this occasion? Its hard to say for sure before Algeria's position is
further clarified and the new president has defined his policy. It is said
that Chadli is a moderate. ready for dialog. but how far will his hands be
free to attespt to find with Morocco a solution to the Saharan affair. if
there should be place for it in the dialog? Mauritania's overtures for peace
and POLISARIO's military offensives show that the political issue is tied to
Algerian/Moroccan contacts.

During the transition period that began with Boumedienne's illness and was
prolonged until the election of Chadli Bendjedid. each party delivered it-
telf to psychological warfare. not restraining itself free any aeans. any
violence. verbal or other-arms parachuted. urban terrorisa. assassination
attenpts--to bend events in its favor. The results have not been, so it
seems. what the three protagonists had hoped for. The principal and new
enigma of the Saharan affair is called Chadli....

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

8860
C80: L000

10
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

SELECTION OF ALGERIA" PRESIDENT DISCUSSED
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 14 Feb 79 pp 27-30
[Article by J.-L. 3.: "who Really Is the New President?"]

[Text] Bouuodiene's heirs have taken good care of things. 0n 9 February,
after 65 days of Mr Rabah Bitat's weak interis. Col Chadli Benjedid took
over the highest office. Two days earlier. the new president (alone) went
before the voters. At the close of a fourth PLN convention which had
lasted longer than planned, a week earlier. the party had named him as its
candidate to succeed to the presidency.

The new president who is accepted by everyone. is said to have been chosen
by the convention after open debates where a lack of coaprosise between
various factions finally led the aray to achieve a consensus by proposing
his candidacy. The transition which was accompanied with great fanfare.
appears to have taken place flawlessly. The constitution was scrupulously
observed and continuity was assured.

The Host Senior

All this is reassuring. as is the iaage portrayed of Col Chadli Benjedid.
Along the first iapressions characterizing this nan who has been stationed
in the region of Oran for 14 years but who is not well known at Algiers.
are his moustache and white hair, the "Raf Vallone look" as they say in
Algeria, his relative youth (not quite so years old). a solid and discreet
bearing. and a reputatiun of being anything but gullible. As the head of
the second military region. conmanding the lost iaportant units of the
Algerian army. this career officer who was forged in the underground after
serving with the French army, was concerned solely with his own jurisdic-
tion at Oran. his participation in Algeria's political affairs was minor.
He is considered a nan of experience. on the noderate side. without strong
ideologies.

Now then can these characteristics make his a head of state? He are told
that we shall have to observe his at work. and are offered one explanation
for the selection of this individual: Chadli leajedid is the IOIC senior

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

officer holding the highest tank. This is where we can start asking our-
selves some questions. The same type of argument prevails in other lati-
tudes. especially in Latin America: when the army takes over the govern-
ment. as a general rule the highest ranking officer is installed as the
head of state. The decisive factor is not so much a matter of qualifica-
tions of a particular general. but a question of what he represents: the
military establishment and. behind the scenes. the small groups who ac-
tually control it.

Regrouping

The comparison is valid. to a certain extent. with respect to the evr..s
in Algeria. Colonel Chadli Benjedid's election did not take place I; one
would have us believe and the army played a much more important ro'. than
that of simply a final arbiter. In order to reconstitute the process it
is necessary to go back to the last days of November (Bousediene died on
27 December) when the first signs of regrouping appeared within the Coun-
cil of the Revolution. in anticipation of the need to find a successor.
Two major trends took shape. labeling as virtual candidates the names of
Abdelaziz Bouteflika. minister of foreign affairs. and Mohamed Salah
Yahiaoui. top leader in charge of the party machine. Col Ahmed Ben
sherif. former gendarmerie chief. tried to play his own card. Holding
fewer aces than his two adversaries. Ben Sherif is said to have pleased
for an expanded convention and for a greater number of candidates. His
proposals were not accepted.

The question then arose. concerning the assignment of control over the
Hinistry of Defense to colonels Chadli and Belhouchet. as to whether this
decision should be credited to Bouteflika'a group or whether it merely
endorsed it. The latter theory now appears more likely: everything

leads us to believe that the army rapidly tried to slow down the rise of
aoumedieae's minister of foreign affairs who had a head start in the race
to power according to numerous observers (especially foreign). For this
reason the army is said to have supported Yahiaoui whose expanded possi-
bilities became rapidly apparent. By projecting a double image as an
Islamic and Marxist scholar. presenting himself as a strong man who favors
a pure and hardline Algerian brand of socialism. Yshiaoui seemed to pre-
dominate. His chances appeared to be so much the greater as he was in
charge of the organization of the convention. But his progression alarmed
some members of the state apparatus who were displeased with his plans to
strengthen the party. Businessmen as well as technocrars were equally
disturbed. fearing Yahiaoui's economic options.

Ahead of Time

in this game of succession which consisted of shifting alliances within a
small group of men. the weight of respective positions taken by these dif-
ferent interest groups was felt in terms of the relationship of forces on
a particular day. It would appear above all that the military side also

12
FOR OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expressed reservations concerning Yahiaoui's extremism. Thus. it is re-
ported that he. in turn. was slowed down to the satisfaction of other
groups less anxious than the army. although Yahiaoui had to take into
account a strong representation of the military at the convention. his
supporters did constitute a majority among the participants. This is why
the army. in pursuing its offensive. presented Chadll Benjcdid as its
candidate--a move which was far from displeasing to many young officers--
and had him accepted before the meetings of the FLN. lf Chadli's candi-
dacy was firmed up ahead of time. what is the use of these debates and
the closing report. one would ask? It would be simplistic to believe
that it was just a maneuver to hoodwink people. First of all. it is to
be noted that in addition to the delegates of a structuxed party. the
convention was attended by different groups constituting the enlarged
power elite. namely the military. tachaocrats. representatives of gov-
ernment and administration. members of the FLN apparatus. etc. A num-
ber of participants who were ready to play the game thought that the
convention must in fact reach an agreement concerning the candidacy.
However. the prevalent attitude. especially that of certain officers.

is said to have shown them that it was not really worthwhile to go very
far. Not to mention the sluggishness of bureaucratic organization. the
dispersion and channels within the various committees and other programmed
interference. Those who believed in an orderly process were left with a
certain uneasiness. At a higher level. there was a question of balancing
the representation of different interest groups and regional constituen-
eies: this preoccupation is reflected in the composition oi the central
committee (l60 titular members and 30 substitutes) which is the hypotheti-
cal "supreme body" of the FLN between conventions.

The New Regime

Finally and above all. matters yet to be resolved outside Chadli's candi-
dacy were at stake. That is to say there was a question of dividing the
power among the different elements present. There was apprehension about

a possible demonstration on Ben Sherif's part. he is reported to have been
active and to have been reconciled with Boutefliks. Yahiaoui. for his part.
was able to keep some of his projects concerning the party-~whose support he
had been counting on--but he had to accept. surprisingly. Chadli's designa-
tion as the FLN's secretary general.

Here again. as a new surprise. the question came up as to whether the army
might not be attempting to reconstitute the Boumediene system--whereby nu-
merous positions were being given to the chief personages--when it had been
expected that the cards would be widely distributed. Negotiations are con-
tinuing and a first balance of different forces will be reflected in the
composition of the government. it is nevertheless difficult to imagine
that there will not be a real division of power. The different leanings
hope to be able to derive some benefit under Chadli. And. after all. the
latter comes in from Oran whereas the others are already in Algiers in
their positions. when it is time to appoint one or more (probably two or

13
ran orrrcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three) vice presidents nnd.tho prime minister. there will be a better
understanding of the extent of conpronises. The political bureau con-
sisting of 17 members who represent a sort of enlarged council of the
revolution. is regrouping those who remain within the area of considera-
tion. Noteworthy at this level is the arrival of Colonel Hirbah. the
chief of military security. He undoubtedly is s man on the rise. Chadli
nenjedid who was selected on the basis of his qualifications. will he
seek to assert himself when he is confronted by those who placed him in
power? It is reasonable to suppose so if one renenbers that this one
stood fire when Beusediens tried to pull him away from his territory at
Oran.

A new regime is being born at Algiers.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

9261
050: 6&00

lb
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

ROLE OF ALGERIAN ARMY VIEUBD
Paris JBUNE APRIQUE in French 16 Feb 79 p 29
[Article by n. K.: "A highly Politicized Army"]

[Text] The People's National Army which is one of the strongest armies in
Africa and in the Arab world (78,800 men). derives from the National Liber-
ation Army which was forged during seven years of the war of independence.
The National Liberation Army was divided into autonomous wilayas because of
the nature of combat and the vastness of the Algerian territory. Shortly
after the country's independence this splintering which was aggravated by
divergencies among the PLN leadership. led to the "crisis of the wilayas"
which cane close to becoming a bloody conflict. But thanks to the support
of the border armies led by Colonel Boumediene. Mr Ahmed Ben Bella pre-
vailed over his opponents in the Provisional Goverment of the Algerian
Republic. After he was appointed minister of defense in the first govern-
ment of independent Algeria. Colonel Bomediene managed to unify the
National Liberation Army which then became the People's National Army.

The Drop of Hater

It is through the People's National Army that President Ben Bella succeeded
in suppressing the armed uprisings of his adversaries. Colonel Shaabani
was executed and Rocine Ait Ahmed was jailed. But the head of state had
become aware of the dangers of having to depend on the army. In 1965 he
began to undermine the powers of his defense minister by naming. during
the latter's absence. Col Tahar Zbiri as chief-of-staff of the People's
National Army. Colonel Boumediene's comrades from the Oujda group were
pushed aside: after Messrs Hedgehri and Raid Aimed came Hr Bouteflihs's
dismissal. This was the drop of water which caused the bowl to overflow.
During the night from 18 to 19 June the People's National Army went into
action. President Ben Bella was overthrown.

The Courtship

President Bot-ediene who was aware of the mistakes made by his predecessor,
consolidated his power by relying heavily on the army the comnd of which

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’OR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

he jealously kept for himself. The future would hear his out. On
lb December 1967. Colonel 2biri, the chief-of-staff, advanced on Algiers
leading an armored convoy. Hie troops were rapidly dispersed.

Being as strongly politicized as its forerunner, the People's National
Aray with its political conniaaariat as one of its lost iaportant ale-
nents participates in all aajor decisions. Calling itself the ”spear-
head" of the revolution, it supported President Bounadiene's initiatives.
and it has been courted by different leanings such as those which surfaced
within the Council of the Revolution during President Bousediena's agony
and later on during Hr Rabah Bitat's tera. As the country's principal or-
ganised force it finally decided in favor of Chadli.

Beshir aen Yahned wrote shortly before the country bees-e independent,
"Toeorrow's Algeria will be what the People's National Army wants to lake
of it." This truth still is indispensable.

COPYRIGHT: Jeane Afrique GRDPJIA 1979

9261
080: £400

16
you onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

POLISARIO FRONT ANNOUNCES 'DBFECTION' 0F MOROCCAN DEPUTY
Peri! HARCNBS TROPICAUX 3T MEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 308

[Text] In a bulletin published in Algiers on 1 February. the POLISARIO Front
announced the "defection“ to the Saharan movement of Abderrshlan Ould Leibak,
deputy in the Moroccan Parliaeent. According to the POLISARIO Front, Ould
Leibak is reportedly also president of the Con-unal Council of Boujdour
(northern Uestern Sahara) set up by Rabat and a member of the Ho‘occan Red
Cross.

The bulletin also eephasises that "important officials from the forner Jenna
(assembly of notables during the ties of the Spanish Sahara) and former
tribal chiefs have also joined the ranks of the POLISARIO."

At a press conference held in Algiers at the headquarters of the Saharan
novenent. Lelbsk. whose "disappearance" uas officially recognized 3 days ago

by Rabat. said that the Horoccan opposition parties. particularly the USP?
[Socialist Union of People's Forces] and the PPS [Party of Progress and So-
cialisnl of Ali Yata "speak a great deal about a widespread war in the region."
Leibak nevertheless believes that "Horocco could not usge such a war because
the authorities in Rabat thought that it would be the end of the royal regime."

Leibak also said that Morocco was experiencing a "serious economic crisis"
and that the "morale of the Royal Aray was at its lowest point.“ According
to his. nilitsry spending represents over 35 percent of the general budget

although no investments have been esde for the development of the western
Sahara.

Finally. Leiba' stated that he had "infiltrated" the western Sahara for

several years on behalf of the POLISARIO Front. that he had been auto-sti-
cally included on the lstiqlal Party's list for the elections and that his
eanberehip in the Parliament had been "the only way to continue to wage
militant action.“

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie., Paris. 1979'

11.664
CSO: 5400

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OF ALGERIA DOES PRESIDENT BOMBIBNB RONOR
Paris NARCHES TROPICAUX 81' HEDI‘I‘ERRANEBNS in French 9 Feb 79 p 308

{Text} In an editorial devoted to the "oil heritage" of President Domediene.
the periodical PETROLB 31‘ 6A2 MES states that "the name of houari Boule-
diene will remain attached to the principal events that have completely trans-
formed the physiognomy and structures of the world hydrocarbon industry in
the course of recent years."

Analyzed by the national agency ALGERIE PRESS! SERVICE. the editorial. which
is signed by Dr Nicolas Sarkis. editor of the periodical and an oil expert.

emphasizes that for Algeria. "nationalization was not an end in itself. but

a means of rationalising the working of its hydrocarbon resources and inte-

grating the oil and gas industry into its ambitious economic development

plans. The action was accompanied by a heavy increase in petroleum production.
which went from 26.5 million tons in 1965 to $7.2 million tons in 1978. and
the launching of major refining projects (installed capacity will be raised
from 2 million tons in 1965 to over 21 million tons in 1980) and petrochem-
ical projects (Arrow. Annaoa and Skikda complexes).

"Regarding natural gas. Algeria is already the world's leading exporter of
liquified natural gas with 6.10 billion cubic meters shipped in 1978. It will
remain so in the foreseeable future with exports that will be gradually in-
creased to 70 billion cubic meters in 1985."

Dr Sarkis. observing that SONATMCR (National Coapany for the Transport and
Marketing of Hydrocarbons) has "rapidly become the ninth-ranking hydrocarbon
producer in the world and one of the most dynamic national oil companies."
also emphasizes the spectacular development of the "human capital" of this
coapany. which from "a dozen cadres in 1965 went to over 5.000 Algerian
cadres in 1978. while the total personnel of the company and its subsidiaries
reached the figure of 78.620." He notes that "while assuing the heavy
responsibility for :11 and gas activities in Algeria. SONATRACH even began
several years ago to grant technical assistance to several Arab and African
nations.

Fitting the action of MATRACB into an overall perspective. the editorial-
ist of PBTROLB 21' 6A2 ARADBS observes that it "was waged within the more

18
F03 OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

general framework of the economic development plans carried out under the
Boumediene regime. No less then 520 new projects. including 270 plants

and 150 infrastructure projects. sent into operation between 1971 and 1977.
In the course of the last 6 years. over 500 other projects were launched in
the different industrial, agricultural and service sectors. A few figures
enable one to measure the results of these efforts: The production of
electricity want from 1,000 kﬂhs in 1962 to over 4,000 in 1977; that of
unprocessed steel from 5,500 tons to nearly 600.000 tone: that of cement

from 963.000 to 2.5 million tone; and that of compound fertilizers from
£6,300 to nearly 600.000 tone.

"Most of the investments required to finance this development come from the

gas and oil export receipts." the editorinliat recalls, "which receipts
went from $321 million in 1971 to $6.2 billion in 1978. It is estimated that

at the beginning of the 1980's, they will exceed $12 billion with the start-
up of the major natural gee export projects."

Suming up the role assigned to gas and oil in the development of the Algerian
economy. President Boumediene said in February 1978 on the occasion of the
official opening of the Araew gas liquification complex that "the develop-
ment of our hydrocarbon reserves in order to increase our export receipts

is dictated by our determination to use these receipts in a wise, austere and
effective manner so as to encourage the systematic creation of new economic

activities capable of engendering by themselves other sources of revenue
that we must bequeath to the future generations."

COPYRIGﬂT: Rene Mortux et Cie.. Paris, 1979

11.6
080: 6600

19
roe orncnt use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGBRIA

CRADLI BENDJBDID CALLED MRGETIC. REALISTIC
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 293

[Text] Col (mean Bendjedid. the new Algerian chief of state. appears to be
as reserved in manner and sparing of his words. as secretly authoritarian

and oodestly devoted to public service. as President houari Iounediene was
when he came to power. But the newly elected president energed from a regu-

lar procedure which took place in an atmosphere of perfect call: and in keep-
ing with strictly observed constitutional standards. while for a long tine.

his predecessor could only clais a "revolutionary legality."

The choice of the nu candidate -- actually the appoint-ant of the chief
of state by the party — will in the final analysis have set two factions
against one another: the hard-line wing of the national organizations,

particularly the workers and youth groups (the UGTA [General Union of Alger-
ian Uorkers] and the UNJA [National Union of Algerian Youthl.) which did not
conceal their desire to see Hohaned Salah Yahiaoui occupy the nation's
highest post; and the ease of Ioderates. who feared progressive excesses

but who could not hope to impose a person such as Abdelazi: Bouteflika,
described. especially abroad. as a liberal.

Under such conditions. the People's National Amy. sufficiently well repre-
sented in the Congress to constitute a blocking einority. could offer a
solution by bringing out of its ranks a man of character, noved solely by
overriding national interests: Col Chadli Bendjedid, who inedintely ceased
to be a possible successor to President Bounediene. therefore beam the
only possible successor because he was the person who could be accepted by
everyone.

Balance Between Government and the Pill

To any that with Col Chadli Bendjedid it was a question of a "compromise
candidate" makes it possible to explain the reasons for his choice, but it
also risks failing to recognise the character of the new chief of state.
Everything that one can learn about him. his rural origins and his almost
exclusively ailitary training, his life as a soldier and his career as a
ailitary leader within the confines of the West, and finally, his strict
loyalty to President Boueedisne and his political line, lead one to think

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that he will be a strong and decisive personality. in no way a journeyman
seeking middling solutions.

In other words. those persons at home and abroad who would expect Col Chadli
Bendjedid to provide a fundamental revision of Algerian socialism, consider-
able expansion of the private sector and an indulgent orientation toward
consumer privileges will know nothing but disappointment.

0n the other hand. since he is an attentive observer and a realistic leader,

one can presume that all practical progress that is possible will be reso-
lutely sought. It is very likely that the trend -- already affirmed in the

past several months -- toward social and human concerns and toward concrete
development aimed at productivity will not be abandoned; on the contrary.

It will perhaps give rise to broader and bolder developments.

Hhile with Mohamed Salah Yahiaoui the FLN would have had its role asserted
and its options radicalized. one may now wonder whether the party will, as
previously expected, succeed in breaking away from the government in order
to take control of it on behalf of the nation and formulate the general
policy of the Algerian people. “bile within the party's Central Committee.
which the Congress has just appointed. active factions that will move in
that direction are represented. it is not certain they they will be able to
carry the rest with them.

Furthermore, the very traditional makeup of the Political Bureau does not
lead one to expect radical modifications in the general policy. One finds
in it all the members of the former Council of the Revolution. along with
an equal number of prominent persons of diverse merits representing reformist

Muslim thought. as in the case of Ahmed Taleb Ibrahimi. determination to have
modern industrial development, as in the case of Belaid Abdeaselam, and

continuity of the high administration, as in the case of Hohammed Seddik
Benyahia.

New President To Govern Alone?

It is highly likely, moreover. in the face of this PLN in the midst of
transformation and whose future is difficult to predict. that there will be
a state authority which will no longer be. as one saw in the past. concen-
trated in the person of the president of the republic.

It will be remembered that after the constitution went into effect, President

Boumediene did not use the power given to him to appoint a vice president
and a prime minister. He would probably have done so eventually. oat first

of all he wanted to bring about the renewal of the FLN and he undoubtedly
thought that the latter would then have something to say. not only about

the president of the republic but also about the other persons placed at
the head of the state.

It is generally thought that unlike him, Col Chadli Bendjedid is anxious
to bring two front-ranking personages into the vice presidency and the head

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the government. In this way. he could. it is explained. balance the
different factions that were rivals at the time of the presidential choice.
however. it is not certain that the new chief of state is inspired by such
a mixing. He may junt as well govern alone. for a certain tile at least.
or bring in persons without any particular political or social orientation.

The choice that Col Chadli Bendjedid sakes will be of great interest. for
it will provide an indication about the 'uturc orientation of the regile.
The very distribution of high posts will perhaps be as lsportant as the
presidential choice just made.

however. one cost not therefore forget the warning which the newly chosen
president innediately issued: He "will resist all pressure. no latter whet
its origin. in order to tackle the task of building a strong government."

For aany Hentern observers. the choice of a new president would necessarily

give rise in Algeria to a change in political ataosphere. Whatever future
changes may be made in structures. the person elected is precisely the one

who should most clearly take up once again the methods. attitudes and style
of President Bouaediene and in the final analysis. this is perhaps the

essential psychological reason for his designation.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie.. Paris. 1979

ll.é6b
CSO: £600

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

BRIEFS

SNS-NiPPON AGREEMENT--The Japanese firm Nippon Steel has announced that it
will send a delegation to Algeria headed by its vice president. Knnse “arada.
to sign a memorandum of understanding with the SNS (National Steel Company)
concerning Japanese cooperation on the construction of an integrated iron
and steel plant having an annual capacity of 10 million tonr of unprocessed
steel. According to a dispatch from Tokyo issued by AGEFl. the only details
given are that the program of cooperation will last l0 years and will in-
volve the design. planning and construction of the plant. along with super-
vision of its operation in the future. [Text] [Paris HARCMES TROPICANX 8T
NEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 309) ll.bbb

EL HOUSTAKIAL DAM-~The El Houstakbal Dam. which will be built on the hills

oi southwestern Bleds and whose cornerstone was laid on 22 January by Ahmed
Bencherif. minister of hydraulics. land development and environmental protec-
tion. will make it possible to regulate the flow of the boo-Ronni. Djer.
Chifia and uarbil wadis for the purpose of irrigating the Hitidia plain.
Mastery of these wadis is all the more important because their waters pre-
viously emptied into the sea. During times of abundant rainfall. they
sometimes caused considerable damage. Some 30.000 hectares of land will be
irrigated thanks to this dam. which will hold back 188 million cubic meters
of water. The dam will be made up oi a dike 100 meters high above the Bou-
Roumi wadi and 290 meters long. The volume of the dike will be on the order
of 1.3 million cubic meters. According to the technical specifications.

the provisional diversion will be made up of a gallery 830 meters long

and 6 meters in diameter whose opening upstream will be designed as a

bottom drainage structure. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS
in French 9 Feb 79 p 309) ll.hbk

DAIMLER-BENZ VEHICLEs--The SNTV (Algerian National Passenger Transport Com-
pany) will receive a shipment in February of the first vehicles to be for-
nished by Daimler-Benz Ac of Stuttgart. The total number ordered was 381
(360 Mercedes passenger cars. 30 small bases and ll safari buses). The Heat
German firm emphasises that it won the order despite strong foreign compe-

tition and that the SNTV. recognized as one of the principal transport
companies on the African continent. already has many Mercedes vehicles in

its pool of 2.400. [Text] [Paris HARCRBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANZENS in
French 9 Feb 79 p 309] 11.466

23
Fox orrtcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUIPMENT FOR STEEL commit-arm lsst elesents oi‘ the track for an overhead
crenc going to the electric steel sill of the El lindjsr iron and steel
cosplex nesr Annebe were supplied to the 5N5 (Netionsl Steel Cospsny) by the
enterprise VEI Hetelleichtbeukonbinst Leipzig. The steel {use has s total
weight of 2.550 tons and the different elesente uessure up to 12 Istora.

with a weight of 50 tons. Another enterprise in the Gilli. van Schwerssschinen-
kosbinst "Ernst Thslssnn of Hsgdohourg. -s also psrticipsting in the equipping
of the new Algerien iron end ~teel cospleft. in addition to the equipsent

from the Soviet Union. s cosbined rolling sill for the production of strip
iron and wire hearing the trsdeserk of the biggest builder of heevy sschinery
in the con will he tried out in 1979. [Text] [Psris wants TROPICAUX ET
“EDITBRMNEBNS in French 9 Feb 79 p 309] 11.1061.

CSG: 1:600

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIDYA

BRIEFS

LIBYAN NUCLEAR PROGRAH~-Karnchi aaaerte that Qadhdhafi has the atomic
boob. A Pakistani source has revealed that Libyn ia preparing to explode
e nuclear device in the desert in Fezzan which will have the sane force as
the Miroahina [explosion]. This will take place between now and the end
of April. Pakistani engineers will nanufncturt this device. [Text]
[Paris PARIS HATCH in French 23 Feb 79 p 67]

HRAPONS DELIVERlBs--The Soviet Union haa delivcced to Libyn aoae MIG 23a
and 25s as well as sole Tu-ZZ mediua-range boebers. In addition to 1.000
T 56 and T 55 tanks. Libya has 200 T 62 tanks. Its SA 2 nieailes. now
obuolete, have been replaced by 8A 6 and SA 78. Rare indeed are the
Libyan: trained in the use of these weapons. [Test] [Paris VALEURS
ACTUELLES in French 5 Mar 79 p 52]

680: 6800

25
you omcm. use can
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

DETAILS ON SNIH RBORGANIZATION NOTED
Paris JBUNE AFRIQUB in French 16 Feb 79 pp 35. 36
[Article by Abdelazi: nah-ant. "Difficult Birth for the New SNIH"|

[Text] During the 60's a popular saying was "Mauritania in HIFERHA [Iron-
Hining Company of Mauritanial". This company for exploiting Mauritanian
iron was nationalized 28 Noveaber 1974 by President Hokhtar Ould Daddah.

At the head of HIFBIHA. now renamed 5“!" [National industrial and Mining
Company]. the former chief of state put the country's foremost engineer:
Ismail Ould Amar. Since then Mauritania has been drawn into the Sahara
conflict. The iron industry (which provides 80 percent of the country’s
foreign exchange) has suffered greatly from the murderous raids launched
from Tindouf by the POLISARIO Front. There followed a deterioration of the
economy which acted like yeast to the coup d'etnt of l0 July 1978.

Ismail Ould Anar was among the first to support the new regime of Colonel
Houatafa Ould Saleck. He explained his support to the military by citing
his hope of saving the Guelb project which. during the 1980's. ought to
extend ore exploitation through opening a new mine 35 kilometers from the
present deposits at Zouerate. This project is estimated to cost $900
million. of which 5‘60 million will go for the first phase alone.

Financing for the project has already been obtained before the coup d'etat.
But before committing themselves. the western and Arab financiers had de-
manded that SNlH be cleaned up. During this process occurred a dramatic
event: Ismail Ould Amer resigned on 3 January 1979 "for personal reasons“.
saying "it was not possible for him to continue with this task." At the
some time he also turned down a ministerial post.

This unexpected leavetoking left a job uncompleted. The keystone to the

clenn-up operation. a joint company to replace the former state firn so
that work at Guelb could get started. had not yet been constituted.

0n 7 January 1979. Ely Ould Allaf. 42. native or Atnr. graduate in physics.
telecommunications engineer. was appointed head of SNIH. The new president/
director general was torn from his post as secretary general of OHVS (Senegal

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

River Development Organization) at the noaent when that organization was
beginning to he operational. Ely Ould Allaf. who fron 1965 to 1975 had
occupied various ninisterial and diploaatic posts. has the reputation of
being a good aanager. he set to work quickly.

Kuwait

His first task: reconstitute capital for the new company. of which Mauritania
still holds Al percent of the shares. To do this, there first had to be an
evaluation of SMIM'a assets. Such an evaluation was doe-ed difficult for

the cliaate was not one of confidence. Just a year ago Kuwait had declared
itself ready to take 49 percent of the shares. with the proviso that eventual-
ly shares could be pasaad on to other partners. But just recently Kuwait

and the Mineral Arab Coepany refused the 8360 Iillion valuation of the coup
pany’a assets proposed by Mauritania. After hard bargaining. they finally
accepted a figure of $295 nillion.

On 29 January. four Arab financial organizations agreed to underwrite the
new company's capital for 898 million: Kuwait. 360 nillion; the Arab
Industrial Conpany. $28 million; Morocco. 820 million; and $10 Iillion from
the lslanic Develop-ant Bank. Libya and Iraq's intentions are not yet known.

The new SNIM has a new adainiatrative council presided over by Yedali Ould
Cheick. 31, an excellent journalist and the nest knowledgeable about Saharan
affairs. The vice president is a young Kuwaiti executive. Mohamed Houseeyan.

Kuwait. which allowed the shareholders of the for-er MIPBRMA to be paid off.
proposes to maintain its right to oversee strictly the manage-ant and control
of the new conpany.

COPIRIOBT: Jeane Afriquc ORUPUIA 1979

8860
680: 6600

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITANIA

AGRICULTURAL SITUATION APPEARS TO BE CRITICAL
Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET "EDITERRANBEUS in French 9 Feb 79 p 314

[Text] Grains: harvest lesn than 30,000 tom. and deficit higher than
10,000 tons.

nosed on the report. drawn up by a mission of the Mauritanian Ministry of
Rural Development (free: 22 November to 6 Decenber of last year), the daily
newspaper CIIAAB reported in a series of articles published at the beginning
of January the agricultural results and forecasts for 1978-1979. The
situation appears to be critical due to the lasting drought which has
prevailed for the past few years.

This mission, which included "representatives of the donor countries and
organisms" disclosed the decrease of cultivated areas men results in an
increase in the grain deficit. 0n the basis of an annual allovence of

120 kg of grain per head for a total population of approxinately 1.5 nillion,
consumption requirements amount to 180,000 tons.

At this point Heuritania's production for the l978-l979 season, using the

last 3 years’ average, will certainly not exceed 30,000 tons (20,000 tons
for the previous season).

Foreign aid and inportation through the intermediary of SONIII’LX [National
Import-Export Company] amount to about 66,000 tons, to which stocks amount-
ing to 17,000 tons from the emergency plan and 6,000 tons progra-ed by the
one leuritanien Grain Office] should be added.

Consequently, the investigating mission estimated that the cereal deficit
for the period of l Deceeber 1978 to 30 Decenber 1979 will be between
38,000 and 107,000 tone.

the reason for this very definite national shortage is due to the intensi-
fication of the drought, which has particularly affected “rainfall" ("dieri,"
ponds, vadis and dams) cultivation. These cultivated lands represent 70
percent of the agricultural production capacity in Mauritania.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The decrease in cultivable land is due to nany factors: rural exodus
accentuated by the land-locked isolation of the agricultural regions;
the wadis are frequently choked with sand and quite a few dens and
ubauknents are broken and in disrepair; shortage of seeds; unequal
distribution and duration of the rainfall in the area; for instance.
it did not rain enough in August and it rained too much in Septelber;
daaage caused by the birds. and especially by the nigratory locusts,
while stocks of pesticides have been notoriously insufficient: 20,500
tons were needed while only 10,000 tone were available.

The livestock(?) is also in grave danger: the mission estimates that
the state will have to intervene before the nonth of lurch. In fact.

23,900 tons of cattle feed nest be found for the needs of the aninsla.
The 1977 stocks do not exceed 3,000 tons.

in addition. sanitary protection of the cattle is- very inadequate. The
needs are enormous: that is, 1.2 million doses of mixed vaccine for
bovine plague and contagious peripneunonis; also 500,000 doses of vaccine
against symptomatic bovine anthrax and other diseases.

The mission made many reco-endations: continuing the distribution of

food to the nest afflicted segments of the population; encouraging truck-
gardening during the dry season; increasing safety devices for the protection
of the grazing grounds against bush fires.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie., Paris 1979

7993
050: 6600

29
ron orncut use ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL US]! ONLY

MAURITANIA

BRIEFS

LIEUTENAM'S HOUSE ARREST-it Houlaye liaehela, 29 yeara old, aide-de-canp
of Earner Mauritanian Preaident Hotter Ould Daddah, uaa caahiered and
returned to civilian life for "indiacipline" by the Military Committee for
National Refonation (can) of which he vat a lac-bur, according to infer-a-
tion received by AR? from "reliable sources" and reported on 5 February.
Not having received the aeeisment he coveted on the day after the coup
d'etat of 10 July 1978. Lt Haahcn had atte-pted a few vaeke later to

inatigate Iany officers againat the new region of Col Houatapha Ould Mohamed
Select. Denounced and arreatcd, he had been placed under houae arrest.

[rut] IParie malts 1:091qu 31 matrrmms in French 9 Feb 79
p ml 7993

JAPANESE "$1!ch CENTER-Mt the end of January the Jepaneee shipownera
Iaeocietion preecnted a fishing center valued at 2.2 nillion francs to
Mauritania, located at Nouadhibou, 600 It: north of Nouakchott, to be used
for the training of Mauritanian aailora. [Text] [Peril mums 1'80?wa
31‘ RDITBRRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 310] 7993

65'): 1.1.00

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WC Drummer, 1978-1980 PM" DETAILED

innocc

Perl. mums TROPICMX B? "BOW in French 26 Jan 79 pp 183-187

[mt] 'rayeb Bencheikh, lbroccan secretary of stats in
charge 0': planning and regional develop-ant, presented
the 1978-1980 ecomaic and social plan during a nesting
held in Paris on is Jamary under the sponsorship of the
Morocco mittee of the cam (National Council or n-ench
Employers). nouis Berthaieu presided over the meeting,
in which Dr Youssef Ben Abbas, Moroccan nbaasador to
France. also participated. The essential points in his
talk are presented below.

Speaking to French businessmen and representatives of the
specialised press. Benchsikh first expressed satisfaction
with the nesting as a new expression or the will both
counuiss have to strengthen their bilateral relations in
a transact): of mtually advantageous cooperation. He
took pains to explain the reasons underlying this 3-year
plan. which King Hassan II announced on d June 1978 as a
roplacensnt for the expected new 5-year plan for 1978-

i982. The plan was approved by the house of Representa-
tives last 27 Dece-ber.

As a plan asrking a tins of transition and reﬂection,
it is shed tirst of all at consolidating the achieve-
ments or the previous 5-year plan (1973-1971) . This
explains why the secretary of state considered it neces-
sary to begin his talk by briefly taking stock or that
previous plan. But tho new plan does not aasn stagna-
tion. zoom-1c developuent and social progress will
continue, but at a pace adapted to the new realities—
nsrhed by austerity-which are no longer the sane as
those that prevailed in 1914, when the considerable
rise in phosphate prices aade it possible to envisage
accelerated develop-out. Iconoaic conditions have

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

changed a great deal since then. In addition to the
inevitable effects of the inflation and eoonouic crisis
that have raged steadily on a worldwide scale. Morocco
has been forced. since the “Green narch' of Mater
1975, to bear the very heavy burden of the Saharan war
and the resulting financial drain.

‘l'ho proposed investoent program sens sshitiouo. It will
require extensive foreign participation. Pulfillnent of
tho new plans will also depend on tho increased resources
that sMuld be provided by better harvests. a recovery in
worldwide dessnd for phosphates and phosphate products.
the announced exploitation of certain petroleu- deposits.
and dovelopent by tho mu [Mineral mloration and In-
vostaent Office] of recent discoveries. Lastly, tho soc-
retary of state did not conceal his country's fears in
connection with tho adnission into the sac of Spain. Por-
tugal. and Greece.

1. General Survey of Econonic and Social Developentea 1973-1977

Great efforts were node in the area of econoaic and social development during
the 1973-1977 period. This was in keeping with the general orientations of
the plan. which was aimed essentially at the following objectives:

a) mbiliaation of all of the country's productive capacities with a view
to achieving the highest growth level.

b) ‘me equitable distribution of the fruits of that growth in a fruework
of genuine sOcial justice.

It) changes in Chief Bcomuic Indicators

1) @oss domestic production: During the 1973-1977 period, despite a particu-
larly difficult international and regional environment, Morocco achieved an
average annual growth rate of 6.8 percent in its gross donestic production.
The goal set by the plan was 7.5 percent. The gross dolestic product. which
includes the salaries of goverluent uployoos. experienced an average annual
growth rate of 7.4 percent during the one period.

with the exception of the agricultural sector, which registered a decline
due to poor weather conditions, all sectors experienced notable average an-
nual growth rates: 8.9 percent for energy, 6.9 percent for industry and hand-
icrafts. 28.5 percent for construction and public works. 7.2 percent for
transportation and counnications, and 9.4 percent for co-Ierce. ‘i‘he nining
industry registered a relatively moderate rate of developuent (3.9 percent)
owing to difficulties in the marketing of phosphates.

ll‘hose differing rates of growth by sector led to i-portant changes in the
structure of production: a drop in the importance of the agricultural sector

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and a rise in that of the secondary and tertiary sectors. as shown below (in
percentages):

1972 1973-1977 1977

Activity structure average structure
Fri-arty 21 .0 17 .4 13 .9
Secondary 30.6 32.9 34.9
'l‘ertiary 47 .6 49 .7 51 . 2
metal gross donestic production 100.0 100.0 100.0

2) Gross fixed capital for-stion: There was an unprecedented rate of growth
in gross fixed capital formation: 38.9 percent annually in value and 29.5
percent in volme. The rate of investment in relation to gross dosestic pro-
duction rose fron 15.4 percent in 1973 to 37 percent in 1977. It averaged

25.6 percent for the 5 years frm 1973 through 1977, compared to 15.7 per-
cent for the 5 years free 1968 through 1972.

An analysis of the structure of gross fixed capital formation reveals the
predoninance of I'evguipulrent,‘I the value of which showed an (verage annual
growth rate of 43.7 percent. 'construction" and “public works“ registered
average annual growth rates of 38.8 percent and 43 percent respectively.

Such performance in the field of invest-ant was the result of efforts by both
the public and the private sector. For example, issues from the state equip-
uant budget reached unprecedented levels: nore than 26 billion dirhm

(1 dirhan I approximately 1.10 francs) during the period from 1973 through
1977. All sectors benefited from goverment efforts in the field of out-

fitting. ‘rhe breakdown of outfitting expenditures by sector (excluding na-
tional defense) was as follows:

'o

Agriculture

Industry

Infrastructure

Education and cadre training
Social and cultura1 facilities
General administration
Regional development 1

e

Hear-M

OmQNOQUI
O

mumbada

It should be noted that because the disruption of the international econony
had its effect on norocco‘s econosy, which remains very open to the outside
world. it was necessary to revise the plan's forecasts in 1974 in order to
protect the financial equilibriun and naintain the rate of growth by intro-
duclng new investsent program.

Important econonic and social projects uterialized.

1n the agricultural sector. the building of dams continued: four new dens
were conpleted and eight lore are under construction. In addition, 159,000
hectares were developed.

33 .
FOR omcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the industrial sector, 11 projects were coupleted. along that Morocco-
Phosphorus 1, expansion of Morocco Chuicels and the Mohuuadia refinery, the
best sugarnill in Xsar El Kebir and the cane sugarnill in Meohrae Bel xsiri,
the sugarnill in sidi Bennour, and the cement plant in Marrakesh. Thirteen
big projects are also nearing completion, along tho Morocco Phosphorus 2,

a plant for the production of chlorine and PVC, expansion of a sugereill end
a refinery. Morocco Cellulose. and the cement plants in Oriental and Toners.

In the field of infrastructure and transportation, we can mention the follow.-
ing among the projects that have been conpletsd or are underway: five new
ports (Nador, Jorf Lasfer, 'rerfeya, Ten-ran. and Jebha), mien of the
ports of Casablanca, Agedir, Sufi, and Tangier, the construction of 2,200
kilometers of new roads, and the doubling of the rail line between Casablanca
and Rabat. In addition. the landing strips have been extended at the airports
in Oujds. Marrakesh, Ouarsesate, Er-Rachidia. Snare, Goulinine. end Tan-ran,
end the Nouasseur air terninel has been built.

‘lhe merchant fleet has been increased by the acquisition of 39 new units,
with the result that 15 percent of the ocean shipping was carried on Moroccan
ships in 1978, comared to 2 percent in 1973.

The growing duand for energy has required the construction of lo hydroelec-
tric plants and 2 therlel plants.

In th- tourist sector, more than 10,000 beds have been added, and another
19,000 are on the way.

In the social sector, construction work is underway or complete on ll univer-
sity schools and higher institutes, 5 student residence halls. are than
5.000 secondary-school classroom, 12 regional pedagogical centers, 17 first-
tine education centers, 11 regional prinary teacher training schools, and
10,000 prilary-school classrooms.

also cowleted were two university hospital centers. five regional hospitals.
and nine provincial hospitals.

he regards drinking water and housing. nearly 123,000 low-cost dwelling units
were built by the Ministry of housing and the mo': (Regional Development
and Construction Comanies) , and lore than 60 towns and urban centers were
supplied with drinking water and water purification facilities: with the re-
sult that the capacity for producing drinking water increased 2.5 tines.

This rapid growth in invesuents has certainly had its effect, notably on
prices. the trade balance, and the financing of investments.

3) consumption and prices: The 1973-1977 period was Iarked both inside and

outside the country by inflationary tensions that varied in strength depend-
ing on the year. since 1974 the Moroccan econo-y, which is very open to the
outside world, has suffered the effects of generalized inflation. especially

3';
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that in the western World. Measured by changes in the oost-of-living index,
domestic prices rose by an avorage of 9.5 percent annually between 1973 and
1977. But despite the investment effort and the rise in prices, the volume
of household consumption rose at an average annual rate of 3.8 percent, rep-
resenting a significant improvenent in the standard of living.

Moreover, the general price rise would have been even greater if the state
had not stepped in to stabilize the price of essential food products. Gov-
ernment. subsidies of wheat, sugar, and oil prices amounted to as such as 10

percent of household food consuaption during the 1974-1977 period, compared
to only 1.3 percent in 1973.

4) Foreign trade: During the 5-year period, Moroccan imports rose at an ev-
ersge rate of 33.8 percent. while exports increased at a slower rate (20.7
percent), partly because of the difficulty in marketing phosphates in 1975
and 1976. The result was an unfavorable development in the trade balance,
whose deficit ended up at nearly 8.5 billion dlrhalssl the rate at which in-

ports were covered by exports declined from 80 percent in 1973 to 41 percent
in 1977.

The growth of imports is explained chiefly by the higher prices for products
traditionally inported by Morocco, notably energy products, by the steady
rise in Horocco's purchases of seminanufactures and equipment goods (a direct

consequence of the growth of inVestments) , and the massive purchases of wheat
and sugar.

The trade balance deficit had repercussions on the balance-of-paynents equi-
librium which, despite a sizable increase in transfers from Moroccan workers
abroad and tourist earnings, could not be maintained except through recourse
to foreign loans. But the debt ratio, which rose from 12 percent in 1972 to
17 percent in l977, retains within acceptable linits, seeing that the criti-
cal level generally falls between 20 and 25 percent.

5) Financing of investment: As far as the general state budget is concerned,
current expenditures experienced accelerated growth (24.3 percent). This was
due in part to increased operating expenditures (21.5 percent) as a result
of pay increases for governnent esployecs and higher capital spending, but
also to the rise in public debt (19.5 percent). The rise in current revenues
(28.5 percent) exceeded the rise in expenditures, however. The result was

that during the 1973-1977 period, it was possible to finance 18 percent of
the government's capital expenditures.

If domestic loans are taken into account, that rate rises to 33 percent, a
figure that nevertheless appears inadequate in view of the spectacular growth
of inVestIsents. The portion covered by foreign financing was therefore rela-
tively sizable (45 percent), but since Morocco's debt capacity was under-
utilized, the country's recourse to foreign borrowing did not weaken the
confidence placed in Morocco abroad. This is shown by the still-sizable
volt-1e of loans contracted in 1978 on the international capital market.

35
ron orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR Ol’l-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

he regards the financing of investments in general, whether publio, s-ipublic.
or private, the rate at which loans granted by the banking system increased
was a faithful reflection of the expansion of those investments. But that
rate was held within limits ooepatible with the needs of growth: the aoney
supply increased at an average annual rate of 20.6 percent during the 1973-
1977 perioduthet is, at a rate very close to that of available resources

(19.7 percent) from the production and importation of goods and services.

3) Principal neasures and Reforms

Concerning the principal measures and reforms introduced during the 1973-1977
5-year period, and particularly those aimed at a more equitable distribution
of the fruits of growth (the second part of the plan) , 'l‘ayeb Bencheikh enha-
sized in his talk that to begin with. there were several reforms of a general
nature. They included recovery of the country's productive apparatus, the
encouragclent of private investment. increased participation by young people
in the general development effort, and the reform of the country's adminis-
trative, judicial. and university systns.

1) Recovery of the country's productive apparatus: Parallel with its action
aimed at economic development. the stats undertook the total and permanent
recovery of the last remaining farms in foreign hands as well as the Moroc-
canization of the tertiary sector and of certain activities in the secondary
sector. Those important operations were carried out without losing sight of
the basic objectiVe of maintaining and increasing production and investment.
as can be seen from the figures cited above.

Furthermore, territorial waters were extended to 70 alias. and agreements
were signed with foreign units willing to cooperate, whether Spanish, trench.
Japanese, Korean, Soviet. or any other nationality.

2) Encouragement of private investment: A set of texts making up an invest-
aent code was published back in 1973 at the same time as the 1973-1917 eco-
nomic and social development plan. Their simultaneous appearance was not a
matter of chance, because while the plan is mandatory for the public sector,
it merely offers guidelines as far as action by the private sector is an-
cerned. As a result, it was necessary to provide a favorable framework for
participation by the private sector in the country's economic reflation.

The coo. -,...'-. a spectacular boost to investment in the sectors of industry,
handicrafts. mining, tourism. fishing. and merchant marine. seeing that from

l972 through 1977, the money value of tho progrus approved by the Investment
m—ission increased ninefold.

Despite those convincing results-achieved notably as a result of simplified
procedures and the automatic nature of the advantages granted--lioroccan of-
ficials are convinced that the codes can be further improved, notably by
stimulating the creation of jobs in disadvantaged regions.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) Greater participation by young people in the general development effort:
This participation has been expanded by the introduction of 2 years of civil-
ian service for all graduates of schools and university-level institutions.
By associating young people mre closely with the daily struggle against un-
derdevelemnt and simltaneously increasing the nuaber of competent cadres
in the governasnt departunts. therefore. an attempt is being made to give
the upcoming generations a sore realistic view of their country‘s probleas

and of the way in which the letter are solved. considering the scans and
possibilities.

4) Refers. of the adsinistrative. judicial. and university systeas: In these
areas. important reforas have cone about, the purpose being to stake the ad-
Iinistration a flexible tool in the service of economic and social develop-
Ient. the judicial systea an equitable and efficient instrument for the noral

growth of the citizen, and the university an eutommus entity whose develop-
ment must keep pace with the country‘s needs.

Alongside those general neesures and reforms. others sore specifically social
in character were adopted in order to give defimte fora, often in e pregnatic

mnner, to the plan's second objective--that is. a more equitable distribution
of the fruits of growth.

5) Social leasures: These measures affect the following areas in particular:

a) Worker participation in the profits of certain state-owned enterprises
and participation by growers in the capital of the sugerlaills they supply.

b) mintenance at a reasonable leVel of the price of essential food products

such as flour, oil. and sugar by allocating substantial subsidies through
the state budget.

c) Subsidizing factors of production such as seed, fertilizer, and fern equip-
lent.

d) The distribution of 160,000 hectares of land to 12,000 small far'aers and
the establisluaent of 340 new agricultural cooperatives.

e) stepped-up action to provide social facilities such as low-cost housing,
drinking water systos, rural electrification, public health. education and
training, and so on.

Generally. therefore. there has been considerable progress in the area of
ecomnic and social developaent and in the field of reforzss and other uses-
urea. But edjustnents must be aade in order to offset the imbalances cre-

ated by e rapid acceleration of economic develop-ent. mtebly in the areas
of both foreign trade and doaestic financing. Those were the considerations

that governed the drafting of a 3-year plan aarking a time of transition and
reflection.

37
Fox orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Orientations and Objectives of 1978-1980 3-Year Plan

A} Orientations

For the 1978-1980 3-year period. the plan provides two sain orientations:

l. consolidation of the achievements to date in the political and econoaic
at.“s

2. Continued social action aimed at a more equitable distribution of the
fruits of expansion.

Action in pursuit of both those goals requires the mbilisstion of all the
citizens and their participation in the work of development.

consolidation of the schievnents to date means first of all i-ple-enting
adjustment measures designed to deal with the current economic difficulties
that are threatening to hnper continued economic and social development.
Those seasures, some of which have already gone into effect in accordance
with the directives amounted by King liassan u in his speech of d June l978.
must aim at iaproving Horocco's foreign pay-ants situation and developing
national savings. Equilibrium in our external economic relations will there-
fore be insured by i-plnenting specific sessures aimed essentially at the
selective limitation of imports. export promotion, development of the tourist

sector, and the encouragement of transfers of savings by lbroccans working
abroad.

Appropriate neasures will also be i-plemented for the purpose of mobilizing
maxi-u resources fros the economic agents (firm, households, and govern-
ment departments) in order to finance the investments provided. In this
framework, administrative procedures for granting the advantages allowed by
the invesuent code will be further simplified and savings will be encouraged,
chiefly by raising the interest rate.

Studies will be asde and thought will be given to the proper solution of the
probluss existing in certain isportant areas such as education and the voca-
tional training of workers and cadres. the tax systu, government administra-
tion, and so on.

In the economic area. the harmonious development of all secmrl.I es a whole
will be pursued by completing the projects begun under the preceding plan
and by undertaking new invest-ant programs set up in accordance with the
country's priority needs. Sectoral plans and long-term large-scale projects
have been prepared for increasing production in certain key fields. This
concerns primarily essential food products (cereals. oils, sugar, and dairy
products) and basic indusuial and mining products (cuent. phosphates, en-
ergy, and so on).

In the social area. the efforts made under the preceding plan will be con-
tinued and intensified with a view to achieving a sore equitable distribution

38
ma omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of income. not whether the issue is development of the social sectors, crea-
tion of the maxim number of jobs, the regional development policy, or adap-
tation of the tax system to the requirements of social equity, action in these
areas must be persevering.

s) ObjectiVes in figures

It emerges, from the prospects established on the basis of the rotor-ended
investment projects and economic actions. that gross doaestic produ..-tion will
rise by 4.6 percenv annually from 197s through 1960. The GDP will rise at

a rate of 5 percent during the same period.

Although modest in comparison with achievunents in the recent past, that rate
actually represents an ambitious objective in the current internatiOnal eco-
nomic crisis and at a time, moreo‘Ier, when the country is being forced into
heavy expenditures. It can be achieVed only by maintaining the investment
etiort at a high level and substantially increasing our exports.

The various sectors will participate unequally in this growth. The primary
sector will grow at a moderate rate (1.4 percent). chieﬂy because of the
fact that farm production in 1970 was considerably aloue average. It calcu-
lated on the basis or an "average" year, its growth rate would be 3.4 percent.

As regards the secondary and tertiary sectors. their growth rates will be
6.2 and 4.8 percent respectively.

It is expected that household censrmption will show an annual growth rate of
4.3 percent in volume during the 3-year period.

Wage-earning saployment will rise by 4.1 percent, or faster than the increase
in the labor force. Specific measures will be adopted to give this sector a
boost: grants for the creation of jobs. a real estate developent code, spe-
cial programs for reforestation, the reclamation of farmland, and regional
development, and other programs.

he tar as investments are concerned, their total comes to 37 billion dirhams
for the 1978-198C period. me rate of growth will average 4 percent annually.
nut considering the high level of investment achieved in recent years, that
rate will be enough to keep the investment effort at a high level, since the
investment rate in terms of gross domestic production will exceed 24 percent
during the 1978-1980 period.

no public sector will continue to be responsible for a large share of the
investments: i.sues through the state's equipment budget should total between
19 and 20 billion dirhams from 197s through 1980. But 34 billion dirhams
will be made available to government deparuaents so that they can undertake
their capital spending programs--practica11y the same volume of credits as
that provided under the 1973-1977 plan, not counting the investment programs
of state-owned and partially state-owned enterprises. For example, the Ge?
(Dbroccan Phosphates Office) alone will invest are than 5 billion dirh-s

39
Fan orncm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in its expansion plan. what all this means is that this 3-year plan must not
be viewed as one of stagnation.

the breakdown of those credits by sector (excluding national defense) reveals
the importance assigned to agriculture and the social sectors:

 

‘
Agriculture and due 25.8
industry 13.9
Infrastructure l7.9
Education and training 17.4
Social end cultural facilities 8.9
General ahinistrstion 5.0
Regional development 11.1

In the area of foreign trade. exports should increase by 6.6 percent annually.
while imports should rise by only 3.6 percent: the resulting trade deficit
will bring the rate at which imports are covered by exports up from 41 per-
cent in l977 to 70 percent in 1980.

Achieving that objective will require the impl-entation of measures supple-

menting the existing export promotion code and aimed at reducing the risks
inherent in winning foreign markets and at increasing the confidence of the
exporters.

In the area of financing. the planned tax reform and the various measures
aimed at increasing the I'obilization of national savings will make it pos-
sible to improve the plan's financial equilibriu. Between 1978 and 1980.
for example. the volume of budgetary savings could triple, with the need for
Treasury financing being reduced by 20 percent. This would make it possible
to reduce the level of required foreign assistance by one-fourth.

Before discussing the projects included in the plan. Bencheikh reported the
early--but preliminaryuresults achieved by the end of the first year of the
1978-1980 plan. Those results. which are the outcome of the measures mdopted
in June 1978. some encouraging in every respect:

1. The Treasury deficit has been reduced by more than 20 percent in compari-
son with 1977.

2. The rate of increase in the coet-of-living index was under 10 percent,
compared to 12.5 percent 1 year earlier.

3. The value of imports fell by 14 percent. while exports rose by 6 percent.
thus raising the rate of coverage to so percent. compared to 41 percent in
1977. And the balance of payments will be almost in equilibrium.

4. Production has continued to rise overall. The decline noted in construc-
tion and public works activity is offset by increased activity in the agri-
aaltural and industrial sectors.

ho
roe orncm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(2) Principal Projects in 1978-1980 Plan

The general survey or the principal projects included in the plan, as pre-
sented by Bencheikh in his talk to the CNPP, will be rounded out by the de-
tailed table published at the end of this article.

In the sector of agriculture and due, nearly 70,000 hectares will be deVel-
oped in various regions. Nine dus now under construction will be completed.
and work on four more new dams will get underway. In the "hour zones.” in-

tegrated develop-ant projects will be undertaken in the regions of El llajeb.
Karia Tissa. Guinea. and Ronni.

In the industrial sector. execution of the sugar plan will be continued by
setting up new sugarcane sills in Chub and Doukkala and expanding two others
in 'l'adla. Work on the cesent plan will continue with completion of the proj-
ects underway and the establishment of a new cement plant south of Casablanca,
in addition to which a nusber of existing plants will be expanded.

In addition, the program for the 001 (Office for .ndustrial Developuent) pro-
vides for cospletion. in cooperation with the private sector. of sore than
lo projects concerned primarily with agroindustry and the engineering indus-

try. There is also a program entirely under the responsibility of the pri-
vate sector.

in the pining sector. important projects are included in the Horoccan Phos-
phates Office's program. Among them are the establishment of new production
zones in Denguerir. Khouribga. and Heshala and new units for calcining and
tmating phosphates, in addition to units for the conversion of this ore.
Examples are the expansion of Morocco Phosphorus l and the establishment of
Horocco Phosphorus 3.

In the infrastructure sector, in addition to the operations now in the proc-
ess of completion, the program includes in particular the completion of 10
major projects for supplying drinking water and the construction of new roads
in the sugarbeet zone and of trails to same the lining areas. In the field
of telecomsunications, the plan provides in particular (or the expansion of
seven telephone exchanges, the connection or a large number of rural comnes
to the national system, the construction of 80 postal service centers, and
extension of the television network to the Saharan provinces.

In the social sectors. numerous projects will be completed or started. In
the field of education, in addition to the completion of operations now un-
derway, the plan calls for the construction of 1,550 new classroous for pri-
mary education, 5,200 classrooms for secondary education, and 17 boarding
schools. as well as for expansion of the capacity or the vocational training
centers.

Action in the field of public health will be centaed primarily on expansion
or the two university hospital centers in Rabat and Casablanca. oomletion
or the cancer treatnent center, and expansion of the preventive network.

hl
mu OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The housing progra- provides for the construction of more than 114,000 low-
coat units in the urban areas. and there is also the progras to eradicate

shantytovns. In the rural sector. there is the plan to build 10.300 dwelling
units and five pilot villages.

Along with the above projects. which very in scope, the state has also set
aside sizable credits for specific intervention in the for: of ssall projects
as part of its regional develop-ant policy. Those actions are designed first
of all to relieve the pressures on esploysant that sight be felt in certain
regions and, second, to provide the local conunities with increased resources

so that they can fully accosplieh the duties assigned to th- by the conunal
charter of September 1976.

Principal Projects Included in Horocco'a 1978-1980 3-Year Plan
(in 1.000's of dirhana}

Agriculture
(Responsible organirationx Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reforn)

1 . Irrigated zones:

houlouya: deVelopment of 10.000 hectares 278.4‘0
Gharb: developlaent of 17,630 hectares 384.000
Doukkala: development of 15,140 hectares 256,600
heouzx construction of the belt canal 99.015
Tadlaa modernization of 83,000 hectares 126.590
'l‘afilalet: soderniretion of the traditional system 06.100
Sousa-Hesse: dcvelopuent of 7,670 hectar ‘a 197,315
loukkos: develop-ant of 10,000 hectares 383.890
2. “Omar“ zones:
Karla-Tina integrated project 41,052
Agrarian reform 65,000

Pm (small and ”dim-sized water projects: 25,700 hectares) 127,000
mammal facilities (water supply. electrification.

drainage. and so on in the rural co-unea) 100.000

3. Stockraising:

Prophylaxis of livestock 27.900

Feeding stations 34.200
4. Hater and forests:

Soil protection and restoration 51.200

Reforestation 53 ,000
5. Agricultural research:

General and special studies 21,100

locust control 20.000
6. Land register:

Overall topographical work 8,700

#2

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Induetry
(liinietry of Industry) primarily the 009 and the ODP plue private intereate)

A) Public and euipublic sector:

1) Sugar plan (Hinietry or Industry): 392.000
Sunet/sunn (expaneion unknown) expansion 132.000
Sunecae (expaneion unknown] II 260.000

2) Phoephate plan (06?): 3.536.000
rourth line at liorocco Phoephorue 1 30.000
uorocco-Phoeerue 3 1.513.000

3) Projects c! the Ofﬁce for Induetrial Development (00:):

Sicor (expeneion unknown] (canned vegetablee from Oriental) 10.000
”Bridge” project for rolling chock 153.000
Date packaging (zagora) 22.211
hodulec (expansion unknown] (electrical and engineering

equimnt) 12'000
Steel cables 27 .000
nechine toole: preeeee 12.000
nechine toole: lathee 15.000
cotton and poplin weaving 35.000
Poplin weaving-«light drapery and carded epinning 90.000
Printed matter for export 20.000
Cologne and afterehave lotion 2.000

4) Integrated leather unit in Oujde (Directorate of Ilandicrette.
private eector. and the OD!) 5.200

3) Private sector:

Engineering and electrical induetriee' 750.000
Textile and leather industriee' 300.000
Chemical and parachenical induetriee. nateriale. construction.
ltnber. paper and printing l.“0.000
of which:
Caea Sud count plant 730.000
Agadir ceeent plant (expaneion) 200.000
Deni hellal count plant 300,000
Other pcojecte' 430.000
Agricultural and food industriee 510.000
of which:
Doukkala 2 eugarnill 286.000
Other projects0 224.000

' The amount ehown includes projecte with 001: participation.

“3
FOR omcm. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mining and Geology
(009. “PM. and private interests)

1. Expansion program or the Moroccan Phosphates onice (0C!)

Betablishnent of a new nining zone in Ben Guerin labouribga
projects (a new landing and installation ot a washing plant):

construction of a calcining plant for black pmsthes).

2.261.650

2) Program or the Mineral wloration and Investment Office (mat):

Mining exploration
Specific projects
of which:
Dleida (copper concentrate)
sidi Lahcen (concentrates ot argentiserous lead)
zgoundere (silver concentrate)

3) Petroleun exploration (am and private interests)

4) Mining conpanies (private)
of which:
Mining exploration
naploitation
Development

GeOlogy
Airborne prospecting and reconnaissance on the ground
Prospecting studies and work
Applied geology in sedimentary basins

Energy
(Directorate of Energy and ON! [National zlecu'icity Office!)

1) Directorate of Energy:
Studies for establishing a solar energy center
Energy studies

2) National Electricity office (ONE):
Oomletion of:
Idriss 1: plant
Ones El-Mskharine plant
Al Massirs plant
Alterations at Takerkoust
Kenitra poverplant
Mohasnadia powerplant
Studies or shale and nuclear energy
Transmission system
Distribution syste-

Us
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

49 .000
252 .000

188 .000
30.000
34 .000

33 l .000
195 .080

59 .000
111.000
25.080

10.098
7.387
8.347

27.728
103.¢54
201.620

38.057
430.330

1.334.575

15.942
692.765
120.000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Studies of new construction and sites:
Norija plant
Other 31 Oued plant
nit chouerit plant
Hdez plant
31 Monsei plant
Haunts giant
hjare plant
nirdiltane plant

Icean fishing
ION? [National Fishing office) and private interests)

1-)

I)

I)

National Fishing onice (GNP) and private interests:
acquisition or 63 oceengoing units, including 50 trevlers
(12 for the ONP). three tune beets, end 10 sardine hosts

Ooid storage industry (our and private interests):
(our cold storage plants: Agadir (5,000 tons), Bafi (2,000
tons), Tan-Ten (1,000 tons), and Laeyoune (1,000 tons)

on» studies in cooperation with the UNI)? (0N Developent
Program] and the no: evaluation of stocks) study of fishing
gear; training of fishing specialists

Laboratory laterial and equipIent and renovation of the
fish nerkets (0N?)

Rourisu

I)
.)
l)
i)

Hinistry of murissu
Economic studies
Studies regarding tourist facilities

vocational training:
Four new Raining centers
Tangier murist Institute
zl-Jadida Hotel School

Gaping and caravan ing

hotel investments:

Public sector (om [Moroccan National 'iburiat Officel)
(completion and developent)

Seaipublic sector (3,574 beds)

Private sector (“,773 beds)

1&5
FOR OFFICIAL use on?
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/07J08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030046-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vocational Training
ministry of Labor and Vocational Raining)

‘i‘en institutes of applied technology

Expansion of three existing institutes

Wenty centers for professional qualification

Forty apprenticeship centers

'Nenty mobile training centers

(Note: this program will be started during the 3-year plan
and continued under the future plan)

education
(Ministry of National Education and cadre training)

- Construction of classrooms, centers and schools!
computerization of the ministry

(As follows: 7,550 primaryv-school classrooms. 5,204
secondary-school classroom. a regional teachers
school, three srvzional pedagogical centers. and eight
higher normal schools)

Road Infrastructure
(Directorate or Roads)

New work
Maintenance of the prinary and secondary road systems
Construction and maintenance or third-class roads
Sugarbeet zones:
Doukkala sons
Loukkos tone
Sebou area (51'! [expansion unknownl)
Deni-min area
‘rescsouet-Amont sone
Souss-Anont zone
Other specific projecta:
Erosion control and soil conservation
Karia-Tissa project
Doukkos development (study)
Other projects
Mining trails
Acquisition of public works eguipuent
Road service to Jor! Lasfar
lburist intrastructure
Tangier industrial zones

1:6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-OOBSOROOO100030046-7
Rail Transportation
(National Railroad Office [0mm

1) over program

fixed plant:
Beplacuent of track between Casablanca and Marrakesh
ministration building
Technical shops and buildings
SerVioe to the new phosphate center in Ban-Guerir
Doubling of track between Casablanca and Rabat

Rolling stock-
hseanbly of railroad cars in Morocco

2) Specific projects:
Morocco-Phosphorus 1 project
Phosphorus 2 project
Railway intrastructure in connection with ocp expansion

Port Facilities

(Directorate of the Port of Casablanca and Directorate of.
Secondary Ports)

Port of Casablanca:
Miscellaneous isprovanents
Restructuring
'i‘rsverse pier
Port of Kenitran
Strengthening of piers
Port of Agadir:
Citrus wharf and roll on/roll of! berth
Secondary ports:
Tartaya fishing port
'ranJran tishing port
Port of Nador:
Infrastructure
Superstructure
Purchase or special equipment
Port of Safit
Oospletion of the quay paralleling the shore
Port of Jort-Lestar:
Infrastructure

Housing
(Ministry of Housing)

Urban housing:
Reconstruction of the Rabat shantytown
Studies of other shentytowne
now-coat housing developments and lots
Building eaterials assistance

“7
son ontcm. us}: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rural housing:
Pilot villages
bow-cost housing developasnts
town planning:
M plans for rural intrastructurs
Seven luster plans
Movement and development plan
Architectural studies
General studies
Enviromental studies and projects
Raining:
Development Institute
Sdtools for technical cadres
ottice tor the 'technical Control 0! Construction:
Participation in the capital of the m (“Damion unknown]

aydrnulic Engineering
(Directorate of Hydraulic Engineering)

Hydrology

Hydrogeology

Data processing

Technical assistance agreusnts
Water supply

Specific studies

Tininoutine Dan

Ousd El Hakhozine Dam

noukkos protection dam
Abdelkrin mattabi Da-

Bl Hassira Du

Heightening of balls Taksrkonst
'i‘a-zourt on the Isssn

Belt canal and Sidi Dries Dal
Restoration of channels connected with the Idriss I has
hit Chouarit Dan

was: Dan

H'Jara Dan

Sari breakwater

upropriations and legal aatters
Census. maintenance. and major repair of dams

Water Supply
(national office for Drinking Water)

Urban water supply:
Aqadir
‘riznit
sidi uni

Ouarzasats

1:8
son ontcm. use om:
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Ten-Ten

Saharan provinces
Merrekesh

Kala: sreghne

Ben Guerir

sari

Rabat-Case Coastal Zone 1
coeetal zone 2
Khouribge

El-Jadide Jort-Laster
Settei.

sidi-Kaceu

Tangier

Assile l

Assile 2

Tetanun and coastal zone
Fez

Setrou

Tau

A1 Boceina

Oujda

Nader and suburbs
Meknes l

Heknes 2

Khenifra

Hidelt

Errachidia

Postal and Teleconunications Service
ministry of PM (Posts, Telegraph, and 'nelephonel)

construction of administrative buildings

completion at the 1973-1977 5-year plan (switching)
mpansion of seven telephone exchange:

Purchase of telephones and lisoellaneous equipment
Purchase of teleprintsrs

Incal circuits in rural comnes

Underground linen

“chased V station for satellite telecomunications
Acquisition of international circuits and multiplex equipment
construction of five urban collection offices
Construction of 22 rural collection offices

Postal mechanization

Ccepletion of work at the National Institute of the m

'69
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/07J08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030046-7

FOR OPFICIAI. USS ONLY

Radio and Television
'I (Horoocan Radio and television (mu

Tangier Radio

Conntruction of the Sidi aennour rndio traneuitting center
thsneion of the television network to Piguig

thansion o! the TV network to Bi Jadida and zsnaouira
Expansion of the Doukouaii 'N transmitting center
Outtitting the 5.21 radio trans-itting center

Providing Sari Province with television progrning
Extension of the TV network to buyouno

Outfitting and equipping the Caeablanca TV station

Information
(Ministry of Information)

Outfitting the Tangier receiving and transmitting station
Finn processing ieboratory

COPYRIGHT: Rena Horeux et cie, Paris, 1979

11798
C803 «00

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-OOBSOROOO100030040-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

REPORT ON INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DURING FIRST HALF OF 1978
Paris HARCMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French 9 Feb 79 p 309

[Text] Iunisia's Fifth Economic and Social Development Plan (1977-1981)
devotes 62.4 percent of all investeents to the induut'inl and mining sector.
It grunts the manufacturing industries invest-onto totaling 950 million
diners. or nearly 23 percent of the total (1 diner - approximately 10.60
francs). The objectives of the plan establish the growth rates of each
sector as follows:

lnvestaents Rate of Growth
(nillions of diners) Achieved
5th Plan 2 1978 Est.'78 let Half '78
Mining sector 120 30 8.4 + 3.1
Energy sector 710 126.1 10 + 15.3
Manufacturing industries 950 100 170 12.8 + 7
Agricultural. food industries 130 13.7 24.3 12.3 + 15.8
Building naterials industries 290 30.5 64.8 30.5 + 20.6
Mech. and elec. industries 170 17.9 18 15.1 + 6.3
Chenical industries 220 23.2 46 10.2 + 3.5
Textiles, leather industries 100 10.5 10.9 6 - 10.6
Hood, paper. etc. a0 0.2 6 15.2 + 2.2

According to statistics published by the National Institute of Statistics.
the overall index for industrial activity rose only 10 percent during the

first half of 1978 compared with the level for the sane period of the previous
year (base figure of 100 in 1970).

This average was obtained only by leans of the perfornance of certain sectors

such as energy (+ 15.3 percent). the food industries (+ 15.8 percent) and
the construction nsterials (+ 20.6 percent). But on the uhole. the nanufac-

turing industries rose at a rote of only 7.2 percent during the period con-
sidered.

A. Mining

Mining activity inproved. Although slow, the resumption continued in 1978
and the index use 122.6 points. up 10.6 percent over the sane period in 1977.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1 -- Phosphates: The resumption of activity in this branch (+ 1.5 percent)
was lower than estimates (8.5 percent). At the conclusion of the first

6 months. quantities sinsd totaled 1.882.600 tons compared with 1.855.000
tons in 1977. This small growth stems from a slump because exports were
down 28.5 percent compared with the some period during the previous year.

2 -- Iron: Compared with the low production registered for the past several
years, a certain increase was noted (+ 5.6 percent). with 209.600 tons mined.
This increase should help to build up stock because exports have been halted
since October 1977.

3 -- Zinc and lead: Totaling 5.900 tons. production of zinc ore increased
20.6 percent compared with 1977 (6.900 tone). but estimates put them at

20.000 tons for the 12 months of 1978. an increase of 37.9 percent. Produc-
tion of lead continues to drop. going from 8.600 to 7.000 tons (- 16.7 per-

cent).
8. Energy

Production of the energy sector developed satisfactorily. The production
index was 165.6 compared with 163.5 in 1977. whence a variation of + 15.3

percent.

1 -— Electricity: Production rose from 728.9 to 868.6 million kﬂhs. an in-
crease of 19.2 percent. The portion of hydraulic electricity remains low
(only 2 percent of the total).

2 -- Crude oil: The quantity of crude oil extracted during the first half
of 1978 is 2.367.700 tons. while it was only 2.120.100 tons in 1977. an in-
crease of 11.7 percent. For the entire year of 1978. the anticipated pro-
duction was 6.8 million tons.

This increase is due to the injection of water into the two main deposits
at 31 Borma and Ashtart. which causes a deterioration in the added value.
Investments totaled 62.9 million dinars in 1978.

Crude oil exports remained around 2 million tons for the first 6 months of
1978. but the corresponding receipts (75.3 million dinars) showed a drop

of 6.5 percent compared with the same period in 1977 due to the depreciation
of the dollar.

3 -- Natural gas: The recovery of natural gas from the El Borma oil deposit
served to accelerate industrial activity in the Cabes zone. The production

of this source of energy rose from 108.9 million cubic meters for the first

half of 1977 to 136.1 million cubic meters for the first half of 1978. or

a 25-percent increase.

C. Manufacturing Industries

1 -- Agricultural and food industries: The production index for this branch
rose by 15.8 percent. going from 139 to 161 points.

52
son omcm. use our
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2 - Building uaterinla: Growth in thin rector included all products.
particularly cenent. whose production nearly doubled. going from 261.600
tona (firnt 6 months of 1977) to 466.300 tone (none period of 1978). The
production of hydraulic and artificial line alao showed strong growth:
216.500 tone (151.600 tone during the first half of 1977). But the quan-
titiea produced are still not enough to aeet the country'n needs. which are
uatiuatad at 1.95 million tone of cement and 385,000 tons of line for 1978.

3 -- Mechanical and electrical induatriea: From 225 pointn. the production
index in thia branch went to 239.1 point» during the firot half of 1978.
on increaae of 6.3 percent. The trend in favorable with respect to the
eeaembly of automobiles. Batilatea for 1978 had reaerved 18 million dinura
in inveatmenta for thia sector and the rate of growth of the voluue of pro-

duction woe to be an anticipated 1b.6 percent compared with 15.8 percent in
1977.

Steel: The activity of the Al Pouladh steel mill dropped in the area or

the production of iron bare and wire. with respective figurea of 72.200 and
6.200 tone for the firet half of 1978 coupnred with 83.900 and 8.900 tons
during the firat 6 montha of 1977. On the other hand. the production of
liquid reduced aetel and billeta -- intereediete products -- increneed.
going from 62,200 and 67.700 tone to 76.000 and 91,200 tone.

6 -- chemical induatriea: The production of phosphate derivatives expanded
greatly during the firat half of 1978.

Superphoaphatee and phoaphoric acid: Siuple euperphoephateo (16 percent) are
only sold on the local market. Production for the first 6 months went from
l9.000 tone to 23.200 tone. The quantities of triple auperphoaphatea (65
percent) produced totaled 258.100 tone. including 252,800 tone of exporte
worth 11.7 aillion dinara, an increaae of 11.5 percent. During the same
period in 1977. exporta totaled 276.700 tone, bringing in only 9.9 million
dinara. The unit price of auperphoaphatea became steady in the meantime.

Phosphoric acida (56 percent) maintained their level of production with a
alight increaae (2.7 percent). During the first half of 1978. 115.100 tone

were produced compared with 113.100 tone in 1977. bringing in 9.9 Iillion
diuara (9.5 aillion dinara in 1977).

5 -- Textile inductriea: This sector ahowed a drop of 10.6 percent coupared
with the level during the firat half of 1977 due to the drop in the production
of cell-finished producte and eapecially the slump abroad caueed by protec-
tioniat leeeurea taken by the EEC concerning textile products.

Principal Typea of Mining and Industrial Production (in 1.000 tone)

6 uoa. '77 6 men. ‘78 1 Variation

Crude oil 2.120 . 2,367.7 + 11.7

Calcium phoaphate 1,854.9 1,882.3 + 1.5

Iron ore 198.5 209.6 + 5.6
53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lead owe 8.6 7 - 16.7
Zinc ore 6.9 5.9 + 20.6
Triple auperphoaphetea 231.5 259 + 11.9
Phoaptoric acid 113 116 + 2.7
Electricity (nil1ione of kﬂhe) 729 868.7 + 19.2
Natural gee (ail1ione of cubic aetere) 108.9 136.1 + 25

Refined fuel 519.9 563.9 + 8.5
Reinforced concrete hare 83.9 72.2 - 13.9
Liquid reduced letal 62.2 76 + 22.2
Billete 67.7 91.2 + 36.7
Hire 8.9 6.2 - 30.3
Cement 261.6 666.3 + 70.6
line 151.6 216.5 + 61.7
Bricke 226.2 260 + 6.1
Plaster 117.8 112 - 6.9

6 -- Leather and ehoa induetriee: The index for thie aector dropped 13.5

percent compared with the 1977 level. Thie in due to circueatantial diffi-
cultiee.

(Thie report on Tunieia'a induetriel activity during the firet half of 1978
will he followed in the near future by an erticle devoted to induetriel
projects.)

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie.. Parie, 1979

11,666
C30: 6600

56
ron onxcm use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

TRADE DEFICIT INCREASES IN 1978
Perle HARCﬂES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEBNS in French 2 Feb 79 p 286

[Text] The rate of growth of Tunisia's foreign trade in 1978 van slower

than that registered the previous year. During the first 10 months. exports
increased 3.8 percent and imports rose 10.£ percent compared with the figures
of 25.8 and 25.6 percent for the same period in :977. This means that the
rate of cover of imports by exports remains low. scarcely exceeding 50 per-
cent. Reflecting this situation. at the end of the first 10 months of 1978.
Tunisis's trade balance showed a deficit of 326.6 dinars. an increase of

12.6 million compared vith the deficit for the same period in 1977. At

this rate. the snntal deficit would exceed the figure of 424 million diners
anticipated by the Ministry of Planning.

During the first 11 months of 1978. Tunisian imports amounted to 719.896.000
dinars (l diner - approximately 10.50 francs). compared with 652,037,000
dinnra for January-October 1977. This increase included all groups of pro-
ducts. vith the exception of raw materials and semi-finished products. pur-
chases of which totaled 273.1 million diners in 1977 compared with 268.5 mil-
lion in 1978 (first 10 months).

Beginning in 1977. the upward trend of exports continued during the first

10 months of 1978. although at a relatively less rapid rate. Export rc-
ceipts totaled 357.3 million diners. up 27.3 million diners. or 8.3 percent.
compared with the level for the first 10 months of 1977.

This trend mainly stems from the growth in shipments of citrus fruits, olive
oil. wines. knitted goods and especially clothing. on the one hand. and from

the improved sales price for triple superphoephetes.

COPYRIGhT: Rene Horeux at Cie.. Paris. 1979

11.666
050: 6600

55
For orncuu. use out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

BRIEFS

KUHAlTl LOAN-0n 25 January at the headquarters of the Kuwaiti Arab Scononic
Development Fund. 'Abd-al-Rahman al-‘Atiqi. Kuwaiti minister of finance.

and Mohamed Hegdiche. Tunisian ambassador to Kuwait. signed a loan egreesent
for the sum of 6 million Kuwaiti diners. or approximately 8.0 million Tuni-
sian diners (l diner - approximately 10.40 francs). The loan. to be repaid
in 15 years. including a 3-year deferment. has an interest rate of 3.5 per-
cent and is to be used to finance the Kef-Chfaier phosphate mining project.
The coat of the project. which will lead to the production of 2.5 million
tons of phosphates in 1981. is 36 million Tunisian diners. [Text] [Paris
HARCRES TROPICAUX 8T HEDITERRANEBNS in French 2 Feb 79 p 266] 11.664

NEH RAILHAY STATION SUchn--The SNCFT (Tunisian National Railroad Company)
has placed an order with the French company Jeumont-Schneider for a TLC 10
automatic electronic switch to equip the new station in the city of Tunis.
The system, equipped for 800 inside lines and 60 outside lines (expandable
to 1.290 inside and 190 outside lines) takes up little space (area needed
for 800 lines less than 2 square meters). Possibilities of use will be
vast and will include in particular: the utilisation of lines with multi-
frequency numbering; abbreviated numbering; three-way connections: musical
waiting periods. and so on. The work of setting up. connecting and main-
taining the system will be done by employees of the Tunisian SNCFT and

the FTT (Postal. Telephone and Telegraph Service]. who will be trained by
Jeumont-Schneider at the Telecommunications School in Ariana. [Text]
[Paris HARCBES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBRS in French 2 Feb 79 p 256] 11.660

EEC AID To CITIBs-The BBC has decided to grant aid amounting to 2 million
accounting units (1 accounting unit . $1.35 or 5.7 French francs) to Tunisia
for the completion of studies relating to a project for sanitation improve-
ments in 17 Tunisian cities (including the suburbs of Tunis and sfax). The

announcement was made at the end of last week by a source close to the BBC.
according to an AP? dispatch from Brussels. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX

ET HEDITERRANBENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 309} ll.b64

JAPANESE ELECTRONIC AID-~0n 30 January. accompanied by Yutaka Tamura.
Japanese ambassador to Tunis. Minister of Social Affairs Mohamed Jomaa

visited the Blectro—Technical Instruction and Advanced Training Center.

56
ron onrcm. use ONLY
roe orncm. use may 3w

where he became acquainted with the equipnent given to Tunisia by the

Japanese Government. Officially opened in 1959 by President Dourguiba. the
Center is a training institution for young people where they can study several
areas of specialization such as electricity. cold storage and electronics

in order to meet the country'a needs for intermediate- and upper-level per-
sonnel. It was set up within the frnaework of cooperation between the

Tunisian Ministry of Social Affairs. STEG (Tunisian Gas and Electric Cospsny).
UTICA (Tunisian Union for Industry. Trade and Crafts) and the UGTT (Tunisian
General Federation of Labor) and France. Since 1975. Japan has participated
in the project by sending measuring end electronic control equipaent amount-
ing to the sum of 25.000 diners (l diner - approximately 10.50 francs).
Minister Jones also officially opened the elactro-technicsl shop which has

been supplied with Japanese equipment. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 310] 11.464

AID FROM GDR--A cultural and scientific cooperation program for the years
1979-1980 was signed in Tunis on 3 February by Ismail Khelil. general
director of international cooperation in the Tunisian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. and Dr Alfred Peukert. sabassador froa East Germany. This program
establishes exchanges between Tunisia and the GDR in the fields of education.
higher education in science. public health and culture. It was recalled on
this occasion that at the close of the first session of the Tunisian-Bast
German joint coemiseion. the two countries had joined together in November
in signing a framework agreeaent for economic. industrial and technical
cooperation and that the commercial accord between the two countries had
been extended until 1983 (see HARCRBS TROPICAUX. l Deceeber 1978. p 3.306).
Among other things. the documents in question provide for large shipments
of machinery and equipment from the can. while Tunisia will provide East
Germany with more sining products. At its 1 February session. the Tunisian
Council of Hiniatsrs approved the bill ratifying the framework agreement on

cooperation. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French
9 Feb 79 p 310] 11,66‘

GDR AID FOR PHOSPHATEs--Several East German companies are supplying Tunisia

with industrial equipment for strip mining of phosphates. The VEB [expansion
unknown) Verlsda und Transportanlsgen enterprise of Leipzig has developed

a machine especially for the purpose. Other facilities will be delivered
by Tskraf, V23 Zamsg Zeite and V33 7 Oktober of Hagdebourg. [Text] [Paris

HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French 9 Feb 79 p 310] 11.066

C80: 6600 END

57
me orrrcm. use ONLY