ma ()I-‘FK‘IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10105

9 November1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No.74?

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

POUO No. 747

CONTENTS

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

French Trade With Africa
(HARCBES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAﬂBENS, 25 Sep 81) .........

Strategic Importance of Diego Garcia Examined
(Denis Ropa; JEUNE AFBIQUE, 30 Sep 81) ...................

BENIN

Steps Toward Normalization with France Taken
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS,25 Sep 81) ..........

BOTSHANA

Planned Rail Link with Halvia Bay Reported
(m AFRICAN, Oct 81)

CAPE VERDE

Briefs
No Agrarian Reform without Consensus

GAMBIA

Sanysng: Leader of a Revolution That Rent Sour
("EST AFRICA. Oct 81) C...'...COOCOOOOCOOOCOOOOOOOOO0.0...

GUINEA-BISSAU

Briefs
IMF Assistance

IVORY COAST
Briefs

IMP Assistance
Favorable Exinbank Credit

- a - [III - NB 8 A - 12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

Five-Year Plan Stresses Netionel Production Style
(meats moncwx t‘r mmnmns, 25 Sep 81)

SEYCHELLES

Choice of Creole as National Language Reported
(m ”RIC“. Oct 81) 0...OOOCOOOOOOOOOOIOOOIOOIIIIIOOCOOOO

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL NSF. ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

FRENCH TRADE WITH AFRICA

Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1872. 25 Sep 81 pp 2424-2425

(Report: "Trade Between France and Developing Countries in l980; France and Non-
French Speaking Africa"l

[Text] Overall trade between France and non-French speaking Africa accounts for about
4 percent of the overall worldwide French trade.

The French balance of trade with this group of countries, which showed a surplus in
1978, is currently showing a deficit which totaled 3 billion francs in 1980. The
balance of trade had already turned negative in 1979 (-1.3 billion). which means that
this deficit rose substantially in 1980. The main reason for this increase was
Nigeria, with which France showed a negative trade balance of 7 billion francs in 1980.

France and Non-French Speaking Africa
(in billion French francs)

II" was .
I Imus-am.“ . . .. . “1.! I”) !
'w on w (W lle-Hau- |ll 24
(nanometre-saunas .. . “4.7 0.]
[mama-simian.“ .. It! 2|

~..........

5mm 4 . -I1 -3

 

Key: 1. Total French imports
2. Imports from non-French speaking Africa

3. Total French exports
4. Exports to non-French speaking Africa

5. Trade balance

Following the sane procedure used for French-speaking African countries, we have
classified these ecuntries by big geographic area.

North Africa. The results of this zone may be seen in Table No 1. French trade with
this zone showed an extensive surplus as a result of a very favorable balance of
trade with Egypt. French purchases free this group of countries were essentially
crude oil from Libya. cotton from Egypt and petroleum products (light fractions and
fuel oil), small quantities of which were bought. All in all, crude oil purchases
accounted for 65 percent of all purchases from this zone and cane essentially fro-

Libya.

I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Trade Between France and North Africa
(in million French francs)

 

an “91's.. 3.!ntla1aaswutm.wenﬂlel2l-uuaswn E
was

..- .. .———.-.‘

 

Key: 1. Imports; 2. exports; 3. Cents Helilla. Canary Islands; 4. Libya;
5. Egypt; 6. Sudan; 7. Total; 8. Of which petroleum (l); 9. (l) tonnage:
3.9 million tons in 1978. as much in 1979 and 2 million tons in 1980.

French sales are quite diversified. In Libya's case, however. they consisted essen-
tially of automotive vehicles (33 percent of French sales to that country) and heavy
equipment. Let us emphasize that the balance of trade with that country is virtually

balanced (slightly negative).

To Egypt. with which French trade shows a substantial surplus. France sells a sub-
stantial quantity of cereal crops and malt (30 percent of total value of sales). The
balance consists essentially of industrial equipment. automotive vehicles and aerial
navigation equipment. Everything seems to indicate that such sales would continue to
increase on the basis of the latest industrial agreement concluded between the two

countries on 16 July 1981, making France Egypt's biggest industrial partner. Let us
point out that sugar accounts for one third of French sales to the Sudan.

west Africa (Table No 2). The French balance of trade with this zone is largely nega-
tive because of the dominant position of Nigeria. which is the third largest supplier
of petroleum to France, totaling 10.9 million tons of crude oil. The French balance

of trade with that African country is -6.b billion francs. A negative balance of trade
prevails with Liberia also. to which French sales dropped by nearly 60 percent in 1980

compared with 1979.

Table 2. Trade Between France and West Africa
(in million French francs)

    
   
  
  
 
 
  
      
 

g m 2
I an use
i 0"” 3 - as: us
- Guido-ll.- 13.2 J...
. Ilene-urns sea “I '
! Leo-u ass 33” :
on. _ _ no ma I
‘ m 8 am an“ i
0m, 03‘” I
I

    
     

   

. m In Isms.- [law-sown IO". walnuts-mass msa
'0..|.-lld\1m

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key: 1. Imports; 2. Exports; 3. Gambia; 4. Guinea-Bissau; 5. Sierra Leone;
6. Liberia; 7. Ghana; 8. Nigeria; 9. Total; 10. of which petroleum (1);
11. (1) in tonnage: 8.5 million in 1978, 10 million in 1979 and 10.9 million
in 1980. '

Other than petroleum, French purchases from this zone have consisted mainly of cocoa
beans from Ghana and iron ore from Liberia, which is the fourth biggest supplier of
France with 2.3 million tons in 1980 as against 1.8 million in 1979. or 12.5 percent
of French purchases of this kind.

Here again French sales are quite diversified. Let us note. however, that sales of
automotive vehicles to Nigeria rose from 1.48 billion francs in 1979 to 2.33 billion
francs in 1980, or by 63 percent in one year. French exports of ships (tankers,
fishing. etc.) to Liberia remain substantial, although showing a drop compared with
1979 (-35 percent). a trend which began in 1977. Here again, French sugar exports
kept their relatively substantial position.

Central Africa (Table No 3). French exports to Angola. the only substantial partner,
are continuing to develop. Such exports. which are quite diversified, have consisted
essentially of equipment and automotive vehicles (and wheat flour, among comestible
products). French imports from this country have remained unchanged.

Table 3. French-Central African Trade
(in million French francs)

 

—--~ \

Key: 1. Imports; 2. Exports; 3. Equatorial Guinea; 4. Sao Tome and Principe;
5. Angola; 6. Total

East Africa (Table No 4). Overall, the French balance of trade with Eastern African
countries remains negative. However. French exports rose from 731.5 million francs

in 1979 to 1,109,400,000 francs in 1980, or by 52 percent. French exports to Zambia.
Mozambique. Uganda, Kenya and Somalia showed substantial progress.

Table 4. Trade Between France and East Africa
(in million French francs)

 
 

1.1.

 
       
       
   

   

    
      

1

I

z - -

- tm3 no.0 mu

1 can... 4 ..... 10.! 5.1

a loan 13' 1Q]
Ova-so asla no.7
lunar-b . “.3 00.1

. uses-III.» .8 as «a
lawn. 3 on; «at
Mind 1 so. as:

   

..
1

p:
F”

1 ‘17.?

 
  

Key: 1. Imports; 2. Exports; 3. Ethiopia; 4. Somalia; 5. Kenya; 6. Uganda;
7. Tanzania; 8. Mozambique; 9. Zambia;.10. Halawe; 11. Total
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

French imports from this zone have changed little in terms of value (+3 percent only).
hence a lowering of the negative French balance of trade with these countries.
French purchases from Kenya. Tanzania and Mozambique cover essentially farm products.

Zambia. however, is France's main supplier of unrefined copper cathodes, accounting
for 63 percent of overall French supplies.

France's exports to these countries remain diversified. Somalia increased quite
substantially its purchases of automotive vehicles (from 9.9 million francs in 1979

to 63.9 million francs in 1980); the same applies to the rest of the countries in
this zone.

West Africa (Table No 5). Except for the Republic of South Africa, trade between
France and West Africa is insignificant. Let us emphasize the resumption of French
trade with Zimbabwe, with which the balance of trade is negative. Host French imports
consist of item No 77 (cast iron. steel). About 50 percent of French exports to that
country consist of refined petroleum products.

Table 5. Trade Between France and West Africa
(in million French francs)

    
         
          
          
    
  

I anus «It!
. 4am:

2247.4 AMLI

 
 

W2
nun new) to» nub ‘
- - - - I
? lou-mn.3 . n1 on as a:
l w to ..... 12.4 M: u 01
nun» S as: as In a: I
nzacuu- 6 - was on 1&1 '
I
I

6260.4

    

Key: 1. Imports; 2. Exports; 3. Botswana; 6. Swaziland; 5. Lesotho; 6. Zimbabwe;
7. Republic of South Africa; 8. Total

France's balance of trade with the Republic of South Africa, which was quite negative
in i978 and 1979. became slightly better balanced in 1980. while still remaining quite
negative (-1,016.000,000 francs in 1980 and -l,796,200,000 francs in 1979). In 1980,
French exports to the Republic of South Africa account for 6 percent of France's total
exports to Africa. Imports from that country accounted for 10.2 percent of French
imports from Africa.

In 1950. as in 1979. most French iaports from the Republic of South Africa were item
No 27 goods, totaling l.926.900.000 francs (+47 percent). This consisted of South
African coal purchased by France. These imports are broken down as follows: anthra-
cite, 599,226 tons, or 24 percent of total French imports (the Republic of South
Africa is the third largest supplier. after the USSR and the FRO); lean coal,
1,322,355 tens or 85 percent of French procurements (main supplier); coking coal,
671,890 tons; other coal, 6,663,162 tons. or 39 percent of French supplies, main
supplier. The total is 9,236,000 tons of coal as against 8,117,300 tons in 1979, or
a 14 percent increase.

The second most important item is French imports of inorganic chemicals. totaling

1,291,400,000 francs, most of which is natural and enriched uranium: 21 percent of
the total tonnage imported by France, which makes the Republic of South Africa the
second biggest supplier to France after Niger (4,145 tons in 1980 as against 3.858

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tons in 1979, or +7.5 percent); 170 tons of natural uranium were imported from South
Africa in 1980 as compared with 137,000 in 1979 (or a 26 percent increase).

Imports by France of some minerals from South Africa are not negligible in the least
compared with total French procurements. This applies to manganese, chromium and
titanium, broken down as follows:

Manganese, 485,300 tons of ore, or 40 percent of French purchases, second largest
suppl ier;

Chromium, 87,200 tons, main supplier, 31 percent of French purchases;
Titanium, 18,900 tons. main supplier, 77 percent of French purchases.
All in ail. imports of such items declined compared with 1979.

Finally. the last important element of French imports from South Africa is that of
precious metals and diamonds. In 1980, France purchased 2,718 kg of gold as against
530 kg in 1979; 513.8 kg of platinum and platinum alloys, as against 232.4 kg in 1979;
and 56.356 karats of unpolished diamonds, or 8 percent of French purchases.

Host French sales (2,037,000,000 francs) were of item No 86 (boilers, machines and
mechanical engines), which were part of equipment items, and item No 85 (electrical
machines and apparatus) (636.7 million francs). These two items account for 61 per-
cent of French sales to South Africa. Sales of French vehicles to that country ac-
counted for 8 percent of total sales (3&4 million francs).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

5157
C50: 4719/71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE OF DIEGO GARCIA EXAMIMED
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1082, 30 Sep 81 p 13

[Article by Denis Ropa: "um: is the strategic importance of Diego Garcia?" mes-
tion asked by Armand Tissot, Lille, France]

[Text] Situated in the Chagos archipelago, half way between the Indian subconti-
nent and Madagascar, the small coral island of Diego Garcia (25 square has) bears
the name of the Portuguese seafarer who discovered it in 1532. Now it is the lar-
gest American base in the Indian ocean. Linked until 1965 with Maurice Island,
then a British colony, the latter, after its indepmdence, ceded it back to the
London government which then rented it for 50 years to the United States with a
view to "joint utilization for defense purposes." (J.A. No 1019).

The Mauritian prime minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, "unaware" of the content
of the successive agreements of 1967 and 1976 between the two great powers, is
demanding the return of Diego Garcia which has not been used as agreed upon by
Maurice and Great Britain (i.e., merely as a communications station). Following
his proposal, a resolution plan favoring restitution was adopted unanimously by
the participants in the 17th Suuait of the OM) [Organization of African Unity] at
Freetown (Sierra Leone) in June 1980.

The attitude of the Mauritian head of government, who wee, hoever, one of the
negotiators of the cession of diego Garcia, is less surprising when one knows that
the next elections could put in power the Mauritian Militant Movement (MMM), Mar-
xist in tendency, lead by Paul Deranger and Jean-Paul de 1'Bstrac. who advocate
making the Indian ocean a "peace zone," and who are therefore hostile to an Ameri-
can military presence.

The Malagasy president also, Didi 2r Ratsiraka, for whom "bases are the exact op-
posite of peace," proposes the scheduling of a conference on the subject in Mada-
gascar in 1982. "One cannot," he said, "convert the Indian ocean into a peace zone
and at the same time build new bases there which, like Diego Garcia, cost millions
of dollars. These bases must be dismantled; they happen to be American, but I
would demand the same thing if they were Soviet....“

Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam does not go so far. Quite simply, he would like to re-
negotiate the Diego Garcia statute directly with the United Statee without the

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mediation of Great Britain. which still regards itself as the owner of the island.
As regards the American presence, he considers it ultimately justified since Hos-
cov is doing all it can to "destabilize the Indian ocean."

The invasion of Afghanistan, the progress of the Red Any towards the warn seas
along the route which supplies Japsn and the Western world with oil...these are
so many pretexts for the Americans to reinforce their positions on Diego Garcia.
Sheltered from cyclones, and far from any possible surveillance point, the island,
cleared of its 1,200 inhabitants in 1971, could not lend itself better to the cir-
cumspect equipping of a naval base.

For 10 years, the Sea Bees, American marine corps units, have worked in shifts
without letup to transform a small paradise into "a veritable natural aircraft
carrier." There is a 3,600 aeter runway capable of receiving large transporters

of the C130 type, deep water harbor installations, eight gigantic fuel reservoirs,
a aajor teleconunications station, basins for long range nissile ”Marines (ULMS),
and more than 30 has of roads. A total of $200 million. A fresh works program
(estimated at $237.7 million) will per-nit the anchoring of the aircraft carriers
Midway and Kitty Hawk, and the improvement of the airfield's landing strips.

Such work progress provide good reason for worry for the coastal countries of the
Indian ocean; they fear the outbreak of hostilities on this oil route and that they
will be the ones to pay for the confrontation, as was the case for the Pacific
islands during the Second World War. "111 anyone heed their voices, although dis-
cordant, and their hope of one day seeing the Indian ocean transfer-ct! into a
"peace zone"? It is doubtful.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9821.
080: 4719/75

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BENIN

STEPS TOWARD NORMALIZATION WITH FRANCE TAKEN

Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1872. 25 Sep 81 p 21052
(Report: "President Kerekou in Paris")

[Text] Colonel Mathieu Kerekou, president of the Republic of Benin. was paying a
visit to France this week. As we pointed out. the visit scene to represent the
final stage of normalizing relations between Benin and France.

President Kerekou arrived in Paris on 23 September. The sane day he had lunch at
the Elysee Palace with President Mitterrand. The president of Benin was accompanied
in his visit to Paris by several ministers and senior officials such as Pierre Osho
and Mrs. Nathalie Barboza. deputy chairperson of the Standing Co-ittee of the
Revolutionary National Aaseably; ministers Faul Ifede Ogouna (foreign affairs and
cooperation), Babs-Mousse Aboubecar (plan). Colonel Isidore Aloussou (finance). Gado
Girigissou (public works and housing), Major Martin Dohou Aeonhiho (information and
propaganda). Major Edouard Zodehougan (technical and vocational education); Valere
houeto, secretary general of the government. and Mode bussaYaya, Benin's aebassador
to Paris.

During his stay in Paris President Kerekou met with J.-F. Cot. sinister of
cooperation and development, and Robert Badinter, sinister of justice. he received
Georges Marchais, secretary general of the comnist party, Chirac, the mayor of
Paris, and a delegation from the CNFF [National Council of French Baployers].

Benin and France

0n the occasion of President Kerekou's visit to France. let us recall that his
advent to power in 1972 marked a turn in relations between France and Benin. At
that time, Major Kerekou blamed "foreign donination." neaning France. of being "the
prime reason for the country's backwardness. The ettenpted overthrow of his regime
by some 100 European and black mercenaries. who landed by plane in Cotonou on 16
January 1977. provided another occasion for accusing France, which triggered the
recall of the French ambassador.

The Marxiat-Leninist orientation and the nationalization of key economic sectors
intensified the "misunderstanding" between the two countries even further. However,
starting with 1978, relations began to improve slowly. leading eventually to a visit
by Robert Galley. the then minister of cooperation, to Cotonou in 1979. The
improvement was concretized by increased French aid which. in fact. had never been

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

suspended, and which rose from 61 million French francs in 1975 to 95 million in
1980. The president's trip, therefore, marks the completion of the normalization
process.

On the economic level, let us recall that Benin (115,000 square kilometers, 3.6
million population) has an econony based essentially on food growing. However, the
country is still not fully self-sufficient despite a substantial improvement in
output because of strong demographic expansion.

Thanks to the port of Cotonou, which is being steadily developed, and which handled
1.5 million tons of freight in 1980. Benin is a natural outlet for import and export
activities of neighboring countries without access to the sea, notably Niger.
Actually. the port will be expanded with s View to relieving the pressure on the
port of Lagos in Niger.

Finally. off-shore petroleum deposits (10 million tons) will also be exploited as of
next year. This will largely reduce the cost of petroleum purchases, which exceeded
10 billion CPA francs in 1980. and thus eliminate the trade deficit.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

5157
cso: 4719/71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOTSWANA

PLANNED RAIL LINK WITH WALVIS BAY REPORTED
London NEW AFRICAN in English No 169, Oct 81 p 28

[Text] As the world's energy crisis worsens. Isaac Hando reports on the emergence
of a plan to link land-bound Botswana with the Atlantic coast at Walvis Bay, a move
that would help entrench South Africa in Namibia.

The possibility of a railroad linking land-locked Botswana to the Atlantic port of
Halvis Bay in Namibia has emerged following a recent statement by Botswana's Minis-
ter of Finance, Peter Hanoi.

The idea of a railway linking the central part of Southern Africa to the west
coast was first meted more than 50 years ago. It is now gathering momentum as
the world energy crisis worsens and the search for alternative fuel sources be-
cones more urgent.

Feasibility studies have reflected more optimism recently in the light of Botswana's
coel wealth, particularly in the south-east Morupule fields.

Export Potential

Botswana's coal export potential could encourage the opening of a line fron Palapye
to Gobabis, a rsilhead on the existing line to Halvis Bay.

But politics remains the major stumbling block. The government is not actively
pushing for the trans-Kalahari line because of the continuing war in Namibia.
Informed sources say the schene would probably be opposed by other Prontline states
until Namibia's independence is settled. The South African Government claims Hal-

vis Bay as part of the Republic.

Namibia's private sector has for years shown great enthusiasm for the idea, pre-
dicting tremendous benefits for Southern Africa.

Des Matthews, owner of a Namibia mining company who has pursued the plan for 26
years, is trying to give it fresh impetus.

Matthews, managing director of Trust and Mining 00 (Pty), is due soon to lead a
delegation of overseas business interests for talks with authorities in Gaborone.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He said the business men he planned to take to Botswana would probably try first
to secure coal purchasing contracts. The provision of capital for the project
might follow.

A Johannesburg girn, Loxton Hunting, has calculated that a railvay line from the
Botswana border to Gobabisnand improvements to the existing Gobabis-Ualvis Bay
link-would coat nearly $300 million and take five years to build.

It would create hundreds of jobs. A new ore terminal at Halvis Bay costing about
$90 million would also reduce the port's dependence on the ailing fishing industry.

The improvements to Namibia's track. bringing the envisaged link to a total length
of 1,600 he, would entail the flattening and straightening of the Gobahis-walvis
Bay connection to accommodate long and cumbersone coal trains.

"Studies on the railroad have long since reached the stage of determining the
various gradients," said Matthews. "The plans are well there, the scheme is con-
pleted. Interested parties could virtually go out to tender now," he said.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 IC Magazines Ltd.

C50: MOO/192

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPE VERI

BRIEFS

N0 AGRARIAN REFORM WITHOUT CONSENSUS-Cape Verdian President Aristides Pereira
confirmed that the incidents that took place in the island of Santo Antao on
the occasion of the discussion of a bill for agrarian reform in the country
had resulted in the death of a person opposing the project, who had attempted
to disarm a member of the police force. President Pereira affirmed that the
agrarian reform bill now under discussion. aimed at making the exploitation
of the land more equitable and at updating agriculture, will not be presented
to the National Assembly if it does not obtain a popular consensus. Be
specified that the text of the bill guarantees that land belonging to Cape
Verdians who have emigrated abroad will not be expropriated. [Excerpt]

[Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDTTERRANEENS in French No 1873. 2 Oct 81 p 2498]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Noreux et Cie Paris 1981]

C50: 4719/38

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISF. ONLY

SANYANG: LEADER OF A REVOLUTION THAT mt SOUR

London "381' AFRICA in English No 169, Oct 81 pp 18, 19

[Text]

Although the attempted coup in The Gambia was quickly
suppressed. there is evidence that initially it attracted surprisingly
strong support trom many sections of society. Ndey Na Faal
reports on the tailed revolution and the man behind it

FOLLOWING e civilian-led "military"
attempt to overthrow the government in
July. The Gambia is still in a state oi
emergency. The death toll from the
attempted coup and the aftermath is
estimated at close to 1.000. Families in
the capital Banjul and the suburbs are
being given emergency food aid. Doctors.
nurses and medicine have been flown in.
Saudi Arabia and other countries have
already donated more than £10 million.
President Dewda Jawara has signed the
29-point Emergency Powers Regula-
tions. He awaits repatriation of Kultoi
Samba Senyang from Guinea-Bissau
where the leader of the attempted coup
was arrested along with nine others late
last month.

The Gambia Gazette has so far pub-
lished the names of 665 persons of the 100
reported arrested and detained in con-
nection with the rebellion. The most
important of these is detainee No. l3?
Sherri! Mustepha Dibbe. leader of the
National Convention Party (NCPi oppos-
ition in Parliament. Leaders of the ban-
ned Socialist Party Pengu George and
Kore Selleh of the Movement for Justice
in Africa iMOJAi have been reported
killed during the unrest.

The regulations underwhich they were
held nuthrnae "the police or any troops
temporarily stationed in The Gambia to
detain any persons suspected of having
participated in. or aided and abetted in. a

rebellion“. ChilelJeware. the President's
wife. said on her release esehostegs that
she had been interrogated at the resi-
denoeoi'theOppoaltiouleederduringher
captivity. if this is true. it will damage
the rebels' image and their cause. Their
professed Marxist proletarienisrn could
be interpreted as hot air. For the NCP
geld J ewere'a PP? manifeatos ere identi-
A Review Tribunal has been consti-
tuted. Whether it will be mandated to
conduct trials. or simply to screen
deteineesbei’orstrial.remeinstobeseen.
It consists of a solicitor or barrister
appointed by the Chief Justice. and live
presidential appointees. The power of
signature of death warrants now lies
with the Inspector General of Police.

This mandate followed the announce-
ment tothe foreign Press by the Attorney
General that the ringleaders of the coup
will be with treason. Execution
will probably be by firing squad. The
Gembie's stretch of beaches already
bring ghastly memories of April 1980 in
Liberia.

Notwellknosvn

Contrary to reports from news agen.
cres. Kukoi Samba Sanyeng was not in
the military. Neither was he a well-
Itnown opposition politician. A product of
St. Augustine's High School in Banjul. he

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09:

masterminded the takeover with friends
inside the Field Force. A former class-
mate described him as the last person
you'd think would lead a coup.

”But it would notbe allthat surprising.
Kukoi belongs to the rising urban young
men and women whose exposure to world
events. has developed in them a lower
threshold for corruption and bad gov-
ernment." he said. “They cannot stand
what their parents took for granted."

Samba Sanyang. indeed. charged the
szara Government with corruption.
and with running low-calibre health.
education and welfare services. The gov-
ernment. Sanyeng announced in his
takeover speech on Radio Gambia. had
strangulsted the economy. But the plot
thickened when he aligned himself with
socialist ideals vested in revolution and
the establishment of a "dictatorship of
the proletariat."

A Gambian student in London said: "I
lost hope in Sanyeng very quickly. His
methods became irresponsible. One must
align oneself Vt'llh dynamic forces. not
with former business moguls turned
socialist after their businesses collapsed.
Change. yes. lagree. But you do not arm
prisoners and children and set them loose
against the community Nor do you
scream socialism and dictatorship from
thin air It must be understood that to a
certain extent Jawsrs was a nice little
well-behaved bov to most of the world.
and in African circles. Total condemna-
tion of him would be difficult as we have
all seen.

Hard to interfere

”Ail Ssnyang had to do was keep it at
the level of an internal crisis. No Libya.
No Marxism. No socialism. No rain-
forcements from Guinea-Bissau. Make it
basically a people screaming for change
at home. Senegal would have found it
hard to interfere in that kind ofbacltyard
squabble. If they did. world opinion
would have been harsher."

Foreign missions in Baruul came to the
government's aid during the crisis. The
Communist Chinese made available
their communications equipment to keep
President Jawara in touch with London

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000400070020-8

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Dakar via Peking The Nigeria High
Commimion offered sanctuary to a -
ernment minister. The British igh
Commission was instrumental in com-
municating British assurances of support
and. probably. for contacts with the SAS.
The Senegalese office became the Presi-
dent's bunker.

The civil service nceived the news of
the coup with supreased jubilation. The
number of civil servants among the

detainees speaks of the support for the
coup. This quickly spread with radio
endorsements of the rebellion by certain
inﬂuential village and religious heads.
High on the list is Alhaii Sanially Bojang.
one of the architects of the political
movement which became the PPP. and
who invited Jawara to lead the party in
the l950s. Bojang was chiefof Kembitidi
outside Brikarna.Jawara's electoral seat
He has been stripped of this chiaﬁaincy
and detained.

‘What remains is
how quickly the
detainees will
come to trial’

 

 

More than 30 Gambisns and another
loo-odd sympathisers turned out last
month in London to denounce the pres-
ence ofSenegalsse troop in Baniul.1'hs
Senegalese Embassy staff failed to show
up to receive the petition. The demon-
strators carried banners and chanted
anti~Senegal slogans under the watchful
eye of London's Metropolitan Police.

“The march was not in support ofthe
coup." a leading organiser told New Afri'
can. "but a serious attempt to show our
discontent with Senegal's military pres-
ence in The Gambia. We understand our
particulars have been sent to Banjul as
agitators. But we reserve the citizen's
rights to demonstrate.“

Restless nights

Senegal's President Abdou Diouf told
the French daily Le Marin of his restless
nights over the decision tosendhistroops
to Banjul. His main worry was the reac-
tion from Paris. He took the decision
without consultation. Dioufhas since had

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ClA-RDP82-00880R000400070020-8
talks with the French Government over
an unmoud SuuGambh manna a»
two Weat African Presidents had
unbuiedonahuatheenupanaumL
Foreign traveller; from The Gambia
bring repeated reporte ofaevere torture of
Gambian detainees. Similar atoriee have
come from Gambian who ﬂed acroea the
border with Senegal. The publication of
line ofdetaineea and the eetting up of the
Review Tribunal are atepa in the right
direction. but observer: are waiting to
mhowthetnahlueconduuedandhow
quickly detainees are brought before the
Tﬁbumﬂ.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 1C Magazines Ltd

CSO: 4700/191
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-B ISSAU

BRIEFS

IMF ASSISTANCE--The International ﬁonetary Fund authorized Guinea-Bissau on

17 September to purchase 1,850,000 SDR within the framework of compensatory
financing to compensate for the drop in export receipts for the 12 months
ending in March 1981. The main reason for this drop was the [IS-percent

decrease in peanut exports as a result of the drought and the drop in the

price of this product on the international market. Guinea-Bissau's quota

at the IMP amounts to 5.9 million SDR. and its obligations to the Fund now total
1.1 million SDR. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDI‘I‘ERRANBENS in French

No 1873, 2 Oct 81 p 2498] [COPYRIGIIT: Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1981]

C50: 4719/1238

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

BRIEFS

IMF ASSISTANC£--The International Monetary Fund authorized Ivory Coast on

17 September to purchase 114 million SDR (or approximately $125 million)

as compensatory financing in anticipation of a drop in export receipts in
1981. More than three-fourths of this drop would be related to coffee and
cocoa exports, since their prices have decreased on the international market.
Ivory Coast's quota at the IN? is 114 million SDR, and its obligations at

this time amount to 116.8 million SDR. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANE£NS in French No 1873, 2 Oct 81 p 2500]

FAVORABLB EXIHBANK CREDIT-~The Export-Import Bank of the United States (Eximbank)
has granted Ivory Coast a credit amounting to $99.35 million at the interest rate
of 10 percent, reimbursable in 20 years (instead of the normal 10 years).
According to Eximbank's own communique, the bank is thus waiving international
regulations in order to "counter intense French competition." The credit

granted Ivory Coast is earmarked for the purchase of $136.2 million worth of
electrical equipment in the United States (turbines, generators, etc.) for the
hydroelectric complex at the "noun Falls, on the Sassandra River. [Excerpt]

[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANKBNS in French No 1973, 2 Oct 81 p 2500]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981]

C50: 5719/138

17

mm nmnu Ilcl‘ “N! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

FIVE-YEAR PLAN STRESSES NATIONAL PRODUCTION STYLE

Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBS in French No 1872. 25 Sep 81 pp 2439

(Report: "The Draft 1981-1985 Plan; The Total Cost N111 Be 936 Billion Mali
Prancs"]

[Text] At its 17 September extraordinary session, the Malian National Assembly

examined the five-year plan for the country's economic and social development for
the 1981-1985 period.

The five-year plan, which was submitted by Ahmed Mohamed Bamani, minister of
planning and transportation, and was amended at the meeting of the Higher Council

for the Plan, held in Bamako last July, includes 539 projects requiring: a total
financing of 936 billion Mali francs.

They include 114 projects related to the rural economy, to which 282.7 billion Mali
francs. or 30.1 percent of total financing have been allocated; 160 projects,
costing 251.7 billion (26.9 percent) will be related to infrastructures,
communications and housing; and 77.7 billion will go to the social sector (8.3
percent.

The plan meets the major guidelines formulated by the Democratic Union of the Malian
People (UDPM). the only constitutional party, which is trying to develop an
"independent planned national economy." The new plan, which calls upon the
population "to take its own future in hand," is characterized by the desire to
improve the national production system on the basis of primary rural collectives.

The reorganization of the state sector is another priority included in the draft
plan, which also intends to consolidate enterprises considered "strategic" and whose
support is deemed essential to the national economy. Finally, the plan stipulates
that "Certain state and mixed enterprises will be consolidated as well."

Bid Tender Based on the European Development Fund (No 1689) for Rice-Cultivation
Sections. On the basis of anticipated BBC financing, the Malian government has
called for bids on additional controlled flooded rice-cultivation sections in the
Segou region. The project is divided into two lots: 1. Development of Farako; 2.
Development of Tanani. This includes the terracing of approximately 730,000 cubic
meters for lot 1 and 700,000 cubic meters for lot 2. plus various other works.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

Bids must be sent before 27 November 1981 and addressed to The Director General of
Rural Engineering, B? 155, Bamako. The file (150.000 Mali francs) can be obtained
from the sane source or consulted on the prelisea of the information services of
European Communities. 61 Rue des Belles-Feuillea, Paris 16c.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

5157
CSO: 4919/71

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHOICE OF CREDLE AS NATIONAL LANGUAGE mom
London NEH AFRICAN in English No 169, Oct 81 p 23

Creole ls now the national language of Seychelles. bringing to an
end a long and bitter controversy over which language should take
pride of place in the country/s atlalrs- Creole. French or English
anary schools will start teaching Creole from January. Moot
school subjects will be taught in that language. llsh will be the
only other teaching medium This report cornea om Victoria

[Text]

CREOLE. the mother tongue of the
Seychelles. will now be used as the
medium of instruction in the island's
schools.

This is the result of a keenly argued
and comprehensive debate organised by
the ruling party - Seychelles People's
Progressive Front (8???) - at its third
annual national congress.

English gets second place while
French. which has been spoken for many
years by Seychellois. is now relegated to
third place.

President Albert Rene. who chaired
SPPF's central executive committe
which decided the language question.
said: "In a revolutionary society it is
important that the processes of analysis
and re-analysis. of criticism and self-
criticism. continue every minute of our
lives."

This was an imitation to discuss the
language issue thoroughly.

The committee consisted of rnernbersof
the national congress. Minister of Educa-
tiun and Information James Michel. ofﬁ-
cials of the Department of Education. and
head teachers of all the schools in
Seychelles.

Am

President Rene stressed that the his
toric decision made by the oongreu
meant that the official bilingualism of
English and French with equal status
was over. Bilingualism would now mean
that the islands would have only one
other foreign language.

Referring to an earlier decision by the
congress to aim at establishing both
English and French as the equal official
languagesatthecoetofCreolehadbeena
mistake. President Rand said. Even if a
decision was reached by concensus. it was
not necessarily correct.

”Very often. whether in our personal or
political lives.“ he explained. "we are
called upon to change a decision because
experience and time have proved that we

have made a mistake.” Hence. the change
in the country’s ﬁrst Intranet. he said.
Theooniinitteetoolionedaytoooin-
plots the task and make manda-
tions. This included answering a set of
nine questions put to ltby President Band
on behalf of the central aseotttive com.
mittee. These mainly covered such issues
as the timetable for change. and the
method and problems of establishing
Creole as the national language.
English. the second national lanm

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
will be the only other medium of teach-
ing. while French. the third language.
will become a coauthor: subject but not
a teaching medium.

Creole academy

Primary schools in Seychelles will
start teaching Creole from nextJanuary.
This is to enable those involved in the:
teaching totrai'n thenecessery personn
and prepare the material. followed by the
design and production of dictionaries.
grammar and other books and the com-
plete revision of the present teaching
programmes for PI classes.

A Creole academy will also beset up to
monitor and guide the development of the
country's first language.

Following a basic instruction in Creole
up to P6 level. Seychellois students will
then be allowed to study English. the
second lenguage.

The committee recommended thst
Creole. being the mother tongue. will
still be used to facilitate understanding of
English. The medium of instruction for
certain subjects would be determined by
the Ministry of Education and Informa-
tion.

Many Seychellois feel this is a welcome
move because they believe that in ' tern-
ing English as the medium of instruction.
pupils tend to become Westernised.

”This way. at least. they will now take
Interest in their culture. which is so rich
am:l must be mastered.” one teacher
sai O

COPYRIGHT: 1981 1c Magazines Ltd
cso: MOO/192