FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10307
5 February 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 760

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIhE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA REPORT
1000 No. 760

CONTENTS

ANGOLA

UK Correspondent Interviews UNITA loader Savmbl
(1”! ”mar; mm, 2h J” 82) OOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Lack of Progress, Alleged 8A nee knurled
(Henry Mm, m 8?“, 21 M 81) eeeoeeeeoooeeeeeoneeoooo

MADAGASCAR

Libyan Accords To Establish Joint Commas Reported
(mm TROPIGAUX 31' mms, 11 Doc 81) ...........

Briefs
1982 Budget
Tannin. Refinery
‘.coords With Hobil, Occidental
Delivery of 'Benolenge'
HA'AUI

Speculation on Bands's Successor Noted
(“curd Smell; THE STAR, 6 J.“ 82) oeeeeee‘eoeeeeeosooeoeoe

NIGER

Briefs
hastened Libyan Action

swarm.

Senegal President Abdou moo! Interviewed
(Abdou mout Interview; am mums, 30 Dec 81)
M OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

Bulletin on Recent Economic Activity
(W WHOM a? mmms, 1 J” 82) 90.09.0000...

Mining Bureau Activitiu Include Establishing Two New Companies
(macaw THOPICAUX rr mums, 1 Jan 82) .............

Briefs
Budget for 1982

mm

[keno Diniasea Party Merger Old.”
(Stephen Taylor} 1113 m, 19 J“ 82) oooooooooooooooooooooo

mmmouw
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

moon

UK CORRESPONDENT INTERVIEWS WITA LEADS! SAM!
mam London m OBSERVER in English 24 Jan 82 p 10
[Exclusive report by Ian Mather]

[Test] The exchange of two Russian pilots held prisoner in Angola for two moaned
Americans could be the first step in s nova towards reconciliation of the warring
forces in Angola.

The exchange is to be one carried out by the International Red Cross in agreenmt
with the Angolan Goverment and the Iain rebel force, IIIITA (the National Union
for the Total Independence of Angola). It could lead to further exchanges of
prisoners and is to be seen in the context of a najor Anerican initiative in South
Heat Africa, one of the objectives of which is the setting up of a government of
national reconciliation involving Dr Jonas Savidi, the WITA leader.

Last week the Angolan Govern-ant officially denied that it had sent a letter to
UNITA offering negotiations for reconciliation. But President Jose Eduardo Dos
Santos, bedeviled by a ruinous civil war in the south of his cour‘ 7. has nade it
plain that in principle be favours the 'nornelisation' of relations with the United
States and the econonic aid that would flow fron this. '

The Reagan administration. for its part. is seeking to bring the two factions in
Angola together as part of a ‘two track' initiative ail-ed at securing the with-

drawal of the 30,000 Cuban troops fron Angola and the departure of South African
troops from neighbouring Namibia.

The first exchange of Angolan 'prisonere.’ in which the hand of Dr Chester Crochet,
President Reagan's assistant secretary for African affairs, can be detected.
will take place in about 3 weeks.

The Russian pilots. whose Antonov military transport aircraft was shot down by
UNITA forces in hovewer 1980, will be flown in a Red Cross plane fron a base

in southern Angola, where UNITA has its stronghold, to a West African capital.

At the ease tine. the two Americans. who were held after their private plane
landed in Angolan Govermsnt territory. will be brought to the cane airport in a
second Red Cross plans. The Anerican and Rmsian unbassedors in the chosen country
will shake hands and fornelly accept their citizens.

1
P0! omcm. USE ONLY
The American initiative has significantly strengthened the position of Dr Savinbi,
a charisnatic doctor of philosophy. who has spent the pest 15 years fighting m the
Angolan bush. first against tho Portuguese colonial rulers. than. for the pan

7 years, against the Marxist governnent of independent AngoLa.

Ssvinbi, as a staunch anti-mist. is now the firs favourite of the Reagan
adninistration. During a 17-day visit to Washington in Deceﬂer, Savisbi was given
to understand that. if necessary, ways and neans would be fomd to by-psss the Clark
snendnsnt, which forbids 0.5. aid to any group in Angola by chamelling nonsy through
a third comtry.

Last week. in an exclusive interview with the OBSERVER Savinbi told no that he was
'very interested' in the idea of s 'govsronent of national reconciliation,’ and
that {RITA had established unofficial contacts with the Angolan Goveth party,
the “FLA (Popular Liberation Hovensnt of Angola).

as said that 10 days ago. at a nesting in Paris with Paulo Jorge.- the Angolan
foreign sinister, Crocker had expressed on his behalf arm's willingness to enter
into discussions with the W.

The principal sin of the Reagan adninistration was to get the Cubans out of Angola.
he said. "the United State Governannt has -told us they will be very firn about
the Cubans. If Angola wants Anerican economic aid. the Cubans will have to go.

'This in turn hinges on the position of the Russians. ‘l‘hsy have acquired a
strategic position in the southern Atlantic without fighting for it. They say
not be prepared to give it up.

'On the other hand, the whole world wants an and to the war in Angola. and the
Russians will not want to be seen putting obstacles in the way. So they could try
to find a way of causing delays.’

the interview took place in a suburban villa surrotmded by a large garden in

which roaned [as published]. Savinbi. who has the rank of general in WITA forces.
was wearing a khaki nilitary sweater. he showed photographs of captured HPLA
weapons and of hinself sitting astride the wreckage of the crashed Russian air~
craft.

Within the “FLA there appear to be two strands of thought about Ssvinbi. The hard-
liners appear to be led by Lucio Lars, the HPLA's secretary for organisation.

Lara travelled to Moscow for consultations at the sans tine se the Angolan foreign
ninister was nesting Crocker in Paris.

They want to fight on. But others. including a nuﬁer of senior nilitary officers,
nay believe the ties has cone for a settlenent that will end the war.

A further nesting between the Americans and MA was taking place yesterday in
Kinshasa.

Whatever the officially stated positions of the parties, events on the ground

to appear to be nong in Savisbi's favour. mile the Angolan Governnent nay be
forced into a corner because of its growing econonic problens. Savisbi can count
on adequate support, both overt and covert, anong s nunbsr of black South African
states. as well as from South Africa and the lbited States. Savinbi now claias
to control about a third of the country and to be getting the supplies he needs
for his troops.

COPYRIGHT: The Observer Ltd, .1037

680: 6700/616 2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

canto 18W

LACK OF PROGRESS. ALLEGED 8A TIES m
Johmueebutg THE STAR in English 21 Dec 81 p 23
[Article by Henry Renter: "Contain Reine 1n the Conrad']

[Text]

36mm {Gnede‘ new mm mm mm“ mnhms‘
Comont—Ukeﬂu‘ uerceeen invol- ecv approach. the g,"- can
rumbling m“ «meet. the OM! rte 0A0 am e seven u m up the

- never been cite the . eetiee ceunittee no
W- "Nd! 1'“ At-deileh mm en M's chairmen- maﬁauu.
It

i

5
i
33%

spewed lie rut mm.” mm' :hi to Imi In:
obbets ol‘ clack which 5.3.1..“ to math to do!“ the "‘hw

i

ev over coun- withhold aid uniete be new. 1‘ '
wade «meet-Ind. nerd wee kicked out at in titties: Vere held eve! [$133! $13.!
Comm am you: w "“ '3 0' M ”ltd dead but uh”. ll ten to

' ' coup Netteuei ”item-tot~ eat eueeeqeent
.thuenormily . gm ulauwudtm
new -iellnde a! .inuw me u a. 0A" sin-mu

E;

GrendeCom An- ew!» bevel t. a...“ a, Want mam
.Wud .Denetdwu ua‘ﬂ‘ﬁ," -umeoouu
Wmch lie “WWW“ mun-7m“ dim-mum:
end the Blend 0! uuznnmm mm. ease
northern Moumbi- umwnmb manning. the
' ‘ ' M m» lulla-
uecoeetereooce ewﬁltgcmd‘u: m‘ ”“0;ng
Iﬂh mm; o I v tn t --- . . N m :
the. m Fgenchrule'heethe M 't “I“ $1.1!»de-
other three wands do an the 0m peeled comm. .
The 800- eeeeie tiered themelm tn. ei um I!!! an taint "I.“ the
mayhem... dependent in 1073. cut tit-tr ledge-y MMM‘.”
fee-them continuedtebee: demuwegideeee ismmdﬂﬂi
icee diheeelilbte Menu-vetmud- .mum unit "u, to a.“ m
Indium tone “vermin-nee." mmmpette diet m their
Putin: out of the in. New. with title 1 e (dand- te M ' 5““ in
am can Mnbeea Mach election «on they eere tn. .gt, WWW
valiantly «tenant of Preemie ﬂitteread wen u N we 1|me . m
”alumnae endhteeecieilltpeny. m - «1‘me eel-AI
”mm” m‘“”""'"‘”’“ one «at meet. “upmmm.
Deeel'd mm the teret to retue thwieetlheeﬁet.
‘°""'m°‘w” m'm”mc°’°" at. Heedn mid MM“ lulu“ ml
autumn-name Modem. '0'th 6‘09":- u
unnam““ mﬁtmmmm ”"hmw «twain-{glow
to
- z manhunt.» W M!“ em
malignant-3‘3; mm mm e! at ”WWW "W manly. 93mm“:
“Mist: Illd out» four ieleede In e mu “it .0 M 0! be: now me
than» theeiemd Ab- el diam ted at”! all {our Intends m «on out “"3.“
delleh meat confuiee about their teeth! thet under the umm and ”on.
with imp (to. the future. mi. el leewlieeniv hendouie im e
eocieiietverid. Ouictietehe edven- ien the M In! W, Oil"

ten of the new

3
F0! 05116“. US! ONLY
mo boon won 000‘
on. But ooo of tho;
lolu' moan ”own.-
income an": -

mun—mono
mod-owe

demo. who not: It?"

ms. |

fOoly'poa w;
donco m not.
enough jobo to: oIL‘
I!” It hon any.
moonln‘ to: '5." con“

Al duobmuo

mmémm o1 mum Munoo Mu m u
ammo by tho noun coon moods” c
oppoduoo uuwummmmo
“W WMMMUoNGIc
pour.

FOR OFFIClAL LSE ONLY

mound o “Moo! mo'
Im [run seller.

Ion-hue. the
people complain that
tho mo cum on 6-;
duo

Proud”! Wish
I“ his '09 “do: «0
accused 0! monopoli-
uog uﬂculmol out-
run; and mum; tho
ocooony. Doom may
be w. m ho a not
forgotten. Ho viola Ire-
"va no a: :29»
too to have comm»
nolo Con-notion but
not: more” io coo.
ﬁlm I!“ m

-- - vu- ‘

”Niko

not o monopolv a! mo

communists

Doom o u
Nov. encouraged b!

000'

u-umooonoo no mo
mom to be mm the (MU mmm. me
In! In dovol?hg tho um underground :3
moor no o who once «no rumbling.
South Mrla. nov Abdolloh‘s 350-qu
worth over minutiae pnme defenco rotce
oyoor. mined and led by,
um g ._ ohm mercenams. I:
"on”? 533.4%, . Noon“ to ho jittery
m m "om fl Ofdlllll'! Comomoo
the “can“. 3.. how found tho from

court not: on! «moo

31:; on «mod oloc- '
one: and prom;

of endopondonco butter.
The}! ﬁsh that oil
pawn-hungry people
mid to any and
loovo than olooo,

Gooomcobym
mount to

tummu,

h

0 m: South Alnco has arm to me Mum-
loh'o :onmmoot nS-nnIIwn:

0 11m .thoro or: plans to step up trodo beaten
Sou": 3!ch and tho "lands; and

0 That mo ropuollc Is also helpm; an Comma
”summon! ‘0 build a largo bmdcomn‘ complex.

Tbooo olloutiooo on undomood ‘0 have boon

put u on 0A0 mission which spool throo mo boro
”autumn a! pounding tho

cm
mud South MM “mum Monaco mm.
at" out] on ma nut to on islands um um

you. Mn; him" of! os 1 SM.

No omaol reaction to the new 1110‘.qu on
boon node by Pmoom Abduuh'o Cont-uncut.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBYAN ACCORDS TO ESTABLISH JOINT COMPANIIS REPORTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITEWS in French 110.1883, 11 Dec 81 p 3319

[Text] Agreements were signed on 6 Decoder in Antananarivo providing for the
establishnent of the Libyan-Malagasy holding Company (LIMA) and the Libyan-Malagasy
Agricultural GOIpany (SALM), as well as the proposed Libyan-bluesy Sugar Company.
The agreements were signed by e Libyan delegation headed by Mr Mousse Ahmed Abou
Pris, secretary of the people's general planning cmittee, and a Malagasy delega-
tion headed by the minister of foreign affairs. Mr Christian Rani Richard.

The Libyan-Malagasy Holding Company (LIMA) was first the subject of a protocol
agreenent signed 25 April 1981 in Tripoli. The cowany'a headquarters will be in
Antananarivo, and it will have capital assets of $8 million (2.6 billion Malagasy
francs). The president of the board of directors of the deputy general teenager
will be Malagasy. LIMA's mission is to invest in the fields of industry, agricul-
ture, stockreiaing, fishing, nritine transport, eining and prospecting, and in
all kinds of co-Lercial and industrial activity in general.

The Libyan-Malagasy Agricultural Coqany (SALM) will have assets of $20 nillion
(6 billion Malagasy francs), with Madagascar a majority shareholder. The vice
president of the board of directors and the general nenager will be Malagasy citi-
zens. The conpany's nandate is to invest in the field of agriculture and stock-
raising in Madagascar, through the production and earketing of products by the
company itself-«ice. wheat, soya, sunflower, coffee, tea, bovine and ovine prod-
ucts, etc.

The Libyan-Malagasy Sugar Cowany is still only in the planning stage, and by
terns of the agreeeent, the LIMA holding cowany will work out the modalities of
its establishment and financing.

He would add that the agreements signed ‘ Decawer in Antananarivo also call for
Libyan and Malagasy experts to meet before March 1982 to discuss the creation of
a Libyan-Malagasy Conpany for the Produr tion, Processing and Marketing of Uranium.
Cooperation in the field of nickel will also be exanined after a study of the

technical data.

Finally, promotion of trnde between Madagascar and Libya was one of the subjects
discussed in the course of the matings held 28 Movenbar-b Decenber. Steps will
be taken to finalize contracts between Libyan and Malagasy importing and export-
ing conpaniea.

5
roe omcm. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During his speech following the signing of the Libyan-Halegney agree-ante. Hr
Christian Bani Richard noted that, following Preeident Rateiraka'e vieit to
Tripoli in Septeder, Libya had provided Hedagaecer e 850 million loan. A general
cooperation agreement nae eigned on 3 September between the two countriee.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Parie 1981

9516
080: 6719/366

IKIIIHHWCIAI.IIHECNULY
tion ‘l‘nx (m) will go up iron 10 to 15 percent. l'ha proposed hudgnt also calls
for a nodification in regard to oil royaltiaa: oil-producing conpaniaa will have
to pay a "primary duty” of 36 to 65 percent. which can be deducted tron profits
for the first 7 years of production. In regard to oil, it as aasertad during tho
debate that two or three oil conpsnies including Mobil Oil, are already prapared
to begin oil prospecting, on condition that the lava governing such operations ha
quite clear. According to 0mm [National Military Office for Strategic Indus-
tries], raaearch has already be , avan though final operational agreements have
not et been signed. [To t aria 11180338 TROPICAUX ET norms in French
No 1 83, 11 Dec 81 p 331 can acne Moron: st c1. mm 198;? 9516

TOAMASINA mmBRYnAccording to officials of SOLD“, the state-owned mlagasy
Petroleum Cowany. prograaa is being Iade on the second phasa of expansion of the

noml production and without increasing the amount of inorted crudc, 70,000
tons per yaar of diesel oil, 5,000 tons per year of gasoline. and 20.000 tona
per year of asphalt for roadwork. 'l'ha romaina rsfinary. which want into opera-
tion in 1965, was first oxpandcd in 1971 by an addition which increaaad its pro-
ductiva capacity by 25 percent. sown-.- atata-ownad coqany established in
1975-dccid¢d upon the second expansion. which is now undar any, as part of the
govarnnent's invest-eat policy. Work hem in Hatch (Cf. m of 26 April 1981,

p 1206). [Text aria W333 TROPICAUX ET mums in French No 1883,

Harem: Rene norm st 019 Paris may 9516

company. Those accords with one of the world's largest oil cocpaniaa should fe-
cilitatc an intensified aesrch for oil in Hadagaacar. They allow Mobil to proa-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which will require an investment on the order of $3 million. Pour wells will the:
be drilled within a period no longer than 6 years. at a coat of alone 310 million
per well. On 9 October OHIIS was to sign another oil promoting agreement with
the American conpany Occidental Petroleun. [Text] aria mans TROPIGAUX ET

HEDITEBRANEBIS in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 331 [EOPYRIGHTx Rene Nor-aux at Cie
pm: 198;] 9516

DELIVERY 0? 'BMWGA’-—The oil tanker ”Benolanga." SOLm'a [Halasaey Petroleum
Cowany] eecond international-clue veaeel. moored at the port of romaine on

22 Noveﬁer. 3 years to the day after the state-owned company delivered its first
tanker. the '"i‘einororo." The "Benolansa" cane fro. Japan, where it had been built
at the Ueuki Iron Horka ehipyard; 100 meter. long, 16 austere ride, it can carry

4 500 cubic meters of hydrocarbons. Its hone port will be thejansa. [Text]
aria mans TROPIGAUX ET MEDITERRANBDIS in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 331?
comments Rene noreux et c1. Paris 198;? 9516

CSO: 4719/ 364

FOR OFFICIAL [532 ONLY
SPECULATION ON BANDA'S SUCCESSOR NOTED

Johannesburg THE STAR. in English 6 Jon 82 p 19

[Article by Howard Burton}

[Toxc]

“Tho old man.” sold
a diplomat ,0!
Malawi: President
Kamuzu Ronda. “to
sun as sharp as a
tack. And nothing
happens here with-
out his ordlnntioaf.’

In thot' monotton
thou u much. though
not uﬂnltod. comfort
for South Africa nod
othor commotion

moan.

no Macy tho
mums"
Do I! ham Bondo
~mnnnmnmm.
humonddon‘tfornot
obltdlt—mnino
amtylncontrolotoll

on (odd. on No
country.

Tho “Mon ho
rocolvoo from hln
pooplo (mucous
"no: on oyoophonq.
Tho Pro. nod tho
counuy‘o only loco!
Dirty. mo loln't Con-
gress Pony ([0). to-
you his onion: and
sum to Boom)
fashion. ‘

in; mm -— M
"Mr 0! Ink-inn
wouon in drooooo
beam: h1- oomm .—
tum out no btd bun

o

poms. not tho
‘Nm" (or hm)
totd Mo poooto ot the
mull. o! tho Known
Acuony tocontly. ho
mmlroldtodto.

"tandooytho
uoot mm: _‘
don blankﬂot
bowel-boob!»
donooo? -.
“monu-
oaonod ln'tho t?

m
who Ind I‘ll!“ to I!»

doooodoooo om Dc
londo In mo. dlod to

in
their nasty on. They
on tho mu Proo-
don Momma! motto»
Ino). lod by Ir Orton
Chino. forum than.

.c w atolluouco-hospm

9

m .

mu Dr Bondo 1:: 1m;
tho Cocoon (or m
8 o c o n d,;' molt:
(C83). hodod b! o
for“ External Aﬂoin
ﬁlm. It Konyolno
Chimno: ond tho
Socmht Woo o! lo-

be! 0! ”ION!" 03‘
mom; [to cnuo hovo

reportedly om ohm
butod tnthocoumﬂ-
But 'Looomo. told N
ho tho non Imus!"
o! the m. M 0"
portonood tto on totoc
no! roam Pamphlet!

mm to como
groin tho tntoaol om

cud: Onion (IIDU).

Ono. lulu“ you:
our. («not £on
ﬁlm It Mao Boo-
do. unod no Do a»
do'o ouccosoc, now
"no tho lltc of o nom-
icol rocluso undo! onco-
riu com-mm

And It Gouda
NIL mother comm.

dorfoothomm

Ind hoodod I PM
oi company am not
tantrum. to now at»
an. out 23 yonn (or
oodltlon. Ono nthor
cynlcol loam
Mound to It htrl'o
orluo no "odnnood
Ilywhlnkaom tho
N‘m'o woman.”

Thorn to no room.
nun-onto cl tampon {or
Motown-nod pom»
caution. Andvhot sup-
oonthotomy bodooo
not luck its neck out
Ebola Inna, hobo git-

(tune: or I' D.
an doom. and tor n
motion In which
thorn lo dloootmocuoo
begun Ilium out
otontiol ocononuc
north hoo not hono-
ﬂtod tho poot no. 0!
min.

Went Ito-
lnvlon m null»

ton ohoutd. tn toms at
tho convention. (on o
pnddontm council
'Nch would run tho
country until olocuono
m hid.

Glynn tho SIC?!
who dominance o!

no mine: at Youth' 1W Politico to Halo“.

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Assn: Co. 1981

COPYRIGET

6700/575

CSO:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

mum LIBYAII Anton—Mm: Libyan action against Instr 1- chrutcnod.

Sons 1,500 Nigerians, ”an of thc Ion-1c Lesion, are being trained at present
on Libyan 3011 by the can of tho for-or Pro-taunt of the “public of user. Inn-n:
010:1. [Text] [Patio PARIS M16! in lunch 18 Doc 81 p “I

080: 5719/672

11
F0! OMCIAL US ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USEINVLY

SENEGAL

SENEGAL PRESIDENT A3000 D100? INTERVIEUED
PHIlebl Paris JBUNB APRIQU! in French 30 Dec 81 pp 26-27

[Interview with Senegalese President Abdou Diouf by Sennen Andriamirado: "'Hhen
Senghor "ant There Were Rumors of Disaster'“; date and place of interview not

given]

[Excerpts] [Question] A year ago. on 1 January 1981. in your first message to
the nation as President of the Republic. you declared: "I will undertake changes
while maintaining what has been achieved." Has that a subtle way of announcing
"de-Sanghoriaation"?

[Answer] I disapprove of the word "ds-Senghorization" and. as far as the issue
itself is concerned. I think that it is a false problem. To bring in changes
does not mean to “de-Senghorise". No one is more attached than ayself-if I may
say so-to President Senghor as a person and to everything he achieved. I may
say so-to President Senghor as a person and to everything he achieved.

[Question] nevertheless you have announced changes....

[Answer] We have to confront new challenges. And for a man who has neither the
temperament nor the character of President Senghor. it is question of taking up
the reins of power. exercising it in his own style and using special tactics
adapted to the problems of Senegal.

[Question] Could you be more precise. Mr President? what do you mean by special
tactics? The states general of education which people were calling for in
Senghor's time and which you have convoked. the multiparty system rejected by
President Senghor which you have established. are these "special tactics" or a

"desire to break with the past?"

[Answer] (Denying this energetically): No! No. not at all. These are things
which I thought of quite naturally. I have not done these things in order to
take a stand against my predecessor but because I considered that the time had

come to do them.

[Question] Senghor thought your decision to authorize a multiparty system with
no restrictions somewhat premature.

12
I‘lliﬂﬂﬂCIAl.USE<ONLM
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I thought that the Senegalese people were mature enough to tackle this
new stage in their political destiny. It had to be done. And had my predecessor
remained I would have advised him to do it.

[Question] Does not the current burgeoning of parties (11 registered as of
7 December) present a danger of destabilization?

[Answer] No. provided that the party leaders show a sense of responsibility. put
the interests of the nation before their personal aebitions and do not use every
trick in the book to get into power. Having said that. I am not in favor of a
ballooning of parties. That would be ridiculous. Moreover. we have specified
clearly in the constitution that no party must cite as its authority elements
that would split the nation.

[Question] A report from the world Bank says that African states have mis-
managed their economies and that not only did Africa get off to a bad start. it
never even started at all! It recommends integral liberalism.

[Answer] Integral liberalism? Impossible. There are sectors which can be left
to private initiative but in certain others. if the state does not intervene. no
progress is made.

[Question] The In? also reproachea you for a certain amount of unhealthy manage-
ment and recommends you to take some draconian economic measures if you want the
IMF to help you. .

[Answer] Re are agreed upon the need to balance our economy. But we will not
take any measures which will be too difficult for our people from the social view-
point. That is the position as regards our negotiations with the IMP. A coapro-
mise will have to be sought.

[Question] At present. rice costs only 80 Central African Community Francs

[CRAP] a kilogram thanks to a state subsidy of 20 francs. If you were to sell
things at their true price. as the IN? recommends you do. rice would cost 100 CFAI.
The people could not take that. But you need the IMP. ﬂow are Senegal's politi-
cal and social interests to be reconciled with its economic and financial

interests?

[Answer] He are anxious to redress the imbalance in our country's economic situa-
tion and to reach agreement with the IN! on the main objectives because we need

its help. But we are equally anxious to defend our people's purchasing power and
we are not keen advocates of unsubsidized prices. That is why we are negotiating.

[Question] The INT suggests you also scale down your bureaucracy a little.
There seems to be a supersbundance of public servants. would you be willing to
make some tangible cute in the budget and reduce the nuaber of staff?

[Answer] There can be no question of such a thing! we shall make sure that the
number of people employed in the public services does not swell unreasonably in

the future. He shall pursue a more rational recruitment policy. But it cannot

be said that we are going to undertake a draconian reduction in staff.

13
FOI.OIIWC1A1.IEHE(HVLY
FINI¢ﬂﬂﬂCJA1.UGEZ€ﬂﬁLY

[Question] You do not. however. have enormous means at your disposal. As things
stand. Senegal does not carry too much economic weight. will your influence there-
fore be a political or moral.... not to mention military?

[Answer] (Laughing) Do you have the impression that our present policies are so
very different from those we pursued before?

[Question] Abdou Diouf's first year has also been the first year of Senegambia.
Senegal intervened militarily in Gambia in August-your soldiers are still there--
and. in November. the confederation was created. You were quick!

[Answer] The alert was serious. really serious. But 1 must add that it was the
Gambian President who uttered the two key words: Confederation and integrated
security forces.

[Question] The fact remains that Senegambia is an old idea of Senegals.

[Answer] Quite so. I think it corresponds to the two countries' interests.
Gambia cannot live without Senegal. and Senegal cannot live unaware of the
existence of Gambia. without establishing powerful economic ties with it.

[Question] For the ties being Seneganbia is a reality. Could this sort of union
be extended to include other Heat African countries? Does this mean that the
federalist dream is not dead?

[Answer] This old dream could become a reality if we Africans show prudence.
realism and patience.

[Question] The political systems of the countries involved must also be reconcil-
able. Gambia and Senegal both have multi-party systems. That is not the case
elsewhere.

[Answer] The main problem is the economy. If we manage to achieve economic
integration within the Heat African Economic Community or the Heat African States
Economic Cor-unity, vital sectors of our nations will be grouped together and it
will be easier to envisage political groupings.

[Question] Do you now have the impression that West Africa is looking for new
leaders to create these groupings? President Senghor has retired. President
Houphouet-noigny belongs to the generation of founding fathers. Even President
Sekou Toure belongs to the generation of historical leaders.

[Answer] I think that the time of historical leaders is over. After this genera-
tion we shall see the emergence-at least in Heat Africa-~of leaders who are more
like the man in the street. And it is fraternal cooperation that is the key to
the prosperity of west Africa. without any attempts-on the part of anyone-oat
hegemonism. any seeking of personal prestige or undue influence.

[Question] No one suspects you yourself then of seeking undue influence?

1!:
IWJI.CIﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂiE.Oﬂ‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I as very much against that sort or thing. in the past rivalries have
distorted the real problems.

[Question] Are you thinking of the old rivalry between Bouphouet-noigny and
Senghor?

[Answer] A great deal has been said about this friction. I personally never saw
any evidence of it. I was always hearing one of the two heads of state praising
the other. Attempts have been made to cultivate some kind of antagonism between
Houphouet and Senghor or between the Ivory Coast and Senegal. That is an unhealthy
state of mind and it must be combstted. I am doing so with President Bouphouet.
for whom I have a great deal of respect and esteem. I regard myself as his

junior. as his son. And I am pleased that he regards me as such.

[Question] You are too young to have taken part in the battle between the two
historical chiefs shortly before independence.

[Answer] (Suddenly excited) I have never had any quarrel with anyone. Anyone.
Neither on the national plane nor the foreign plane. If certain people have
opposed me I have never opposed them. Some people have regarded me as their rival.
Not me. I have never had occasion to via with anyone. I might add that I have
always practiced forgiveness.

[Question] Do you fear that someone might be tempted by hegemony in Africa.
[Answer] The only hegemony I deplore-~and I hope it will be no more than an
unpleasant memory-~1s that of Libya. But in Rest Africa I cannot see who might

be tempted by hegemony.

[Question] Nigeria?

[Answer] I don't think so. Some Africans fear it. Not I.

[Question] Do you believe it is possible to reason with al-Qadhdhafi?

[Answer] I don't think so. So far no one has succeeded in doing so. I do not
think he can change fundamentally. (A silence. then raising his voice) I would like
him to change. but he will not change.

[Question] “111 you take part in the GAO sun-it in Tripoli in 1982?

[Answer] In my opinion Tripoli will break no records in terms of participation
in an 0A0 sum-it by heads of state!

[Question] Are you afraid that conflicts in Africa may proliferate?

[Answer] Yes. Conflicts. particularly border conflicts. should not be under-
estimated. All uninvolved states must be vigilant and seek to extinguish the
slightest spark before it becomes a conflagration.

[Question] Do you believe. like Songhor. that world HarIII has begun in Angola?

FOI4OFFKJALIEELONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lAnuwor] m Angola: mun an ymu val! a wm hl war?

[Question] In this case it would Iaean a confrontation of ideologies.

[Answer] It is not only in Angola that there is a confrontation of ideologies.
[Question] Are you afraid of col-misn?

[Answer] I an not an out-snd-out entices-mist. but I do not believe comnisn
to be the solution to Africa's develop-ant problalae.

[Question] Do you not believe that commis- is necessarily subversive?
[Answer] an! ...at any rate. it has been!
[Question] You are improving your relations with Angola.

[Answer] I have not with President Dos Santos. Ila had a discussion. Senegal.

as you know. has recognized the stats of. Angola. but we have never formed diplo-
natic relations with its govern-ant. We are studying this problem today in the
light of the inadmissible behavior of the Republic of South Africa. which is daily
attacking Angola and rejecting the slightest progress in the case of Nanibia.

Even if at the beginning we did not agree with the way in which the HPLA took
power in Angola. we cannot do nothing in the face of South Africa. (A silence.
then) I can tell you that between apartheid and counties: 1 would choose
cot-Ionian.

050: 6719/1050

16
'0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR m1. USE ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

BULLETIN ON RECENT ECONCMIC ACTIVITY
Paris MAROIBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in Preach No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 27
[Article: "Recent Economic Events"]

[Text] A recent bulletin of economic and monetary statistics from the Central Bank
of the Nest African States (BCEAO) is devoted to Upper Volta.

The main agricultural production sold in the 1979-80 season came to 77,520 metric
tons [mt] of seed cotton (up 17,560 mt over the previous season). After spinning,
this yielded 28,716 at of cotton fiber (up 8,615 mt), 40,060 at of karite (up 33,070
mt), 4,236 mt of sesame (up 200 mt), and 1,165 mt of shelled peanuts (up 165 mt).

The value of the seed cotton harvest came to 4.3 billion francs CPA [African Pinan-
cial Cpnlunity] (up 1 billion francs CPA over the previous season), and the produc-
tion of karite was estimated at 1 billion CPA (up 0.8 billion CPA).

At the beginning of the 1980-81 season, the producers purchase price was raised in
francs CPA a kilo from 24.5 to 27 for karite, from 54.3 to 81.93 for shelled peanuts
and lowered from 90 to 75 for sesame. The buying price of seed cotton remained
unchanged at SS.

1n the first 4 months of 1980, rail traffic of the Abidjan-Niger Company brought in
197,300 mt from the Ivory Coast, of which 56,700 mt was in combustibles and 28,600 at
in cement. of 85,400 mt going to the Ivory Coast, 15,100 It was in cotton fiber and
there were 9,900 head of cattle.

The Ougadougou international airport had traffic of 355 commercial planes and 7,800
passengers in transit in January 1980.

As of 31 March 1981, the merchandise index of the main commercial firms was at 371.9
as opposed to 329.3 for the previous year (1970 . 100).

At the end of the first 4 months of 1981, the general consumer price index for African
families was at 271.5 as opposed to 249.6 on 30 June 1980 (1970 - 100). Since 1 Jan-

uary 1979, no change has been made in the guaranteed interprofessional minimum hourly

wage.

:lhe budget for fiscal year 1981 (January-December) has been officially calculated in
debits and credits at 40.5 billion francs CPA (as opposed to 40.2 billion CPA for 1980).
Equipment credits came to 3.9 billion CPA (as opposed to 5 billion CPA), debt service
on the national debt came to 4 billion CPA (up 1.1 billion CPA). At the end of July
1981, customs receipts came to 12.3 billion CPA, more than 95 percent of which was in

ilport duties. 17

m mﬂnl I“ All."
In 12:80. the commercial aunt-n was 50.0 bullon til-A, greater than in 19/9 (47.7 bil-
lion CPA). llports totaled 75.!) billion CPA as opposed to 19 billion CPA in exports
(of which 8.4 billion CPA was in cotton fiber and 4.5 billion CPA in cattle).

At the end of December 1980, the national debt cane to 69.4 billion CPA (up 17.3 bil-
lion CFA during the year); the margin available on credit obtained was 33.4 billion
CPA (up 3.5 billion).

On 30 June 1981, bills and coins in circulation totaled 23.3 billion CFA, as opposed
to 18.6 billion a year before. The auount of deaand and time deposits in banks was
36.5 billion CPA on 30 April 1981 (up 6.9 billion over the end of June 1980) .

0n the other hand, credits to the economy cane to 62.3 billion CPA (up 3.9 billion
over June 1980), of shich public corporations accounted for 55 percent of the total
and the private sector, for 45 percent.

Also at the end of April 1981, the Treasury's net balance for donestic accounts showed
a net surplus of 3.9 billion CPA, an increase of 1.2 billion over April 1980.

Net foreign holdings also iaproved at the sane tine, going from an excess conitnent
of -3.8 billion CPA to a surplus of 2.9 billion CPA at the end of April 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

8782
$0: 4719/461
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

MINING BUREAU ACT IVITIBS INCLUDE ESTABLISIING THO NB! NAMES
Paris MARG‘IBS TROPICAUX ET "EDITERRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 27
[Article: "BUVOGMI Adainistrative Council Creates M New Mining Coqanies")

[Text] The administrative council of the Upper Voltan bureau of Geology and Mines
(BWOGMI) net on 19 Decenber. It was chaired by the ninister for Conerce. Industrial
Development and Mines, Mr Ojibrina Barry, and adopted the proposed 1982 budget, uhich
totals 942.37 million francs CPA [African Financial (Io—unity].

The Council also authorized the establishment it! 1982 of two nining comanies. the
Sahel Hines Coapany (SOMISA) for prospecting and aining in the Baildjaga and Djouga
nines. and CWIKI (Kiere Mining Many), which will also be found in 1982 for unga-
nese aining in the Hounde region.

On the save day, in Bobo-Dioulasso, the 011158"! (BUVOGMI Regional Adninistration)
buildings were dedicated by Mr Djabrina Barry in the presence of the ninisters of
Social Affairs and the Status of Ionen, Mrs Marie-Madeleine Kone, Justice, the State
Secretary. Mr Bena Ouattara, Public Functions and works, Mr Alexandre loungrana, and
Post Office and Telecommications, Lt-Col Charles Homsouho Baabara. '

work was perforned by the SEC (General Contracting Conpany) , especially in the con-
struction of the buildings and the courtyard; the Bernard Coulibaly OoQany, for

the enclosure and the rooms for mechanical rock-processing; and the OPT (Post office
and Telecoumnications) for telephone installations. The main building houses 9 of-
fices, a library, a reading room. a museum. and a designing roan. for about 350_square
meters of usable space. The second building houses a garage, stores, a laboratory,
and two connecting rooms for about 660 square neters of usable area. -

The Bobo-Dioulasso regional administration will be the site of the project evaluating
the gold-bearing copper deposits of the Caoua region, in the context of cooperation
between Upper Volta and the Netherlands. The total cost of building DIREGII has come
to 116.6 aillion CPA, 20 aillion of which has been financed by a subsidy from the
French Aid and CoOperation Fund (PAC) and the difference by suvom's own funds..

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie. Paris 1982

8782
C80: 4719/46]

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

National Progress (04PM on 29 Decoder. The 1982 draft budget for Upper Volta bal-
ances at 48.9494 billion francs CPA [African Pinancial Comity], an increase of 20.8
percent over 1981. he budget receipts cone fro. taxation (40.2562 billion CPA).
ordinary funds (5.8037 billion CPA), and extraordinary funds (1.7894 billion CPA)

as well as loans (1.1 billion CPA). Expenditures: 34.0021 billion CPA will go to
services, 5.525 billion CPA to public works. and 5.3928 billion CPA to equip-ent and
investaent. As concerns expenditures, the finance minister said, "the desire to

and often painful choices." Mr Ky added that proposals for services cane to 135.4
billion francs CPA, "which is out of line with the resources available.” Contribu-
tions to international organizations, inter-African and others, are not spelled out
in this draft budget. Dir Ednond Ky said that the Upper Voltan ninister of Por'eign
Affairs and Cooperation, in conjunction with the other ministers. will take the ini-
tiative in asking choices that will reduce Upper Volta‘s contributions to organiza-
tions that ”do not have any real interest for Upper Volta." [Tut] [Paris muons
TROPICAUX E‘l' monamms in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 26] 8782

(:80: 4719/461
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZIMBABWE

W DISHISSBS PM more GLADE
P14191633 London m was in English 19 Jan 82 p S
[Dispatch by Stephen Taylor: "Memo Denies Party Merger Proposals")

[rest] Salisbury. 18 Jan-4h: Joshua moms. leader of the second largest party
in Zimbabwe's coalition government. today condoned trends with the ruling
mu (PP) party and diseissed claims by Mr Robert hugabe. the prime minister.
that talks would start in two weeks on aerging their parties.

In his most outspoken statement since his followers clashed with Mr Mugabe's
supporters last Pebruary leaving more than 200 dead. Hr mono indicated that
prospects of a merger had, if anything. receded.

Hr Nkomo, President of the Patriotic Front, told me TIMES he was worried that
ZANU (PP) was departing increasingly iron the constitution agreed at Lancaster
house and was holding itself above parlianent.

Mr Mugabe told rallies around Salisbury yesterday that talks would start between
ZARU (PP) and the Patriotic Front shortly to discuss making Zimbabwe a one-party
state. No party other than ZANU (PP) would rule in Zimbabwe and it would be in
power forever.

Nr Nkomo. veteran of nationalist politics and known by his supporters as "Father
of Zimbabwe." said the prime ninistar's statement had raised serious misgivings
in the Patriotic Front and had deeply concerned him personally. ZANU (PP) was
assuming that the Patriotic Front would acquiesce.

The Patriotic Front holds 20 of the 80 black seats in parliament and as the Iain
alternative to ZANU (PP) would have to be involved in any peaceful transition to
a one-party systea. Kr Nholno indicated that there would be no talk on unifica-
tion in the foreseeable future and that although the possibility of a aerger
had been raised "you never heard it froa me."

It was on the constitution that he was most critical. noting that speeches by

Mr Mugabe which set 2AM) (PP) up as the aain political force were a contradiction
of the document which the two leaders signed at Lancaster House "which states
clearly that parliament is supreme and not any political party."

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result ZANU (PP) nenbers were setting theuselves above the organs of state
such as the police and any while party nen had been given a disproportionate
nunber of eppointnents in the civil service.

Mr Nkono. who has been a virtual recluse from public life in recent months, said
he had been shaken by the prime minister 8 weekend speech: "I believed we were.
working together for peace and unity... but you can't force unity."

Speeches by m.- Hugebs on the one-party theme upset Mr Nkoeo's supporters who
traditionally have different regional and tribal affiliations but in recent
nonths they have drawn back from public criticism The fect Mr Nkono has
responded in so forthright e nennsr does not bode well.

COPYRIGHT: fines ﬁswspapsrs Limited 1982

080: 4700/556 m

22
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY