FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10217
28 December 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 755

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

P000 No. 755

CONTENTS

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Improving Economic Situation. Long Term Austerity Reported
(NAMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBIS, 6 Nov 81) .

CHAD

French Actions Said To Have Helped Goukouni -
(Jean-[pins Buchet; JMB AFRIQUE, 1: Nov 81)......................

Details or GUllT's Aid Request to France Reported
(Jean-Louis Buchet; Jm APRIQUE, Is Nov 81)

Meeting ﬁeld To Coordinate International Reconstruction Aid
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET mmmm. 20 Nov 81)

Briefs
Request for Tunisian Assistance
Goukouni's Daughter Marries Qndhdhei'i's Cousin
CONGO

Briefs
EEC Add

MA LMv'I

Foreign Trade in 1980. Trade With France Reviewed
(MARCHE TROPICAUX ET HEDI'I'ERRANE’ENS, 9 Oct 81) ..................
NIGERIA

Increase or Air Traffic With Europe Reported
(MARCEES TROPICAUX Er MEDITERRAN-S, 6 llov 81) ..

Improvement in Port Situation Reported
(MARCEES TROPICAUX LT DEDITERRANEEIIS, 6 Nov 81)

Over 5,1;00 Nev Conpanies Established in 1980
(wow moucmx m man-ms, 6 Nov 81) ..

Briefs

Shsgari To Run Again
More Piracy Feared
Insecurity Outside Capital

Sugar, Tobacco Difficulties
Identity Cards

RWANDA

Briefs
Cooperation with Yugoslavia

S EIEGAL

Two Export-Promoting Bodies Sec l'p
(MARCBES TROPICAU‘X ET MEDITERRANEENS. 6 Nov 81)..

Briefs
831 Loan for SOOOCIM
Decline in Customs Receipts

SOUI’H AFRICA

Homelands. Townships Harbor Seeds of Discontent
(Francois Soudsn; mm: AFRIQUE, 11 Nov 81)

Gold Swap with Foreign Banks
(J.D.P. Jones; FINANCIAL TIMES, 10 Dec 81)
UGANDA

Briefs
Swiss Aid for Coffee

European Financing for Coffee
Agricultural Equipment
Poultry ProJect

- c -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010015-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

IMPROVING ECONMIC SITUATION, LONG TERM AUSTBRITY mom
Paris HARCIIBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov Bl p 2831
[Text] Economic Policy Reported to Be Improving

The Al-‘P [French Press Agency] recently reviewed the political and economic situation
in the Central African Republic [CAR]. Two months after the military coup, this

news agency does not think that a return to the multiparty system is very likely to
take place in the near future. It seems that the parties opposed to Daclto support
the moves made by his succes or such as reorganizing the civil service and taking
legal action against a former minister of national education. Nicolas Gotouas, who

is charged with embezzlement. with the exception of Patasse (Central African People's
Liberation Hovement, me), the other politicians are willing to cooperate with
General Kolingba. They have rejected the MLPc's proposal to hold presidential elec-
tions in the CAR next month. Yet, pamphlets are reported to be circulating in Bangui
denouncing both the military and the politicians.

In the economic sphere, the accession to power of the military brought about. accord-
ing to the AFP, a "relaxation of tension" in public life which has led to a resump-
tion of industrial and economic activity. While they do not speak of a "genuine
recovery." experts from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and from the French
Ministry of Cooperation and Development, currently on assignment in Bangui, indicate
that there has been a “slight improvement" in the Central African economy since 1
September this year.

There is a clear resumption of activity in most local businesses, they note. M
Central African agents, representing French manufacturers of comercial vehicles and
light motorcycles, saw their sales for the month of September going up by 50 percent
and 10 percent respectively compared to the same period in 1980. The only shoe
manufacturer in the CAR increased his retail sales by 30 percent and had to engage
more employees. During the first 8 months of this year, that same manufacturer had
a 17 percent drop in his sales.

However, financial experts consider that they will have to wait "at least" 6 mths
before they can make an "indicative" initial evaluation of the economic situation in
the CAR. In their view. the current economic trends are the result of a climate of
confidence which the military regime was able to create in a country where corrup-
tion and popular dissatisfaction had become a "fact of daily life."

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [ESE ONI.\'

The same experts also point out that the prompt introduction of an economic program
based on relaunching agriculture and cutting back on public expenditure (salaries
account for two-thirds of the national budget) will be as important for the future
of the country as maintaining the present political climate. In particular, they
mention the fact that in 1980 the national public debt amounted to 62 billion CPA
francs (1.26 billion French francs) which included 10 millions worth of debts to
private enterprises established in the country. Only 40 percent of these liabil-
ities can be met at best.

Pensioning off 1,000 civil servants, out of the 24,000 which exist in the CAR,
between new and January next year is one of the conditions set by the IN! to put

the economy on a sound footing. The announced decision to reduce levies and taxes
as an incentive to local business is also intended to boost productivity, according
to the experts.

The campaign against fraud and corruption which the government has started. has
also encouraged consumption. These experts also point out that for more than a year,
the insecurity prevailing in the neighborhoods of Bangui and in the provinces and

the fear of being the victims of looting had curtailed consumption just as much as
the higher cost of living.

To successfully get the economic activity going again, the Military Committee has
adopted a far-reaching program. -Its main objective is to improve the road infra-
structure and to develop the rural and social sectors. A project involving 1,800 has
of roads which will be built, mostly in the direction of Cameroon and Chad, or re-
paired will be implemented between now and the end of 1983 at an estimated cost of
18 billion CPA francs. So far, financing has been found for only one-fourth of

this project.

The military regime is in favor of increasing before 1985 the acreage of four zones
of production to boost cotton farming, since cotton is the country' a main export

crop The estimated capital required for that project is 16 billion CPA francs.

The cotton crop for the 1981-1982 agricultural year, financed by the development Bank
of Central African States (BDEAC), is expected to yield 15,000 tons of cotton. The
1970 crop was 27,000 tons.

A Policy of Austerity

Gen Andre Kolingbs, the CAR's head of state, announced in a radio and television
address, on 1 November, that austerity will be the cornerstone of the budget in
coming years and that public expenditures will be severely curtailed. The president
explained that there will be no salary increases for state employees in. 1982 and
that the major task of the private sector is to create new jobs.

Two months after his accession to power, General Kolingbs painted a dismal picture
of his country's economic situation and explained it with the help of some figures.

The gross domestic product (GDP) has declined by 5 percent since 1977. There is
good reason to fear, the head of state pointed out, that it will drop even further
in 1982. One out of five workers has lost his job since 1979, he added. More than
one—third of the budget is paid by foreign aid. '1his state of affairs," General
Kolingba said, "seriously undermines our dignity and jeopardizes our national
independence and any possibility of recovery for our economy."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Central African Government is alao comitted to reatoring a climate of confi-
dence in the country. "No threat of nationalization will be allowed in Central
Africa," General Kolingba aaid.

Finally, the Central African head of state urged his compatriots to accept long-tern
aacrificea: "It is only at the coat of great efforts that we can hope to enjoy
moderate prosperity in a few year'a time," were his closing words.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena at Cie Paris 1981.

8796
080: 6719/216

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRENCH ACTIONS SAID 1'0 HAVE HELPED COUROUNI
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1087, 4 Nov 81 pp 56-58
[Article by Jean-Louis Buchet: "What is France's purpose?"]

[Text] Some of the actors are different but the same drama is still being played in
Chad. Hitterrand's France is now following on the footsteps of Giscard's France:
under the tenuous cover of a powerless OAU, France's purpose is to neutralize
Qadhdhafi.

First cane the surprising news in Cancun, on 22 October, that the French president
had sent a message to the DAB chairman. Arap Moi of Kenya, asking him to set up
immediately an inter-African force as provided for in the Nairobi Resolution and to
send it to Chad without delay." Francois Hitterrand added that his country was
prepared to participate in this undertaking "in the material, financial and logistic
spheres. To the exclusion,” he explained, "of any military participation." "as

this a public relations love? A reminder of France's "responsibilities" in its area
of influence? A signal to the Americans who consider Qsdhdhafi as a permanent threat
in that area? None of these theories is consistent with France's new diplomacy.
There is more to it.

The embarrassed and conflicting explanations put forward by Claude Cheysson and Jean-
Pierre Cot have not cleared the mystery. The minister of foreign affairs answered
with platitudes: "We are only repeating what has already been said. We want the
GAO resolution on Chad to be implemented and we are underlining our willingness to
help. This matter is dragging on. The Nigerians are prepared to send troops and

so are the Senegalese. There are long-tern financial difficulties. The French
contribution could expedite the arrival of the first troops of the inter-African
force in Ndjanena."

In fact the French attitude is nothing new. Also, it is shared by the Americans who
are determined to contribute toward the setting up of an African force. When
Chadian Minister of Economy and Finance Michal Ngangket Koaneye met, at the end of
September, in Hashington, with James Bishop, assistant undersecretary of state for
African affairs, he is reported to have been given reassurances on that point.

But what is the reason for France's "urgent" call to action now and from Cancun?
Cheysson resorted to the argument of “rumors" usually carried by the press in
connection with Chad and of the "double-dealing" also commonly attributed to Trance
with regard to that country.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.‘ur. 'Ja'l'LbLﬂ'. oat. umbi

For his part, the minister of cooperation and development dramatizes: "The situation
in Chad has deteriorated even further," Jean-Pierre Cot tells us. "France wants to
count on public opinion in Africa and in the world to prevent Libya from carrying

out an actual annexation." This makes things clearer but he is still avoiding the
basic facts.

The truth is that the threat hanging over Chad has taken shape in recent days.
Actually, Qadhdhafi has not abandoned his plans for a "merger." Twice, before and
after Goukouni's visit to Paris, he tried to win over to his idea the president of

the GUNT [Transitional National Union Government] alternating pressure and persuation.
All to no avail. Then he delivered his master stroke. In mid-October, he persuaded
the Chadian president to travel again to Libya and come to Sehba. Goukouni did not
meet with the top Libyan leader. Instead he was given an ultimatue: the merger must
take place "without delay." He is reported to have refused or, according to other
sources, to have asked for a few days to think it over. In any case, his attitude
was interpreted in Tripoli as amounting to a refusal.

The news reached Paris simultaneously with other alarming reports coming from
diplomatic sources and from intelligence agencies. They reported renewed clashes
between the various factions. The usual thing? Not exactly, since the reports add
that "Goukouni's troops are being systematically eliminated." Finally, on Tuesday

20 or Wednesday 21 October, the French Government was told that the Libyans were
preparing to replace Goukouni. Foreign Affairs Minister Acyl Ahmat, who continues

to stay out of the country, was mentioned as his possible successor. He is reported
to be the most "pro-Libyan" member in the GUNT team and his differences with Goukouni
are well known. It is thought that the operation will be carried out very soon or,
at least, before the French-African summit meeting in Paris (3 and 5 November).

The French, who since Goukouni's visit to the Elysee are convinced that he is a
nationalist, view him as the last line of defense against the Libyans. Therefore,
they made their move to help the president of GUNT. As early as the 21st [October]
the decision is made to provide "logistical support." For the time being, this
support will consist of light weapons and ammunition. This will enable Goukouni to
strengthen his troops' position but, naturally, it will not allow him to stand up
to the Libyans effectively. Therefore, it became necessary to launch a diplomatic
offensive. Paris got confirmation from Dakar that Senegalese troops will participate
in the inter-African force. In Cancun, the French delegation wrung out of Shagari
his agreement to send Nigerian troops and got Algeria's support' it made contact
with the Americans. Mitterrand could now send his message to Arap Moi.

It then became obvious that if Qadhdhafi meant to act promptly, he could not be pre-
vented from doing so by the CAD force which will require some time to get organized.
Meanwhile Libya has further consolidated its military hold over the country.

Entrusted with training the future Chadian Integrated National Army, Libya has four
bases in the country: Douguia, Largeau, Biltine and Abeche. The Libyans are far

from behaving like spectators during the clashes between the various opposing factions
in the GUNT and they support Acyl Ahmat's troops.

This is what they did in August when President Goukouni's troops clashed with those
of the minister of foreign affairs in Abeche and in Adre. And again in October when
Acyl Ahmat's supporters fought against the supporters of Minister of Interior Abba
Said.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But, more particularly, the Libyans are fighting against hissein Habre's troops who
are trying to consolidate their positions in the Sudanese frontier. After capturing
three small towns situated northwest of Abeche in Septeatsr, Babre was formd to

fall back behind the border of that neighboring country when he faced Libyan artillery.
Qadhdhafi's troops did not hesitate to cross the border and bold: cams where Hisssin
Habre's army (of 2,000 men) was stationed.

But Mitterrand is hoping that the top Libyan leader will interpret his message to
Arap Moi as a warning and that he will abandon his plan of a merger. At issue is the
reconciliation with France which the leader of the Janahiriya could find useful new
that he has becone, more than ever, Washington's bete noire. and, ultimtely, the
holding of the 0M.) sumit scheduled for 1983 in Tripoli. It seems that Qadhdhafi
was quick to realize this and on the 26th [October] he sent a letter to Hitterrand
through the French Enbassy in Tripoli. In that nessage, he denied that he had tried
to force the merger. Therefore, things are back to where they started with the
slight difference that the creation of the OAU force finally seems to be underway.

In any case. this is a "hot" issue which will impart a feeling of deja vu on the
French-African conference while Hitterrand wanted it to be a "new type" of conference.
(Research by Jos-Blaise Alina)

COPYRIGIIT: Jeune Afrique GRUPIA 1981

8796
C80: 6719/2110

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe brat m. use: omx

DETAILS OF GUNT'S AID REQUEST TO FRANCE REPORTED
Paris JBUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1087, lo Nov 81 pp 58, 59
[Article by Jean-Louis Buchet: "Prom Needles to Peugeot 505 cars"]

[Text] Political problems and military tension notwithstanding, life is reasserting
its demands. It is a question of adding along. There is a positive development:

in the late afternoon of Monday, 5 October, the population of Rdjamens saw a
comercial aircraft land in an airport where only military planes had arrived since
March 1980 when air traffic was suspended a few weeks after the 'battle for Ndjamena"
started. As for the telecomsunicstions system, a team of French technicians is
working round the clock to get it back into operation.

Moreover, in June the Bank of the Central African States (BEAC) reopened its offices
in the capital. The Bank would have preferred to start by reopening its branch in
Houndou where business activities were continued during the war which destroyed
Ndjamena. But for political reasons, President Goultouni decided in favor of re-

opening the branch located in the capital hoping to inspire confidence among foreign
investors. Meanwhile, the Paris National Bank and the Lyon Credit Bank do not seem
to be prepared to resume their activities until a settlement is reached in the matter

of their dispute with the Chadian state.

A moratorium was signed to enable these French banks to be compensated for var damages,
but for the time being, the government cannot relieve the state of insolvency of ‘
the companies, not even of state-owned companies.

The GUNT (Transitional National Union Government) "does not have the required military
or financial resources and this is the njor obstacle to an effective and overall
recovery af the administration." This diagnosis is given by the patient himelf and
it is the main theme of a bulky Memorandum on Urgent Aid for Chad prepared by the
GUNT and presented to the French by President Goukouni when he visited the Elysee

(l8 Septmaber). The memorandum also states: "hpenses are huge and the prospects

of revenues for Chad, in the immediate future, have been signed away due to the total
lack of organization in the tax and customs services.

The total figure for this "urgent aid" is established at 62 billion CPA francs.

Although this amount represents "as Inch as three times the national budget in normal
times," it is not enough to cover the real needs. Even before the civil war started,
the annual operating budget of Chad—which has put all its investment program on the
back burnsr--only amounted to some 20 billion CPA francs. But the current problem is

one Of reconstruction.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US? ONLY

Nothing has been left out of that fully detailed list which includes lilitary
equipment, power-generating sets, bicycles, tank trucks, typewriters and even needles,
notebooks, household utensils and so on.

The lion's share, almost 23 billion CPA francs, goes to the army, The army has top

priority, according to the Chadians who explain: "Eh mast integrate and regroup all
those who are in possession of military weapons to prevent then from regroupiag either
for political purposes or to continue their plundering."

It has been estimated that the Ministry of Economy and Finance needs around 21 billion
CPA francs. Spread chr a period of 6 months, starting in June 1981, these upen-
ditures cover the salaries of civil servants (8.10 billion), the operating expenses

of the various government departments (4.5 billion), repairs and equipment of govern-
ment buildings (7.778 billion). No sector has been left out and the Ministry of
Public Health, with 5.8 billion CPA francs, takes third place in the list of priori-
ties. It is followed by. Tourism (3.8 billion), Rural Develoth (2.656 billion),
National Education (2.556 billion).

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs comes last and looks like a poor relative with an
allocation of 150 million CPA francs. Which does not mean that the GUN! does not
believe in the effectiveness of diplomacy. But its first concern is to establish

a fleet of cars. "Hhen we receive guests of our country," the Ismrnndum explains,
"the ministry has to appeal to the civic spirit of our compatriots, asking than to
let them have a few cars." Peugeot cars aeens to have a particular attraction for
Chadian diplomats. In fact they want France to provide 20 Peugeot 501., 10 Peugots
6010 and 10 Peugeots 505.

All this based on the premise that the civil war is over. And over for good.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPIA 1981

8796
(280: (0719/2110

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

MEETING HELD TO COORDINATE INTERNATIONAL RECONSTRUCTION AID

Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1880, 20 Nov 81 p 2954

[Text] As we announced in our issue of the 13 November, p 2892, a coordination
meeting on international aid for reconstruction in Chad was held in Paris on 12
and 13 November. The meeting, which was scheduled a long time ago, in the be-
ginning was to be attended by representatives of the UNDP, the FED (European
Development Fund), and France, who in fact have been granting economic assistance
to Chad since the end of the fighting in Ndjamena. Other possible aid donors
expressed their intention to participate in this meeting; the meeting was there-
fore enlarged and its new importance was marked by the fact that it was chaired
by Mr Tahir Souleymane, Chadian planning and reconstruction minister.

In addition to the French, Chadian, and UNDP and FED delegations, the meeting was
attended by representatives from the PRC (Economic Cooperation Ministry), Canada,
the United States, Italy, the ADB, the EADEA (Arab Bank for African Economic
Development), the IMF, the world Bank, the BEAC [Bank of Central African States],
the BDEAC [Development Bank of the Central African States], and the HEP. The
French delegation included representatives of the cooperation and development
minister, of the Ministry of Economy and Finances (Treasury Directorate), the
Foreign Relations Ministry and the CCCE [Central Fund for Economic Cooperation].

Positive Record

The Paris meeting led to specific commitments which were called "encouraging" by
Mr Tahir Souleymane who told APP [French Press Agency] that the participants.
particularly France and the international organizations, had announced a certain
number of specific commitments in the areas of food aid and the restoration of his
country's infrastructure.

The discussions revolved around an aid program for needs estimated by UN and the
Chadians at between $200 and $300 million over a period of three years. “The
Americans," Hr Souleymane added, "were content to listen although their partici-
pation in this meeting was already a positive step." "Their representative indi-
cated that the United States can contemplate aid to Chad only if there are no
longer any Libyans in the country," the Chadian minister explained.

Hr. Souleymane emphasized that financing for the Inter-African Force was not taken
up in Paris but "it seems that the United States and France are ready to contri-
bute to its financing." It was noted in the Ministry of Foreign Relations that the
logistic aid which France was ready to give to the Inter-African Force would amount
to several tens of millions of francs.

9
It“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂi(nﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The meeting was primarily concerned with the revival of Chadian administration,
the infrastructure facilities (roads, transportation, water, electric power,
communications), rural development, and animal husbandry. Chad wants this to
be followed by a similar meeting at Ndjamena within 5 to 6 months.

France pledged to step up its aid to Chad in the areas of health and agriculture.
It is also to furnish 5,000 tons of cereals,to restore the Chadian Ministry of
Finances and the public works school, as well as the Ndjamena-Abeehe road and
the electric power plants in that latter city. It will participate in the res-
toration of telecommunications and the electric power grid.

Among the international organizations represented at the meeting, the UNDP promised
aid in the amount of $6.5 million for infrastructure facilities in the city of
Ndjamena, the FED promised food aid amounting to 4,000 tons of cereals plus a sum
of 5.5 million European ECU (highway network, water pipelines. infrastructure).

The HFP is to furnish aid in the amount of $5 million, the AD! is to give 817
million (electric power and water) with the possibility of becoming active in

the areas of telecomunications and the road net. The IMF has basically approved
compensatory financial assistance and will take care of Chadian demands.

The A03 will support the Ministry of Public Works and the water supply system for
Ndjamena.

International aid for the reconstruction of Chad would thus come to a total of
Pr 800 million-—not including France.

French aid in progress comes to Fr 42 million with Fr 30 million earmarked for aid
to restore the Chadian administration. For the 1982 program, the restoration of
the Abeche electric power plant alone was estimated at Fr 2 million.

In detail, the French aid program for 1982 calls for the continuation of operations
in the southern part of Chad and new activities in the polders of Lake Chad and
rice cultivation at Doba under the heading of agriculture, rural development, and
animal husbandry. Technical assistance to the laboratory at Farcha will be re-
sumed, as will health protection for Sahelian cattle.

The resumption of technical aid will involve the sectors of finances and education,
as well as health (major endemic disease service and continuation of aid in the
form of medical teams at Ndjamena and Houndou). It will also be manifested in
telecommunications and electricity.

Chad inn Needs

In his speech on 20 November at the opening of the meeting, the Chadian planning
minister drew a detailed picture of Chad's needs.

The Chadian program is set up around the main topic, that is to say, the revival
of the central administrationrhich requires major financial and logistic resources

which the CUNT (Transitional National Union Government) does not have at this
moment.

The administrative buildings, where 15 percent of the total volume are currently
beyond recovery, would require a financing effort on the order of 10 billion CPA.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vehicle needs would be 1.3 billion CPA, with 117 million for reproduction
equipment, 7 billion for specific technical equipment, to which we would have
to add 1.7 billion for office furnishings and supplies.

In addition to the administration's need for technical assistance, Hr Tahir
Souleymane also pointed out the considerable shortage in cereal output expected
for this year and asked the international coonmnity for emergency aid amounting
to 100,000 tons of cereals. He estimated the cost of rebuilding homes in
Ndjamena at 2 billion CPA. For rural development, the total amount of desirable
efforts (correction of food production shortage, restoration of cereal stockpiles
and cattle, effort to stop the advance of the desert) would come to 2 billion CPA.
The information and telecommunications sector would need 880 million while educa-
tion would require 2.9 billion.

The health situation, which is mediocre even in peacetime, has deteriorated and
the needs of this sector would come to 3.2 billion (destruction of infrastructure
facilities, shortage of medications and personnel). To guarantee the maintenance
of the basic road net for the airports and the cleanup of Ndjamena, the planning
minister has come up with an estimated figure of 9 billion which Chad needs.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morcux et Cie Paris 1981.

5058
C50: 4719/293

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

REQUEST FOR TUNISIAN ASSISTANCE--‘hmisia/Chad: Technical Assistance. Chad is

said to have asked Tunisia to send technical assistants. It is however not certain
that mnisia; which has a strong need for qualified personnel for its own develop-
ment, can respond to the wishes of the Chadian officials. Logistical problems are
present besides: neans to put at the disposal of the technical assistants. vehicles,
etc. [Text] [Paris NAMES 1'30le 81‘ HEDITBWS in French No 1878. 6 Nov 81]
[COPYRIGB‘rz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

GOUKOUNI'S DAUGHTER MISS QADHDHAPI'S COUSIN-Jrhe daughter of Chadian President
Goukouni Oueddei got married at the end of August to 001 Abdeleaie Messaoud. a
cousin of Qadhdhafi. This colonel is none other than the cos-lander in chief of the
Libyan troops in Chad. "as it with this happy event in mind that Goukouni was given
the rank of honorsry Libyan colonel? [Text] [Paris JEUNB AFRIQ'UE in French No 1087.
6 Nov 81 p 1.2] [COPYRIGH'R Jeune Afrique GRUPIA 1981] 8796

680: 4710/2110

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

00300

BRIEFS

BBC AID--The European Development Fund (ED?) is providing 2.5 aillion ECU: [Mopean
currency unit] to continue financing the inroveuent project in the M'Poe, in
Brazzaville, as well on £00,000 acne worth of technical assistance to the nunc

[National Development Bank of the Congo]. For additional detaila, see under the
heading "Courrier de Bruxellee." [Text] [Paris WES TROPICAUX 31' animals

in French No 1878. 5 Nov 81 p 2833] (comment: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

080: 4719/216

l3
POI! OITIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hum

FOREIGN ME IN 19803111133 WITH FRANCE REVIEWED
Paris ELBOW TROPIQUX ET MEDITMEDIS in French 110 18711, 9 Oct 81 p 2582

ﬁrm 7 Showing a chronic deficit, mum balance or foreign trade has
Seriouﬁy deteriorated since 1977, with the changing eituation in foreign
trade as follove, in nillione of kwachae (1 kwacha equalling roughly 6.30
French trance):

1977 1978 1 979 1980
Inporte 209.8 287.7 326 355.6
Brporte 180.3 155.7 189.8 238.9
Deficit - 29.5 -129 0136.2 416.?
Rate of Coverage (S) 85.9 514.7 58.2 67.2

In 1980 inporte, raw nateriale for induetry, including petrolem producte,
nuke up 31 percent of the total; trans neteriel anounteto 17 percent;
then uni-finished products (16 percent ; induetrial Muriel and equip-

ment (1!: percent), and coneuner goode (12 percent). South Africa ie Malawi'a
main eupplier, with 38 percent of all inparte; it ia followed by Great
Britain (19 percent) and ﬂeet Ger-any (6 percent), the Netherlande (14 percent),
the United States (3.5 percent), and Zimbabwe (3 P‘rcent).

Agricultural producte nuke up the eeeentiel part of exporte tron Halaui with
tobacco and tee providing 71; percent of exporte in 1980, or tobacco, 108.8
million kwachee; eugar, 36.3 million; tea, ”.3 nillion; peanute, 15.9 nil-
lion; cotton, h.6 million; rice, 3 million; niecellaneoue producte include
dried vegetables, tuna oil, coffee, caehew and nacadmia note (which have been
ehowing a narked increaee the paet few yeare) The Waited Kingdon ie Halawi'e
main cuetoner, with 26 percent of the 1980 total; after it are included the
United Statee (16 percent), ﬂeet Oernany (8 percent), the Netherlande (8 per-
cent), and Zimbabwe (11.5 percent).

So far as France ie concerned, in 1980 it waa Halawi'e 11th ranking eupplier
(0.9 percent of inporte) and ite 7th ranking cuetcner (2.7 percent of the
country'e exporte). l-‘renoh euppliee are coaprieed nainly of equipent goode

1!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

(36 percent), semi-finished products (his percent), end coneuer goods (20
percent). 1979 deliveries were increased by helicopter soles. As for French
purchesee, 97 percent of then were nade up of agro-alinentary products: prin-
cipally tobacco and sugar.

The evolution of French-Melanin trade since 1977 is amused as follows,
in millions of French trance:

19?? 1978 1979 1980
French sales 12.8 23.9 u6.9 18
French purchases 311.9 35 30.6 35.8

In December 1980, e contract for 39 zillion francs, concerning the supply of
meteorological equipnent, was signed with Helm-Ii: the delivery of meteriel
was to be spread over 2 years, so these euppliee uill be reflected in French-
Moleuien trade in 1982 and 1983.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

121h9
050: 1319/2119

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

FERTILIZER PLANT PROJBCT--Haputo has entrusted the study of a project to manufacture
fertilizer from local natural gas to the u.s. Fluor Corporation. There is one
hitch: Mozambique is thus resorting to a firn which has been put in cha:3e of the
expansion of the South African plant transfer-ins coal into oil. [Text] [Paris
JEUNB AFRIQUE in French No 1091, 2 Dec 81 p 63] [COP’YRIGH‘1‘: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA

[981]

C80: 4719/2331

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONIJ
FOR OFFKJAL USE ONLY

NIGER

United Arab Emirates and current president of the Islamic Solidarity Fund, Mr 'Izz-al-
Din Ibrahim. This first section, whose cost comes to $18.5 million, cells for the
construction of an Arabic language teaching school. an administrative complex and
housing for the students. The sort, which is to be started during the next several
days. is to be finished in 24 months. The total estimates for the project of the
Islamic University of Niger come to $60 million. The Second Islamic Summit in Lahore
had decided on this in 1974. This university is to serve Central Africa. The con-
struction of a second Arabic-Islamic University is also planned in Uganda for East
Africa. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1880,

20 Nov 81 p 2947] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 5058

COOPERATION HIT" FRANCB--Col Seyni Kountche 0n 7 November. concerning French-Nigerian
cooperation, welcomed the fact that the mixed commission, which met after the con-
ference of heads of state of France and Africa in Paris, gave "satisfaction in the
areas which Niger considers to be priority areas. that is to say, rural development,
communications. health. and education." Concerning uranium. Niger's principal export
raw material, the president of Niger estimated that initial negotiations on the sales
price charged France in 1982 seemed to indicated a "turning point" compared to 1981.

in Niger and brings the MADE commitment volume to that country to a figure of
5,749 million CPA. [Text] Paris MARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No
:92" 7O an 8) n 2948] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et 7‘: Paris 1981] 5058

630: 4719/291
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL}
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum

INCREASE OF AIR TRAFFIC HIT}! EUROPE REPORTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET “BMW in Reach No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2829

[- Text _7 Nigeria Airways freight traffic between Nigeria and Europe last year
anounteo to 1,600 tons, of which 72. 9 percent was in connections with Great
Britain alone. In the same year, traffic with Italy showed 151: tons and
with the Netherlands, 267 tons.

In 1980 also, the company's passenger traffic with Europe amounted to a total
of 138,517 passengers, of which the neJority, 108.1159 were outbound from, or
passengers to, Great Britain. The Netherlands took the secondpl place asfor
freight, with 30, 058 passengers, closely followed by Italy, with 28, 899 pes-
sengers.

The passenger traffic for the first six nonths of this year ,with no separec-
tion of connections with Dir-ope, has already reached 911,876 passengers. The
traffic permits prediction as of now of a large increase for the 12 months
of 1981 over the 12 months of 1980.

The freight traffic for the six-month period of this year between Nigeria
and Great Britain also permits the prediction of a large increase in general
traffic between Maps and the federetion for this year over last ear' s.
Indeed, the Inndon-Legos traffic for the first six months of 1981 totalled
859 tons, whereas during the first six months of 1980, it was only 298 tons.
July, September, November, and December being the heavy traffic nontha,"a
record 3.000 tons is expected for the year. It should be noted that on this
link, the second six-month period of 1980 showed a figure over twice as high

as the one for the first six-month period, with 725 tone, which anounted to
a total for the 12 months of about a thousand tons.

The London-Lagos link is the busiest. The one from Reno to London, which
comes second, achieves only one-tenth of the figure for the first. In third
place, but much farther behind, is the Port ﬂarcourt to tendon link.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

121119
080: [4719/2118

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

IMPROVWT IN PORT SITUATIOII REPORTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRMEB‘S in Punch No 1378, 6 Nov 81 p 2828

Text _7 Nigeria's ports, which a few years ago experienced very heavy conges-
ion, are reportedly under-utilised at present. The Nigerian Ports Authority
(NPA) prefers to think of this situation as closer to nornal, and attributes
it to the refitting of the handling equipnent and the develop-lent of contain-
er transport and roll-on roll-off vessel traffic which make load-

ing and unloading operations easier and quicker.

The ports of Lagos, Tin Can Island, and Port has-court thus seen less crowded,
although they are the busiest. a) the other hand, the ports of Harri and
Calabar are experiencing clearly insufficient traffic oo-pared to their capa-
city. The port of Calabar, especially, is the least attractive to ships, and
it is even estimated that since it was put into service, it has never func-
tioned at full capacity really.

Containerisetion hes conpletely changed the look of the ports. The unpacking
of goods, often bsdly stored, is no longer seen in then. It is true that a

few old containers are found hung up in transit, but generally speaking the
empty containers are reloaded onto the ships.

Container Consultants (Nigeria), united (crc) is believed to receive sons
350 containers a day, sending back 330 of then enpty. The nonthly container
traffic is said to be between 10,000 and 11,000 units of about 20 tons of
merchandise each, which would amount to an annual tonnage of containeriaed
goods of 2.5 million tons.

The shipping lines serving Nigeria at present, it is recalled, are the Far
Bast-west African conference (FDIAC), the Anerican Heat African Freight Con-
ference (mm), the Continental West African Conference (0M0), the Associ-
stion of Indigenous conference Lines (”1101.) , the United Kingdo- 11est African
Line (UKUAL), and the Mediterranean Heat African Conference (mo).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1981.

121119
080: ”19/2118

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

OVER 5.1.00 NW mum ESTABLISHED Ill 1980
Paris MARCHES TROPICWX ET mnmums in Preach No 1878, 6 “av 81 p 2829

ﬁrm] The umber or col-puma established in Nigeria in 1980 wee supposed
to be, we reported, 5,1155 (HARCHES TROPIGAUX ET MEDITMS 1) October,
page 2766). This figure was given by the First Bank of Nigeria, Limited
(formerly Standard Bank Nigeria, Limited) in its latest quarterly report.
The bank also gives some interesting details about the subject.

Indeed, according to the bank, these 5,100 companies are divided into activity
sectors as follows: comeroial culpanies: 2,080 engineering and construc-

tion coapanies: 1,095; service es: 1,08 3 nanufacturing companies:
526; ogre-alimentary companies: 3 financial and investment cupanies:
2 2.

What can be seen frcn these figures is that the nest important sectors for '
the develoment of the local econoly, the manufacturing, ago-industrial,
and financial sectors, are the ones which have attracted investors the host.

This is a result of their lack of financial assets, as the anountnf these-
new conpanies' capital indicates.

Indeed, still according to the First Bank, 50 percent of the new companies
in question were set up with capital below 50,000 naira, 22 percent with
capital between 50,000 and 100,000 naira, and less than 3 percent claimed
capital in excess of 500,000 naira.

It is understandable, in these conditions, that the federal goverment should
have considered liberalizing investeents by granting increesed opportunities
to present Joint venture companies associeting Nigerian capital and foreign
cspital (MARCHES TROPICAUI ET mimms 30 October previously quoted,
page 3765). In addition, it is probable that geverment pronises to grant
supplementary assets to the Nigerian Industrial Developeent Bank (IIIDB)

end to the Nigerian Bank for Counrce and Industry (NBCI) will in future
years be beneficial to productive invesuents of enterprises, Just as they
will benefit from the future industrial development centers planned for esta-
blishsent in each state for the proeotion in particular of small and mediue

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industries.

The First Bank else points out that the otete of Lagos is first in rank for
estehlialaent of new coapaniee. In 1980, 3,052 are acid to have been estab-
lished, or 58 percent of the total umber. In second place, but with e much
lower figure: only 292 conpaniee (5.3 percent of the total) con-u the
state of Keno.

COPIRIGH'I‘: Rene Morena: et Cie Peri: 1981.

121119
050: b719/2h8

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOBIL

BRIEFS

swan: 10 RON Ammo-Addressing journalists on 1 lovslaber, Chief adise
Akinlaye, chairman of the ruling party, the national Party or Nigeria (in),
stated that the head of state, ilbaji Shehn Shegari, would seek mother tern
of office at the 1983 elections. Chief Akinlaye specified that the constitu-
tion provided for such a possibility, and added: I'luihen a use has been satis-
factory, he should be given a chance to shine again.I According to this poli-
tical leader, it is unlikely that a coalition of the four other official par-
ties can be formed because of the antagonisn between at least two of then:
the Nigeria People's Party (NP?) and the Unity Party of Nigeria (UPI). He
therefore did not feel that the prospect worried his party. '1: one of the
per-ties wants to cooperate with us, the door is open,‘ he added for the bane-
fit or the "PP, which has broken or! its accord with the UPI. When asked
about the for-er leader of the Biefran secession, Oduegu 03m, living in
exile in Ivory Coast, Chief Akinlaye stated that in his party's opinion, a
nan who has connitted an error need not necessarily m for it with lifelong
exile, adding, however, that the free pardon issue solely on the _
president, according to the constitution. [Text 7 Paris moans marrow:
in mnmms in French 11o 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2‘82 J [cements Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 1211.9

NR3 PIRACY mam-There is already concern in Nigeria over a possible re-
currence of acts of piracy during the year-end holidays, especially since
after a lull due to the security neaeures implemented, there have been fresh
repeated attacks over the past few weeks. The well-equipped, erased pirates
still seen to be receiving, all too often, the benefit of connivance, especi-
ally in finding out about ships' nanifests. It is true that unlike last year
and the beginning of this year, there is no longer'.an average of 12 attacks

a day, but recent examples do arouse legitinste concern. The radio alern sys-
toes are felt to be inadequate, even detective, and the 2M; private vharves in-
sufficiently protected. In addition, several organisations bsve suggested that
ships waiting to be unloaded anchor at least 20 to 25 miles off shore, rather
than S or 6 miles, where they are much more exposed. Along vessels recently
attacked are mentioned the "Tainan," 'Pean Piraeus,“ "Pia Danielsen," “Atlan-
tic Mai-u," 'Maela," "African )hru,‘ "l‘endai ham," and 'chai Van." The
"Taifun' was even attacked three times, on 3 consecutive days, 15, 16, and

17 September. [Text] /‘ Paris moans mncaux m mmmems in new:
No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2823] [commute Rene noreux et Oie Paris 1931] 1211.9

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INSBCURITY OUTSIDS CAPITAL-omen though the insecurity prevailing in Lagos is
often denounced (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITEBRMIBDIS, 23 October, page
2697), it appears that the capital has no monopoly in this donein. Indeed,
attacks are often noted in other localities and other states. They are
reported as news items in the press or by travelers passing through. A few
recent exanples bear witness to the general insecurity. Thus, in Kaduna,

the wife of a British officer was violently attacked on 15 October. .In Ilerin,
all assenblies have been forbidden since 11; October because of the insecurity
resulting from political rivalries. In the state of Oyo, according to the
police comissioner of that state, Alhaji tharu (below, about 30 13~year-old
girls were kidnapped during the month of Septenber alone, which anounts to
one per day. /' Text 7 Paris MARCHBS TBOPICAUX 3T MEDITERRANEIS in french
No 1878,61 Nov-81 p 1’82 _7 [daemon-r: Rene Moreux at on Paris 1981] 121119

SUGAR, TOBACCO DIFFICULTIESn-Two large Nigerian conpanies, the Nigerian Sugar
Company, Limited, of Becita, in the state of Kawara, and the Nigerian Tobacco
Company, Limited, of Ibadan, in the state of 0.70, are currently grappling with
serious financial difficulties, to the extent that they are considering luring
off some 3,700 persons between then. The first conpany has appealed to the
federal government for help, as it did, incidentally, in 1978 when it found
itself in an identical situation. That appeal, supported at the tine by the
National Union of hood, Beverage, and Tobacco hployees was heard. The union
has just given its support to the sugar company again, while, however, request-
ing the authorities in Lagos to hold an investigation into the conpany's man-
agenent this time. The union, whose secretary general is 3.1:. Oyebanjo, feels
indeed that the company has been mismanaged, having, in particular, made some
purchases that were not necessary at all. As regards the second company, also
receiving the union's support in its dealings with the goverment, and whose
lay-offs reportedly effect only 700 people, the difficulties are believed to
stem from the high level of contraband activities in the cigarette narket.

The contraband goods are said indeed to deprive it of outlets. The union
does not oelieve, though, that 1 ing off 700 persons would be the best solu-

tion to the company's roblen. rm] Paris mom TROPIOAUX m mum-
mms in trench No 1 78, 6 Nov 81 p 2829] [00911101111 Rene noreux at on
Paris 1981] 1211.9

IDENTITY CARDS-4m: Nigerian federal minister of the interior, Professor Iya
Abubaaar, announced during October that the national identity card will be
required at the next elections, planned for 1983. [Text] FParis moans
mopzcwx m HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 1981 p 3829] [corr-
RIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.7 121119

C80: 16719/2108

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

COOPERATION RITE xmosuvnnln Belgrede, Ruende end Iugoslevie heve signed
e cooperetion screenent in the srses of science, technology, educetion and
culture, the Yugoelev egency mum enncunced on 30 October. The Wt
provides for exchenges of experts end stw groups between the tvo countries.
the training or students end verious Iugoslev end Ruenddn culture]. events

in both countries. [Text / ans memo: n'r man-mews in punch
No 1878, 6 m 81 p 2837] comment: Rene Hereux et 01. am 1981] 1211.9

CSO: l{LIB/2148

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

THO EXPORT-PROMOTING BODIES SET UP
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITEBRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2818

[Text] In its issue of 12 September, the JOURNAL OFFICIEL of Senegal published two
decrees. One (No 81-635), dated 6 July 1981, deals with the creation and organiza-
tion of the National Commission of Export Credit and Credit Discount Fund.

The introductory statement emphasizes that Senegal's foreign trade suffers from
chronic deficit due to the sharp and constant climb of imports and the slow and
fluctuating increase of its exports. This situation made the government decide to
launch a coordinated program aimed at promoting Senegalese exports to eventually
correct the trade balance without having to cut back on imports beyond a level
compatible with the country's development targets.

However, to effectively encourage exports one must have easily available financing,
credit that is not too costly and protection against the risks inherent in export
operations. As a matter of fact. the economic situation has now reached the point
where it is becoming difficult to get export orders unless prospective clients can
be offered conditions of deferred payment similar to those offered by competitors
in the international marketplace. That is the general idea behind the creation of
the bodies described below.

--The National Commission of Export Credit and Credit Insurance is the first link in
the system of export credit and export credit insurance. Its function is to eval-
uate whether export operations are eligible for preferential credit and for credit
insurance. In a broader context, the commission participates in the process of
deciding and directing Senegsl's policy on export credit.

Its membership indicates that pains were taken to associate all the parties involved
in the process of deciding and implementing the national policy on credit and in-
surance. Its secretariat is entrusted to the Senegalese Agency for Foreign Trade
Insurance (ASACB) attached to the Senegalese Center for Foreign Trade.

--The Export Credit Discount Fund will be in charge of the compensation granted when
preferential rates are assigned to exports guaranteed by the Senegalese Agency for
Foreign Trade Insurance (ASACB) and will also act as the underwriter of ASACB.

The financial resources required by this fund have been estimated at 240 million CPA
francs after assessing the financial needs of the Senegalese export enterprises.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These resources will be provided by stand-by credits eamrked in the 1980-1981
budget to subsidize exports.

The amount of funds required for the balanced trade subsidies and for the interest
discount will be determined every 6 months on the basis of estimated figures sub-
aitted to the Ministry of Economy and Finance by scum [expansion unknown].

The discount Fund will be managed by a special office of the SO'MGA to facilitate
the financing of export operations through endorsements, acceptances, discounts or
any other loan and credit instruments.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

8796
080: [0719/216

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

loan at 8 percent interest rate taking into account an interest discount on the
resources of the European Development Fund (EDP). This company, with a capital stack

held by Senegalese private interests, operates the country‘s only cement plant which
is located 30 has from Dakar near limestone deposits. With an annual capacity of

380,000 tons, the plant can no longer satisfy the local market. The investment pro-

satisfy the local demand and possibly to export to neighboring countries (Mauritania,
Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali and even the Cape Verde Islands) which do not have

sufficient production capacity. Part of the investments required for the project

will be supplied by the Central Funo for Economic Cooperation. [Text] [Paris
MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2817] [COPYRIGHT:

DECLINE IN CUSTOMS RECEIPTS--Customs receipts brought in 55 billion CPA francs to
Senegal'e national budget of 125 billion CPA francs. said Serigne Pall. director
general of the Senegalese Custoas Service in a recent interview with the Dakar

daily LE SOLBIL. These receipts, which had been growing by 10 and 12 percent a year,
have now dropped 1.2 billiin CPA francs below their expected level, Pall added.

peanuts) and of more liberal tariff measures adopted to boost the exports of local
industries. Fall announced that the Senegalese Customs Service. a paramilitary force
of 1.800 agents. will receive some 100 new vehicles and is also going to computeriae
its operations and improve its radio equipment. In addition to this, coastal

Senegalese Navy. while air surveillance will be carried out in cooperation with the

Air Force. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ar HBDITBRRANEENS in French No 1878
6 Nov 81 p 2818] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

350: h719/216

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HOMELANDS, msmps HARBOR s-s or DISOONTENT
Paris Jsuus AFRIQUE in French No. 1088, 11 Nov 81 pp 52, 55-56 '

[Article by Francois Sotdan: "Journey Through Apartheid."]

[Text] It was a July day in a Paris restaurant. A French
businessman. the official Paris representative of the interests
of an "independent" South African Bantustan, Bophuthatswana, had
invited a JEUNE APRIQUE journalist, Francois Souden, to lunch.
Curious, on who knows what kind of trial, our associate accepted.
Vaguely suspicious, he would soon become flatly skeptical when
the "commercial counselor" (that is his title) said to bin, in
the most serious tone in the world: "He invite you to case
visit gophuthatswana, we will pay for everything, airfare and
hotel.

The deuce! The embassy of South Africa in Paris has always
refused any visa to JEUNE AIRIQUE, and one of our journalists
could, just like that, visit one of these hoaelands, these
"Bantu reserves" with fictitious independence, down there where
no one-or almost no one--goes, short of being an inveterate
propagandist for apartheid. However, Souden went. And,
furthernore, not alone, since Pascal Haitre photographer,
accompanied him.

“by? Basic. When a country--even a phantom one-invitas a
journalist to visit and pays his hotel bill, it is always
under the impression (sometimes with reason) that an article
let us say a favorable one overall, will result. This is what
is called "returning the elevator." In the specific case of
Pretoria and the rather pitiable chiefs placed at the head of
the Bantustan, the anticipated benefit was incalculable: a
"positive" article in JEUNB APRIQUE was a possible introduc-
tion to the GA" and the UN, in short, a step towards inter-
national recognition of the honelands and the legitimization
of the policy of separate development. For Souden and Haitre
it was the unique chance to delve into South Africa, even in
its most disgraceful aspects, its most hidden faces.

Of course, they were followed, guided, "listened to," questioned
and searched. But all of South Africa would have had to be

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l-‘Sl-I ONLY

covered with a black veil to prevent them from seeing. “hen
reality is this violent, it no longer hides itself. As for
those who believed that a jorunalist could be "influenced,"
they will understand that this is not done. No doubt they
were unaware of Hubert Beuve-Hery's, the founder of LB
MONDE, quip, when he advised his associates to accept

invitations, but not to forget to "spit in the soup" afterwards.

For 5 million whites south of the Liapopo, between Beitbridge and Cape Town, the
press is free. That is, almost. The only restrictions: pornography and
military secrets. For the rest, everything is told, displayed, photographed. And
this is not the least of the paradoxeswor of the ingenuity-wf the South African
system that it does not permit those who have forged it and who live by it to be
unaware of any of the conditions imposed on 20 sillion blacks.

Example: one week at the end of this year 1981, a tendon selection fros the news-
papers. In Johannesburg, wellington Hpalweni, age 22, an unemployed youth from
Soweto, appeared before the regional court for "possession of subversive literature,"
in this case, a copy of DAWN and one of AFRICAN MST, the magazines published
by the African National Congress [ANC]. In Cape Town, Hashiela Brown, age 29 years,
black and female, is fined 20 tends (or the choice of 20 days in prison) for having
dared to cross a beach reserved for whites. In Pretoria, a 27-year-old black
guitarist, Abey Hahlobo, and a 23-year-old white student, Vivien Epstein, were

just arrested in the middle of the night. Reason: they were making love, an
infringment of the Immorality Act which may cost them dearly. In Florida, in
Transvaal. a drun majorette conpetition was interrupted by about ten young whites'
with crewcuts brandishing placards such as "ltsffirs not welcome” because two
competitors-«Rita and Rena Nene, age 15 years—had the scandalous nerve to be African.

These various happenings, routine in "deepest" South Africa, reported in minutest
detail by a liberal press which linits itself to recording the most blatant effects
of apartheid, but does not explain them. show, if there is still a need to, that
nothing basic has changes within the pale fortress. Nothing, or very little: 3
years later, the resounding speeches on the need to "liberalize" apartheid with
which Pieter Botha inaugurated his term as prime minister in 1978 have only been
followed by the "desegrstion" of certain restaurants and some nightclubs in
Johannesburg and Cape Town.

Elsewhere, rural South Africa has not even known the slightest breath of change.
In Baberton, for example, a small village in Orange Free State, "bantu bashing,"
a favorite sport of Afrikasner farmers which consists of beating blacks suspected
of the very with tree stumps before taking them to the police station, is still
practiced.

In Brandfort, where Winnie Mandela, wife of the leader of the ANC who is imprisoned
for life at the Robben Island penitentiary, has been placed under house arrest, the
stores always have two doors and two counters: one for blacks (with black cashiers)
and one for whites (with white cashiers). And the "homelands" policy, the ultimate
goal of the "great apartheid" theorized a quarter of a century ago by Hendrik
Verwoerd, has ended in such a disaster that an official commission of inquiry, the
Riekert co-sission, was able to recongise its "total failure" in the conclusions of
its recent report.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, those who imagine South Africa as an ocean of nisery punctuated with
islands of white prosperity are wrong: a black middle class, rich enough to be
able to furnish itself with glittering W's and 7.000 rand (more than 2 million
CPA francs) weddings exists, and its growth is one of the rare "successes" with
which the Botha team can flatter itself.

This comfortable middle class, this generation of supposed "Uncle Toms" intended
to serve as a buffer between the white power and the black mass, is recruited

from among the several hundred thousand Africans authorised to live outside the
homeland:. permanently. In Soweto, for crawls, small black businessmen have

f inanced—and live in--the 300 spacious villas of the Selection Park quarter. while
the large majority of the inhabitants of this inense suburb of Johannesburg are
still crowded into their brick bores without running water or electricity. Bach
township of the major cities of South Africa thus hes its "chic" quarter with
gardens and swi-ing pools where black doctors, professors and businessmen live.

however, the constitution of a privileged urban black class. ardently hoped for
by white business interests—who see in it the possibility of increasing their
markets», has a strong chance of turning a ainst its instigatora: "You know, the
best way to oppress men is to keep them in misery and ignorance," smiles one of
the members of a civic group in Soweto, seated in a leather armchair below a .
portrait of Martin Luther King in a villa in Selection Park; "If you let them live
a little better. then they realize that they could live a lot better; and it is
these people who create the revolutions. If the whites believe that we are Uncle
Toms. it won't be long before they change their tune."

The non-violent civic resistance groups which have arisen over the past It or 5
years within the non-white col-unity are. indeed. most often led by the most
active members of this African middle class. Cowarable to a certain extent to
the Black American Col-unity Action Groups in the 1960's, they refuse any coopera-
tion. any contact with power; they preach passive resistance, selective boycotts
or rent strikes. "He practice the tactics of harassment." explains llthato hotlana,
55 year-old salt and pepper goateed founder of the "Omittee of the Ten" in

Soweto, first of these civic groups, "and we trap apartheid in its on contradic-
tions."

One case among others; last 21 September, Hotlana and two of his friends appeared
before the Johannesburg court for having illegally organized a meeting against
evictions in an Anglican church in Soweto. with great dignity and in a slightly
ironical tone. Hotlans told the judges in powdered wigs that he didn't understand
the reasons for his indictment very well: "The law prohibits political meetings
for blacks, this is true. But you know as I do, Your Honor, that under the con-
stitution the blacks have no political existence in this country. Therefore, you
can call this meeting what you will. but it would be unconstitutional to term it
a political meeting since it was a meeting of blacks." The judges, red with
embarrassment, had to interrupt the hearing for time to find a reply.

The ideological support for these resistance organisations very naturally arises
from the black consciousness movement. whose founders--such as Steve Bantu Biko,

dead due to torture lo years sgo--also belong to what is called the African elite.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWDR OFTNCIAL USEICNNLY

The Black Consciousness Movement [BCH] has inundated an entire generation of young
blacks in the townships, giving them back this cultural pride which. quite often,
their parents had lost. Its influence is enormous, many-faceted, felt as much in
clothing styles, in music--two of the singers most popular with blacks, Steve
Kekana and Patience Africa, are directly inspired by the "Hovement"-~as in the
posters hung along the townsiip streets ("Co black to natural," "Straight black
and beautiful!").

For the South African police, who watch it and penetrate it with a certain degree
of effectiveness (through the intervention of the "Z squadron," security services)
to the point that Nthato Notlans willingly affirms that "when three black militants
meet, one of this is an informer," the BC“ is an informal group without defined
structures, manipulated by the ANC and the Pan Africanist Congress [PAC].

In fact, although it is certain that the ANC, which operates more and more precise
sabotage actions from Swaziland and Mozambique, benefits from active and plentiful
support (almost each township conceals a cache of arms), nothing proves that if
manipulation does exist, it is going in this direction.

After the events in Soweto in 1976, almost 20,000 young blacks, supporters of black
consciousness, in effect clandestinely left South Africa to rejoin the ranks of the
ANC (and to a much lesser extent. the PAC) before claiming its structures and mode

of operation as too archaic and modeled on the Hestern communist parties. Regen-
erated, the ANC today, after 2 decades of paralysis. has become an active movement
in spite of its lack of "sanctuaries” (neither Zimbabwe nor Botswana authorizes the
use of its territory as staging areas). For 6 to 8 months, searches and roadblocks
have been routine on the major access routes to Soweto, without the South African
police having succeeded for the moment in dismantling the infiltration of the "boys."

Symbolically, many of the ARC raids take police stations and the administrative
offices of the three homelands which Pretoria recongizes as independent (Transkei,
Vsnga and Bophuthatswana) as priority targets. For them. the leaders of these
Bantustans are collaborators, types of ”harkis," whom any struggle for liberation
must eliminate as a priority. And it is true that if you cross Bophuthatswana,

for example, it is impossible to believe for a single instant in the reality of

this state cut like a puzzle into seven disjointed parts separated by the rich lands
of white farmers. The border here is a simple sign on the edge of the road and
independence is reduced to two or three external signs: flag, national anthem

and official language, Tswana. on the same level as English and Afrikaans.

There is, of course, a capital in this phantom state, Habetho, with its p.efabricated
Government House, its ministers (about 15), its mini army (in orange and green
uniforms, strictly led by white officers), its head of foreign affairs who displays
on his desk a photo where he is seen chatting with Leopold Seder Senghor in Kakar.

Of course, legal apartheid was abolished in Bophuthatswana, and when Lucas Msngope,
58 years old, with the face of an ascetic, the head of this fairy tale state, says
that he "hates" racial discrimination, he is no doubt sincere.

Plainly, he and his friends, who sometimes greedily share the cars, villas and
other flashy symbols of political power. through weariness or ease, have made the
wrong choice of the "third force" which we know in advance is inevitably doomed to

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oblivion. Horse, to infamy. For the nonent, they content themselves with dreaming
and not believing too much in a consolidation-with Pretoria will never accept-of

their piece-eel state and of an impossible recognition of their "independence" by
the 0A1] and the UN.

This bureaucratic bourgeoisie in fact, whether it wants to or not, serves as a link
between Pretoria and the black population of the Bantustana (13 percent of the
territory, 70 percent of the African population), and the apparent steadfastness
which it demonstrated in its negotiations with Pretoria only serves to legitimize
its existence in the face of those it is supposed to represent. Until now, only
Israel (through security services), Austria and Senegal (through cultural aid) and,
of course. South Africa have been cooperating with the honelands.

This systen of honelands presents Pretoria with a triple advantage: it permits her
to legally discharge herself of her economic and social responsibilities with re-
gard to the Africans, most of who: in South Africa are now no more than nigrant
workers. It then enables the transformation of the black-white conflict into
fictitious inter-state relations. Finally, since apartheid no longer exists in
these homelands, it permits the use of these territories without puriten restric-
tion as "escape valves" where everything which is prohibited in South Africa, for

whites as well as for blacks, is permitted: prostitution, pornographic movies,
gambling.

Sun City, in the heart of Bophuthatswana, is probably the most intolerable example
of the use of these Bantustans by the white power. This insnse coins: built
with hundreds of millions of rands. where casinos alternate with hotels, jackpot
halls, erotic films shown 2!. hours a day, golf courses and mining pools in a
superb site in the aiddle of the bushveld, is the first so far of these "pleasure
conplexes“ which the Southern Sun and Holiday Inn hotel chains want to build in
each honeland.

The projects are unbounded: an international airport is planned for 1990, not far
fron Sun City; it will enable the reception of the Japanese and American tourist
charters that they hope to attract to this "fun capital of Southern Africa." mree
thousand blacks work here, as hell boys. waitresses, caddies. Their average salary:
110 rands (less than 890 French francs) per month, while the lowest level white

eaployee, e swining instructor, for exsaple, earns 700 raode with room and board.
Every Friday evening, endless lines of cars converge on Sun City from Pretoria.

-In the township of 10,000 inhabitants, nodestly hidden in the shelter of a hill,
where the black workers from Sun City and their families live, a very simple
ceremony took place on a Septeder evening in the diffuse fight of an oil lanp. A
priest and about 50 faithful people of all ages commuted the fourth anniversary
of the death of Steve Biko by singing gospel songs from the South African ghettos:

"When the white Ian come. our brothers became children. When the white nan came,
our mothers became slaves. Freedon will cone, Mun, when all the "baas'd have gone."

 

1. Boss in Afrikaans.
COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9693
cso: 67191256 32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOUTH AFRICA

COLD SWAP HIT}! FOREIGN BANKS
PH101223 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 10 Dec 81 p lo
[Dispatch by J.D.P. Jones: "South African Gold Swap Worth SZOG‘I")

[Text] Johannesburg-South Africa has completed a further series of gold swaps
with foreign bankanthe second in 2 monthsuto help pay for its soaring current
account deficit on the balance of payments.

Although details are never released, it appears from the latest monthly statement
of the Reserve Bank that approximately 500,000 oz of gold were involved, in return
for something under $20G! of foreign exchange. Last month the swaps were thought
to exceed 2.6!! oz, worth approximately $an.

News of the move, which amounts to new borrowing by the Reserve Bank, comes after
a warning by the prime minister's Economic Advisory Couittee that foreign
exchange reserves will remain under pressure following an expected Rlohn (2.23n
pounds) current account deficit in 1981.

South Africa's external accounts have undergone a remarkable turnaround of some
R7Bn, following a current account surplus of R3Bn in l980--in spite of significant
depreciation of the rand against the dollar. This week the rand reached a record
low of $1.02, compared with a rate of $1.2“ one year ago.

The Economic Advisory Council blamed the turnaround on weak export performance
because of the international recession—although imports have also shown a large
increase. The decline of the gold price to nearly $400 an ounce has been a
major factor.

The South African gold swap technique is to sell gold for cash to foreign banks.
but to undertake its forward repurchase by the Reserve Bank at a price which
includes the equivalent of an interest payment to the foreign banks. The Reserve
Bank's total gold and foreign assets stood at R3.76Bn at the end of Novasber, a
decline of R406}! on the previous month.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd. 1981

CSO: l0700/410

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SWISS AID FOR com-Uganda's Coffee Marketing Board has signed a contract

with Buhler Brothers Coupeny Limited, of Uswil (Mtserland), for the aanu-
facture, delivery, installation, and start-up of equipeent intended for the
modernization of the coffee processing plant at Bugolobi. The project is in

two phases, and delivery will be made in the spring of 1982. The contract,
concluded after thorough research to avoid so far as possible any equipent
stoppage and to assure stinum hygiene. mainly consists of

32 HTRA sorters, 16 DSTZ drum calibrators, 28 HVSB setters.

16 NVRS jet air filters for dust removal throughout the facility,

17 truck scales. and a large number of mechanical and pneumatic transport devices.

This facili for coffee processing will be the largest and nost nodern
in Africa. Zing [Paris mums norms: at museums in much
11o 18711, 9 1. 81 p 2580] [00913101111 Rene 11am: et c1. Paris 19837121119

EUROPEAN FINANCING FOR COFFEEn‘l'he Mopean Develop-ant Fund will finance up
to 25 nillion ecus, sons operations connected with the first phase of the
Ugandan coffee industry recove ogru. See details above, in the “Brussels
Correspondence' section.€'fext? Paris mam narrow: rr animus

in french 11° 1878, 6 has 1 p 8 7 (common: Rene Ioreux .1. c1. rem
1981] 1211.9 '
AGRICULTURAL scum-~11» Central Tender Board of Uganda has issued a new
call for hide, this one valid until 11 Decuber, for the supplying of various
types of equipment and materials (especially 11,000 tons of steel) for the re-
furbishing of Uganda Hoes, united, in Janja. The project is also financed
by the EDP, so the bid file can he obtained free: the sane atropean Calamity
information offices. Text Paris muss TROPICAUX 31‘ WNW in
l-‘rcnch 11° 1876, 6 Nov 1 p a _7 [cormoun Rene 11mm: at on Paris 1981]

121119

POULTRY PhOJEC‘I-o'fhe Central render Board of Uganda (Post Office Box 3925,

Kampala) has issued a call for bids valid until 121 January, concerning various
supplies, notably poultry and concentrated foodstuffs, for the develop-cut of

local poultry-raising. This project is being financed by the mopeen Devel-
opnent Fund. The file nay therefore be obtained fro- the Mopean Conunity
intonation offices, 61, rue des Belles-Peuilles, Paris 16.[ 13:37 /- Paris
MARCHBS TROPICAUX s‘r MEDITMNKDIS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 p 2336]
[COPIRICH'B Bane Horaux et Cie Paris 1981] 121119

cso: (1719/2119 END

3b
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY