FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10085

30 October 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 745

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FINICMHHCJAI.USEANVLY

JPRS L/1ooss
30 October 1!

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

POUO No. 745

Coureuts

BITE-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Activities of west African Central Bank Reported
(HARCRBS TROPICAU! m mums, 18 Sep 81) .............

Problems Facing African Timber Production Reviewed
(MARCHBS TBOPICAUX ET mm, 28 Aug Bl) .............

Briefs
African Railroads

CENTRAL AFRICA! REPUBLIC

Nation's Recovery Said To Depend on Unity of Sound Forces
(Gillette Cot; AMQUE-ASIE, ”$.27 &p 81) cacao-00.000.000.000

Briefs
Goodwill Mission to Paris
Japanese Relations
Demand ft“ Constitutional Restoration

CHAD
Political, Military Situation Seen as Largely Positive
(Ame-m, 111-30 sep 81) 000.000.300.000...ooooooooeooooo.
Briefs
0.8. Involved in Destabilization
COHORO ISLANDS

Opposition Seen Strengthened by Paris's Ne lect of Abdallah
(Sadio Lamine so"; JUNE ANGIE, 1 Sep 81) eooeeoeoeoooaaoo

- a - [III - NB 8 A - 120 PO

FOIIOFFNJII.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

Briefs
FAO Financing Agreement

NIGEMA

Oil Production Down in August; Favorable Prospects for Early 1982
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS, 18 Sep 81) .........

British Loan for Abuja Federal Capital Project
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANKDIS, 19 Sep 81) .........

SENEGAL

Briefs
IDA Agricultural Loan

TANZANIA

Economic, Financial Situation Reportedly Remains Serious
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAN-IS, 18 Sep 81) .........

Political, Economic Conditions at Time of Nyerere's Visit to

France
(Daniel Joussan; WOW-A313, 28 sep'll wt 81) oooaooeoo

Briefs
Nyerere's Paris Visit

Educational Reform
Belgian ‘Iransport Aid

UPPER VOLTA

New Regime's Chances of Success Ruined; Imprisonment of
Officials Questioned
(Siradiou Diallo; JEUNB AFRIQUE, 23 Sep 81) ..............

ZAMBIA
Briefs

Hheat Program's Probleus
IMF Vegotiations Continue

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHI(MWHCJAI.USE1DNLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ACTIVITIES 0F "EST AFRICAN CENTRAL BANK REPORTED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET NEDITERRANEENS in Prench No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2379
[Text] West African Development Bank Fiscal Year 1980

The west African Development Bank (ROAD) was established in 1973 by the six member
states of the West African Monetary Union (UHOA): Benin. Ivory Coast, Upper Volta,
Niger, Senegal and Togo, and their issuing institution, the West African States
Central Bank (scmo), for the purpose of promoting the balanced development of the
mesber states, and implementing economic integration in West Africa by financing
development projects on a priority basis.

A total of 25 billion of an authorized capital of 36 billion CPA was subscribed by
the end of Septenber 1980 by the 6 above-nened states, the BCBAO, Prance and the
Federal Republic of Germany (with a unit share of 1 billion CPA for the 2 share-
holders). The main office of the BOAD is located in Lone, and operations were be-
gun during the 1975-76 fiscal year.

During its 1979-80 fiscal year, the BOAD began [16 studies] [in boldface] for national
and regional projects which involve a total of 236.1 sillion CPA.

For the same fiscal year, investment decisions involved nine projects amounting to
5.2 billion CPA. Thus, since beginning operations, the volume of ROAD loans and
shares has risen to the financing of 36 projects for a total volue of 16.9 billion
CPA.

Investments during the last fiscal year involved rural development (27 percent of
the total). industry (17 percent). energy (39 percent) and telecoulunications (17
percent). The financing is broken down as follows:

Senegal; Back-up of the investment in well-digging groups in the Thies, Diourbel,
Kaolack, Tambacounda, Natal. N'Dioun and Ziguinchor regions, for a long-term loan

(13 years) of 580 million CPA, which represents 70 percent of the cost of the pro-
gram.

Electrification of 7 new districts of Kaolack, through a long-term loan (11 years)
of 630 million CPA. or 70 percent of the cost of the project.

Togo: Development of village waterpower by constructing drilling rigs and pulping
equipment, with a 13-year loan of 631. million CPA, which represents 80 percent of
the projected costs.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!!DFFKJAL.USE¢MNLY

Construction of the second production facility of the Benin Brewery Company at Lama-
Kara, for which the majority of the capital is held by Togoleae nationals, with a 12-
year loan of 708 million CPA, or 33.5 percent of the required invest-ant.

Expansion and modernization of the Lame overhead-underground telephone lines system,
by a 15-year loan of 900 million CPA. which represents 33 percent of the program.

Benin: A loan to the Farm Loan National Bank of 180 million CPA for a term of 7
years to finance fishermen-craftsmen cooperatives. The BOAD assistance represents
58.‘ percent of the projected costs.

Expansion of the diesel generating plant of Parakou through the purchase and instal-

lation of 3 new units with an 11-year loan of 585 million CPA, or 80 percent of the
project.

Upper Volta: Taking a 200 million CPA share of the capital of the Farm Loan National
Bank, or 15.38 percent of the capital of 1.3 billion GPA of that organization.

Expansion of the diesel generating plant at Ouagadougou through the purchase and
installation of 2 new units by a 13-year loan of 1 billion CPA, which represents
32.19 percent of the projected cost.

Aside from the capital which has already been subscribed and paid (5.1 billion CPA
to 30 September 1980), the BOAD has at its disposal donations from the member states

(3.7 billion) on the balance sheet at the end of September 1980. with commitments
for long-term loans written for 6 billion CPA.

Mr Pierre-Clever Damiba is chairman of the board of the BOAD, whose board of directors
includes representatives from the six member states, from the West African States
Central Bank, from the treasury of France and from the Federal Republic of Germany.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9174
C30: 4719/36

2
FOR‘0FFK]AL.USE(MULY
INJR‘OFFICJAI.I£5Ei(MNLY

INTER-AFRICAN A!?AZRS

PROBLEMS FACING AFRICAN TIMBER PRODUCTION ? VIEHED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANZENS in French No 1868,28 Aug 81 p 2236

[Excerpt] In many African countries. one of the priority problems requiring a
solution is the obvious exhaustion of their natural forestry resources as a
result of their increasingly high rate of population growth and extensive
farming. The system of shifting cultivation has proved to be dangerous for
forest conservation as well as for the sustained soil fertility even when the
land is allowed to lie fallow for long periods of time.

This situation has resulted in efforts to find and to improve the methods of
simultaneously growing trees and food crops. methods which have proved to be
effective. Now. attempts are being made to perfect systems of agriculture
and silviculture which could serve as models for the dual purpose of produc-
ing fast-growing species of valuable wood alongside perennial crops such as
coffee, cacao and bananas, while care is taken of restoring and maintaining
the fertility of the soil.

with this in mind, two kinds of actions are being considered. One is based on
a short-term rotation period (between 5 and 15 years) and can be used in areas
of very high population growth where the natural forest has disappeared almost
entirely and where there is a shortage of timber. It consists in planting
fast-growing species, such as eucalyptus, which will be used to make poles and
as firewood. The other action. based on a longer rotation period (between 30
and 50 years), makes it possible to grow coffee and cacao crops but gives pri-
ority to species such as the limbs. framire, samba, obeche or wava.

Another problem arising also in Africa is the concern created by the very low
productivity of the natural forest in that area which has led a number of
countries to request a study on the possibility of increasing the yields
through effective methods of forest replenishment (either by the method of
regrowth under cover, by the method of gradual clearing of the cover or by
clear-cutting) and through the genetic improvement of quality species.

To increase the volume of the "timber material," many countries have planted
artificial forests with local species and the chief purpose of these experiments
is to identify and select the fast-growing species. But the planting programs
have revealed an important element: the relationship between the properties

of the wood and the requirements of final utilization.

3
FOR¢0FFNJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Particular attention has been given to a species which grows naturally in
Sierra Leone and Zaire and is known under different names (samba, obeche or
wawa) but has been exploited so heavily that it has disappeared from the
natural forests. This species is currently the object of planting programs

in the Ivory Coast. Ghana and Nigeria. Having found a simple method of pro-
ducing clones propagated by vegetative means, it is possible to consider trans-
ferring stocks to the hinterland beyond the natural forest area.

There is a third problem drawing the attention of African countries and now
being studied. Countries with an increasing tendency to process their own
timber on the spot. so as to increase the value of their products whenever
possible. are very interested in finding adequate processing methods for com-
binations or groups of species. The need to find ways of seasoning the wood
which can be applied to every possible combination of species and the need to
perfect methods to protect the timber from perishable species, both pervious
and nonpervious species, is something obvious in that context.

A characteristic of the African tropical forest is the great variety of its
species. many of which are not known or hardly used. With the traditional
coumon species becoming more scarce, it has become necessary, as we know, to
study the possibility of using and marketing species which up to now were lit-
tle known or little used, and some of which were not exploited because some
of their properties made them commercially unsuitable or undesirable. Since.
for the time being, it is impossible to solve that problem by suitable methods
of silviculture or by improving the quality of the trees, efforts must be
directed to solving it as best as possible at the processing stage (experi-
ments in saving. planning, seasoning, impregnation and so on).

Another characteristic of the African forest is that after the trees are cut
down much logging debris is left in the forests or at the sewing location.
There is much wastage in the various stages of logging, transportation, secon-
dary processing, manufacture of the finished product and final utilization.
Undoubtedly, this large amount of wasted material considerably reduces the
productivity of the forestry industry. Technological progress has been
achieved in the utilization of the debris to manufacture by-products (chip-
board. plywood, wood pulp. charcoal and so on) but one still has to solve the
problem of finding economic ways of gathering the logging debris.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

8796
C30: ‘719/19

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

AFRICAN RAILROADS--The Higher Council of OFEIHAI (French Cooperation Office for
Railroads and Bquipuent) is scheduled to meet in Paris on 20 and 21 October
this year. This meeting. held every 2 years, is a gathering of national repre-
sentatives of the various railroads froa French-speaking African countries
which have signed cooperation agreements with that agency. The purpose of this
ninisuanit--uhich will be chaired by Jean-Pierre Cot, French sinister delegate
to thendniater of external relations for cooperation and development, and by
Charles Fiternan, French minister for transportation--is to bring the OPERHAT
partners together and take stock of the situation with regard to current activ-
ities and future projects. Jean-Pierre Cot has emphasized the fact that this
meeting "offers a very good opportunity for an exchange of views between France
and the French-speaking African countries on questions of transportation and
equipment." The 20 October meeting will take place at the headquarters of the
International Railroad Union (010) and will be attended. among others. by the
general secretary of the African Railroad Union (UAc), Adams Diagne (Senegal).
This meeting will make it possible to underline the new guidelines of the
French policy regarding France's cooperation with developing countries and
more particularly the lines along which the development of land transportation
will be directed in Africa. [Text] [Paris APRIQUEPASIB in French No 247

31 Aug-l3 Sep 81 p 53] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Aaie] 8796

C80: 4719/19

5
me OFl-1CIAL use ONLY
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY

curmu. AFRICA! m1

NATION'S RECOVERY SAID TO DEFEND 0N WITY OF SOUND FORCES
Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 248, 110-27 Sep 81 pp 13-16
[Article by Ginette Cot: "The Military Transition"]

[Text] The burdensome heritage left to Central Africa by the former Giscard
regime was dealt a decisive blow by the departure of David backs from the
political scene in Bangor, on 1 September last, and the substitution of his
cabinet by a Military Comittee of National Recovery headed by Andre Kolingbs,
the chief of staff of the Arsed Forces who was recently promoted to the rank
of general.

Whatever version is accepted--that David Dacko himself resigned for health
reasons as he has indicated, or that he was compelled and forced to do so by
the nilitery to when he gave full powers when a state of emergency was pro-
claimed following the bomb attack of 14 July this year-everybody realizes
the significance of the bloodless coup. And it was with a general feeling of
relief that the Central African people and the leaders of the opposition par-
ties received the news.

A Powder Keg

This was no surprise at all. David Dacko, who was brought back to power in
Bangui riding on the trucks of the paratroOps which carried out the "Barra-
cuda" Operation on 21 September 1979. was the ultimate synbol of the process
of colonial reconquest initiated by Giscard's former French Government in that
country implanted in the heart of Africa and ruined by 20 years of dictator-
ship during which its national wealth. both in terns of hmn and naterial re-
sources, was squandered. Neither the democratic process hastily launched

last November. nor the presidential election of Harch 1981, which was unani-
nously contested and only gave a narrow najority to the ousted head of state
'(ln spite of the support he received fron the adainistration and from the
barracuda troops). succeeded in eliminating the stigsa attached to Bokassa's
successor right from the very beginning. This situation was cospounded by the
fact that, as soon as he took office. David Dachau-who reportedly was forced
to return to power against his wishes-agave the impression of being not so
such a chief of state as a puppet nanipulated by his French advisers and proved
that he was incapable of bringing even the slightest improvement to the situa-
tion in the political, economic or social spheres.

6
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFKHAI.USE‘ONLN

He know that in October 1979, the former head of state--who had little incli-
nation to establish a dialogue--prevented an opportunity to start building a
national consensus when he scuttled the roundteble scheduled to bring together
all the country's political movements and leanings. 'Ue know that later he
tried to challenge at every opportunity (particularly in March and July this
year) the multiparty system which. apparently, he had been forced to accept
under protest. As for the economic and social situation, it merely deterio-
rated to such an extent that prospective financial backers avoided the coun-
try. The constant strikes, the general absenteeism from work and the farmers'
refusal to pay taxes or to plant cash crops-a11 signs of the population's dis-
satisfaction with the deterioration of living coaditions--contributed to
aggravate a situation always characterized by cases of corruption and embezzle-
ment and by an ever-increasing decline of moral standards (gsngsterism, rob-
beries, prostitution) which had reached unprecedented proportions.

As the months went by, Central Africa became a powder keg where the worst--es
proved by the bombing of la July--could be expected.

This is why the opposition parties were calling for David Dacko's departure
as an absolutely necessary precondition to any normalization of the situation.
It is known that on the day after 10 May this year, the Central African people
celebrated with joy the fall of the Giscard regime in France, a fall which, in
their view, would inevitably sound as well the knell of the Dscko regime in
Bangui.

Although Mitterrand's France-which truly intends to apply the principle of
noninterference in the internal affairs of African countries regarding its
relations with that continent--refused to engage in any operation reminiscent
of the "Barracuda" adventure, it nonetheless expressed displeasure for the
repressive measures taken by the Dscko regime after the 16 July bomb attack
and the regime was, in fact, forced to back—pedal (this is how in mid-August
it lifted the measures banning and suspending the movements headed by Dr Abel
Goumba and Ange Pataase and promised to hold "soon" the general and municipal
elections which had been previously postponed). At the same time, some of
the demands made by the opposition were listened to in Paris. For instance,
after the departure of Mr Serre, the Trench adviser to the presidency in
Bangui, the former ambassador, who was deeply involved in some of the scan—
dals associated with the "Barracuda" Operation and its consequences, was re-
placed by a new ambassador, Francois Couturier, the first diplomat appointed
by Francois Hitterrand. The network of "overseas voluntary service members"
dispatched by the former French regime was being dismantled and the green
berets integrated into Dncko's presidential guard to which they were attached
were recalled. As for the "barracuda" troops, recently renamed "units of
operational assistance in Central Africa," they were restricted to their
camps and. as we know, remain there with strict orders to intervene only in
the event of external aggression or to protect French citizens. All these
developments indicate that the "de-Giscardisation" of the situation is under-
way and this process should make it possible to clear the scene and help the
Central African people to take their fate into their own hands.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unknown Factors

It is not surprising for the Central African Army, reorganized and reequipped
over the last 2 years. to have taken the driver's seat when one knows that the
opposition of David Dacko (including the more or less convincing last-minute
adherents) was slow to agree on a com-on program of govern-eat. Also when one
knows that the Provisional Political Council (CPP, which included the PPO-P'l'
[Ubangui Patriotic Front-Labor Partv], the am [Central African People's
Liberation Movement], the PR? [People's Revolutionary Party] and the cm
[Independent Group for Reflection and Political Action] respectively headed by
Abel Got-abs, Ange Patasse, Henri haidou and Francois Pehoua). whose initial
objective was to fight against vioiations of the rights granted by the new
constitution, did not make a move in that direction until recently, when it
was jostled by what was happening.

Of course there are still many unknown elements and, understandably, the former
parties of the opposition to David backs are adopting wait-and-see attitude
until they know more about the intentions of the new leaders whom people hope
will rule only temporarily.

In any case, the transfer of power took place on 1 September under conditions
which augur well for what is to follow—there was no shooting, no arrests and
not even the slightest show of force.

As for the hastily spread rumors that the United States had a hand in the
events, ruaors chiefly grounded on a simple visit which the American ambassa-
dor paid to the new head of state, they seem to be the product of those who
want to create alarm rather than to be based on facts. Besides, in the first
statements he made, Gen Andre Knlingba, who described those rumors as "utterly
false," clearly called for maintaining privileged relations with France which
has also been asked to pay the salaries of the Central African civil servants
for, at least, 1 year thus allowing him to "have his hands free to reorganize
the country and lay down the foundations of its economic recovery."

To put the economic machinery beckon the right course and to restore "order
in business activity" seem to be the chief concerns of the new head of state.
who explained the army's intervention in the following terms: ”During the
last 6 months, the scene was one of sterile arguments and violence which
severely tested our patriotism. with blatant violations of democracy and un-
acceptable challenges to our reason. our honor and our rights. It is out of
respect for the constitution, freely created and adopted by the people, that
until now the neutral and apolitical army has maintained a wise silence in the
face of the distress calls issued by the Central African people."

But when he announced that the constitution and political parties had been sus-
pended, General Kolingba indicated that the army would rule "until the right
time when conditions are met to hand over to civilians the powers of the state."
The duration of that transition period will depend. he explained, "on the poli-
tical parties and their leaders. For the time being, let them keep quiet and
stay in their corner. When order is restored, I will see what can be done to
hand power over to them."

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To what conditions and what order is he referring? The question remains
unanswered.

A Page has Been Turned

however, in an interview broadcasted by Radio France Internationale, the
French minister for cooperation and development said that France "was not re-
assured but remained attentive." He explained that what had happened on

1 September was "a problem of domestic nature" in which "France must not get
involved although it is concerned by all this," and taking note of the wish
for cooperation expressed by the new leaders in Bangui, Jean-Pierre Cot
pointed out: "A military takeover is always a defeat for democracy. The
constitution is suspended. He always regret to see a democratic process in-
terrupted. But, of course, we are not in a position to judge the situation
on behalf of the Central African people."

A lot will undoubtedly depend on the ability of all the sour! forces of Can-
tral Africa to put forward ideas, to get reorganized and to unite behind vital
objectives if this new phase, just initiated in Bangui. is really to be the
beginning of a revival process in that ravaged country. Let us definitely
turn over one of the darkest pages of African history ever written by suc-
cessive French regimes until 10 Hay 1981.

COPYRIGHI': 1981 Afrique-Asie.

8796
C80: (0719/25

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

GOODHILL MISSION TO PARIS--A Central African "goodwill" mission headed by the
minister of foreign affairs, Lt-Col Jean-Louis Gervil Yanbala, arrived on

13 September in Paris where it gave to President Mitterrand a message from the
President of the Military Conmnttee of National Recovery (CMRN), Gen Andre
Kolingba. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No
1871 18 Sep 81 p 2392] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

JAPANESE RELATIONs--The Japanese Government has decided to recognize the new
Central African regime. Japan's Foreign Affairs Minister Sunao Sonoda ex-
plained in Tokyo, on 8 September, that he would ask Akio Akada, the Japanese
charge d'affaires in Bangui, to convey to the new Central African head of state,
Gen Andre Kolingba, Japan's wishes to maintain friendly relations with the Cen-
tral African Republic. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in

French No 1871 18 Sep 81 p 2392] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreum et Cie Paris 1981]
8796

DEMAND FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RESTORATION--The Association of Central African
Workers in France (ACTF), in a communique issued on 8 September, calls for the
immediate restoration of the constitution which was suspended on 1 September

by the new Central African head of state, Gen Andre Kolingba, and called for
the formation of a National Union Government. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX
HT MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1871 18 Sep 81 p 2392] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux

et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

C80: 4719/18

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

pouncu, MILITARY summon saw as uncut Posrrm
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French No 248, 16-30 Sep 81 p 1.6

[Text] The normalization process continues in Ndjamena where the Chadian
branch of the Bank of Central African States (BEACuInstitute of Issue) re-
opened its doors on 10 June and air traffic between the Chadian capital-
which has been cut off from the world since the last war ended in December
l980--and African and European capitals is due to rest-e any time now.

This normalization is taking place in all spheres of activity and more particu-
larly in the political sphere. As a natter of fact. there is no further lention
of political leanings or factions in Chad. Interrupted by llissein labre's

"bid for power" which led to a long fratricidal war, the process to reunify
within the Chadian National Liberation Front [FROLINAT] all political and
military forces which clai- to adhere to the ideas of that organization, re-
suned last January on s sounder basis and has reached an irreversible stage.

After several meetings, a political platform containing eight points of the
Front's initial program in an updated and inproved version and new statutes
were adopted until the time when they convene a congress of the unified
FROLINAT.

This, together with the new national army now being formed, an army where the
best fighting forces of the former political factions are merging with troops
of the Chadian Armed Forces (remnants of the former goverment's army), is the
most important event registered in Chad in recent months and represents the
best safeguard for the protection of peace, independence and territorial inte-
grity in the country.

Meanwhile. it is noticed that the first contacts between the GUNT [Transitional
National Union Govenunent] and the new French Govern-ant have been positive
ones.

According to some sources, it has been implied that any French love remined
linked to the issue of the Libyan troops' presence in Chad.

But these reservations appear to be a minor question. Is it not a fact that
the question of the Libyan troops' presence is an artificial problel? Parti-
cularly since it is known that in Ndjamena and in Tripoli what they want is a
final normalization of the situation. The only thing that conplicates this
problem is the threat hanging over Libya and Chad as a result of the military
preparations taking place in Sudan (with Egypt's backing), a country harboring
the remnants of Hissein Habre's FAN [Northern Armed Forces].

COPYRIGHT: Afrique-Asie 1981.

8796
080: 6719/26

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

BRIEFS

US. INVOLVED IN DBSTABILIZATIONHTM incursions of llissene Habre's armed
forces near Irika and Cuereda in east Chad near the Sudanese borders again
confirm what we have written about unceasingly in these colums: because

of Egyptian-Sudanese military and financial support--whose main supplier is
America--remnants of the FAN [Armed Forces of the North] manage to cross
Chad's borders to try and disturb the security of the country's eastern
regions. Guided by remote control from Washington, Cairo and Khartoum aim
to destabilize the Chadian government in order to overthrow it and replace

it with another government under orders from western, especially American,
strategy in the area. When all is said and done, the incursions of ﬂabre's
mercenaries did not do very much damage. Contrary to Sudanese press statements,
the head of the Chadian diplomatic corps, Ahmat Acyl, who was recently in the
border areas, was not wounded. Although Iriba (1,000 inhabitants) has always
been considered a bastion of support for ﬂabre, the PAR soldiers there were
driven away last month but they are still trying desperately to regain control.
The Chadian national forces, assisted by Libyan troops, have deployed many
soldiers and much military equipment to crush, once and for all, FAR
operations. According to reliable sources, their soldiers are reportedly
now being trained by Egyptian and Sudanese officers who avoid entering Chad
for fear of being captured by government forces. Some 20 military advisers
from the US were allegedly attached to them in early September 1981. [Text]
[Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French so 2&9, 28 Sep-ll Oct 81 p 29] [constant

1981 Afrique-Asie] 9479

C80: (0719/69

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mom

'OPPwITIGI SEEN STRWTIENED BY PARIS'S mm 0? ABDALLAH

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1080 16 Sep 81 p 51

[Krtiele by Sadio Lamina Sow: "Vigil of Amy

[fay] After a long wait, the Comorian head of state will finally be re-
ceived at the Elysee in October. Ahmed Abdallah had multiplied his ges-
tures of goodwill towards the French socialists since the election of
Francois Hitterand. He has taken as his own the official position of the
PS on the western Sahara, thus diminishing his support of Morocco. At the
last OAU summit in Nairobi, he refrained from any allusion to Hayotte.

And for the past few months he has been striving to convince Paris of the
"painful necessity" represented by the Denard affair.

But the French Government maintains an attitude of watchful waiting regard-
ing the regime which emerged from the 1978 coup d'etat. It thereby leaves
a clear field to an opposition trying to take shape as an alternative.

Mouzawoir Abdallah, former Minister of Foreign Affairs in the government of
President Soilih (killed in the Bob Denard coup d'etat), secretly left
Horoni in June to come to Paris and make contact, according to certain sour-
ces, with some exiles. Mousewoir Abdallah is preparing to return to his
country, after a pilgrimage to Mecca. He took care to alert the Moroni au-
thorities by a profession of faith which he particularly addressed to the
presiding judge of the supreme court and to the army chief of staff. "A
demagogic and useless precaution," according to Ali Hlahaili, Comorian am-
bassador to Paris, "since Mauzawoir has never been troubled, and could move
freely on the island. Besides, he represents no one but himself."

And yet certain French circles, who have kept interests in the Comoros, see
in him a possible successor to Ahmed Abdallah. The more so since the URDC
ﬂuion for a Democratic Republic in the Comorog7, whose president is Soihili
Bacari, has just made .him its "principal animator." If the ultimate aim of
that association is the conquest of power, it also wishes to bar the way to
the FNUK-UNIKOM, a movement born of the fusion, on 18 July in Paris, of the
United Comorian National Front and the Union of Comorians. Presided by
Aboubakar Ahmed Nourdini, that movement does not rule out recourse to

13
FOR OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

violence to force in Moroni. The Comorian Government. for its part, main—

tains that Nourdini is of Kenyian nationality and came to the Comoros but
once, in 1960.

There is another opposition movement in the running: the National Committee
of Public Safety, founded by Said Ali Kemal, former ambassador to Paris,
who resigned his post. He appears to have the support of the Association
of Comorian Workers in France. As yet, little is known of his program,

which professes to be liberal and contemplates attaining power only by demo-
cratic means.

Everything suggests the Comoros are on the eve of change, even though Pres-
ident Abdallah has denied rumors of his intention to leave office before

his term expires in 198k. The economic condition of the country could have
justified that intention. The state treasury has a chronic deficit of over
1.5 billion CPA Fr. Prices for the four export products (ylang-ylang. va-
nilla, cloves,snd copra), from which are derived 95 percent of the country's
foreign exchange. are falling from year to year. France contributes £5 per-
cent of budget subsidies. Development projects exist only thanks to Persian
Gulf countries, particularly Saudi Arabia.

Occupying a strategic position in the Indian Ocean, alongside forward-looking

Madagascar, the Comoros aspire to change. If Ahmed Abdallah does not impose
it, a storm could well follow for his regime.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Arrique GRUPJIA 1981

CSO: 4719/33

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

BRIEFS

FAO FINANCING AGREDENTnThe PM) and the Congo signed on 8 Septuber, in Brazza-
ville, a financing agreesent dealing with the study of self-sufficiency in food
supp1ies. The PAO's share in this project is 3105.000. [Text] [Paris ms
TROPICAUX 21' HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1871 18 Sep 81 p 2393] (COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

(:50: (0719/18

15
son omcm. us: ONLY
NOR10FHKJA1.USE(MVLY

NIGERIA

OIL PRODUCTION DOWN IN AUGUST; FAVORABLB PROSPECTS FOR EARLY 1982
Paris HAROHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in Prenéh No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2384

[Text] According to financial circles in Lagos, Nigeria's oil production reportedly
amounted to some 708,000 barrels a day in August and was consequently higher than
previous estimates that put it at 640,000 barrels a day (HARCRES TROPICAUX, 11 Sep-
tember, p 2334). Nevertheless, this production of 708,000 barrels a day represents
a 66-percent drop compared with the beginning of the year. As for exports. they
were put at 500,000 barrels a day for the sane month, about one-fourth the nonthly
exports of a year ago.

The same financial circles indicate that the government's losses in receipts, which
were on the order of $1 billion a month during the last quarter, reached some

$6 billion for the first nine aonths, according to unofficial sources, or nearly
30 percent of the 1981 budget. put at $21.6 billion.

Nevertheless, the drop in the price of crude oil; thanks to the granting of a $4
or lObpercent rebate by the government since 26 August, should favor a resumption
of production in the months ahead. Oil circles believe that production could

go as high as 1.5 million barrels a day during the first quarter of 1982.

The situation with regard to new prices in effect since 26 August renains confused
and it would appear that buyers are awaiting their first bills in order to know
the true situation.

Initially, an official bulletin from the Office of the President authorised the
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) to grant a $6 per barrel refund to
its custoaers. However, the bulletin stated that the official price per barrel
reaained $60 until the OPEC sulnit conference, to be held in_Abu Dhebi in Decenber.

For its part, the NNPC notified companies that the rebate would be 10 percent and
that it would imply a price variation ranging from $36.83 to $36 a barrel, depend-

ing on the quality of the crude, and that it would involve only that portion of
production from the NNPC.

This share is partially bought back by the foreign coapanies. The rest is sold
by the “NFC itself.

16
FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOMiOFlﬂC1Al.lﬁﬂE(MNLN

At a recent meeting, officials of the national company assured their colleagues
in the foreign firms that the refund would finally be granted for all production,
to wit, the 70 percent from the NNPC and the 30 percent for the other companies.

Concerning the latter, the rebate should result in a reduction in royalties and
taxes paid to the Nigerian Government and should be around 10 percent.

In addition, the statement by Saudi Minister of Petroleum Ahmad Zaki Yamani con-
cerning another future drop in Nigerian crude to $31 or $32 a barrel has not been
commented upon officially. The statement by the Saudi minister-has been reported
in several daily newspapers in the Nigerian capital, which, as usual, are very
discreet about the country's oil situation and publish only authorized statements.
In the circles concerned, Yamani's statement was somewhat surprising insofar as
for the time being, nothing would seem to point to a drop in the price of Nigerian

crude.
Oil: Company Production During First Quarter and in June and July

011 production of the different operating companies in Nigeria has as follows dur-
ing the first quarter of this year and in June and July (in thousands of barrels):

 

 

June July Ayerage
we;

Ashland 9.6 . 5 9.6
ELF [Gasoline and Lubricants Company of France] 57.5 56 - 73.3
Gulf 329 206 318.1 .
Mobil Ken/Sun 8 8 8.3
Mobil ‘ 112.1 93 192.1
AGIP/Phillips [Italian Petroleum Enterprise] 81.1 23 154.6
Pan Ocean 7.6 7 7.9
Phillips 1.02 1 1.2
Shell 698 363 899.3
Texaco b6 31 42.9
Total 1,349.2 771 1,707.3

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,466
C80: 4719/439

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINIfHﬁﬂCJAl.USEGDNLY

NIGERIA

BRITISH LOAN FOR ABUJA FEDERAL CAPITAL PROJECT
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1871. 18 Sep 81 p 2385

[Text] Following his visit to Nigeria (MARCHES TROPICAUX. 11 September. p 2335).
British Minister of Housing and Construction John Stanley announced on 11 September

that the Export Credits Guarantee Depart-eat (£060) of his country - the equivalent
of COFACE [French Insurance Conpany for Foreign Trade] in France - was planning

to guarantee 300 million pounds in bank credits for construction of-the future fed-
eral capital in Abuja. The minister added that the guarantee could subsequently
be granted for additional credits.

It is emphasized that this is the first tine that the ECGD, which has already
guaranteed 100 million pounds in credits for about eight other specific projects
in Nigeria, has guaranteed such large sums in an African country.

It will also be recalled that the Abuja project was granted the equivalent of

some 1.9 billion pounds by the Federal Government itself. Contracts concluded by
foreign firms already amount to over 1 billion pounds. but the British share was
previously under 10 nillion pounds. The British firms involved in the project are
Scott Hilson Kirkpatrick and Partners, Taylor Woodrow and the Milton Keynes Devel-
opment Corporation. Representatives of these firms acconpanied the minister on his
trip, along with representatives of Balfour Beatty, Costain International and the
Morgan Grenfell Bank.

The Abuja project is included in the 1981-1985 National Development Plan. The
new city will welcome the first official organizations in 1982-1983 and its popu-
lation should reach 1.6 million inhabitants between now and the year 2000.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,666
C80: 4719/639

18
FOR<NHHC1ALIEEIONLY
FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

IDA AGRICUL‘HJRAL MAIL-Senegal is borrowing $19.5 million (17 million SDI!
[Special Drawing Rightal) from the International Development Association
(IDA, a subsidiary of the World Bank) to upgrade the practical impact of its
agricultural research operations. The long-term goal is to diversify the
agriculture and improve the productivity of crop farms. Five regional re-
search stations will be modernized and research teams will be formed. hpha-
sis will be placed on establishing better links between research and diffusion
of knowledge. A communique issued by the bank indicates that the m credit
will be opened as soon as funds become available. [Text] [Paris HARCKBS
TROPICAUX B‘l‘ HEDITERRANBENS in French In 1871. 18 Sep 81 p 230] [COPYRIcHTz
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

C80: 4719/26

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONHIC, FINANCIAL SITUATION REPORTEDLY REMAINS SERIOUS
Paris HARCIIPS TROPICAIIX ET museums in French 80 1871 18 Sep 81 p 2396

[Text] 0n the eve of President Nyerere's visit to Paris, the m [French Press
Agency] has taken stock of the economic and financial situation in Tanzania
which is generally viewed as remaining very serious.

The news agency mentions that since May this year, the Dar es Salaa- Covera-

nent has outlined a “national ecmnic program for survival" on which to base
its policy. Gasoline is rationed and there are constant shortages of bread,

sugar. electric bulbs and batteries. Haintenance work on roads and buildings
is slight or nonexistent.

With a population of 17 nillion people and a per capita GNP of less than $250,
the country has not recovered from three successive shocks: the oil price in-
crease (55 percent of its foreign currency earnings goes to pay that bill), the
war against Idi Alain Dada (which according to the goveth has cost $500
million) and the downwards trend in selling prices for agricultural goods
(coffee, cotton. sisal).

For the second year running, the industrial activity dropped in 1980. Due to
the lack of spare parts and raw neterials, which can no longer be purchased
because there is no foreign currency available, lost factories are operating at
1.0 percent of their capacity, according to the minister for the plan and eco-
nonic affairs, Kighona Ali Malina.

But what is even more serious is the long-tern downtrend in the production of
agricultural goods for export which represent 80 percent of the foreign cur-
rency resources. Observers think that this is probably due to the mistakes
made in the iaplenentstion of Tanzanian socialism in the rural sphere and most
particularly the nationalization of cooperatives.

Over 30 percent of the develop-ant budget for 1980-1981 was not used as a re-
sult of econonic freezes. 0n the whole, Tanzania imports two and a half tines
more than it exports and trust live on credit.

The external debt anotmts to no less than $1 billion and the outstanding trade
debts total $300 nillion (one-fourth of the unorts), a fact which creates
hesitation anong those who would like to trade with that country.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tanzania receives very large amounts of foreign aid-$32 per inhabitant and
per year-«mostly from the Scandinavian countries.

But only the International Monetary Fund (IMF) can restore Tanzania's finan-
cial credibility through direct and massive aid to its balance of payments.
However, the IHF's conditions for granting new credits are seen as unaccept-
able by the Dar es Salaam Government. Among other things. the fund calls for
a devaluation (the figure of 50 percent is reported to have been put forward)
of the Tanzanian shilling which is sold in the black market for one-fifth of
its current value (1 Tanzanian shilling - 0.7 French francs). Tanzanian econ-
omists believe that a devaluation would increase the government expenses be-
cause the cost of imported goods would go L). To offset this increase, there.
would have to be dismal cutbacks in the social program since the 1980-81 budget
for ordinary expenditures already shows a $150 deficit.

Tanzania does not want to give up its social system which provides. among other
things, free primary education. "What is the advantage of development if most
of the population is deprived of basic things such as education and medical
care?" the minister for the plan told APP.

So far, the government had managed to keep the price index within reasonable
limits (+30 percent) through a price control policy. But inflation is appre-
ciably higher in the growing black market.

Faced with the pressing suggestions made by the IMF, thenar es Salaam Govern-
ment is implementing its "national economic program for survival" which a110-
cates foreign currency on a priority basis to the purchase of equipment, raw
materials and spare parts to enable the economy to keep going.

Priority has been taken away from big development projects (except for the
building of a paper plant and the expansion of Dar es Salaam Airport) and placed
on improving the existing structures. But this change of direction will take
some time. Two textile factories, in Arusha and in Dar es Salaam. are sched-
uled to be expanded in the near future although they are currently working at

a mere 40 percent of their full capacity. All the financial backers are aware
of this need for a change of direction. Making use of unexpended funds froa
Lome I, the BBC will overhaul 600 vehicles which were put out of service by

public companies and will make improvements on the Dar es Salaam-Kigoma cen-
tral railroad service.

The Tanzanian Government refuses to establish a connection between the country's
economic and financial situation and its socialist option. During the United
Nations conference recently held at the UNESCO in Paris, the Tanzanian minis-
tor for the plan again pointed out that countries following "capitalist" poli-
cies find themselves "in the same boat" as Tanzania.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

8796
C80: 4719/18

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OFFICIAL USIZCHVLV

TANZANIA

POLITICAL, ECWGIIC CMDITIQIS AT T118 01' Nissan's VISIT 1'0 Pm
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French No 259, 28 Sep-ll Oct 81 pp 18-20
[Article by Daniel Joussan: "Socialism, Tanzanian Style"!

[Excerpts] The new direction of French policy toward Africa received the
approval of Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere, on an official visit to Paris.
After a 2-hour meeting with the French head of state, the Tanzanian leader
said he was "very happy” with the exchange of views, mainly on Namibian
matters. They also discussed the new international econonic order, a topic
on which the two heads of state had already expressed very sinilar ideas.
They will meet again next month at the North-South Conference at Cancun.

On 15 Septenber 1981, Tanzanian President Nyerere met the new French president,

socialist Francois Mitterrand. This was a significant event. For the past
l5 years, Tanzania had tried to wed socialism with African tradition. This
effort, on the fringe of the official canon of scientific socialism, has
attracted French theorists whose principles the current government espouses.
Moreover, the Tanzanian president is, on the international scene, a spokes-
man for Third ﬂorid demands-~nonalignnent. new international economic
order, African unity and the struggle against apartheid are the keynotes of
Tanzanian foreign policy. It was hoped that this meeting would be the time
that the new French government would outline more clearly its policy toward
the Third Horld and Africa in particular.

Another question arises at the time of this visit: 'ﬂhat is the current
status of Tanzanian socialism?“

The results of nearly 15 years of this policy are necessarily mixed.’

 

*The Franco-Tanzanian Friendship Association has just published a pamphlet
“Tanzania, Toward Another Kind of Development?" which tries to evaluate these
15 years of Ujanaa socialism; it provides specific types of support in France.
(It can be ordered fron the Franco-Tanzanian Friendship Association,

20 rue Rochechouart, 75009 Paris, 12 francs plus 3 francs handling charge.)

22
INDR OIIWCJAI.USIZ(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Arusha Statement

First there is "villagization." If the somewhat authoritarian last phase
shocked some well-meaning self-management types in the west, the upheavals
ultimately were few in number and it is undeniably a success.

Here is 1 example among 9,000--the village of Kigwe located about 50 km from
Dodoma, the future capital. It has 10,000 inhabitants. Since villagiaation,
aervicas have increased. There is a school and, as throughout the country
since 1977, all primary school-age children are being educated. A total of
eight water faucets throughout the village supply inhabitants with running
water. In Tanzania, approximately one out of three villages has such taps.
Kigwe also has a post office, cooperative store, a veterinary station.
dispensary, workshop for making cattle carts, mill, police con-issariat and
county court. Moreover, village life has provided training in collective
life and in decentralized decision making through village comittees and
various related subordinate cmittees.

The Ujamaa ob jective1 of cooperative production has perhaps been downplayed
somewhat because of the obligatory resettlement. Today, collective production
is a modest portion of the total agricultural production. However, its
social significance should not be underestimated. Thus, in Kigwe, with the
proceeds from the Ujamaa field-~here, a vineyard--the villagers purchased a
truck which serves all villages in the area. However, the possible dis-
advantages of villagization should not be denied either, disadvantages
which Tanzanian authorities sometimes have trouble seeing. Rene Dumont
points out that, "in the very large villages, decreased labor productivity
has been noted since people lose more time. going to the fields, taking
fertilizer and harvesting the crops. There is also decreased soil
productivity because of the constant cultivation without organic or even
(more often) chemical fertilizers." lie added that, "these drops in
productivity are the primary causes of agriculture and foodstuff deficits
which grew larger in 1980." Agricultural production is inadequate and
although in 1978 and 1979, the food self-sufficiency goal seemed to be
attained, this is no longer so; in 1980, Tanzania had to import nore than
200,000 tons of cereals.

To encourage food crops, the govern-eat kept the price of export crops
relatively low. Their production, for the most part, decreased, thus
aggravating the balance of trade deficit (they represent a total value of

 

l'l’roduction and service cooperative

2Rene Dumont, Marie-France Hottin "Africa Strangled", Le Seuil, Paris
1980.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60 percent of exports.) To reverse this tendency, the government was obliged,
on 9 July 1981. to increase the price of these crops.

Crisis in Industrial Sector

The situation in industry is more serious. Bach crisis shows the catastrophic
mismanagement of the nationalized sector. Anir Janal, the finance minister,
recently said that Tanzania had doubled its production capacity since 1971.,
but that at the sane tine its production had decreased 20 percent. In other
words, factories are currently operating at 40 percent of their capacity.
There are several explanations for this. Pirst, the perverse effects of
foreign aid. Despite its principles, Tanzania is one of the Third World
countries which receives the noat foreign aid. It represents nore than

15 percent of its GNP. It is used to invest in elaborate technologies which
very often exceed the country's capacity to operate or maintain either
because of the level of technical knowledge or financial ability. Decreased
foreign currency resources and the increased price of oil exacerbated this
tendency. Tanzania no longer has the means to buy raw naterials or the
necessary spare parts for its industry. here is one example among thousands:
most trawlers of the Dar es Salaam port, all provided by foreign nations,

no longer have functioning radar or sonar equipment for navigational safety
or for detection of fishing beds.

There are other reasons for the current problems. The establishment of a
sizable nationalized sector has facilitated the energence of a large class

of bureaucrats. Since the Arusha statement, one objective of the leaders

has been to set up a code for civil servants. Most are devoted and effective.
Yet administrative delays are often long. Also, traditional family ties
overcome national solidarity with all the attendant problem: theft of

public equipmnt, creation of useless jobs, etc. In the past 2 years
especially, corruption has been on the increase because of econonic difficulties.

Black Market

It must be said that life is very expensive in Tanzania now. For understandable
reasons, the government refused, as the m wished, to devalue its currency:
this would increase its difficulties in obtaining oil unless its exports

really increased, since production structures cannot neat this new external
deuand. Inflation has increased considerably and in June 1981, the government
had to double prices. Scarce foreign currency and the relative overvaluing

of the Tanzanian shilling created a large black market where the rate of
exchange went as high as seven tines the official rate.

To deal with these difficulties, the Tanzanian government 2 years ago requested
DIP credits. These were conditional on the application of measures of a
liberal economic policy, inconpatible with the Tanzanian option. A

 

*Por more details, see “Economic Alternatives" lo 5 (July 1981): "Tanzania
Grappling with the DIP”.

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compromise was reached 1 year ago, respecting in part the Tanzanian objectives.
however, since May 1981, the situation has been deadlocked with Nyerere
refusing to devalue, as the Fund still wants.

Today, this economic crisis deepens into an ideological one, perhaps more
difficult to resolve. The well-off segments of the population are beginning
to question openly the socialist option. The well-to-do class is, for the
most part, Indian, some of these people are obviously very rich and they
regret they must invest their capital elsewhere. Indians, however, are on
the fringe of political life. The well-off Africans, especially small
businessmen and bureaucrats, are being tempted by the siren call of liberalism
and could easily imagine Tanzania following the Kenyan way which they
idealize all the more easily because they do not know it well. This tendency
is expressed decidedly within the party which brings together most people

and civil servants.

During IMP negotiations 2 years ago, the current Finance Minister Edwin

Htei, reputedly pro-American, wanted to accept the Fund's conditions. he

was then replaced by Nyerere's old collaborator, Amir Jamal. At present,

this liberal faction appears to be very disorganized and does not speak

out publicly. Yet discontent is growing among some civil servants and

could coalesce. Nyerere's faction which is first nationalist and understands
the word socialism as having a strong humanist, government-management

content remains in the majority. Today, this uncontestably popular leadership
group seems shaken by the crisis of its theoretical basis.

Flight Forward?

Nyerere has chosen to make a visible show of strength to the IMF. In recent
months, many demonstrations supporting government policy have been held, at
which time m? interference in Tanzanian domestic matters has been criticized.
Yet behind this mobilization against a cannon enemy, was there not a flight
forward in some respects? Is there an alternative strategy if the situation
gets worse? In addition, since January 1981, President Nyerere has waged a
major campaign against corruption: arrest of Indian businessmen, removal of
a minister and two regional commissioners, transfer of many civil servants to
Zanzibar and dismissal of the entire management of a firm responsible for the
cultivation of pyrethrua.

"It is too late, the phenomnonhas spread too much. For years, the ministerial
department for the struggle against corruption has been preparing files on
corrupt individuals. They were never worried." A representative of the
radical faction told us this recently. This faction only exists in intellectual
and university circles. Moreover, marked by the Marxist-leninist tradition,

it is quite dogmatic. After the Arusha statement, its representatives

marched to Ujamaa's tune, attempting to give it a more theoretical content

but they never managed to sell their ideas, especially transforming the

party with its nationalism of the masses into an enlightened avant-guard.

Today, they seem a bit on the offensive, violently criticising corruption

25
son omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the government for not taking measures sooner. Yet this wait-and-see
position is not an alternative.

There is still the army. Its prestige has increased since the war against
Amin. It is reinforced by a militia in all villages and places of production,
and it is made up of party militants. It tends to be much lore visible and
several members of the current government are from the military. It is no
doubt nationalist, but it is difficult to know more about its political
orientation. Would it react if corruption increases or there is a more
liberal orientation? '

That is not the case for the moment. Despite the difficulties, Nyerere's
prestige is considerable. If the situation in the large cities might lead

to pessimism, one need only visit the countryside to verify that the
mobilization of the peasants continues: a school is built here. a dispensary
there and in another place, a village building. of course, the Tanzanian
peasants, perhaps inadequately politicized despite 15 years of socialism,
remain somewhat removed from major national problems. Yet those in the
central plateau who, because of the drought, have harvested nothing in 1981,
know well that the government is distributing free food aid to them. This
president focuses on these people.

what will happen afterward? When reelected in September 1981, Nyerere said
he was running for the last time. The changing of the guard seems poorly
prepared and his departure may cause certain contradictions to arise. The
question was raised and discussed, with no answer given, in the July issue of
"Nova" (a Tanzanian monthly): "After Nyerere, Who?”

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9679
080: 6719/69

26
FOR OITWCLALIJSE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TANZANIA

BRIEFS

NYERERE'S PARIS VISIT--President Nyerere left Dar es Salaam on 10 September and
went to Lagos (see under heading "Namibia"), to Algiers where he paid an offi-
cial visit on 12 and 13 September (see under "Algeria") and then to Paris where
he met with President Hitterrand at the Elysee on 15 September. Since 1969,
this is the first stay of the Tanzanian head of state in the French capital.

It seems that President Nyerere's wish to make that trip this autumn was con-
nected with the preparations for the Cancun Conference. In fact he wanted to
talk with a statesman whose views he considers to be close to his own in many
respects and to discuss the need to establish a new international economic or-
der. Tanzania is a country which increasingly relies on cash crops to ensure
its survival. But in view of the constantly deteriorating terms of exchange.
that country is faced with a very difficult economic situation as we can see

in the article below. The luncheon given by President Hitterrand at the 81y-
see on 15 September gathered, in addition to President Nyerere, the ministers
of foreign affairs and cooperation of both countries and the ministers of cul-
ture, a fact which is explained by the prestige of the Tanzanian "model" in the
eyes of the French socialist leaders. [Text] [Paris MARCBBS TROPICADX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1871 18 Sep 81 p 2396] [COPYRIGBTz Rene Moreux

et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

EDUCATIONAL REFORH--A presidential commission, in charge of reforming the Ten-
zanian system of education, left Dar es Salaam on 12 September to make a Zdweek
working tour of nine countries of Africa, Europe and Asia. The delegation is
going to Ghana, the Ivory Coast, Zimbabwe. Sweden, East Germany, West Germany.
Malaysia and Japan. Prior to making this trip, the members of the delegation
were scheduled to tour the main regions of Tanzania to collect suggestions from
teachers and principals of private schools, including those of parochial schools.
[Text] [Paris HARCth TROPICAUX 8T HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1871 18 Sep 81

p 2397] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreus et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

BELGIAN TRANSPORT AID--Be1gium has pledged to give Tanzania important financial
aid to help improve its transport on Lake Victoria and to help build a training
institute in Hwanza. the largest port on the shores of that lake. [Text]
[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1871 18 Sep 81 p 2396]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

050: 4719/18

27
FINI(HHWCJAI.USEGDNLY
FIHICHHﬂCIAl.USE(NVLY

UPPER VOLTA

NEH REGIMB'S CHANCES 0P SUCCESS BXAHINBD; IMPRISONHENT 0P OFFICIALS QUESTIONED
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1081, 23 Sep 81 pp 26-25
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Nuisance Prisoners")

[Text] After the euphoria and the promises that followed victory. the stats of
grace which the current regime enjoyed is definitely over; Ten months after he
came to power, Col Ssye Zerbo is facing a situation that risks becoming more diffi-
cult with every passing day.

Hoisting the standard of justice, order and economic recovery, the former commanding
officer of the interservice regiment of the Ouagadougou area had no trouble in
ousting Gen Ssngoule Lamizana on 25 November 1980. Paralyzed by the maneuvers and
clan rivalries confronting one another within his regime and violently disputed by
an active opposition supported by the most restless unions in the Southern Sahara

of Africa, Maurice Yameogo's successor was at the and of his rope; Bis young
subordinates had only to bend over and pick up power.

Hishing to illustrate their desire for change, the new leaders immediately took
measures that broke with current practices under the regime of the "old" general.
Thus, they required punctuality of workers in government offices as well as at
work sites and in the factories. and absenteeism was heavily punished. Cafes,
bars and restaurants were closed during working hours and government cars could
not be used outside their hours of service. "ages were frozen and the right to
strike severely regulated.

Authority

In order to show that the slogan of austerity is not an empty word. Col Saye'Zerbo
sets the example himself. At the wheel of a Renault 12, he does not hesitate to

drive around Ouagadougou to see for himself the application of the policy of re-
habilitating the administrative machinery.

This determination to restore government authority both pleases and reassures
public opinion, once exasperated by the laxity of civil.servsnts. "In order to
obtain a simple document," one cadre told us, "you would have to return to the
Ouagadougou City hall several times," because the head of the department was always
absent. He spent more time playing cards and checkers and at the Independence bar
than he did in his office. "Now things have changed snd.it is better," says

28
FOIIMﬂﬂCLALIEﬂEORHN
FOR 0i!ﬁ(1Al.llﬂE(NﬂLY

another, mainly thinking about the peasants who, in order to complete administra-
tive formalities, now waste less time in the city.

Ambition

Nor do the foreigners conceal their satisfaction. .Initially worried, diplomats,
international officials, experts and financial backers did not take long to depart
from their expectant attitude. They are happy to finally be able to deal with
real interlocutors. Now, one of the expatriates told us, "we can work, for not
only is there no fear that one's dossier’isgoing to get lost in a drawer, but one
is sure that within a reasonable length of time, they will reply with a 'yes' or a
'no'." In other words, not only has the paralysis of yore some to an and, but the
absence of authority and the anonymity of government have given way to a new team
that in no way conceals its desire for power. for in its opinion, everything must
be subordinate to the higher interests of the government.

But for the Pretorians in power in Ouagadougou, the leitmotiv is above all economic '
recovery. It was not any accident that the highest organ of government that they
created following the 25 November.l980 coup d’etat is called the Military Committee

of Recovery for National Progress. They intend to march double time in order to
bring the country out of its chronic underdevelopment. This is an ambitious pro-

gram insofar as Upper Volta is not only one of the five poorest countries in the
world, but also a landlocked country which, until proven otherwise, does not have
vast natural resources. ~ '

This does not prevent Col Saye Zerbo from moving heaven and earth. For him, as

for his comrades in arms, it is a question of doing his utmost to succeed where

his civilian and military predecessors failed. To that end, he did not hesitate

to bring back out all the dossiers being studied or that were buried under the old
regime. In February of this year, surrounded by publicity, the cornerstone for the
Poura gold mine, southwest of ouagsdougou, was laid. This project was on the brink
of entering its active phase because in Luxembourg, the retiring minister of
planning, Georges Sanogo, was putting the final touches on negotiations with the
foreign partners when he was surprised by the coup d'etat.

The new authorities not only revived the dossier and succeeded in resuming work,
but they also hope that the mine will go into operation as early as 1986. They are
now trying to find backers for other gold deposits considered to be richer than
that in Pours, particularly in the south and north central regions.

Resources

Furthermore, it would appear that the subsoil of Upper Volta contains a number of
mining resources: diamonds in the Barsagho region, phosphates in the east, uranium
in the west and the Sahel, copper in the southwest. Missions that have gone
abroad have received precise instructions in order to interest investors in the
operation of these deposits, whose extent remains to be determined.

For the time being, it is above all the Tambao project that is enjoying the govern-
ment's attention. Located_300 kilometers northwest of the capital, Tambao contains

29
IN)R!OFFICLAI.USEZOFHUY
Ftﬂl(nﬂﬂC1A1.USE1N‘LY

a rich manganese deposit which all the governments that have succeeded one another
in Ouagadougou put at the head of their program of action, but which none was able
to bring off. Hill Col Saye Zerbo succeed? "hat is certain is that he seems to
wish to direct his efforts, not _so much toward immediate working of the deposit,
but rather, to construction of the railroad, because, some in his entourage say,
of the rich agricultural possibilities of the regions that the railroad will have
to cross.

Questions

The Military Committee has in _fact set as its top priority its food self-sufficiency.
compromised by the combination of the three chronic phenomena: the drought, en-
croachment of the desert and rural underequipment. Consequently, it has planned.
the setting up of 7,000 watering points and the construction of many hydroelectric
dams, particularly the Konpienga, on a branch of the White Volta, and the Bagre,
downstream on the same river. Electricity-must be produced, while irrigating
thousands of hectares of land to be used to produce grain and garden crops.

Hill such a portfolio of fine projects be enough to dissipate the doubts and un-
certainties that hinder the political action of the regime? At any rate, while a
large proportion of public opinion was.overjoyed—about the arrest of the dignitari
ies of the Third Republic, many are now wonderingz- Why are those men still being
held without trial? If some are guilty of embezzlement and abuses of power, as

it has been stated privately, what are they waiting_for to prove it?

What is sure is that they have been assigned officers houses inside the military
camps of Ouagadougou and Bobc-pioulasso. The ministers live two to a home, while
the former president of the National Assembly, Gerard Kango Ouedraogo, and former
Prime Minister Joseph Conombo both occupy a house of their own.‘ The same is true
of the former chief of state, Gen Sangoule Lamirana, who occupies the house which
he himself once assigned his predecessor at the head of state, Maurice Yameogo,
since freed.

We are told that all of these former dignitaries are being treated with the regard
due their rank. Hith respect to food, they have the same menu as the officers mess.

In the beginning, those at the new military camp in- -0uagadougou enjoyed the daily
menu made up at the Hotel de l'Independence restaurant. Military doctors watch

over their health. All receive a salary corresponding to their grade_in the civil
service and regularly correspond with their families. Some manage their affairs
from the camp.

Threats

And yet, the many friends which these officials have abroad are beginning to worry,
if not about the conditions, then at least about the length of their detention.

01d protagonists of the African political scene, such as Joseph Conombo and
Gerard Kango 0uedraogo,cannot disappear overnight without people being moved.

As for Gen Sangoule Lamizana, whose moral integrity and political unselfishnese
is known to everyone, while it is understandable that he was ousted from power,
because that goes with the territory, it is difficult to see why he is kept so

30
FOR!0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OF1NCIAL.USE¢DNLN

long in a camp. Given his age (65), it would be lore reasonable if Lanizana were
sentenced to house arrest, if need be, in his native village of Dianra (Tougan re-
gion in the west) rather than kept prisoner in Ouagadougou.

Not only are such prisoners a nuisance, but their shadows, which continue to haunt
ninds, may well tarnish the country's ihage; Far from facilitating the task of

the new leaders, this situation coiplicates it, particularly with financial backers.
Above all, the truce observed by the unions has definitely cone to an and. Follow-
ing the coup d'etat, the secretary general of the powerful CSV (voltan Trade Union
Confederation), Sounane Toure, issued a cautious appeal to his nenbers for vigi-
lance. However, at the beginning of September. he condemned the threat which

restrictions on trade union freedoaa pose to the independence and autonomy of the
unions.

Are these the first signs of the social hurricane which, whether directly or not,

has always swept away the different regimes in power in ouagadougou? Col Saye-
Zerbo should think about it before it is too late.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

11,664
C80: 4719/431

31
FI”!(MHW(JAI.USE!NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

BRIEFS

WHEAT PROGRAM'S PROBLEMS-~The budget for the wheat growing program in Nampamba,
near Ndola, had to be reduced by 1.5 Iillion Zambian kwachas, said L. Turnbull.
one of the officials in charge of that program. This cutback was required due
to the lack of available funds. The program, started in 1978, is jointly
financed by the BBC and the Zambian Government. During the last farming season
it produced 11,000 bags of wheat and 13,000 bags of soybean. There were plans
to develop 15 farms with an area of 50 hectares each during the current season
but only 11 of these projects could be carried out due to financial difficul-
ties. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICADX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1871,

18 Sep 81 p 2398] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Ole Paris 1981] 8796

IMF NEGOTIATIONS CONTINUE--Zambian Finance Minister K. Musokotwane is scheduled
to go to Hashington at the end of September to continue negotiations with the
IMF (International Monetary Fund). The fund has recently allowed Zambia to
draw 800 million Zambian kwachas worth of SDR (aPecial drawing rights) of which
about 300 million have already been drawn. The minister has refused to comment
on a report carried by the TIMES OF ZAMBIA alluding to possible difficulties in
the withdrawal of the rest of the amount granted by the INT. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITRRANBENS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2398]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 8796

C80: 4719/26 END

32

lwuiﬂlfﬂ1AllﬂW10Nl¥