FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10585
14 June 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 776

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

ma OFITCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGUT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070031-5

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

9000 No. 776

Coursurs

WEB-Am CAN AFFAIRS

Role of French Spies in Africa Reported
(Francois Soudan; JEUNE AFRIQUB, 28 Apr 82)

ANGOLA

Oil Prospects and Soviet Assistance
(HARCHES mOPICNIX B‘r mums, 2 Apr

Briefs
Soviet Dan Aid
CHAD
Briefs
Canadian Aid to Refugees
International Aid Meeting
OONGO

Briefs '
FAG Aid for Dicalyptus

PRC Aid

Congolese-Cuban Cooperation
EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Briefs
Financial Dispute With Spain

GABON

Expert Discusses Problals Facing Developnent of Pi
(HAROHBS TROPICAUX 8T mums, 2 Apr

-a- [III-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070031-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expert Continues Discussion on Industrial Fishing
(HARGHBS TBOPICAUX 81' WES, 9 Apr 82) .......

Briefs
Arrest of Opposition Halters
Soviet Scientist's Visit
Petroleum: Discoveries

Arrests for Banditry
National Transportation Plan

MADAGASCAR

Malagasy Socialism on Very i‘order of Columnist System
(Pascal Chaigneau; PCUVOIRS, No 21, 1982) ..............

MOZAMBIQUE

Briefs
Cahors Bassa Electricity

HIGH!

Fire in Niamey Market Grave Blow to National Economy
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET mums, 9 Apr 82) ........

Briefs
national Debate on Education

Japanese Equipment
UNDP Aid
NIGERIA
Nigeria To Remain Firm of Petroleum Prices Despite Profit
ussegmuss TROPICAUX B? minimums, 16 Apr 82) success

Fall in ShipIents
Production Trends

RWANDA

Kigali Bank Report on Rwanda Econow in 1981
(HARCIU TROPICAUX ET mums, 16 Apr 82)........

SKIES“.

mouf Projects Favorable Economic Prospects in 1982
(MARCHBS TROPIOAUX s‘r mums, 9 Apr 82) ........

1982-1983 Agricultural Production Goals Set; Latest Results

Noted
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDIWS, 2 Apr 82) ........

-b-

FOIOFFIGALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Briefs
Food Reserves

Activity of Bank of Kinshasa Noted in Report for 1980
(W833 TROPIOAUX B'l' WES, 30 Apr 82) ....

Briers
1981 enemas Production
1981 mm Steel Production
South Korean Technical Cooperation
Refugee Statistics

”WWW?
ROLE OF FRENCII SPIBS IN AFRICA Imam
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 28 Apr 82 pp 22-25
[Article by Francois Soudan: "French Spies in Africa")

[Text] To soee extent, every secret service has its own
specialty, its own "game preserve": Latin America for the
CIA, the Middle East for the British Intelligence Service and
Africa for the 8030! [Foreign Intelligence and Counterintelli-
gence Service} . or rather. the DGSB, the General Foreign
Security Directorate, as Francois Hitterrand's services were
tens-ed on lo April. The identification of French intelligence
with the continent is so complete that the invisible hand of
the honorable correspondents of Paris has been imagined behind
every plot and coup d'etat that has happened in Africa in the
past 22 years. "There are several hundred businessmen, big
shots in cooperation (lodged in the African ninistries). sili-
tary men and agents fairl'y well known to the 8080!! who have had
African nationalisn under surveillance since 1960. Their trade.
if I can call it that, their role. is to keep Black Africa in
the neocolonial fold." Bechir Ben Yalned wrote six nonths ago
(J30!!! AFRIQUF, No 1092). Consequently, the actors in this
neocolonisl lobby play conplensntary. perfectly coordinated
parts. When a spoilsport, whether it be a newspaper -- and we
know what we are talking about -- or a president. tries to

six up the play. then the players get their backs up.

For the past year. Francois hitterrand has had this bitter ex-
perience, .whose Iain stages we outline here. There can be no
doubt that this dossier. the dossier of the "betrayal" of his
services in Africa. will figure prominently anong those he
takes with him on his first presidential trip to Africa fro-
20 to 25 Hay.

what goes on in the head of an agent when a regime passes or a presidency
changes hands is a state secret. This is undoubtedly why. in the tiny cat-un-
ity of spies, secret police and other fairly honorable correspondents, there
has been as much talk since the election of Francois Hitterrand a year ago as

at the entry to General Headquarters. This does not mean -- quite the con-
trary -- that the nest fanous of then, at the Tourelles barracks (General

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CUR WI‘ILIAL USE. UNL‘

Headquarters, at the corner of Boulevard Mortier and the Rue des Tourelles, of
the SDECE. newly named the General Foreign Security Directorate since the be-

ginning of April). does not close each evening on a day replete with rumors
and corridor conspiracies.

Privileged Disagreement

At the center of all the gossip. today and every time the French services

have been in a crisis in the past 20_years. in Africa, the private reserve

and place of privileged disagreement. Or more precisely, of the strange
side-slipping. manipulations.and other diversions in which, in the shadow of
their African branches, the agents convinced that a socialist government in
Paris represents the absolute evil were engaged. A fake caup d'etat in
N'Djamena, a musical comedy putsch in Bangui, the "Patasse affair." the
succession of Houphouet. French-Gabonese tension: "We are misinformed." is the
Elysee's caustic remark to the Ministry of Cooperation. "They don't trust us
anymore," is the unanimous sigh of the 2;500 civil servants at Tourelles. Is
it a premeditated betrayal or a mere ritualistic crisis of adaptation? One
thing is practically certain: Por the first time in 24 years of the Fifth
Republic, a French government is facing a situation comparable to the one that
existed between the White House and the CIA under Carter: divorce.

Everything began on a day in June 1981. with the arrival of Pierre Marion at
the headquarters of what was still called the SDECE (Foreign Intelligence and
Counterintelligence Service). he was immediately viewed with suspicion. During
the month of transition following the departure of his precedessor. Alexandre
de Harenches, embarrassing documents were feverishly shredded. compromising
dossiers stuffed into incinerators'and truckloads of memorandums shifted around
behind the walls of the barracks. The SDBCE did not vote for Hitterrand. to
say the least. There will be a witch hunt, the rumor went, and already, the
black lists of the new team were formulated in everyone's.minds. Furthermore.
Pierre Marion's look was disturbing. The Service had finally grown used to

the whims, the cigar and gourmet figure of Alexandre de Harenches, Pompidou's
Porthos, that touchy taskmaster responsible for several massive purges: a
total of 915 agents dismissed or driven out during his 11 years in power.

And new the "Pool" would be headed by an old Hendes-France follower. a Hat—
seillais and graduate of the Polytechnicsl School with the look of a piano
mover who had become a leftist Gaullist before shifting to the movement of
Francois Hitterrand. In short, for the "Ciscardized" agents of the SDECB -- by
far the majority - he was the worst possible type of director, an ideologist
who would lop of heads, given responsibility for cleaning out the stables.

Socialist-Gaullists

When the silhouettes of his "technical advisers" appeared in his wake, panic
ensued: From university officer Pierre Dabezies to Admiral Antoine Sanguinetti
(Alexandre's brother), from'Colonel Bessy to Pernand Hibsux (formerly ambassa-
dor to Senegal and formerly chief of staff of Gaston Deffferre), all are
"socialist Gaullists" to some extent. In other words, the enemy.

2
FORtMﬂﬁCJAI.USE(NVLV
African Section

Nor did it take long. Under the baton of gendarmerie officer Michel houssin,
formerly staff director for Alexandre de Marenches. and Col Jean-Albert Sin-
gland, formerly head of ccunterespionage, it was a veritable game of musical
chairs: Some 60 loyal servants of the previous director, such as Rene Dalmas,
Jean Bontoux, Yves Beccuau (psychotechnical adviser) or Gen Rene Crignola
(head of the Information service branch in the Research Directorate). disap-
pear from the new setup, while Col Georges Grillot. who was a close aide to
General Bigeard during the Algerian war, and Gen Jacques Sylla Pouilland. an
"intellectual" much criticized within the SDECB, were kept on or promoted.
against all expectations. The former went to the head of the famous Action
Service and the latter became the Mo 2 man at Tourelles.

This atmosphere of purges -- limited purges. it is true. but which Pierre
Marion. manifestly surprised by his appointment, mistakenly left to deputies
sometimes anxious to settle their accounts -- joined with the profoundly anti-
socialist feelings of many agents, would bring about a rapid deterioration in
the quality of the information supplied, to such a point that Marion was
forced to have reported submitted to him systematically verified by competing
services. Even more serious was that after the banishment of General Crignola.
who maintained privileged relations with the Moroccan DCBD [Directorate Gen-
eral of Studies and Documentation]. the Egyptian Moukhabarat and the South
African NIS [expansion unknown]. the entire African section of the SDECE

went over to the active opposition. with the militant complicity of a neo-
colonial lobby that ranges from the Chadian and Central African cotton indus-
try to the Gabonese oilmen.

"Gabonese Clan"

The first serious symptom of this "mutiny" came precisely from Libreville.
Prom Maurice Robert, French ambassador being disnissed and former-aide to
Crignola. to Colonel Daniel (ELF-Gabon {Gasoline.and Lubricants Company of
France]).and including General Martin and Colonel Marion (officers in the
presidential guard), Andre Casimir and Lieutenant Colonel Cssterane (security
services) or even Jorge Jardim (former potentate of the Portuguese settlers
in Mozambique. who became head of lnterbanque) and Paul Bory (owner of the
Multipresse-Cabon publishing house), what at Tourellea is commonly called the
“Gabonese clan" would orchestrate a veritable antisocialist campaign with
Libreville authorities. Prom June to October 1981, until the arrival of the
replacement for Ambassador Maurice'Robert. Robert Cantoni, they would try to .
persuade President Bongo that Mittarrand wanted to "drop him," while stepping
up the calculated rumors and articles in the slick periodicals (such as the
major interview with Maurice Robert published in PARISJMATCH). Nor were they
totally unsuccessful because, in order to reassure a worried Omar Bongo, Elysee
adviser for African affairs Guy Penne would have to make more trips to Libre-

ville (see the article by Siradiou Diallo in JBUNE APRIQUE. No 1090).

There was some nervousness in Paris and Marion met with Francois de Crossouvre
(adviser to Mitterrand for information affairs) and Minister of Defense Charles
Hornu several times. The subject of their discussions: The American CIA was

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reportedly at the root of this strategy of tension. At the end of August, two

of Marion's aides went to Langley (Virginia) to the headquarters of the CIA
and returned half convinced by the virtuous denials of William Casey's deputies.

It was in Bangui on 1 September, when General Kolingba ousted David Dacko,

that the second act of the divorce was played. The coup never actually was
one; this can now be stated with certainty. With the consent of President
Mobutu of Zaire and President Bongo of Gabon. David Dacko, who was increasingly
criticized in Paris -- where he was labeled the "awkward legacy of the Gis-
cardian era" - and who was convinced that the "return" of Ange Patasse had to
be avoided at all costs, turned over the reins to Andre Koliogba. "I entrusted
him with a mission." the former president now hints: "Restoring order and '
cleaning out the 'Patassists'."

Local SDECE officials (Colonel Dulaurence and Major Mansion) were undoubtedly
aware that something was afoot. Did they "forget" to inform Paris? The trans-

fer of power from Dacko to Kolingba took place at 2000 hours in the evening on
30 August, at Camp Roux. ' '

"Counterforce"

The Elysee would not be infcrmed until the following day at 0830 hours and
the French ambassador to Bangui was not told. through Dacko's personal physi-
cian, a young Frenchman, until two hours later. at 1030 hours. There was '
general amazement at the Tourelles General Headquarters. Marion. that un-
flappable polyglot with the impeccable manners, exploded, especially since he
had just learned that the American Embassy in Bangui was very active in the
weeks preceding the "coup" and that it had to be involved in what happened.
He wanted to take aggressive action but his assistant, Gen Sylla Pouilland,
Francois de Grossouvre and Louis Sanmarco (a friend of Gaston Defferre who was
at one time governor of Uhangi-Chari). advised caution. If they wanted to
scotch the SDECE for Africa, they would have to have a replacement system, as
De Gaulle had done at the beginning of the 1960's, in reviving the Poccart
networks. The idea of a "counterforce" was born. It was said to have the
backing of Francois Hitterrand. A discreet work group immediately set to
work at informal but regular meetings between the Elysee and the Ministry of
Defense, setting up the "Grossouvre networks."-

Porcing Paris To Intervene in Chad

Hednesday, 28 October: Act 3. The imagined coup d'etat in N'Djamena. A week
after the "Cancun appeal" of Francois Mitterrand evoking the "urgent need" to
send an inter-African force to Chad - it was, in fact, a matter of protecting
President Goukouni from the vacuum created by the imminent departure of the
Libyan contingent -- an AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE dispatch citing "witnesses coming
from the Chadian capital" announced a pro-Qadhdhafi coup in N'Djemena and the
disappearance of Goukouni. On 29 october, several Parisian dailies featured
the coup in their headlines. However, as we would learn several hours later,
there never was a coup d'etat, not even an attempted one. French authorities.
feverish, to say the least, immediately spoke of manipulation, deception

and misinformation and promised an investigation. The purpose of the maneuver.

FOIIOFFIJAI.USE(”VLY
it was stated. was to force Paris to intervene directly in Chad once again.
Possibly. The fact remains that six months later, the promised investigation
into this strange dispatch has not yet yielded tangible results. The name of
an AFP newsman close to the Gaullist opposition and certain military circles
was discreetly mentioned, but nothing irrefutable supported the possibility
that he was actually at the.root of the deception.

whatever the reasons and motives for that October manipulation -- and they
must still be clarified - it is obvious that the atmosphere within the French
services is not the better for them; on the contrary. For the first time.

in fact. the officers at the Operations Center of Military Information, the
Second Bureau, were directly suspected by the government. And, since the
SDECB "mutiny," it was on this second pillar of French information that re-
sponsibility for the collection of information rested. Caullists for the most
part, these officers had previously been very careful not to join up with the
SDECE "Ciscardians." however, outraged at having been accused of disloyalty,
the most politicized among the: would also topple.

November 1981: T'. work group of six officials made responsible, two months
previously, for working out on paper a new system of_information directly under
the Elysee filed its first conclusions. It categorically recommended against
the use of benevolent militants such as leftist technical assistants or members
of nongovernmental organizations: no French-type Peace Corps. 0n the other
hand. it did emphasize the importance of Masonic-type solidarities previously
neglected. In Africa, men such as David Dacko or Omar Bongo are Free Masons
and Guy Penne. the Elysee African specialist, is also. The work group there-
fore attached to its report a'complete list of African presidents, ministers
and high officials who are Free Masons: all potential "collaborators," it
states. A rapidly operational system still has to be set up.

Reviving Foccart Systems

The conclusions of the officials on this subject are surprising, to say the
least: nothing other'than reviving the old Foccsrt system. Naturally, one
would not use the most dubious secret police, those most.highly marked and
the least reliable politically, but only those who "loyally" did their work
and that can be classified in the leftist Gaullist movement. Prominent per-
sons such as Roger Barberot, former ambassador to the Central African Republic,
or Dominique Ponchardier. formerly head of the services of order of General
de Gaulle and now head of the French Company for the Development of Textile
Fibers (CPD?) -- a joint public and private company -- could also provide
useful advice. The anti-Giscardianism of these men, when De Marenches had
cast aside, in a sense, and many of whom had turned to managing hotels and
night clubs from Abidjan to Libreville. would be a pledge -- at least tempor-
ary -- of their loyalty. It would be a risky choice, without a doubt. but_
unfortunately, there was no other.

however. at the beginning of.March 1982, a fourth "affair," once again in the

Central African Republic, would point up the inanity of such a solution and
demonstrate to what extent the divorce between Paris and its African services
is total. 0n the night of Wednesday. 3 March. a group of rebel officers tried

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
lﬁﬂ!0¥¥ﬂ]AL.UShLONL\

unsuccessfully in Bangui to oust President Kolingba on behalf of Ange Patasse.
It was elements of the old Poccart networks linked to the cotton lobby who had
promoted Patasse in France and encouraged him to take power in Central Africa
(JEUNE APRIQUB. No 1106). It is now known that it was officers in the Second
Bureau posted in Bangui, Colonel Joubert and Colonel Paire. who helped.
through their reports sent to the minister of defense and then the Elysee, to
give credit to the thesis of a desirable return (in the name of regional

balance) of Ange Patasse. Moreover, the villa of Colonel Paure. military
attache to the French Embassy. was searched by Central African soldiers on the

very day after the abortive coup. .Pinally. according to reliable sources.
Major Mansion (head of the presidential guard with the rank of lieutenant

colonel), No 2 man in the SDECB branch in Bangui. reportedly deliberately
allowed General Bozize, co-author of the putsch. to flee. with this military

comment: "You are an ass; get the hell out of here!"

A few days later, the anecdote-reached the ears of Pierre Marion and Charles
Hernu. Major Mansion. already called back to Paris a few months ago "for
explanations" following a "confidential" report published in JEURB AFBIQUE
describing his excessively zealous police activities at the Bangui airport,
will very certainly be transferred....

Information Services Against Elysee

Foccart systems, the SDECB, the Second Bureau: It is now clear that it is

the entire French intelligence community -- whether active or dornant -

that now plays. in varying degrees. against or without the Elysee. Nor will
any change in name for the SDBCB. made public or 4 April. or the new nissions
to be assigned to it (intensification of economic and scientific information
research. "all-points" strategy without any privileged targets), much less

the great reorganization announced - actually, a mere dismantling of the
directorate of the infrastructure and means -- be able to reaedy the situation.

It is not enough to change the life guard in order for the water in the "Pool"
to become clear. .

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRDPJIA 1982

11.464
680: 6719/968

6
IND! OIINCJAI.IRSE.CNNLY
01L PROSPECTS AND SOVIET ASSISTANCE
Paris HARCBBS TROPICAUX 3? HBDITERRANBENS in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 926

[Text]. Even though it is not a member of OPEC, Angola paid close attention
to the special OPEC conference held in Vienna 19-20 March (see HTH No 1898
of 26 Mar. pp 827-828). Luanda counts on oil to provide most of its purchas-
ing power (80 to 90 percent), and a lowering of the price of crude on the
world market is bound to have serious consequences for its economy, which is
currently going through a difficult phase.

Hr Brminio Escorcio, managing director of the Angola National Oil Company
(SONANGOL), has talked about his concerns in this area with APP, emphasizing
among other things that Angola, as a small producer, was not affected either
directly or indirectly by the decisions on cutting back production.

In 1981, Angola's oil production was lower than expected--only 6.8 million
tons, as opposed to 8-9 million tons-~"because of technical problems in
Cabinda province." In early 1981, the official price was $38.75 per barrel.

Normally, Angola's oil is priced to conform with Arabian light except for
some necessary adjustments. Presently, Angola is negotiating prices separate-
ly for each customer. Production of 10.5 million tone is scheduled for 1982.

It may well be helpful to describe the structure of Angola's oil operations.
The majority of prospecting and operating contracts have been signed with
Western companies--on the basis of 51 percent interest for SONANGOL, 69
percent for the foreigners. These contracts deal with offshore deposits,
all along the Atlantic coast from Cabinda in the north to the middle of the
country the areas in the south have not yet been awarded.

Though Hashington and Luanda have not normalized diplomatic relations,
Angola's main oil partner is an American company. Gulf Oil, which established
itself in the country before independence in 1975. The French company Elf
has made two promising discoveries with its first two drilling projects.

Current conditions are not such as to encourage Angola to rest on its laurels.
The country has just signed an agreement with the Italian company, Agip,

for exploration and production at a deposit south of Cabinda (see HTH No

1898 of 26 Harch, page 865) and is moving to sign a new contract with Gulf
"that will be beneficial to both sides."

FOR‘OFINCIAI.IEIECHVLY
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

Also, Hr Pedro Van Dunen Loy. the country's energy and oil sinister, left
22 March on a trip to West Europe that is to take him to France, Belgium,
Austria, Italy and Great Britain-accompanied by Mr Erninio Bscorcio.

fl‘he latter has been putting emphasis lately on the training of Angolan
technicians, stating that the long-tern objective is to create a petroleum
university. Angola, he added, is also interested in increasing onshore
exploration and exploiting its natural gas.

As for construction of a second refinery with Soviet assistance, he indicated
that this possibility was not yet being considered, as officials are still
considering the possibility of increasing the capacity of the Luanda re-

f inery that was shut down for 3 nonths as a result of sabotage.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

9516
080: 6719/8103

”WIMONLY
BRIEFS

SOVIET DAM AID—Three Portuguese companies late in March signed an agree-eat
with the Soviets for the construction of a den on the Cuanza River at Capanda,
south of Luanda. The cost of the da- conetruction. buildings. roads and

the hydroelectric generating station will be borne by the Portuguese fins
and will be on the order of 16 billion escudos (1.10 billion French francs).
The Soviet side is to provide equipnent for the production and trannission
of the electricity produced. Installation of a high-voltage line connecting
the towns of Quibala and Gabela (215 In) is alto a part of this trilateral
project. [Text] [Paris mans TROPICAUX ET HBDITERBANBENS in Preach No
1900. 9 Apr 82 p 982] [COPYRIGﬂTz Rene lbreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

”MUSEONLY
BRIEFS

CANADIAN AID ‘I’O WORKS—Canada will give the UN high Comission on Refugees
$750,000 in response to its appeal for a progra- to assist in the repatriation
of Chadian refugees. The funds will cone from the Canadian International
Development Agency via the International Runnitarian Aid Progran. [Text]
[Paris M30338 TROPICAU! E1: MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 9161
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

NATIONAL AID animus-4n preparation for the international conference on
aid to and, postponed to late su-ssr, mas [Office of United Nations
Disaster Relief Coordinator] held a preparatory nesting in Geneva 5-6 April
for donor countries and organizations. The meeting focused on Chad's needs
for energmcy and humanitarian assistance. The Chadian Government was to

be represented by Mr Taher Souleynane, sinister of planning and reconstruction.
A high-level delegation from the DAB use also expected. After describing the
current situation in the country, including its needs for debt and budgetary
support, UNDRO was to explain the energency assistance program and report on
the status of contributions received to date. {Text} [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX
ET HEBREW in French No 1.900, 9 Apr 82 p 9711 (COPYRIGHT: Rene noreux
et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

650: 6719/8105

10
POI OFFICIAL we ONLY
BRIEFS

PAC AID FOR EUCALYPTUS—-Three blocks of financing, totalling 610 million CPA
francs, have been opened to the Congo by the French Pund for Aid and Coopera-
tion since 1978 in order to increase the area planted in eucalyptus fro. 3,000
to 8,000 hectares. A special organization, the Congo Industrial Afforestation
Division, has been created which, in addition to the PAC grant, has received
around 800 million CPA francs from the Congolese budget over the past 3 years.
The 1982 sum will enable planted areas to be increased to 9,000 hectares and
will provide maintenance for the 8,000 hectares already planted with eucalyptus
and pine, with theCongo'sl982 share amounting to 300 million CPA francs. The
PAC financing will cover the cost of technical assistance and durable goods.
According to the French cooperative mission in Brazzaville, all elements seem
to be united on the scientific agricultural level to assure an effective
contribution to the establishment of a cellulose pulp plant beginning in
1985-86. By then, thanks to the financial efforts of the Congo, the PAC ari
probably the French CCCE [central Fund for Economic Cooperation]. the planted
area will exceed 30,000 hectares. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX RT
HBDTTBRRANBENS in Prench no 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 917] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Moreux

et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

PRC AID-~A protocol for agreement between the People's Republic of China

and the Congo dealing with the construction of s ZOO-bed hospital in the
boandjili-Z district near Pointe-Noire has just been signed in brazzaville.

The work will begin in 1986. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS
in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 917] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.)
9693

CONGOLZSE-CUBAN COOPERATION-Congo and Cuba have reaffirmed their desire to
continue to join forces to expand and strengthen cooperation between the two
countries, according to a final communique published following the work of the
third Congolese-Cuban Joint Commission just held in Brazzaville. According to
the text, the fourth session will be held in Ravens next year, and the date
will be set through diplomatic channels. [Text] [Paris NARCHES TROPICAUX

ET HBDITBRRANBENS in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 973] [COPYRIGRT: Rene
Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

080: h719/835

ll
FUIIOIIKIAI.UGI¢NVLY
BR!!!

FINANCIAL DISPUTE WITH SPAIN--Speniah judicial authorities in Madrid froze
Equatorial Guinea'e accounte in tho Banco de Eapana and the Banco Exterior
on 30 March. The decision to freeze the aaaeta cane in reaponae to legal
action filed by one of the Equatorial Guinea Central Bank's creditora, the
Sociadad General limo-African de Gouercio, headquartered in Alicante,

for nonpayment of a lS-nillion-peaeta bill. A ainilar freeze, inpoeed laat
February because the Equatorial Guinea Central Bank had failed to honor an
80-nillion-peaeta credit note in the tine allotted, was lifted 16 March after
the note was paid. According to Mr Manuel Perri, managing director of the
above-nentioned firm. which specializes in trade with Equatorial Guinea. the
Halabo government still once it 863 nillion peaetae. Hr Ferri. who in being
represented by a law firn headed by for-er Spanieh preaident Adolfo Suarez,
said that he wee disturbed by thia indebtedneea because political relatione
between Helabo and Madrid are deteriorating. [Text] [Paris HARCEES TROPICAUX
3r HBDITBRKANEIR8.in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 971] [COPYRIGII: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

080: 4719/8‘5

12
l0.U0iIICIAl.lIII(l§lY
EXPERT DISCUSSBS PROBLEMS FACING DEVELOPMENT OF FISHING
Paris HARCHES TROPICADX ET HBDITBRRANBENS in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82, p 916

[Text] According to Mr Rene 0ndo Nguema, Gabonese specialist on marine affairs,
quoted by the daily L'UNION in Libreville on 26 March, small-scale or pirogue
fishing supplies 31 percent of the fish consumed in Gabon, compared with 33
percent supplied by the commercial fishing industry. Nevertheless, Gabon
imports 36 percent of what it consumes, primarily in canned form.

Freshwater fishing, specifies Hr Undo Nguema, yields an average of 500 tons
annually. It is confined to lagoons and rivers. Freshwater fishing's low
yield is due to the fact that it takes place for only 3 months during the year,
in the dry season.

As for coastal fishing. it yields 3,000 tons. Coastal fishing activities are
geographically widespread, but they are undergoing more intensive growth in
the Cap Lopez area.

In the deep-sea sector, according to the same source, the difference between
the catch and the potential catch remains significant; total consumption can
be estimated at 10,000 tons per year. In any case, consumption is related

to an effort to modernize the fishing infrastructure. Lack of an appropriate
infrastructure is still the major factor in the discrepancy and results in an
average yield per fisherman of approximately 6 tons per year, or 40 kg per
day based on 100 working days. It would be desirable, Hr 0ndo Nguema feels,
to encourage fishermen to consolidate to make fishing a full-time activity.
It is felt in Gabonese fishing circles that such consolidation would make the
granting of credit for fishing equipment, particularly for improvements to
existing refrigerating plants, easier in areas where small-scale fishing is
experiencing significant growth,'chiefly in the southern coastal region. All
this presupposes a satisfactory evaluation of the small-scale fishing effort.

0n the other hand, development of fish breeding remains a priority objective
of the Gsbonese Government. This program involves the provinces of Woleu-Ntem,
Ngounie, Ryanga, the Estuary, Ogooue-Lolo and Haut Ogooue. L'UNION stresses
that small-scale fishing, like fish breeding, has an advantage in that its
development requires a relatively small investment compared to the commercial
fishing industry, which is still very localized.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9693
C80: 0719/835

l3
ROI OIII(IAI.IENE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EXPERT OONTINUBS DISCUSSION ON INWSTRIAI. PISHNG

Paris “(335 TROPICAUX 31’ mum in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 972

[Text] In our 2 April 1982 issue, page 916, we published a piece on Gabon's
small fishing industry. The sale source quoted in the daily L'UNION-Jlr
Rene Ondo Nguena. a Gabonese expert on urine natters--has also provided
sane information on industrial fishing in the country.

The fishing industry has been declining gradually since 1973. The industrial
catch has declined fron 4,600 to 3,300 tons per year. This decline is main-
ly due to imbalances in the utilisation of fishing zones.

The only sustained activity still going on is in the Librevills region, while
the real potential for optinun yields, especially in terns of trawler fishing,
is in the southern part of the Gabonese littoral. This is related to problens
in preserving and transporting the fish products found in that area.

Nevertheless. industrial fishing accmmts for 33 percent of the fish consuned
in Gabon and involves both coastal trawler fishing and open-sea fishing
further out.

Trawler fishing is possible over an area of 1,800 square kilometers north of
Cape Lopez and in theory could yield as much as 140 kg per hour. South of
Cape Lopez, trawler fishing is possible over a larger area covering 15.500
square kiloneters, with yields up to 330 kg per hour.

The region is suitable for both trawler and trawl-line fishing. The latter
techique is conplenentary to the former, as it can be practiced on the rocky
sea-bottom that is inaccessible to the trawlers.

The current fishing area, which remains limited to the Libreville region,
provides 3,1000 tons per year. Sons species are the subject of nuch more
trawling than others. Sons, in fact, are being overfished. Sons 1,600 tons
of shrinp are being taken, for exanple, even though it is not rational to take
sore than 900 tons a year.

There are prospects for annual trawler production to reach between 5,000 and
6,000 tons. But the country as a whole probably needs soae 10,000 tons sore
of fishing products than it produces. Considering only the regions where

110
”MEMORY
fresh fish can be obtained free Libreville, the shortfall night be reckoned
at 1,000 tons, to which should be added another 1,000 tons to account for
the growing needs.

In 1978, 27 percent of industrial fishing sector enployees in the group of
coastal countries that are nenbers of UDEAC (Customs and Bcononic lhion of
Central Africa) were Gabonese. Fishing is now a leading enploynent factor on
the uritine scene, and its role is destined to increase as the fishing sector
grows.

Insufficient production of ice (20 tons per day) causes interruptions in the
supply of Gabonese fish. The result is zigzag production, reinforced by
seasonal vagaries that inhibit normal growth of small fishing on the mainland
during the rainy season. Thus, a period of abundance can follow on the heels
of a period of shortage, and the repercussions on prices are inediate.

All things considered, the price of fish sold at offloading points is relatively
low, especially for the coastal population. This does not always lead to
profitable invest-eats. The fisherman, lacking ise, is in fact often con-
strained to sell his fish at a ridiculously low price. This is true at
wholesale and retail levels as well.

The distribution systen is another inpedinent. Its defects only reinforce

the disparity between consunption in the urban centers and the rural regions.
The fact that certain key roads are inpassible in the rainy season means that
the lack of facilities for the storage of fish results in considerable losses.

at. for solutions to the problems in Gabon's fishing sector, Mr Rene 0ndo
Nguena believes that they lie prinrily in improvements in the facilities for
icenaking, to bring ice production up to at least twice the current level.

At the same time, it is essential to reorganize facilities for freezing and
storage and to sake then available wherever needed. This would nice it pos-
sible for centers far removed fro. the fishing sites to be regularly supplied.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

9516
030: “719/865

15
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOIOITICIALUSEONLY

GABON

BRIBPS

ARREST OF OPPOSITION mess-4h. APP correspondent in Yaounde has provided the
following information on the arrest of more opposition members in Gabon, fol-.
lowing those of last December. Three journalists were brought in for interro-
gation between 11-16 March and have been detained in the aain prison at
Libreville. They are Samuel Ngueaa ﬂu, editor-in-chief of the national

daily L'UNION; Francois 0ndo Edou, news editor at the Gabonese national radio
station; and Jean-Baptiste Asse behale, a journalist with AFRICA NO. 1. Also
arrested, according to the sane source, were Jen-Herc Ekoh, former minister
of education under President Icon “be and inspector (f Protestant private
schools; Michel Ovono, ministry of nining engineer; and a secretary, Miss
Marguerite Eyaa Nkeme. Hr. Ekohwae in Hakokou when he was apprehended. So
far none of these people has been fomlly indicted. Their doniciles have
been searched. The search carried out at the home of Mr Samuel Nguema ribs

was under the direction of a "Trenches in civilian clothes" and found nothing.
according to the reports of the journalist's relstives who arrived in Yaounde
on 5 April. The sane reports also speak of "brutalities" and "bullying" in-
flicted on some of those interrogated. Mr Samuel libs was reportedly made to
strip and sleep on the earthen floor of his cell for the first 8 days of his
detention. Mr Iiichel Ovono was reportedly tortured with electric shocks.
[Text] [Paris HABCHES TROPICAUX 3T HEDITEERANEBNS in French No 1900, 9 Apr

82 p 971] [COPYRIGRT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

SOVIET SCIENTIST'S VISIT-Dr Anetoliy Gronyko, director of the USSR's Africa
Institute and Acadeey of Sciences, left Libreville at the end of Hatch fol-
lowing a visit of about 2 weeks in Gabon. The son of the Soviet foreign
minister, Hr Anatoliy Gronyko was touring of Africa on behalf of UNESCO,

and Gabon was the last stop on the tour. The Africa Institute and Academy
of Sciences which he heads in Moscow is planning to carry out scientific re-
search on the traditional art of the peoples of tropical Africa. Gabon,
because of its artistic and cultural diversity, will have a proninent place
in the research project. [Text] [Paris MARCEBS TROPICAIIX ET MEDITERRANEENS
in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 971] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris
1982] 9516

PETROLEUM DISCOVERIBS—The Gabonese nini cter of lining and oil has announced
that the Elf-Gabon company has just made two oil discoveries offshore from
central Gabon on drilling sites it holds jointly with Elf-Aquitaine (SHEA).
The first discovery involves the Bord Marine l Gonelle extension well, near

16
MWWONLY
the Gonelle field. where the Batanga sandstone was found to contain oil at

a depth of 63 meters. The second involves the Heat Marine 1 Mandaroa well,
near the Handeroa field, where the Batanga sandstone was found to contain all
at a depth of 11 aeters. m the basis of production tested so far. it is
crrinated Ihut each of these wells has the potential to produce 100 cubic
meters a day. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPchUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French
No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 972] [00PYBIGHT: Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1982] 9516

ARRESTS FOR BANDITRX--The Gabonese criminal investigation department succeeded
at the end of March in arresting a group of criminals (including Nigerians,
Cameroonians and Gabonese) who col-itted two dramatic thefts in Libreville
several months ago: 68 million CPA francs from the Banque Centrale and 13
million CPA francs from Air Gabon. [Text] [Paris HARCHZS TROPICADX ET
HEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 916] [COPYRIGﬂTz Rene Horeux

et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

NATIORAL TRANSPORTAIION PLAﬂ--0n 16 March, in Libreville. lat Deputy Prime
Minister Georges Rawiri, minister of transport and heavy industry. presented
the National Plan for Gabonese Public Highway Transportation, prepared by
Jean-Claude Ziv, director of the association for technical studies in planning
and urban development at a Paris university. Hith the exception of certain
points to be reviewed, the plan has received the approval of the lat deputy
prime sinister, who will sub-it it to the next Council of Ministers neeting
for study. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAH! ET HBDITBRRANEENS in French

No 1899. 2 Apr 82 p 917] [COPYRIGﬂrz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

050: 4719/835

17
INJI‘OUINCIAI.IEIE(NVLY
HALAGASY SOCIALISH 0N VERY BORDER 0F COMMUNIST SYSTEM
Paris POUVDIRS in French No 21, 1982 pp 108-116

[Article by Pascal Chaigneau: "A Mode of Socialist Orientation on the Border
of the System: the Remarkable Case of Madagascar")

[Text] The Malagasy political structure,taken in the con-
text of the world communist system as a whole, clearly shows
that this country belongs to the states oriented towards
socialism operating at the very border of the system. The
ideological beliefs, the institutional and economic choices,
the option establishing the foreign policy all contribute

to this statement. However. a political and sociological
analysis based on the very realities and vicissitudes of

the regime tends to show some non-negligible brakes on the
irreversibility of the Soviet influence and on the durability
of the present structure. Nevertheless, the true problem
consists in perceiving that the concessions already made to
the USSR must be analysed basically in military and strategic
terms.

After 12 years of militant anticommunism (1960-1972) and an especially troubled
transition period (1972-1975), the Great Island [Madagascar], under the leader-
ship of Commander Didier Ratsiraka, was to see the advent of the Democratic
Republic of Madagascar, extolled as being "resolutely socialist" in its
concept.

In order to clarify the nuances and consequences of such a choice, we must
therefore ponder first over the phenomena which allow us today to place
Madagascar in the category of states oriented toward socialism and, second,
over the durability of the system and what safeguards may exist against the
irreversibility of the Soviet presence.

Considering that the world communist system can be divided1 into "socialist
party-states" which form the "community of socialist states," parties forming
the "international communist movement," and "states oriented toward socialism,"
an intermediate stage usually leading to a party-state, two different
approaches allow us to integrate Madagascar into the latter category thus
placing this country on the border of the world communist system: the choices
made by the political decision-makers, and the elements of the Soviet presence
and influerce.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PQR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Asfar as political choices are concerned, three essential factors contribute
to give credibility to a Malagasy socialism that would be more Marxist than
specific: the determinants of a fundamental theorization, the economic
measures taken, and the data which condition the country's foreign policy.

Thus, in spite of multiple references to authenticity and specificity, the
ideological-doctrinal support of the regime, the "Charter of the Malagasy
Socialist Revolution" (also called "Boky Mona," i.e. little red book), appears
to be a melting pot of ideologies. the true originality of which is that it
brings side by side tte traditional principles of Marxism-Leninism. loans from
the Chinese doctrine (as far as agricultural deveIOpment is concerned), and
legacies from Kim-Il-Sungism (especially the theory of the three revolutions),
all to provide appropriate reference to the societal background of the country.

Also, institutionally, whereas the Malagasy constitution of 29 April 1959
offered extensive similarities to the French model of October 1958 (apart
from the fact that a unicameral system had been chosen), the Operational
mechanism of the Malagasy constitution of 31 December 1975 will be best under-
stood with reference to the Algerian structure and the Soviet constitution of
1977. Indeed, the legal philosophy of the author of the constitution is es-
pecially clear when it comes to strengthening the state and introducing a
distinction between state power and state administration: the only major de’
viation from the traditional socialist concept resides in this case in a pres-
identialism which gives to the head of the state the powers which, in the
Soviet Union, are given to the praesidium of the Supreme Soviet.

Along the same line, where economy is concerned, we should also note that the
country has taken all the measures characteristic of traditional socialist
countries, viz. nationalization of key sectors. centralized planning and
creation of a ministry to that effect, and the drawing up of "charters" de-
signed so that. by the year 2000. the national economy should be ruled only
by socialist enterprises, state farms and socialist cooperatives which, in
their final version. will be directly related to the kolkhoze model.2

Finally, apart from ideological determinants and economic data, the foreign
policy choices made confirm the impression of an alignment--at least a partial
one--on the East. in spite of a political discourse officially advocating

a multidirectional orientation.

Thus. the Malagasy leaders have joined the "progressive camp" of the OAU,
supported the PLO and the POLISARIO, and actively aided movements as strongly
committed as Militant Africa,3 African Progressive Countries and the World
Peace Council.“ In addition, the most obvious aaterialization of North-Korean
influence on Malagasy political thinkers was to be the convening of the Third
International Seminar on Djoutche's (Kim-Il-Sung) Ideas, at Antananarivo on
29-30 September 1976. Simultaneously, the Conference of Nonaligned Countries
(Havana, 1979) showed that the Great Island had placed itself in the block
which was taking sides with the Soviet and Cuban, and 1980 was to see an
intensﬁsdiplomatic activity along the line of "the Indian Ocean as a zone of
peace.

19

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
Finally, in the test UN vote on Afghanistan. Madagascar clearly aligned
itself on the Soviet position.

In addition, the key elements of a Soviet-Korean presence and influence in the
country now allow the observer to place Madagascar on the border of the inter-
national comnunist system.

Three major approaches to the study of these problems should be considered:
the military and strategic approach, the use of "relays" ahmed at controlling
the state apparatus and the military, and internal partisan support.

In this respect, whereas the Soviet-Malagasy diplomatic relations established
on 29 September 1972 have, economically speaking. not produced much except

in the mining sector (in spite of the creation of a Joint Cooperation Commis-
sion in 1979), the situation has been entirely different in the military sec-
tor since 1977. Thus, as of this writing, and apart from the land forces and
the army service corps regiment budgets, the Malagasy air force consists of

8 MIG-l7, l3 MIG-21, 6 MIG-23 and a YAK-bo carrier, respectively supplied by
the Korean Democratic Republic and by the Soviet Union. and still piloted and
maintained by military personnel delegated from Pyongyang and, to a lesser
extent, from Hanoi.

In addition, since the USSR almost always links underlying conditions to the
supply of equipment of this type, the MIG 21 and 23 aircraft were accompanied
by another present that could not be refused: three radars designed to cover
the Mozambique Channel and the Southwest Indian Ocean.

As a result, from the giant natural aircraft carrier which Madagascar consti-
tutes, the Soviet Union is now in a position, should the occasion arise, to
launch a large-scale action on South Africa, an essential consideration when
one realizes that the South-African problem (especially in View of the situa-
tion in Namibia) is to become a preferred line of the USSR policy on that
continent.

Indeed, while the Diego-Suarez naval base is not yet under Soviet control,6
the problem of that area should essentially be viewed in terms of air bases.
In this respect, however, apart from the radar stations which we have already
mentioned, the Soviet already have at their disposal the Ivato airport and the
former NASA base at Arivonimamo which provide them with the means for a first
class airlift in this western part of the Indian 0cean,through which close to
two thirds of Western Europe oil supplies must pass on their way to rounding
the Cape.

Simultaneously. the past 5 years have seen the beginning of a dual attempt
to control the military institution and the security services where military
personnel, Soviet "technical advisors" (some 100) and Vietnamese and North
Korean "relays" (approximately 600) are working side by side.7 In this res-
pect, in addition to training and supervising the army proper, North-Korean
nationals are now infiltrating the 0610 [Directorate General for Information
and Documentationl-an essential organization of the state apparatus. in charge
of investigations, security and intelligence--and they have established them-
selves in the most strategic organs of the internal mechanism of the
government.

20
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, among the Malagasy political forces, the USSR can rely on a non-
negligible political party to support its implantation process: the AKFM
[Congress Party for Malagasy Independence].8 A party of cadres. representa-
tive of the Antananarivo bourgeoisie, this organization is directed by protes-
tantsin a way which does not conform very much to Weberian analysis, and for
23 years now it has remained faithful to the principles of Marxism-Leninisn,
and intrinsically pro-Soviet; it appears to be the political core on which the
USSR is counting. Actually, to influence Malagasy policy in favor of the
"brother country," this party has assets which range from its infiltration

of state organizations and its influence on political decision-makers9 to

its leadership in associations which have joined the world communist movement,
not to mention brain training, either through scholarships at the Patrice-
Lumumba University in Moscow (900 Malagasy students are now studying there),
or through its control over the protestant college at Antananarivo (through
the president of the party, the Rev Richard Andria-Manjato).lo In this per-
spective, the AKFM is a privileged asset and the privileged place for the
political and intellectual penetration of Soviet ideas in Madagascar.

However, although the above-mentioned elements allow us to classify Madagascar
typologic:lly—-both with respect to its choices and to the degree of influence
--among the states oriented toward socialism and acting on the border of the
system, we should now consider what safeguards may exist against the irrever-
sibility of the line it is now following.

From this point of View, it seems that two categories of determinants, socio-
political and economic, will interact.

From a sonic-political point of view, the problems that arise are that of a
non-receptive societal ground, tle existence of a complex multiparty social
fabric, and the inefficiency of the regime structures.

In this respect, the Malagasy population, imbued with an insular nationalism
evidenced by its rich history, proud of its specificity (reinforced by a single
linguistic vehicle) and for whom the concept of national independence has a
powerful connotation, certainly does not offer the most propitious conditions
for a Soviet-Korean-Vietnamese presence on its territory, as is evidenced

by many pamphlets published in the capital by university circles.

Nevertheless, it is within the parties and political organizations that the
main inadequacies can be observed. Thus, if one assumes that a tmumunist
party,or a single party structured along the fundamental principle of "demo-
cratic centralism," is a prerequisite to the materialistic procedures of a
power leaning toward socialism and to its perpetuation, then Madagascar is
far from filling the bill.

In fact, the Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution (ARBMA)--the presidential
party originally seen as a stillborn oligopoly resulting from an improbable
merger of existing parties--is now experiencing an obvious scission as it
breaks down into a series of smaller groups and networks. A catch-all party,
beyond the simplistic idea of the absolute domination of a party, the AREMA
hears the scars of the almost total ideological competence of its cadres, of

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
its excessive weakness at the organizational level, and of divisions following
which an entire fraction of the party (the so-called "isoraka," i.e. right-

wing, AREMA of Antananarivo) appears to be virtually antagonistic to the trend
gathered around the president of the Republic.11

Moreover, in the case of Madagascar, the institution of a party monism clashes
with a powerful multiparty tradition which goes back to the eve of world War II,
or even, incertain of its aspects, to the period 1910-1915. This, and the

fact that temporary structures tend to perpetuate themselves, accounts for

the survival of a "Front" which brings together seven groups with widely dif-
ferent ethics and political philosophies, all of which--except for the AKFM
and certain elements of the presidential AREMA—-are crossed to a greater or
lesser degree by anticomunism, antisovietism and self-centered nationalism,
the adoption in principle of the current ideology being perceived only as a
prerequisite for survival.

Also, the army has gone far beyond the purely corporatist stage and must now

be considered in ternsof "military parties", in which the leadership remains
monopolized by elements trained in France before 1972, and all the less pro-
Soviet as the introduction of foreign members inside a military institution on
which the regime must rely to a large extent to ensure its survival has some-
times caused ill-concealed reactions of rejection.

Faced with this situation ccnsubstantial to the political fabric, the actual
penetration of socialism is furthermore complicated by the fact that the
operational and administrative skeleton of the system, the "socialist Fokono-
Iona," an ancestral socio-anthropological institution adapted to the needs of
an ideological orientation, is going bankrupt and underminingthevery bases

of state interventionism. Indeed, the "decentralized communities," which were
advocated as the spearheads of Malagasy socialism, have in practice found them-
selves emptied of their conceptual substance to such an extent that the

actual ability of the state to relate to the people is now being questioned.12

Finally, in addition to socio-political facts, the present economic difficul-
ties of the country (less than one day's worth of foreign currencies in reserve
on 1 January 1982), the global failure of the production system (identical
choices will produce identical effects, no matter under what latitude), the
almost total shortage of staples in urban centers, the rise in inflation and
tre collapse of agricultural production which led to the rationing of rice

(a staple food of the people), have brought the public to question the validi-
ty of a doctrine presented in the political discourse as designed to ensure
happiness, and producing a diametrically opposed effect in real life.

Simultaneously with the saturation of society as a whole, the increasing role
played by France in the economic survival of the country and the development
of a climate of permanent tension and latent crisis are beginning to cause
the bourgeoisie--a1though it has been pampered by the regime--to question the
objective value of the orientation chosen and the possible inadequacy of a
way leaning toward socialism for Malagasy socio—cultural realities.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In view of these many problals, and in the absence of operational results at
home, the "progressive" foreign policy of the Democratic Republic of Madagas-
car must above all be perceived as an alibi intended to give credibility to
an assumed importance abroad, the better to hide a domestic failure.

He should then note that the price of ideology has been first rate military
and strategic concessions which have strengthened the Soviet presence in a
zone as vital as the western part of the Indian Ocean.

In spite of all, and contrary to the situation in ' ..go, none of the under-
lying conditions which would make it possible to go f. m a socialist orienta-
tion to a socialist ”party-state" is now present in Madagascar. Also, the
threshold of irreversibility has not been reached, an. it is significant to
note that no validly constituted political take-our has yet been ensured.1
Therefore. if the present regime were to succumb under historical vicissitudes,
it is important to note that the Soviet Union does not yet have an "alternate
solution," since the AKFM itself-because of its "Herina" ethnical coloring-
does not appear ready to assume control of the state apparatus. There retains
the military institution, the last recourse in case of an open crisis, and one
which twice already has had to assume the power; at present. in its most re-
presentative trends, it does not favor either ideological interferences in
politics, nor the creation of privileged links which would place Madagascar

on the border of the world conunist systal.

Nevertheless, we should recognize the difficulties of a prospective analysis
and, in f is respect, distinguish between what is possible and what is
probable in a global strategic context in which the USSR is becoming in-
creasingly interested in the Great Island as was shown, after President
Ratsiraka's visit to Moscow in Septalber 1981, by the reception of a Soviet
delegation headed by the first gecretary of the Uzbek Communist Party,
last November in Antananarivo.l

FOOTNOTES

1. See the typology established by Annie Kriegel in "The Dimensions of Soviet
Expansionism," a paper presented on 6 January 1982 at the EHESS-IFRI [ex-
pansions unknown] Symposiun on "The Form of Communist Expansionima."

2. Charter of Socialist Production Cooperatives, Official Gazette of the
Democratic Republic of Madagascar, 16 July 1977; Charter of Socialist
Enterprises, Official Gazette of the Dalocratic Republic of Madagascar,
1 Hay 1978.

3. Let us recall that Militant Africa represents the "hard-line block" on
this continent, and that it now counts most states oriented toward
socialism among its members: Algeria, Angola, Benin, the People's Republic
of Congo and Mozambique. Soon, Madagascar became one of the spearheads of
the movement, and the organization has been headquartered in Antananarivo
since 8 July 1976.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

ll.

12.

I3.

14.

15.

Meetings of both movements were held in the Malagasy capital. respectively
on 17-19 May 1978 and 23-27 January 1981.

On the problems resulting from Malagasy diplomatic activity likely to favor
Soviet tactics which would tend to include the Gulf in the Indian Ocean
zone, see among others: LADOJSKI, A., "The USSR Struggle to Make a Peace
Zone out of the Indian Ocean," LA VIE INTERNATIONALE, August 1981;

Admiral LONG, in INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE, 21 April 1981, pp 1-2.

Until now. the Malagasy government has rejected Soviet overtures in this
respect, the international (and domestic) opinion being sensitive to
this question.

North Korea is to be considered here as a "specialized contributor" accord-
ing to the terms of the last of the three criteria defined by Annie Kriegel
to analyze the relative originality of the states belonging to the world
communist system: (I) conformity to the dual Soviet model; (2) conformity
in foreign policy; and (3) general or specialized participation in the
operation of the communist system.

The Congress Party for Malagasy Independence created on 10 November 1958.

The AKFM is one of the seven parties belonging to the National Front for
the Defense of the Revolution which cooperate in supporting the regime.

College of the Madagascar Federation of Protestant Churches.

Under the leadership of the minister of Finances, Mr Rakotovao-Razakaboana,
this "opposition AREMA" also shows the blocks which exist within the state
apparatus itself, along with tactical and doctrinal rivalries which can

be seen from the fact that, in spite of the president's instructions,

Mr Razakaboana refused to sign the Soviet-Malagasy military agreement

at the time of his visit to Moscow in 1980.

It is quite unlikely that elections at the various levels of the
decentralized communities will take place, as scheduled. in 1982.

Contrary to the situation in Brazzaville where the leadership has been
duplicated through the Central School of the Congolese Labor Party.

Methodological approach borrowed from Prof Jacques Vernant.

The attempted coup disclosed by the authorities on 20 January 1982 (and
essentially based on the divisions of the military institution) and the
cabinet reshuffle operated by President Ratsiraka after this article was
written, cOnfirm the analyses presented here.

Far from questioning the doctrinal and behavioral bases of the regime.
the third government of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar-which was
installed in mid-January—-reflects in fact, through personnel transfers.
the dual care of the head of the state: to marginalize the AREMA "opposi-

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tionsl" faction, and to introduce more "disciplined" elements into the
apparatus, or elements more in favor of his personal opinions.

In addition, the rivalries and internal struggles characteristic of the
deeper physiognoay of the regime have not been eradicated, since they still
find ground for their expression and formalization in the Supreme Council
of the Revolution (into which Mr Rakotovao Razakaboane has now been inte-
grated) and in the political bureau of the National Front for the Defense
of the Revolution.

The problem is now that the recent attempt at a putsch will of necessity
contribute to strengthen the radical tendencies both of the authorities
and of the opposition forces (31 January 1982).

COPYRIGHT: Presses Universitaires de France. 1982

9294
C50: 4719/956

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

CAHOM BASSA ELECTRICITY—Countries in southern Africa nay soon benefit fro-
hydrogenerated electricity free the Cabora Bases daa. Returning from a trip
to Lisbon the second week in March, Hr Antonio Branco. Hozanbique's energy
minister, said that this issue had been discussed with Portuguese officials.
It should be recalled that Mozambique and Portugal are jointly in charge of
the dan's operations. He have information to the effect that two of the
countries that share borders with lbzanbique—-Ziababwe in the west and
Halawai in the north-«Ire to be the first beneficiaries of the new policy.
Hydroelectric power generated by the Cabora Bassa dam—acne 11,000 nega-
watts—is presently dedicated almost exclusively to South Africa; Mozambique
consules only 7 percent of it. He note that Mr Branco's talks in Lisbon
also dealt with possible exports of coal to Portugal and the latter's
involvement in oil prospecting in Mozambique. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPI-
CAUX 81' HBDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1900. 9 Apr 82 p 982] [OOPYRIGII‘h Rene
Horsux et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

9516
080: 6719/863

26
WWWONLY
FIRE IN NIAHEY MARKET GRAVE 3W :0 NATIONAL ECONOMY
Paris NAMES TROPICAUX B‘l‘ HEBREW in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 966

[Text] Hr Garba Katsnbe, mayor of the capital city of Iliamey, in an initial
assessment of the fire that ravaged the city's market the night of 30-31
March, said an estimated 5 billion CPA francs in merchandise and installations
were destroyed.

The figure does not include the social costs of the disaster. In fact, the
market constituted the hub of the country's conercial activity, and its
destruction could well lead to major disruptions in trade.

In addition, thousands of businessmen have been ruined and are without a
source of income. The great market of Niamey was considered the real "eco-
nomic heart" of the Nigerien capital.

Extending over several hectares in the center of town, it was the place of
business for thousands of merchants and also the site of the city's main road
transport depot.

Beyond its economic role of the highest importance to Niger, it was a verit-
able melting pot. where one could find an amalgamation of national ethnic
diversity. naoussa, Djermas and Songhai, rouareg and Peul came together in
a buzz of incessant activity.

In a commique on 2 April the Nigerien Government noted the "extent and
gravity of the disaster in the current economic environment" and termed the
event a new "tribulation for the national economy." It also launched in "ap-
peal for natiml solidarity" and decided to build a new market quickly, so
that the ruined merchants and vendors can be reestablished.

An interministerial committee comprising the ministers of finance, comerce.
mines and industries and interior has been ordered to study the situation and
with the shortest possible delay propose steps to insure the normalization of
cosmercisl activity. The decision has already been made to build a "modern
marketing center" on the site of the razed market.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

9516
080: 6719/8105

27
”MOSCOMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

NATIONAL DEBATE ON BDUCATION—-A lO-day national debate on Nigerien education
opened in Zinder on 22 March. The aim of the debate, in which six ministers,
high level representatives of other ministries, department heads, the tradition-
al chieftainry and con-unity and professional associations are participating
is to define new directions for the national educational system to make it
"socially integrated and economically accessible." As expressed by the head
of state, Col Seyni Kountche. this debate, which has been prepared for

over the past few months, should enable the drafting of ”the bible on which
the state will rely in implementing the educational program." Among the
questions on the agenda. lightening the educational system's burden on the
state, reforming the boarding and scholarship system and adapting education
to the social fabric of the country figure prominently. [Text] [Paris
MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 910]
[COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 9693

JAPANESE EQUIPNENT--The SO-ton crane that NIGBLBC [Niger Electric Power
Company] ordered from the Japanese company Tadano within the context of the
cooperative agreenent signed with Japan in September 1981 will be delivered

to Niamey next June, with construction on the new thermal power plant scheduled
to start at the beginning of July. Remember that the total Japanese-Nigerien
contract was for some 5 million French francs, including 1 million for the

new crane, which is computer controlled. One of the other major pieces of
equipment in this contract is a gas turbine generator from the Japanese com-
pany Hitachi Ltd. [Text] [Paris HABCHES TROPICAUX 3T NBDITBRBANEBNS in
French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 911] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris.) 9693

0ND? AiD--Hr Michel Doo-Kingue, deputy administrator of the UN Development
Program (UNPDD and regional director for Africa, was received recently by the
Nigerien head of state, Col Seyni Kountche, with whom he reviewed progress on
a cooperative UNPD-Niger program for 1982-1986. DNPD assistance to Niger
over that period will go from $20 million--the total aid provided during the
previous program period-cto $45 million, he indicated. Also, Hr boo Kingue
was in Niger to hold followbup discussions with the government on the UN
Conference on the Least Developed Countries (LLDc'a), which was held in Paris
last Septeaber. [Text] [Paris HARCNBS TROPICAUX BT HROITERRANBENS in French
No 1900, 9 Apr 82 p 966] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9516

C80: 4719/845

28
IIIICHNWCJAI.USIINNLY
NIGERIA T0 REMAIN HRH ON PETROLEUM PRICES DESPITE PROFIT LOSSES
Fall in Shiplents
Paris NARCHES TROPICAUX ET EDITERRANEENS in French No 1901, 16 Apr 82 p 1031

[Text] In Lagos petroleum industry circles at the beginning of the month
it was generally felt that Nigeria would not reduce its crude oil prices
again.

Faced with a difficult econonic situation due to the drop in sales that
has continued since the last OPEC suit in Vienna (the import bill for
February would amount to $2.5 billion compared to revenues barely equal to
half this sun). Nigeria in fact is still the "weak link" in the OPEC chain.

The drop in shipments of Nigerian crude oil, which is the root of the con-
cern in Lagos, is not due to the petroleua companies but rather to the
trading companies. it is felt in the sane petroleum industry circles. The
producing conpanies who have been accused of putting pressure on Nigeria to
bring about a drop in OPEC prices in fact indicate that their purchasing
level has remained the same these past months but that the "traders" to
who: the national company, NNPC [Nigerian National Petroleum Company]. is
selling part of its oil refuse to pick up petroleum that they can resell
on the spot only at a loss.

"We are currently in a period of a worldwide reduction of stocks whose specu-
lative character is not obviate," indicated the manager of a petroleum
company in Lagos, and if OPEC holds to its strategy of naintainin g price
levels. "the narket should restabilize. even if it neana establishing new
lower production ceilings." According to the same source, it is obvious
that Nigeria, which has no note options, should not be affected, and if
OPEC wants to "save" its prices, reductions in production of aromd 2 mil-
lion barrels per day should basically be borne by the ”haves," especially
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. These countries should also lend noney to Nigeria
to enable it to "hold out" until the recovery. which should occur between
June and August, according to the sane source.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"We feel that the petroleum industry still has good days ahead of u. but
we must hold on until then, even if we are currently losing more than $5
per barrel," says the manager of Elf-Nigeria, who also feels that this
effort by the companies on the country's behalf will be rewarded in the
long run.

There is currently no conflict between us and the NNPG, they add in the sane
circles, except for the problen of profit margins, which is being negotiated
at this tine. Nigerian profits are currently around 50 cents per barrel,
whereas they approach $6 in certain South Alerican countries.

with President Shagari having recently reconfirmed his country's total
comitnent to OPEC, it then seems, as noted earlier, that Nigeria will not
lower its prices again, which would isolate it from OPEC and even, it is
felt, cause a world slum.

mWRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.
Production Trends
Paris MARCHES TROFIGAUX ET norms in French No 1901, 16 Apr 82 p 1031

[Text] Company~by-company analyses of production figures shows that with
the exception of Elf, whose production increased slightly conpared with the
month of February, the four other large coupanies (Shell. Mobil, Gulf,
Agip) have all reduced their production significantly (down 270,000 barrels
per day for Shell. which produced only 357,000 barrels per day in March).

According to a high-level executive of a company located in Nigeria, examina-
tion of these figures also shows that Mobil, Gulf and Agip clearly resumed
production at the end of “arch—close to a loo-percent resunption for Gulf,
which produced 277,000 barrels per day in February, with mid-March produtr
tion estimated at 80,000 barrels per day and actual production at the end

of March at 153,000 barrels per day. The sane is true of Mobil (195,000
barrels per day in February, 100,000 barrels per day estimated in aid-March
and 153,000 barrels per day produced at the end of March) and Agip. But the
source did not indicate whether OPEC "threats" with regard to companies
operating in Nigeria are the cause of this resuption of activity.

According to the sane source, only Shell, which produced 630,000 barrels
per day in February and only 357,000 barrels per day in March, did not in-
crease its pumping value at the end of the math.

Rumors circulating in Lagos still mention the possibility of a Saudi loan
to Nigeria to "hold then mtil sales recover," and it is indicated in this
regard that several officials from the Nigerian Ministry of Finance recently
went to Vienna to negotiate the terls of this loan.

OOPl'Rlai'l': Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.

9693
cso: 6719/872

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KIGALI BANK REPORT ON RHANDA EMMY IN 1981

Paris MARGBS TROPICAUX B'l‘ HEDITBRRAREENS in bench No 1901, 16 Apr 82 pp
1040-1061

[Text] The report of the Bank of Kigali for the fiscal year 1981 (1 January-
31 December), presented to the 30 March 1982 regular shareholder's meeting,
provides some interesting intonation on the development of the Pwandan
economy over the past year.

Despite the drop in coffee, tea and ore exports. the trade balance reveals
a deficit of only 800 million Rwanda francs. The net currency position
at the end of 1981 amounted to slightly more than 13 billion Rwandan francs
(1 U.S. dollar - 92.84 Rwandan francs).

As for business itself , it experienced a visible decline: businesses'
sales volumes sagged, and some frequently resorted to credit. Ground and
air transportation were very stable: few problem arose in this area.
The paving work on the Kigali-Butare highway, which provides a link with
Burundi, has been halted and is not to resume until the end of the year.

On the other hand, a Chinese road construction company has begun work on
the Kigali-Ruhengeri highway. The cost is 3.5 billion Rwandan francs. The
same comapny has been comissioned for the Ruhengeri-Cyanika section, pro-
viding a link with Uganda, for the amount of 450 million Rwandan francs.

The Butare match factory began production at the beginning of 1981. It
produced 16 million boxes of matches during the year; studies are under way
to increase the capacity to 60 to 80 million boxes per year.

As coffee has been and continues to be Rwanda's chief export, it must be
admitted that the low prices recorded at the beginning of the Rwandan coffee
harvest, in other words around Hay-June. aroused some concern. Fortunately,
prices gradually recovered, reaching an average of 0.3. 31.1385 per pound,
with prices for the most recent 'contracts exceeding 0.8. $1.33 to $1.35

per pound. Production increased from 26,000 metric tons for the 1980-1981
harvest (May to December) to 26.662 metric tons for the 1981-1982 harvest
(same period). The quantity exported dropped from 33,630 metric tons in
1980 to 22,185 metric tons. a 33-percent decrease. which leaves a very large

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[UK Ul'l'lblﬂl- Ubl‘. UNLI

amount of coffee to export. The export quota originally established by the
International Coffee Organization [010] at 21,600 metric tons was increased
to 28,800 metric tons for the arc 1980-1981 year (1 October to 30 September).
For the 010 1981-1982 year, the quota has been set at 22,500 metric tons.

Tea production is at a slightly lower level than in 1980—5,591 metric tons
conpared with 5,717 metric tons. Exports fell by about 14.5 percent, or
from 6,130 to 5,265 metric tons. This drop is due in part to a shortage of
tea chests during the year. Plant construction continues in tea-growing
reaons. The Hats (Gikogoro) tea plant, financed by the European Develop-
ment Fund, opened in July 1981; it cost 520 million Rwandan francs.

Sugar production renained stable at 2,367 netric tons compared with 2,366
in 1980. The country continues to import sugar to cover its needs.

Quinine production fell about 61 percent, from 646 metric tons in 1980 to
250 metric tons in 1981. Exports decreased proportionately; they totaled
266 compared with 673 metric tons.

In the mining sector, production and exports experienced a general decline.
The trend is lmd up as follows:

.118}. .1_9§9.
Product Produced gated Produced erted
‘l‘in ore (m. tons) 1,869 1,635" 2,069 2,058
Wolframite (m. tons) 535 615 678 675
Colombo-tantalite (a. tons) 61 67 59 59
Beryl (m. tons) 60 60 107 100
Gold (kilos) (00 30 29 20

* Exports were slowed to establish the stock required to launch the faundry
planned for February 1982.

As for the activities of the Bank of Kigali itself, for the 1981 fiscal
year, it showed a business volume of 6.3 billion Rwandan francs and a profit

of 62.5 million. The Bank of Kigali Ltd, with 250 million Rwandan francs
in assets, is headed by Mr Jean-Marie Visnney Nyalihama; Hr beandre Degroot
is the managing director, and Mr Aloys Bizimana, the executive director.

OOPYRIGIT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9693
080: 6719/872

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DIOUF PROJECTS PAVOBABLB ECONOMIC PROSPECTS IN 1982

Paris mans TROPICAUX E‘l' HEDI'l'KRRANBENS in French No 1900, 9 Apr 82 pp 961,
962

[Text] Hr Abdou Diouf, speaking to the Senegalese Bcononic and Social Council
late last March, said Senegal's econonic prospects for 1982 appear better than
in 1981, a year of drought and decline in donestic production, external trade
and the government's financial condition.

The groundnut harvest, the primary source of peasant income and governnent
hard currency, will approach 700,000 tons (conpared with 190,000 tons in
1981), according to President Diouf. lie enphasized that the marketing of this
harvest will nake it possible to inject nore than CPA Fr 50 billion into the
rural sector and lead to a recovery in donestic demand. The upsurge in ex-
ports of groundnut products--projected to be note than CPA Fr 60 billion (com-
pared with 8-9 billion in l98l)--will reduce the (136 billion) trade deficit,
he added.

The Senegalese head of state also predicted a heavy wave of investment over
the next 2 years, with conpletion of the Senegalese Chemical Industries (CPA
Fr 70 billion for the production of phosphoric acid and its derivatives),
expansion of the Hbao refinery and the Rufisque cenent-worka (20 billion)
and the start-up of construction work on the Koalaclt textile conpany and the
Diana da- on the Senegal River.

President Diouf also announced the creation of a rural credit bank to finance
the equipnent and machinery needs of growers, fisher-en, stock-raisera and
crafts-en, the completion of a program of water works costing CPA Fr 10
billion and including the drilling of wells in the regions and preparation of
a plan for the renovation and nodernization of the stock-raising sector.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

9516
C80: [0719/8105

33
MWWWY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

1982-1983 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION GOALS SET; LATEST RESULTS NOTED
Paris HARCBES TROPICAUX ET l-ITBRRANBBNS in French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 906

[Text] Senegal's agricultural production goals for 1982-1983 have been set
at 822,000 metric tons of peanuts, 47,550 metric tons of cotton and 690,000
metric tons of millet, according to Mr Abdou Diouf, Senegalese head of state,
addressing his party's (the Socialist Party) national council meeting in
Dakar on 28 Hatch.

President Diouf felt that the results of the last agricultural campaign were
good on the whole, thanks to good rainfall and to measures taken to promote
agriculture (raising producer prices and absorbing famrs' debts over 20
billion CPA francs). ‘

According to estimates by the Senegalese minister of rural development,
production amounted to 878,365 metric tons of peanuts for oil, 5,342 tons of
peanuts for consumption, 35,521 tons of cotton, 736,412 tons of millet and
sorghum and 25,809 tons of beans. As for marketing, as of 8 February of this
year, it had sold 633,748 metric tons of peanuts and only 12,116 tons of
millet.

The Senegalese head of state indicated that the same producer prices will be
maintained for this year's agricultural campaign, despite the drop in world
prices for peanuts, Sengal's chief export product.

The Senegalese president also revealed that the production goal for fishing
will be 400,000 metric tons of fish in 1985: the 1980 catch totaled 359,000
metric tons, or 36 million CPA francs, worth. Basic efforts in the fishing
sector, he said, will deal with infrastructures as well as with cooperation
with neighboring countries.

In stock breeding (23 million head of cattle, 3.2 million sheep and goats,
500,000 horses, donkeys and camels, 300,000 pigs and 9 million foul, according
to the ninister of rural development's estimates), the emphasis will be on
extending and improving pasture land and protecting it against brush fires
and on creating small feed plants, as well as on promoting rural water
resources. Finally, the 165 breeders' cooperatives will be activited.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

9693
C80: 4719/835

summon“
BRIEFS

FOOD RESERVEs—-In other matters, According to the local press, Senegal will
be provided with a food security stock of 70,000 metric tons of millet.
Thanks to the National Solidarity Fund's 1.86 billion [currency denomination
not given], financing has been acquired for 30,000 metric tons. Senegal is
going to lake an appeal to the international community for the remainder. The
food stock should put an end to fluctuations in production due to rainfall
conditions, correction of regional disparities in millet distribution, and
also regulation of the millet market vhichvariesgreatly depending on produc-
tion. The storehouaes intended to receive the miller have already been
completed. There are Sb located throughout the country. Their capacity is
74,000 metric tons. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in

French No 1899, 2 Apr 82 p 907] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.]
9693

cso: 5719/835

35
FilllJFFICIAl.lllB(HNLV
ACTIVITY OF BANK OF KINSHASA mm: IN REPORT FOR 1980

Paris MAKERS TROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANEEIS in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 pp 1159-
1160

[Text] The report for 1980 of the Bank of Kinshasa emphasizes that the most
important event of this period was no doubt the consecration of the 10th anni-
versary of the bank. On this occasion, the management comittee published a
brochure reviewing the evolution and the activities of the company in the course
of its first decade (1970-1980).

In 1980, the course of the bank's business was marked by an increase in the
demand for credit from bank customers. In the first 9 months, credits out-
standing increased noticeably. From January to October 1980, the level of the
use of credits went from 96.8 million Zaires to 163.8 million Zaires. The
credit ceiling of 120 million Zaires, established by the Central Bank, was
exceeded by 33.25 million Zaires on 30 September 1980.

However, exceeding the credit ceiling was not limited to this bank, because as
a whole the credits granted by the banks to companies and to private persons on
30 September 1980 totaled 1,237,900,000 Zaires, as against an authorized
ceiling of 888,800,000 Zaires. The relative portion of the Bank of Kinshasa in
this overall excess of credit amounted to 9.5 percent. Faced with this
situation, to put a brake on the expansion of credit, the Institute of Emisaion
[of the currency] ordered commercial banks to reduce their outstanding credits
to within the established credit ceilings before 31 December 1980 and warned
that any new excess of credit would be subject to monetary fines. also, exceeding
the credit ceilings would involve suspension of the rediscounting of comercial
paper by the central authorities and the suspension of a bank's accounts.

During the last 2 months of the year, the Bank of Kinshasa had to make a
special effort to obtain repayment of certain loans outstanding, particularly
agricultural credits on coffee that could not be exported on time because of
difficulties in transportation and speculation involving export prices, which
have been declining since 1 January 1900.

The Bank of Kinshasa continued to take an active part in coffee matters. How-
ever, it was able to become involved in the export of only 8,250 tons of coffee,
compared with 9,000 tons in 1979. This decline is due to fraudulent export
transactions and the difficulties referred to above.

36
MWWMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the course of the first 6 months of 1980, measures associated with the
dcmonetization operation of 25 December 1979 continued to have a major. negative
effect on' the resources of the bank and to disturb its activities. In effect,
after the end of this operation, which did not develop as desired, certain
problems arose over a period of weeks, in particular concerning reconstitution
of the cash holdings of the banks, disturbances to cornercial transactions and
the financing of agricultural activity. The banking system, which was no
longer subsidized, as had been the case, by the Institute of Emission, was
unsuccessful in arranging for the freeing of all of the funds demanded by
depositers. For a number of weeks the banks had to make use of a certain
rationing of cash withdrawals so as not to deplete their stocks of cash,

which were reconstituted with great difficulty. 0n the other hand, the almost
total unavailability of demand deposit accounts and the shortage of mean: of
payment favored the establishment of a market for funds outside the banking
system, which handicapped banking activities. Demand deposit accounts were
not entirely freed again until September 1980.

Customer deposits increased from 61.2 million-Zaires, or 22.8 percent, a total
of 268 million Zaires. The increase in interest rates, however, clearly made
itself felt with regard to term deposits. Interest and comissions paid into
term deposits went up fro- 2.8 million Zaires to 3.7 million Zaires in 1980.

International interbanking transactions intensified following the resumption of
GECAMINBS [General Quarries and Mines Company] operations and the participation
of the bank in imports of petroleum by the Zaire-Sep Company. External assets
recorded an increase of 49.6 percent, while the debt position with correspondent
banks abroad also increased, going up frm 3.5 million Zaires in 1979 to 13.8
million Zaires in 1980. The extent of this increase is also related to banking
needs arising from coumlercial transactions.

The securities portfolio of the Bank of Kinshasa at the end of 1980 was valued
at 362,677 Zaires, or 77 percent above the level at the end of 1979. This
increase is due to new subscriptions for stock valued at 144,350 Zaires with
the Development Finance Company (SOTIDB) .

Net profits for 1980 increased by 36.3 percent and totaled 5.2 million Zaires.
This increase is evidence of the major activity the bank was involved in, par-
ticularly as a result of its involvement in the financing of agriculture and
other forms of essential local production, as well as in import transactions.
This result reflects the net development of the total balance sheet, which
stood at 433,100,000 Zaires on 31 December 1980, an increase of 120,600,000
Zaires, or 38.6 percent, compared with the end of 1979.

Regarding the expansion of the bank to the interior of the country, the management
comittee took the necessary action to open branches at Kananga and Hbujimayi in
the Kasai area. The management comittee, moreover, is carrying out studies

with a view to opening agencies in Bandundu and Bquateur Provinces. Con-
struction activity to expand the building of the bank agency in Matadi was
actively continued and was to have been completed in 1981. The bank agency in

Boma was officially inaugurated on 14 June 1980.

The Bank of Kinshasa has a capital of 4.9 million Zaires. Its president and
director general is Dokolu Sanu.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

5170
cso: 4719/930 37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

1981 GBCMIINBS PRODUCTIQIuAccording to the annual report of sozacou [Zairian
Company for the Marketing of Ores], the General Quarries and Mines Company
(WINES) in 1981 produced 468,000 tons of copper compared with 425,616 tons
in 1980 and 11,159 tons of cobalt compared with 12,408 tons in 1980. GRCAHINBS
surpassed its projections for zinc by producing 57,600 tons compared with
44,056 tons in 1980. As for cadnium production, this amounted to 230 tons in
1981 compared with 165 tons in 1980. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAU)! B'i'
HEDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1903. 30 Apr 82 p 1160] 5170 .

1981 $08le STEEL PRODUCTION-—The Steel Exploitation Coupany (SOSIDER) pro-
cessed in its smelter 12,930 tons of scrap iron in 1981 compared with 12,600
tons in 1980 and 11,425 tons in 1979. The president of the management connittee
of the company, Mbangu 'i‘shirut-Binen, has comented that SOSIDER is currently
operating at only 10 percent or its productive capacity due to problems involving
its finances, raw materials and spare parts. These problems have led to the
closing of its cold rolling mill. [Text] [Paris was TROPICAUX ET
mrrmmsms in French No 1903, 30 Apr 82 p 1160] 5170

SOUTH KOREAN TECHNICAL COOPm'i'Iw—The delegation from the National Association
of Companies of Zaire (ARM), which last March visited South Korea HARCHBS
TROPICAOX s'r MEDITERRANBENS of 12 march, p 704], had meetings with several
Iinisters, with the Korean Foreign Trade Promotion Comany (KOTRA), the
Federation of Korean Enterprises and the Daewoo Group, the largest Korean
comercial and industrial group. The delegation also visited a number of
factories belonging to the Sansung Group. Possibilities for the use of

Korean technology in Zaire and the financing of trade between Zaire and South
Korea were examined in the course of this visit. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS
TROPICAUX B'r swims in French No 1903. 30 Apr 82 p 1160] 5170

REFUGEE STATISTICS—There are currently 350,000 to (000,000 refugees in
Zaire, where UN High Comission for Refugees [HCR] spent some $15 million
in 1981. In a commique published in Geneva, the Hex estimates 1982 re-
quirements at $10.5 trillion. These financial needs are in the process of
being-revised to take into account the continuous arrival of Ugandans in
the country. In fact, there are sone 130,000 Ugandans in Rant-Zaire; else-
where in the country, approximately 11,000 refugees from Burundi, 20,000
Rwandans and some 1,800 lesbians are recorded. Snell groups of refugees of
various origins are also found in Kinshasa. The HCR continues to assist in
the voluntary repatriation of Angolan refugees, 21.000 of when are bene-
fitting from its assistance. [Text] [Paris HAROIBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITER-

RANEENS in French No 1901. 16 Apr 82 p 1036] [OOPYRICRN Rene Horeux et

012 Paris 1982] 9693 END
1a

080: urn/872 non mu. use ONLY