NR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10480

26 Apﬁl2982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No.770

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. there no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGlT LABS AND REGULATIOIo’S GOVERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 11115 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

P000 No. 770

CONTENTS

BURUNDI

Briefs
French Aid for Airport

cm

GHANA

Briefs
New Oil Deposit
Company for Uranium, Minerals

OAU Bole at Nairobi Said To Be Plot Threatenin Nation
(Gillette Cot; WW3 BIB, 1-111 ”3" 82 eaeeeeeeoeeeoo

Assembly of All Forces Necessary for Reconstruction
(Jean-Pierre n'mm; Jm mm, 3 w 82). 0.000000

Goukouni Hay Become More Faction Chief
(Francois Soodan; JBUNB AFRIQUB, 21: Feb 82) ...........

OAU Role in Calling for Negotiations Backed
(Jm mm, 21‘?’b 82) OOOOOOOOOIDOOOOOOI....00....

Foreign Minister Acyl Ahmad Interviewed
(Acyl ”not; URINE-A313, 29 Mar-11 Apr 82) ..........

Goukouni Says Kanongue Trying To Talk um: Habre
(Abakar Assicik; ENTER, 9 Apr 82) ....................

Resistance to Rulings Reportedly Exists
(Sirmuo 111.110; Jm WW3, 3 Feb 82) aoeeeo-ooeeo

-&- [III-NaiA-'1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAL IS! ONLY

Cements on Pragility of Libyan Connection
(Siradiou 1118110; Jm W003, 3 “81‘ 82)soeeeeeeeeeeso

Former No 2 Han Expresses nisapproval of Ravlings
(Jm mm, 3 “81' 82)eoeeeeaeeaeeeoeoeeeeeeeeaeeeooo

GUINEA

Relations with France Sean Unlikely To Improve
(Jm mm, 3 Feb 82) 0.0.0.0...ODI'COOO'OOOCCCCOICO

NOR! GOASL‘

Reoriecntation of Premh Aid Effort Reported '
(um I'ROPICAUX B" mums, l9 liar 82) .......

Briefs
Geodetic Survey

WASCMI

Briefs
Malagasy Franc Exchange Rate
Coup Plotters in Custody

HALAUI

Briefs
Polypropylene Bag Production
South African Agriculture Aid
Container Terminal

NIGERIA

Major Railroad Project, Developnents Discussed
(NAMES momma: ET mums, 12 Mar 82) .......

Details of Railroad Contracts
Development of Railroad Activity

Briefs
Arne Purchase Rom Switzerland
Missile Ships hm France
Police Authorized To Shoot
Cooperation Hith Egypt
New Salt Production Company
Hog, Poultry Production
Delegation From Hong Kong

mmmouu
SWWIA

Possible Political Effects of Anticorruption Ih'ive
(Sylviane Kama; Jm APRIQUB, 10 Feb 82) .............

Gambian, Senegalese Confederation Seen for Sena ambia
(3,171“ We; mm“; 17 Feb 2)....0000000000

Briefs
PP? Candidates

3131mm

Briefs
Elections Deaths, Injuries

SOUTH AFRICA

New Gold Bar To Be Introduced
(David Harsh; m MGM TIMES, 15 Apr 82)............

Repressive Ileasures Reportedly Used To Quell Strikers
(‘mm-ASIB, 15-28 Feb 82) 000000.00.Cocoo'eeoooeeeoosoo

Sugar Pix-n Seeks Vehicles, Equipment for Modernization
(W moment: at minimums. 12 Feb 82)

Briefs
“DEA Aid

”WWW?
BURUNDI

ram am FOR AIRPORT-ﬁn 23 February. Jean-Pierre Cot, French sinister-
delogate in charge of cooperation and development, who was heading the French
delegation to the annual meeting of the High-bevel Franco-Burundian Cooperation
Cor-ission. a meeting organised each year in nujlnburenand Rosy Nlrengurutse.
Burundian sinister of transport, posts, and teleco-unications, signed a 7.6
million French franc agreeaent relating to phase II of the sodernisation of
Dujuﬂaura's airport. since 1961, France has been giving assistance to Burundi
in the area of air service. France has been involved in part via the Central

at a sun of 10 million French francs and subsequently to be raised to 11.6
million French francs. An initial agreement signed in April 1981 related to
the financing by France of a first segment of 4 million French francs, which
sade it possible to start up infrastructure work and equipment supply. The
work financed by France. and in particular the lengthening of the runway to
3,600 meters, has nearly been finished already. and the first large transport
aircraft are due to land at Bujunbura in a few weeks. as soon as the handling
equipaent for disc-barking and enbarking passengers and cargo. eminent
specific to those aircraft. has arrived. [text] [Paris was mrrcaox tr
norm in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 69‘] (mm: Rene loreus et
cie Paris 1982] 9631

C80: 4719/66‘

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WNW

mars

m on. DEPOSIT—At the end of February as oil deposit was discovered by m-
SEREPCA on its licensed territory Pl“ (Douala 2) in Camroon. 'i'he drilling.
made on land halfway between Ides ad Kribi, reached a total depth of 1,900
meters. nP-SMCA has a loo-percent interest in that license. If the evalu-
ation drillings, to be undertdren over the short tern, show that the deposit
Iade up of ELY-SERENA and National Hydrocarbon Coweny of Caneroou (3“).
According to a co-nnique tro- ELF-Aquitaine National Company (sun), $18 and
m—smca believe that this new discovery say. after the Rio del Rey
[deposit], open up a new area for oil exploitation in Cesarean. [Text]
[Paris Hams MICAUX B'i' murmurs in Pruch No 1896, 12 Her 82, p
761] [COPYRIGﬂ'h Rene Koren: et Cie Paris 1982.] 8568

COMPANY roe Willi. «Imusum m's newsletter for January 1982 nentions
that the French Nokta Conpany and the 3am (Bureau of Geological and nining
Exploration) have just created a joint enterprise under the nane Caneroon
Ureniun Union, an enterprise for the exploration and surveying or deposits of
uranium, thorius, beryllium and their cowounds in as detailed a fashion as
possible. and for the furthering of their extraction. The union‘s lining
doeain consists of an operations zone located in the northern part of Caneroon
and a perait for nining exploration within that sons. The creation of this
union is thus in response to the wish expressed in 1979 by the Caneroonian
Govern-ent to see the anon play the role of developer for uraniun prospecting
in Cameroonian territory. In the petroleum area. amazon. the nontrading
research company for Caneroonian natural gas development, is starting construction
of a natural gas liquefaction plant which will be supplied by the Victoria
deposit and. very probably, by the sizable reserves currently being prospected
oft Kribi. 3mm has selected the French Oil Coapany [OPP] to supply it
with the required technical assistance. CFP will turn to BRO! tor the work of
surveying the plant's base soil. for the search for 1.5 million tons of
anterials for concrete aggregate and stone blocks to construct a barrier, and
for a hydrogeological study for supplying the tuture plant and its associated
buildings with water. [Text] [Paris WES TROPICAUX a? norm in
French No 1835. 5 liar 82 p 687] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1982)
9631

C803 4719/664

2
NR WI. US}. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0A0 m AT NAIROBI SAID m B! PLOW mumm HAHN
Paris AFRIQUB A81! in Preach Us 1013. 1-16 liar 82 pp 10-12. 12
[Article by Ginette Cot: "mo Is Using Bissein labre?"]

[Excerpts] ”Many individuals and may interests. But
as President Goukouni Ouddei said on his return to
Ndjanena, ”Chad is not a protectorate under 0A0
tutelage"...or one of its performers.

what role are some people trying to give to the 0m. and who is aanipulsting
that organization on the Chadian issue? Already the tendentioua debate on
the nature of the mission of the pancontinental force in Chad following the
Libyan trDOp withdrawal has led to a paralysis of the African "blue helnets"
and has enabled nissein nabre to go on the offensive with immity and to
capture a number of atrongpoints.

For a tine, there had appeared to be signs of rallying on the part of sons
of the officials in charge of the operation of the pancontinental force. 0A!)
Secretary General Bdsm Kodjo, on an infer-tion mission to Chad, himself

had affirmed on the eve of the Nairobi nesting that the aisunderstsnding
between the pan-African organization and the cum [Transitional National
Union Governssnt] over the role of the "neutral” force had been elininatsd

at the level of Goukouni Oueddei.

Has this only to help throw off their guard those against who- he was about
to deliver a strong blow? There is every reason to believe so. The liaitsd
sunit of presidents and ministers of 11 African states which set in Nairobi
10-11 February issued at its conclusion a number of shocking decisions.
Today we can only conclude that if one wanted to pave the way for the chief
of the PM! (Northern Armed Forces) to cone to power and at the ease ties
throw Chad into a new bloodbath and encourage secession by the south. thi's
would be the way to do it. Thus. we can no longer evade the question as to
what intrigues are being prepared, under cover of the ow. against the
future of Clad.

The "tisetable" for a Chad settlesent as concocted in the Kenyan capital is
known. It amunts to a virtual edict to the GUM. The ”concerned parties"

MOWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are “invited" to carry out the following scenario: "ispleaent an i-ediate
cease-fire; i.e., midnight 28 February. Begin, effective 15 March,
negotiations toward a national reconciliation under the aegis of the GAO
permanent con-ittee in an African country to be selected. Draw up, between
1 and 30 April. a provisional constitution and approve it. Organize,

between 1 May and 30 June 1982, legislative and presidential elections and
proceed to establish new institutions under the OAU's auspices," Finally,
while the African "blue helnets" have not even started to really perforn
their lission, the date for completion of their nendete and withdrawal of
the 0A1] force is set for 30 June....

The Edict Resolution

indeed, the Chad issue was raised right at the start fron an unexpected
angle. by both the acting chairnan and the 0A!) secretary general-who seems
to have been the stage director of the Nairobi performance. Daniel arap bi,
Kenyan head of state and ow chair-an, said in his opening speech: "The
Chad problen is basically political. and we met find a political solution
which will be supported by all the Chadian parties." And we saw an "0A0
permanent co-ittee on Chad," whose birth was dubious and whose legitimacy
was questioned by the CONT in Noveﬁer, set itself up as the suprene organ
speaking and acting in the name of the CAD as a whole—that is, for all the
independent states in Africa.

Even sore serious, it clsined the right to judge and sake decisions instead
of, and On behalf of, the Chad people and their governaent.

we also know that the GUN? delegation led by Coukouni Oueddei requeszed,

to no avail, an adjournment of the session in order to review the neeting's
agenda. Thus it was in the absence of the Chad Goverment'a representatives
that the proceedings ended with the known conclusion. who were the
signatories to the plan of the so-called "per-anent cos-littee" announced

by Eden Kodjo in Nairobi on 11 February? The question renains. Because
although the DAB secretary general inplies that this edict was approved
unanimously, it is obvious that reservations and firm opposition views were
expressed. For example. lbhaned Benyahia, the head of the Algerian
delegation-«rho attended the nesting as an observer--pointed out during the
debate, among other things, that the "permanent co-ittee's" proposals could
have the effect of encouraging the PAN to step up the war... But all this
was certainly glossed over at the level of the OAU Secretariat, which does
not seen to hesitate. when the need arises, to resort to acts of political
and intellectual piracy.

An additional and troubling fact nay provide proof of this. Several hours
after the closing of the "nini-suuait," an 0A0 press release was issued
linking the nission of the neutral pan-African force in Chad to acceptance
by the cum of elections under the control of the ow. This statenent.
which was justified—who knows by what juridical acrobatics—on the basis
of the Lagos egreenents of August 1979, declared that the DAB Permanent
Connittee on Chad calls for the organization of national elections under 0A0

1;
FOR Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supervision within 6 months. "The continued presence of the peace force will
be linked to the cum". acceptance of these conditions," the English version
of the co-anique read, while the French version stated that "the continued
presence of the force will conpel the CONT to accept these conditions."

Claring Contradiction

Indeed. the decisions of the Nairobi nesting appear clearly to be the
culaination of a virtual collusion-as, mreover. has already been suggested
in several African capitals, including the Congo, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe--
and a defiance of the whole group of African heads of state, whose previous
decisions respecting the Chad problsa have been canceled with the stroke of

a pen. The "proposals" of the "per-anent co-ittee" in fact sharply conflict
with the resolution on Chad approved by the last 0A0 suit in the Kenyan
capital in June 1981, in which all African states participated. At that tine,
these states recognized the "legitinscy" of the GUIIT and pledged to give'ell
possible support to the governnent teen led by Gouhomi Oueddei.

As for the planned pan-African nilitsry force-designed for the inplicit
purpose of asking the Libyan withdrawal possible-4t was intended not only

to help the CONT establish its own national, integrated arny but also, and
above all, to protect and defend the peace, sovereignty, and security of Chad.
It would no doubt have been advisable, in order to prevent any stalling
tactics, to have stated clearly the most iI-inent danger that could threaten
this peace which had recently been reestablished with so such difficulty.
however, the support for the GUNT had seemingly been sufficiently explicit

to renove all-aﬁiguity. Finally, it was understood that nothing would be
done without the prior approval of the Chad Govern-ant.

Today, ii we are linited to the "per-anent cot-ittee's" objectives, the CWT
will no longer have any legitinacy. The factions have been revived. we are
back to the situation which prevailed on the eve of the August 1979 Lagos
agreeasnts.... The victia and the aggressor are given the sane status. Or
rather, everything is unaged to favor the aggressor party, which~~because
it has conquered a few strongpoints, again violating its co-itnents—is
being invited to the negotiating table. The Glllﬂ'. on the other hand,
sun-toned at its inconvenience, is sonehow put in the position of being an
accused and is called on to participate in a cease-fire process which can
only benefit Ilissein habre, and we know fro- experfence how little inportance
he will attach to it. who but the PAR chief broke the last cease-fire
agreement, which he had hurried to sign at Lone in Deceeber 1980 to secure
his future after the debacle of his forces, while Goukouni Oueddei had
already signed the agreeaent several weeks before?

Indeed, this is a nutter of helping llissein ﬂabre to seize power.
It would take too long to list the extortions that have ornanented the

itinerary of uiseein ﬁabre, who is known for his fanatical tribalisn and
the nassacres he has co-itted.

5
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hissein Eabre certainly incarnates fascist dictatorship to the rsenbers and
leaders of mm'r. And the Chadian people fully cowrehend that
description. There is hardly a family in the country that has not suffered
fros the FM! chief 's extortion.

As for the legend concocted by Bissein labre's propaganda agents that he is
a fervent nationalist. this has been shattered in a dranatic way.

In recent nonths. particularly in 1980 and 1981. the PM chief has used as
his rallying cry the struggle against the alleged danger of Libya's
establishing itself in Chad. However. this threat has totally evaporated.
Hardly had the last Libyan soldier left (:had, invevsr. before Bissein Kabre
again plunged headlong into aggression and van...

A final ' -ctory for Ilissein Babre wuld nean cancellation of all the
progressive and revolutionary gains achieved in sore than 6 years of struggle

at the cost of heavy sacrifices. including the killing of the best sons of a
whole generation.

Fallacious Argus-ants

As for the argmssnt nade by his supporters that only a "nan of authority"
like his can rescue Chad froa paralysis and achieve national reconciliation.
it ignores two things. nov could a people vho took up arts with the very
purpose of coabatting dictatorship and regaining their dignity and full
sovereignty agree to accept an even nore terrifying dictatorship than the
previous one, and also one inposed froa abroad? breover, who is note
conﬁned to national reconciliation than Goukouni Oueddei, who in July
announced a general meaty for PM fighters?

however, this reconciliation cannot cone about until ﬂissein Habra, a
factor of divisiOn and unending var. is removed froa the Chadian political
and nilitary scene.

The instigators of the plot against the cm. vho were exposed in broad
daylight at the latest seeting in Nairobi, no doubt counted for their
project's success on the passivity of a people yearning for peace and
tranquility after their sufferings, and on the discouragement that a knife
in the back of the Chad Government night cause.

Challenge Rubuffed

however, the challenge to Chad's sovereignty and dignity by the Nairobi
resolution was prowtly and courageously rebuffed in Ndjanena. Created by
thousands on his return fron the Kenyan capital on 12 February, President
Goukouni Oueddei affirned: "Certain countries, encouraged by inperialisn,
have gravely insulted our country. people, and any. However. helped by
reliable friendly countries, Chadians will succeed in solving their problem
themselves."

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Repeating a slogan on a sign being saved by the demonstrators, he shouted:
”Chad is not a protectorate; Chad is not under 0A1] trusteeship."

On 13 February, the cum issued a co-amique rejecting ss nul and void the
resolutions of the ow "persenent co-ittee” "suit" and describing the
proceedings of this Ieeting as "absurd theatrics." This per-snent comittee,
the cosnunique continued, "has no reason for being. and still less has the
right to act in place of and on behalf of the people and their legitinte
gvernuent.”

Expressing indignation that the Chad issue has been dragged baclusrd to
hecoee a factional problee again. and that the Gun is being denied its
existence as a government, the co-unique stressed: "lspleeentation of the
Nairobi resolutions would surely seen a return to the vicious circle of
war and destruction."

If, as the first reactions see- to indicate, numerous African capitals agree
with this analysis, the Gum—now caught in a pincer situation betveen ﬂissein
Habre's aggressive forces, which have received explicit encourage-eat from
the Nairobi resolution, and the pan-African force-will not rennin alone in
its resistance to a plot which not only directly threatens Chad's survival

but is a dangerous precedent for the peoples of the continent.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afriqus-Asie

9920
080: 6719/6“

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ASSEMBLY OF ALL FORCES NECESSARY FOR RECONSTRUCTION
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French No 1106. 3 Mar 82 p 22
[Article by Jean-Pierre N'Diaye: "Chad: Nothing Should Divide Then")

[Excerpts] In 17 years of civil war, nany chances for peace have cone and gone.
The conferences organized at the revolutionaries' request in Kano, Nigeria, led to
the final withdrawal, in the sane of the national interest, of Felix Hallow.

Upon returning from Ndjanena, the leaders of Chad's revolution-Hiasein Babre.
Coukouni Oueddei, and Acyl Almat. who were conrades in aria—net in Douguis (10 No-
vember 1979), together with Hadal Abdelkader Kanougue, the strongnan of the south,
to set up the Transitional National Union Government (GUM).

Everyone heaved a sigh. Chad's troubles were over! The end of the tunnel was in
sight. Then one of the key figures in the picture upset the applecart. Bissein
Habre. minister of defense. seemed to contest the way the CUNT was set up. and in
particular the fact that Goukouni Oueddei was to be the country's chief magistrate.
Habre withdrew with his PAN [Northern Armed Forces] to the environs of Ndjanena.

What is the nature of these disputes? Some say these people are military chiefs
who are incapable of yielding. Others stress the different backgrounds of the two
Iennllabre and Goukouninwho, however, are both from the north. One is a revolu-
tionary, more modern. more of an ideologue, an intransigent nationalist. The .
other is more traditional and has closer ties with Chad's northern neighbor, Libya.
At any rate, both are patriots, and both epitomize Chad. There should be nothing
fundanentally serious to divide the- and prevent then frogs working together to
reconstruct a cruelly torn Chad. For Goukouni the trouble is the presence of the
Libyans and Habre's withdrawal from Ndjanens to rebuild his stronghold in the
east, on the Sudanese border. and again begin his long march.

The presence of 10,000 Libyan soldiers-~considered an army of occupatiOn by Af-
rican public opinion-~forced Goukuni to call for the withdrawal of these troops.
The inter-African contingent arrived. The OAU's difficulties in trying to rake
peace are due to internal contradictions and rivalries which can't be resolved.
The difficulty of the OAU's mission can be readily understood when one hears the
two Chadians say that their dispute can be resolved only by nilitary leans, by
outright warfare. But the OAU's presence has had a calling effect on the situa-
tion. attenuating the confrontation and bringing relief to African peoples

FOR OFFICPAL USE ONLY
staggering under the weight of poverty, bombs. and exile. And this is far from
negligible.

In this context, made less tense by the efforts of the OAU, another meeting or
even a roundtable may be possible. It is almost like a film being played over
again. will there be another conference. this time without the sequel of brothers
at loggerheads? Uhile the situation inside Chad seems to be fixed in the same
pattern as before, the international situation has changed. There has been a sav-
age revival of the cold war.

If a country like Chad can't solve its domestic problems in a dynamic and positive
way. and the national participants in the drama are relegated to the sidelines,
there is an unavoidable risk of uncontrollable foreign intervention in the medium
term.

For the past 10 years, Hissein Habre has been Chad's strongman; he has turned
every situation to his advantage, defeated his adversaries. and made the great
powers yield, and he has done it exclusively with Chadian forces. But let us not
forget all the Chadians who have taker part in the combat; Dr Abba Siddick was a
precursor of this struggle, and he is not finished yet.

All active forces should be assembled for the work of reconstruction. Can Habre
bring about national reconciliation at a time when a country like Sudan is again
threatened by the specter of civil war, and when the international situation is
so dangerous? In this connection, socialist France. the 0A”, and Chadian immi-
grants should make bolder suggestions.

The main point--and this is cause for optinism--is that no Chadian faction has
proclaimed the secession of the territory it controls.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
C50: 4719/676

9
FINICHWNC]AI.USE¢JNIV
FOR OFFICIAL llSE ONLY

GOUKOUNI HAY BECOME HERB PACTION CHIEF
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1103, 24 Feb 82 pp 20, 21
[Article by Francois Soudan: "The Call of Rocky Terrain"]

[Text] The Libyans should not have left so fast. Paradoxically. there are two
nen in Chad who could agree with this statement today: Goukouni Oueddei and His-
sein Habre. That is undoubtedly what they have in common, although their reasons
are diametrically opposed. Oueddei has concluded--too late-~that the withdras-l
of Libyan troops left him with no protection other than the overly relaxed boys

in his Presidential Guard. ﬂabre thinks the country would have united around him
if Qadhafi's legionnaires had stayed a few months longer. Their similarities stop
there; after 3 months of fulminating blitzkrieg, the rebel aabre now controls al-
Iost three-quarters of Chad, whereas Goukouni, the President, seems to have re-
verted to the role of a head of state whose authority is contested by his own fac-
tion.

Is it simply a case of the pendulum's swinging back, or is it a historical neces-
sity? Hhen one wins, the other loses, but always haughtily. How else can one
explain the truly suicidal policy adopted by Goukouni Oueddei in Nairobi at the
last meeting of the OAU's permanent committee on Chad (Nairobi, lO and ll Febru-
ary)? By rejecting all of the OAU's decisions-ocease-fire, negotiations, elec-
tions-the man who it still President (for how long?) in Ndjamena has lost much

of his legitimacy in the eyes of the OAU. Furthermore. he is leaving the military
and diplomatic initiative up to ﬂiaaein Habre--while he is already in a weak posi-
tion on both counts-and his intransigence say well lead to an early departure of
the OAU's white helmets.

This self-destructive tendency is certainly typical of this aristocratic Tubu.

the third son of the Derdei Kefedermi. Although used to conpromiaes and hours of
informal negotiations in the shade of a tree, Oueddei is nevertheless more moti-
vated by a sense of honor than by an awareness of reasons of state. And when his
quavering voice loudly interrupted Nigerian President Shehu Shagari in Nairobi

on Wednesday 10 February. while the latter was talking about "national reconcili-
ation“ in Chad, to say that he had not come for that. his listeners were reminded
of the fact that Gouk0uni Oueddei is a man of sonetines uncontrollable anger. But
above and beyond the real feeling he has of having been betrayed by everyone, and
beyond his personal feud with Habre, for when he has demanded and obtained a death
sentence by default, Goukouni is perpetually tempted by “the call of the rocky
terrain."

10
FOI'OFFKJAI.US£10NLY
FOR*0FF1C1AI.£EHE(NNLY

he has never really thought of himself as a chief of state. Every time he has
spoken freely about himself, and apparently especially since the OAU appointed
him to head the GUNT in August 1979. he has conveyed the feeling that his happiest
days were behind him, when he roamed over the rocky terrain of Tibesti with the
French Army at his heels. Oddly enough, it is habre, the eternal rebel, who has
always felt that it was his destiny to lead the nation, so much so that he lives
only for that.

But even if Goukouni has never really thought he had what it takes to be a head

of state, he has accomplished the feat of persuading other people that he has:
first the French, from Martin Kirsch to Guy Penna: then the OAU. Everyone be-
lieved him when he said that Habre was finished. that almost the entire country
was united behind him [Coukouni], and that the National Integrated Army (ARI) was
more than a mirage. But Chad, from the GUN? on down, has never recognized Coukouni
Oueddei as its representative. There have been constant rivalries and sometimes
violent quarrels for the past 2 years between him and Acyl Ahmat‘s pro-Libyans,
the Kamougue's southerners. and Hahamat Abba Said's lst Army. Ten thousand sol-
diers stationed in Chad for 20 months by Qadhafi were unable to stop this perpetual
clan warfare. As a result, barely 3,000 men could be found to resist the FAN‘s
offensive in November and December of 1981, and desertions followed the first de-
feats. Thus Mousse Sougui. one of Goukuni's most effective military aids, and a
hero of the battle of Kotoro Pallets feught at the beginning of December (GUNT's
only victory), joined the FAN 2 months later on Paya's side with 200 men. Hadal
Abdelkader Kamougue, vice president of the CUNT, after a short visit to the front,
refused to send his troops to participate in this combat between northerners....
The list of "betrayale" of which Goukouni can say he is the victim is long. but

he never had the strength or the will to avoid them. Even his crates of weapons
and munitions sent fron Paris found their way, through various intrigues, into the
hands of the FAN....

Hhat can Goukouni do now? Call the Libyans back? But Colonel Qadhafi is likely
to be very cautious, prompted by American pressures, (discreet) Soviet pressures.
the coming OAU summit meeting in Tripoli, and the ghosts of hundreds of soldiers
who died in eastern Chad. France? Goukouni has thought about it. It is said
that he even requested-~through Francois Soubestre, the new French ambassador to
Ndjamena--the intervention of the llth Parachute Division.

But France is not going to do anything, because its support for Goukouni was con-
ceivable only as long as the 0A0 lent him an air of legitimacy. Now the Chadian

President has alarmed the door on Nairobi.

What abOut Algeria or Ethiopia (already approached by Goukouni at the beginning
of December)? For many reasons, neither would think of getting bogged down in
Chad. will there be nothing left for his but to become once more what he has per-
haps been all along: a faction chief alternating between rebellion and power?
History undoubtedly stammers in Chad, moreso than anywhere else.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
C50: é719/676

11
FOR OFF1C1AI.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OAU ROLE IN CALLING FOR NEGOTIATIONS BACKED
Paris JEUNE APﬁIQUE in French No 1103. 2‘ Feb 82 p 20

[Excerpts] Has the can reversed its stance. as Goukouni Oueddei thinks, by call-
ing on the President of the GUNT to negotiate with Hissein labre? Only apparently.

It is true that so far it recognises Goukouni as the only legitimate authority in
Chad, but only in a specific context: that in which Goukouni heads a transitional
union government for the purpose of holding elections.

In Nairobi the OAU sinply took note of a de facto situation. But the situation
has changed in Chad, and the GUNT President doesn't have the support of the govern-
ment or the people. Elections are out of the question now. The transition lust
be acconplished sane other way, now that yesterday's rebel, Habre, controls so
such territory.

The OAU is now proposing new paths to reach the sane ohjective--nanely, the nor-
malization of the situation in Chad. The people of Chad may again refuse to fol-
low this path. But the pan-African organization has stuck to its mission: to
propose nonpartisan solutions and enunciate the lav-but without any way to en—
force it.

It cannot be expected to do more. After all, does one expect note of the United
Nations?

COPYRIGHT: Jeuhe Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
650: 6719/676

12
FOR OFTWCJA1.USEGDNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOREIGI umsrn ACYL AHMAD 1mm
P10511059 Paris APRIQUB-ASIB in French 29 liar-11 Apr 82 pp 18-19

[Unattributed report on Chadian foreign niniater Acyl Ahnet press conference
in Paris: "Nobody Apart Pro. Chadians Can Pind a Solution"; date of inter-
view uncertain]

[Text] Hhile internally an effort is being nede in N'Dja-ena to rally and
reorganize the nilitary forces to quell llissene Babre'a rebellion, the National
Unity Transitional Govern-sat [GUM], which in the past allowed the Araed For-
ces of the North [FAN] propagandists a free hand for too long, is carrying

out large-scale activity to nets its position tnown abroad.

It is within this fraeework that numerous am leaders presented themselves

to the Parisian press. Along then, on 2 “arch. during a visit to brief the
French authorities. was Chadian foreign and Cooperation Minister Acyl Ahnat.
lie reaeserted the correctness of his govern-ent's rejection of the resolu-
tions adopted in Nairobi in War by a group of African states which for-ed
e "standing co-eittee" on Chad-oresolutions which conflict with the decisions
taken at the latest suI-it neting of the 50 African states.

In reply to the question whether R'Djanena envisages requesting Libyan troops
or other countries' forces to help the GUN? crush the PAR aggression, the
foreign minister confined that for the ties being his govern-out intends to
give the OM] every chance. "We are giving the ow tine to take a grip on it-
self snd to reach, in ang-enent with the can. a solution to the Chadian
problee," Acyl Aheet said, explaining that he viewed the GAO u the medals
of neebers states, not a club of reactionary heads of state with little re-
spect for their peers' undertakinp and activated by a desire to restore lebre
to the Chadian political scene.

Asked whether he considers the decision to ask Libyan troops to withdrﬂ fron
Chad a 'histake." the cum". foreign minister took the opportunity to very
wittily "relativise" the distorted issue of hi- provided recently by

Radio France International and other Heetern dis. ”1 have frequently been
called a Libyan agent by Radio francs International. which has too mob to

say about lee and which does the Chadian people lid! here. I have, in a

sense. been denaturalised. I have been depicted ae a Libyan. rather than a
Chadian. Acquainted as I as with uy country and its internal contradictions,

13
F0! OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I u opposed to Chad's occupation by any other power. but I an very realistic.
Libya is a fraternal country that helped us at the nest difficult nonent and
that extinguished the blaze that had been burning for 17 years.... And I
expressed the pinion at the tine that it was inadvisable to request a Libyan
withdrawal, since we were not confident about the undertakings aade by the
others and we were not ready to guarantee our own security...."

Asked about France's stance toward the cum and the Chadian problen in general.
Acyl Ahnat. who at the beginning of March net in Paris with Jean-Pierre Cot,
French sinister of cooperation and develop-nt. and Guy Penna, presidential
adviser on African affairs, was keen to put an end to the questioning of actives
to which Francois Hitterrand'e governaent has been abjected in this regard.

"I met first clarify a aisunderstanding," Acyl Ahaat stressed. "I was with
President Francois Hitterrand and French External Relations Minister Claude
Greysson. Of course one can never know exactly what happens behind the
scenes. But in ny opinion utters were node clear. Francois Hitterrand told
the cum- president in essence: "mere is no question of France‘s asking you to
make the Libyans leave mtil you are sure about your security.’ That is what

I heard Francois Hitterrand say. So people nust not say to us that France
exerted pressure on Chadian leaders via its nost authoritative representative."

with regard to his neeting at the beginning of March with the French sinister
of cooperation and develop-ant, Acyl Ahnet said: ”Our position is clear.

As for France, it pronised, after the .tdvent ofthe socialist govern-ant, to help
Chad's legitinate governnent. According to sons radio stations and press agen-
cies. however, France has allegedly asked us to nova toward a reconciliation
with Hissene liabre. I told Jean-Pierre Cot yesterday (6 March) [date as pub-
lished]: "There is no question of France's urging us to sit down at the ne-
gotiating table with Iliasene llahre. 9e are struggling to eliminate the phen-
oaenon of the currents that have killed the country. This is not so that
others can force us to revive or mltiply then in the future.‘ So the GM's
position is clear and I believe that Jean-Pierre Cot's reply was constructive.
In Iy opinion. France has not changed its position."

With regard to the kind of assistance pronised by Paris, the Gladian foreign
ninister siaply said: What I can tell you is that France asserted, via its
cooperation sinister, that it will continue to help Chad."

Last, asked about the iwact of foreign interference in Chad, Acyl Ahnat pointed
out that "Gaad's problen is above all a national problen. The inconsistency

of which the CONT has been accused is doubtless not entirely unconnected with
the situation being experienced now. But I believe that Chadian peeple have
learned their lessons fron all this. that they have realized that the problens
could nct be resolved except by their own will. Neither France. nor the United
States nor any other country-mot even the 0A!) itself—nobody but the Chadian
people can find a solution. The problen is above all a national one. And
everyone has concluded that everything-net be done to finally extricate Chad
frol deadlock and war.”

comma: I982 Afrique-Asie.

080: 6719/ 826

1!:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
000mm SAYS moon TRYING 1'0 TALK WITH BA!”
M9161) Inndon axons in English 1‘18 GE 9 Apr 82
[By Abaker Assidick]

[Text] lldjsnena, 9 Apr (macaw President Goiouni Oueddei has accused
the country's vice-president of sabotaging his authority and attelpting to
negotiate with the rebels in the country’s civil: war, Ndjanena Radio reported
today.

The Chad leader faces increasing political opposition within the lO-faction
provisional governsunt after serious military setbacks against the rebels last
month in eastern Chad. political sources said.

his accusation. in a statement released last night by President Goukouni's
own arned FROLINAT faction, cans almst five weeks after Vice-President Abdel
Kader Welds]. Kassugus ptblicly suggested a ceasefire with rebel leader liissene
Habre.

Colonel Kanougue, a veteran leader free the predolinsntly Christian south,
suggested the ceasefire as part of a political settlensnt of the civil war
leading to the setting up of a new all-party govemnsnt, seen by the sources
as a return to the original 1979 ll-faction governnent including Hr habre.

The Gotkouni-led FROLINAT rejected the suggest and accused Colonel Ksnougue
of trying to achieve a ceasefire with Mr labre's guerrillas. a proposal also
strongly advocated by the Organisation of African Unity (0A0) .

In what was seen as an effort to boost his credibility as leader of all the
factions in the war, President Goukomi last nonth tried-and failsduto re-
gain ground taken over by the rebels in the past five maths.

Military sources said successive stteqts by the Chad army to regain control
of the key town of Oun-llsdjer straddling the strategic road fDOI the capital
to the Sudanese border ended in failure. with heavy casualties for govern-eat
forces.

Since a Libyan ailitary pullout in Novsnber last year, Mr nagn's guerrillas.
estinsted at around 6,000 sen, have now control of sore than half of the huge
Central African comtry. nilitary sources said.

15
m omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY

They eeid only the presence of en estimated 3,800 troops of en inter-African
force from Nigeria, Zeire end Senegal setting up n ﬂutter etomd Ndjenene
was preventing the guerrilla fro. noving toverde the cepitnl.

'lhe force night have to be withdreun by the end of June for lack of funds. m-

less en egreenent can be reached for the United Netione to finance it, the
eonrcee said.

C80: 6700/109 3

16
1'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RESISTANCE T0 WINGS ”P0311013 EXISTS
Paris .1“! APRIQUB in French 80 1100, 3 Feb 82 p 1
[Article by Siradiuo Diallo: "Jerry Rulings and the lntellectuals”)

[Text] Jerry Rulings certainly had no trouble seizing power for a second
tine. in Accra (31 December 1981). But he is obviouly having sore trouble
governing this tine than after his cusp of June 1979. Oddly enough. the
bloody repression that the idol of Ghana's youth indulged in (a dozen
high-ranking officers, including three fornsr heads of state. were shot)
at that tile did not affect the will of the people of Ghana to resist.

(h the contrary.

The stubborn opposition confronting Jerry Rulings today is evident at

all social levels. starting, naturally, vith the merchant bourgeoisie,
uho are adversely affected by the ”holy war" against corruption proclained
by the country's new stronglan. The freezing of bank accounts, limits
imposed on withdrawals of deposits, and a multitude of controls introduced
both inside the country and at its borders are not likely to reassure
Accra's rich gentry.

But the gentry are not the Only ones to coqlain. Shopkeepers, merchants,
and salesgirls--the fasous "naaies" of Nakola (the capital's Iain narket).
Takoradi, and elsewhere-dmdiately hoisted the flag of rebellion. They
refuse to lower their prices. despite the orders of the Provisional National
Defense Council, the highest authority in the country. In vain the any
plunders and even dynsnites their stalls: the merchants show no signs

of yielding. They hide their wares. thus further coaplicating the problen
of supplying large urban centers.

Trained personnel and intellectuals do not stop at passive resistance.
either. The professional association grouping doctors. jurists. engineers.
and technicians is demanding the speediest possible return to constitutional
govern-est. "Either by sesns of a restoration of the third constitution.
appropriately anended, or by any other legal leans decided on by the
people." states the association's cos-mique. There is nothing surprising
about this stance, as Chem has the largest and nest active intelligentsia
of any country in black Africa.

17
MOFIICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This social stratun. which is keenly aware of its role in the nation.

has never ends any secret of its contth for politicians and the nilitary.
None of the regines which have energed fron Ghana's five coups d'etat

has succeeded in winning over the intellectuals. This is why it took
Jerry Rawlings 3 weeks to fore his cabinet. Even now he has nanaged to
collect only a teas of "secretaries"—no ninisters.

Many well-knwn and respected intellectuals are said to have been sounded
out and to have refused to join the govern-mt. Thus. after forning his
Provisional National Defense Council with eminent mknownswexcept for
Brigadier Nunoo-Hensah. chief of staff of the artsy—the seats: of Accra
was obliged to recruit his ministerial secretaries fron among politicians
when he was vilifying only yesterday. This did not help his public inaga.
The national student union. which initially applauded the downfall of
President Bills Linen and asked its activists to go to the plantations
and help the peasants harvest cocoa (the country's nain export), is turning
against [Rulings]. The students feel that by [picking] a band of "reac-
tionaries" and "professional politicians" to fern his govern-eat, Jerry

Rulings has nade hinself look like the architect of a nere ”palace revolu-
tion."

Thus hard-pressed on both the right and the left. the ebullient captain's
nargin for naneuver is receding daily. In these circuntances, the only
place for his to go is probably straiﬂlt ahead. Unless he resigns once
again—but that is unlikely. '

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
080: “19/680

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI'IGAI. ESE ONLY

COWS 0N mcnm 017 LIBYAN (”MOTION
Paris 3m mucus in French No 110‘. 3 liar 83 p 16
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Jerry Rulings Saved by Qadhdhafi‘!"]

[Excerpt] No nonths after casing to power in Accra, Air Force Captain
Jerry Rulings is Iarking time. lie had no trouble arresting his prede-
cessor, liilla Liaann. and interning bin in Akossodo. or in dissolving
Parliament. But so far he has not been able to form a honogenaous, repre-
sentative govern-ant, restore unity and discipline to the arny. or rally
the active elements of the nation.

It is as though 3.3. (Rulings likes being called by his initials. which
stand for Jerry John) didn't know what to do with the power he has achieved.
lie just harangues the crowds now and then fron the top of an arnored car
flanked by armed soldiers, or he thmders at the woman selling goods in

the market (he has forbidden then to sell imported products). Otherwise.
Ghana's new strongnan lies low at Can Burns, where he has set up his
office and, next to it-ostentatiously--an austere can bed.

All this is in a snall tent guarded by soldiers in combat attire. standing
or lying behind heaps of sandbags. holed up in this nanner at Accra's
main military camp, two steps fro. the airport. J.J. has closed hinself
off in obstinate silence. There is not the slightest indication of a
domestic policy progran or of foreign policy options. Is he overwhelmed
by the enornity of the task of national recovery before he has even begun
to face it?

At any rate. the legacy left by his predecessors is in such a state that
it would be hard to take it produce anything positive.

So it is not surprising that in the Iiddle of February, Captain Rulings
sent a high-level delegation to Tripoli to ask Libya for i-sdiate aid:

not just oil. but ordinary consumer goods. and of course financial support.
Colonel Qadhafi. who nade an inortant contribution to J.J.'a return to
power, has already supplied hia with quantities of weapons, alunition.

and medicine. Bis representatives, who lost no tine reopening the Libyan
Messy in Accra, have been feverishly active there ever since. They

go fron Iinister to minister to find out what the country needs, and
prolise the earth. But the country's needs are inmanse....

19
POI OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is very little chance of the Libyan graft taking hold in a lasting
way in Accra. Given the way of life, Ientality. and culture of the Ila-odd
million Ghanaian, it would be very hard for Qadhafi to convert then to
the precepts of Ialaaic integrationien aa taunt by the little green book-
quite apart from the fact that the drop in oil prices and his ecrapa with
the western power: have given the Libyan chief of state a lot of problem.

It's like saying Railings haan't cone out of the hotel.
COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
080: “719/680

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORMER N0 2 HAN EXPRESSBS DISAPPROVAI. 0P WINGS
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French No 11010, 3 Mar 82 p 50

[Text] Hany young, low-ranking officials who were Iesbers of Rawlings'
first team, and who decided to leave the country when llilla Limann's
civilian government regained power, did not participate in J .J.'s second
coup d'etat on 31 December. They were not recalled. either. Among the-
ie Major Boakye Djan. the former "No 2" of the Revolutionary Council and
Rawlings' forner right arm; at the tine, he was presented as the Council's
ideologue.

He and his friends, whon we were able to leet with in London, take a very
din view of J.J.'s latest activities. "Rawlings thinks it's enouda to
change men to change society," they told us. "If he stays in power now.
Gham will enter a long period of trouble and chaos." The disillusionaent
expressed by Major Boakye Djan and his associates about Jerry Rawlings

was not born yesterday. "then we took power in 1979, we did so to carry
out a genuine social revolution," they told us. "Unfortunately. Rawlinga
and his friends wouldn't hear of it. It was because our tests was rudder-
less and had no coherent strategy that we decided to hand the reins back

to the civilian authorities in October. He were heading for a catastrophe."

Referring to the latest coup d'etat. Major Boakye Djan told us that
"Rawlings' armed bands liquidated hundreds of the new regime's opponents."
At least three of the 16 "martyrs" who were buried with nilitary honors
at the end of January were murdered in cold blood by Rawlings' sen;
Rawlings recorded then as "killed in cosbat."

The Iajor and his friends also confirm the existence of the "Libyan connec-
tion." "Because of it." they say. "Rawlings is alienating all of the
countries which had been Ghana's friends. The airplane that was supposed
to carry food and Iedicine from Tripoli the day after the coup d'etat

was really carrying weapons." Rawlings' future? Anything but brilliant.
if they are right: "The civilian population has had enough. Sooner or
later, it will realize that it takes nore than guns and pronises to be
able to survive."

WWRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982

9855
080: 6719/680

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ﬂ(1Al.USEioNLY

GUINEA

RELATIONS WITH FRANCE SEEM UNLIKELY TO IMPROVE
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1100, 3 Feb 82 pp 30, 31
[Article by 8.0.: "Lost Illusions"]

[Text] The members of the Association of Families of Political Prisoners in Guinea
are preoccupied by the fate in store for their families. Comprising several women
citizens of France, Spain, Italy, and the Netherlands married to Guineans who have
been held in the prisons of Sekou Taure, these women have for years been making
approaches to secure, if not the freedom, then at least some clarification concern-
ing their husbands' situation.

The association has brought its case to the attention of the Pope, international
political and humanitarian organizations, and the governments of many countries.
During his official visit to Guinea (December 1978), the then president of the
French Republic, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, raised the problem with President Ahmed
Sekou Toure. And he obtained a commitment that those under arrest would be freed
without delay.

Confident in this promise, Rene Journiac, adviser for African affairs in the 0f-
fice of the President of the French Republic, hastened to place balm on the wounds
of his fellow citizens.

And time passed. Receiving no tangible sign from Conakry, despite several discreet
approaches by the French authorities, the association resumed activity. 01118 April
1980, the European Parliament passed a motion calling for the liberation of polit-
ical prisoners in Guinea. During the campaign for the last presidential election
in France, the association obtained from the principal candidates the commitment

to do everything possible to this end in the event that they were elected on

10 Hay (1981).

President Francois Mitterrand seems to have kept his word. In any case, incircles
close to the Socialist Party it is stated that the discreet visit to Conakry in
October 1981 by Attorney Rolland Dumas, Socialist deputy from Perigueux and a
friend of the French chief of state, had no other ,urpOse than this matter. But
Hitterrsnd's special envoy obtained nothing definite. 0n the contrary, Mme Marie
Jeanne Pruvot, a Giscardian deputy to the Strasbourg parliament. and author of the
April 1980 motion, knows how things stand.

After having visited Conakry last November at the invitation of President Sekou
Ibure,!mw Pruvot has just received from the Guinean ambassador in Brussels,

22
NUR¢MWHC1AI.USE!0NLY
FOR1OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

xourouna Daouda, called Windo, an official letter dated 12 January 1982. The
letter was signed by Guinean Minister of Foreign Affairs Abdoulaye Tours, who
stated, for the purpose of finally settling this matter, that with regard to the
eight husbands of the Frenchwomen who were members of the association, seven had
been executed since 24 January 1971. The eighth, Barry Abdoulaye, for-er office
director in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, had escaped prior to the executiOn
of the sentence.

Abdoulaye Toure'a letter is troubling, to say the least. First of all, this is
because it proves that, while he was promising in December 1978 to free prisoners
who he knew had been executed during or after January 1971, Sekou Tours was clear-
ly making fun of President Giscard d'lstaing. Even more serious, if it is true
that four of these men were shot on 24 January 1971 at the same time as dosena of
other Guinean officials, the statement of the minister of foreign affairs must,
with regard to the four others, be taken with caution.

Actually. Gen Keita Noumandian, former head of the General Staff of the Guinean
Army, and Keita Kemoko and Sylla Fode Saliou, both magistrates, could not have
been executed on the date indicated. And for a good reason, since they were ar-
rested in May and on 7 and 8 July, respectively, in Conakry. As for Barry Abdou-
laye, who, the head of Guinean diplomatic service writes, escaped before the in-
position of the penalty, his case is rather unusual, for he was arrested on 29 Au-
gust 1972 at Sinko, a little village on the Ivory Coast frontier, during his

escape [attempt]. Brought back to Conakry, he was probably also executed.

These revelations, which say a great deal about the manner in which Guinean author-
ities behave with regard to the rights of man, are not likely to encourage Presi-
dent Hitterrand to fulfill a wish very dear to Sekou Toure: to be officially in-
vited to France.

Sane African chiefs of state, and not minor ones, have intervened in this regard;
French companies interested in exploiting the rich Guinean subsoil are doing
everything to improve French-Guinean relations. This does not alter the fact
that since the election of Francois Hitterrand, these relations seem deed. Are
the open wOunds caused by Sekou Toure's violent attacks in 1976 against the So-
cialist Party--likening it to "filth," and describing its leader as a “Nazi" and
a "bandit"--like1y to heal badly?

The members of the France-Guinea Friendship Association, in any case, plan to make
approaches soon to Minister of Foreign Affairs Claude Cheysson and Prime Minister
Pierre Hauroy in order to find out what Paris intends to do. As for Sekou Toure,
he seems no longer to be under any illusions as to his chances of coming to an
understanding with Francois Hitterrand.

[Toure] seems to be so disabused that he did not hesitate, during his recent visit
to the Federal Republic of Germany (30 November-3 December), to make a long tele—
phone call from Bonn to Valery Giscard d'Bstaing to say that he not only did not
regret having supported him during the presidential election campaign, but that he
was solemnly inviting his to return to Guinea whenever [Giscard] might wish-and
to assure hia in advance that the former French chief of state will be better re-

ceived than in Decenber 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique caqu 1981

6108 23
C50: 4719/678 FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
llﬂltlﬂﬂClALlliECHULY

IVORY COAST

REORIENTATION OF FRENCH AID EFFORT REPORTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 19 Her 82 p 790
[Article: "Toward Reorientation of Cooperation with France"]

[Text] Thu French minister delegate to the minister of external relations for
cooperation, Jean-Pierre Cot, left Abidjan on 10 March at the conclusion of a
2-day official visit to the Ivory Coast.

Before leaving the Ivorian capital, Hr Cot stressed the fact that the adjust-
ment of the cooperation between the Ivory Coast and France--an adjustment de-
sired by the two countries--was not at all a disengagement on the part of
France. 0n the contrary, he declared, it is a matter of "anchoring (this coop-
-eration) better and developing it better."

"France." he continued, "intends to increase its aid to the Third Horld....and
I want to assure Ivorian public opinion that there is no question of reducing
the scope of our cooperation, but rather of developing it.... He desire the
opening-up of new areas of cooperation--in the matter of rural development, for
example.... The fact remains that we have to examine the possibilities of
handing over certain positions occupied by technical sssistants, in those cases
where lvorianizstion is possible."

Hr Cot referred to the fact that France favors self-directed developnent for
the countries of the Third world and encouragement of each country's capacity
to carry out its own development itself. he recalled that France intended to
double its public development aid to the Third world in the course of President
Hitterrand's current 7-year term, to reach 0.7 percent of France's Cross Na-
tional Product, instead of the present 0.35 percent.

For his part, the chief of Ivorian diplomacy, Hr Simeon Ake, considered that
the fundamental principle of cooperation between the Ivory Coast and France
should henceforth be that of ongoing concertation. Furthermore, he continued,
"we unreservedly approve the French idea that the necessary updating or read-
justnent of development policies should he carried out with respect for th?
sovereignty of each country, in function of its needs, its interests and its
political and economic choices."

In the view of the Ivorisn minister, the development efforts should be applied
to three ”sparkplug" sectors: agriculture, industry and energy.

21:
IKIIC“"NC1A1.USE‘ONIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diversified Cooperation

Franco-Ivorian cooperation covers several areas, both on the level of technical
or scientific assitance and on that of developnent.

0f the roughly 12,000 technical assistants working for the French Ministry of
Cooperation, nearly one-third--3,758--work in the Ivory Coast. Teachers repre-
sent 80 percent of this direct assistance, and the cost of then to France was
CPA 6.9 billion in 1981.

On the other hand, France furnishes its aid to the developnent of the Ivory
Coast through the intermediary of several organisms: the Aid and Cooperation
Fund (FAC)--CFA 911 million in 1981; the Central Fund for Econonic Cooperation
(CCC£)--CFA 12.7 nillion in loans and participations; and the Studies and Re-
search Group for Development of Tropical Agronomy (CERDAT), which groups eight
research institutes and whose financing is provided jointly by the two parties
--CFA 1.576 billion in 1981.

Finally. through the intermediary of the Office of Overseas Scientific and
Technical Reses:ch (ORSTOH), which has three centers in the Ivory Coast, with
20 scientific disciplines represented, France is subsidizing research projects
in the amount of CFA 3.786 billion.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux Et Cie Paris 1982

11267
CSO: 4719/786

FOI1OFFKJAI.USB(HVLY
FOR‘OFFRJAI.US£1ﬂNLY

IVORY COAST

BRIEFS

GEODETIC SURVEY--From 20 January to 3 March, a group of 10 experts in geodesy
from several PR6 universities developed a pilot project for geodesy using sat-
ellites, in collaboration with the Geographic Institute of the Ivory Coast.
This project, carried out within the framework of Ivorian-Tao cooperation, has
the purpose of providing the Ivory Coast with 17 geodesic points of very high
precision that will serve as a base for establishment of geographic and road
maps. The project will also be of very great utility for construction of roads
and rail lines, so well as for carrying out irrigation projects end for exploi-
tation of mining resources. At a ceremony on 3 March marking the end of this
work, Mr Ernst-August Rocky, the Fan's ambassador to Abidjan, handed over a set
of geodesic observation equipment to the Geographic Institute of the Ivory
Coast. This equipment, with a value of CFA 60 million, includes, in particu-
lar, two instruments for observation of artificial satellites and three ve-
hicles. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French 12 Ear 82
p 725] COPYRIGRT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982 11267

650: k7l9/786

26

FOI.0FFKJM1.IEIE(H‘LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

mm mm: EXCHANGE RATE—Antananarivo, 10 Apr (mm)—m Halsgssy
franc (M) no longer has fined parity with the Rench franc. according to
official exchange rates published by the central bank. The m, which has
been worth one fifth the value of the French franc since leaving the franc
zone in 1913, is now floating against other currencies. On Thursday, the ex-
change rate for the French franc was 69.94; run. my authorities have not
given any explanation for this change. but infomd sources say that negotia-
tions between the magaey Republic and the M for the redress of the Malagasy
scone-y "have reamed.” These talks cane to a standstill several lanths ago
because of the drastic DIP delends which were apparently difficult for the
country to iqlenent. ‘lhe country is currently facing an economic crisis and
shortages of foodstuff and essential goods. [Text] [0110726 London m
in French 1336 G!!! 10 Apr 82]

mm was It! cum—Autumn”. 10 Apr (Wk-The suspected plot-
ters of a coup eined at overthrowing the regime of President Didier Ratsiraks
have been reaended into custody after an inquiry by the Office of Investiga-
tion and Doc‘nentation (Political Police). This was announced on Saturday by
the daily MADAGASCAR mus. ‘lhe newspaper did not give the nanes of the sus-
pected coup plotters. According to Helagesy Fresident Didier natsiraka, offi-
cers, civilians and clergynen were involved in the plot. 'lhe Malagasy head of
state said last January that "the priest who engineered the plot intended to
call on witches to nake lightning strike at the houses of present Maguy
leaders." In case this nethod failed. I was to be killed by seven sticks of
dynanite at Mchistsirohitra Palace (presidential palace)," he added. [Text]
[16110665 London mum in French 1337 car 10 Apr 82]

CSO: b719/827

27
FOR OFFICIAL L85 ONLY
BRIEFS

POLYPROPYLENE BAG PRODUcrIm—In keeping with a plan to develop activitiee to
replace imports in Hal-i. Blantyre letting Ccapany, a eubeidiary of the David
Uhitehead group, will eat up a factory to ate polypropylene bags for packag-
ing agricultural producte (grain, fertilizer, etc.). Ita annual production
capacity in to be about lo million bage. [Text] [Paria mans mrcmx 81'
mtmmms in French No 1896, 12 Her 82 p 767] [COPYRIGsz Rene Koran
et Cie Paris 1982] 8568

swm AFRICAN AGRIGIL‘NRE AID-«during his recent vieit to Hal-ti, South
African Agriculture Minister P. r. Du Pleeeie announced that hie country would
grant a loan of 1.5 nillion malevian hachae (over a period of 15 yeare at 2
percent) to the National Seed Cowany of nalui in order to enable it to a:-
large ite uarehoueee and increase ite feed atocka. Be aleo eaid that hie
country would nake a gift of 620,000 hachaa to finance the traneportation of
vheat which Kalwi (uhoee needa increaae at .1 annual rate of 26.000 tone)
nornelly ieporte from South Africa. [Text] [Parie ms TROPICAUX l‘l'
mammals in French No 1896, 12 Her 82 p 767] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Koren:
ct Cie Paria 1982] 8568

CORTAINER Tannin—Lilongwe hae juat inetalled a container terninal (an an
addition to the two terninala already set up in Blantyre) with an initial
capacity of 120 unite (6 netere per aide); this will aoon be expanded to 370
unite. he overall coat of the operation ia to cone to alnoat 1.5 aillion
kwachae. It ehould be noted that 60 percent of Malawi'e exporte and 50 per-
cent of its inporta travel in containere, principally vie lacala, eecond
largest port in Hoaaebique. [Text] [Patio mamas MIC”! 81‘ mtmnmms
in French llo 1896. 12 Mar 82 p 767] (comm: Rene Horeux et Cie Paria
19822 8568

(:80: £719,706.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

mm ammo» PROJECT, nmwrms DISCUSSED
Details of Railroad Contracts
Paris mars TROPICADX ET mums in French No 1896, 12 Mar 82, p 739

[Text] Three railroad contracts of $1000 nillion each, recently concluded in
Nigeria by a French coqany. a 'Eugoslav cupany. and a Chm-Swiss consort-
iun, actually involve ! single international-gas. railway project of sons ‘00
he aiaed at linking Port Harcourt with the future Maohta steel couples.

The French conpany (than) has ban assigned the Umahia-Bnugu section, the
Yugoslav comm (Partisanski), the Utonkon-Hskurdi section, and the Guineas-
Swiss consortiu- (CCBCC-Blectrowatt-Roga) the Oturkpo-Aymgba section (tron a
place halfway between Utonkon and Nahurdi to another place halfway between
Oturkpo and Maokuta) .

or the three renaining contracts to be concluded to cowlets the railway, a
Brazilian oospany (Parana-Penna), presently under consideration, is to be a-
signed the southern Port Harcourt-Undua section. It is thought that another
French coqany, Dragagu et Travail: Publics. night be osignsd the Bnugu-Uranko
section. On the other hand. it is not yet known which cowany will be selected
to ooqlete the last section. linking Ayngba with the steel coupler.

‘lhe railroad project as a whole has been established at $2.5 billion (sore than
half of this anount renains to be invested), ad the project is expected to be
finished before the coapletion of the steel cowlex itself . foreseen for 1985.
We nay recall that this clesx is being built by the Soviets, headed by a
{in called ‘lyazhpro-sxport.
COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris. 1982.

Developaent of Railroad Activity
Paris mans TROPICADX 8T harms in Prnch llo 1896, 1.2 Ilar 82, p 139

[Text] the Nigerian Railway Corporation (NRC) is counting on average nonthly
receipts of 7.7 nillion naira this year, or 92.‘ aillion for the 12 nonths.

In 1980 its average nonthly receipts can to only 5.07 aillion naira be-
cause of strikes. 0!! to a good start duriu the first quarter. with a

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nonthly average of 7.6 eillion naira, receipts dropped in Key and June due
to protest nave-ants.

It is to be noted that in 1979, nonthly receipts cane to only 3. 82 nillion
naira, and in 1978 to only 2.78 nillion.

the increase in receipts expected in 1982 is based on the nor-a1 develop-set
of traffic and, according to the railway orgnisetion. could be still higher
if there is a revision in rates.

In fact, the increase in receipts each year has not kept pace with the cost of
operations. which increases Inch more rapidly and leaves the organization with
. ddidCe

In 1978. with receipts of 33.65 nillion naira, operational costs increased to
76.77 nillion. giving a negative balance of 61.32 nillion naira.

In 1979, operational costs exceeded 100 Iillion naira colpared with receipts
of 65.86 nillion, resulting in a huge deficit.

In 1982, because of increases in wages and other development costs, end despite
receipts of 92.6 ndllion naira, the deficit is expected to reach £3 nillion
naira at the present rate schedule.

In another natter, the NRC has been pleased with the technical accord reached
with Rail India Technical and Econolic Services Ltd (311:5) early in 1979 for
a period of three years, which expired at the end of 1981. In fact, this ac-
cord pernitted the NRC to get back on its feet and develop its services.

Thus. with 10.5 nillion passengers per year, paseenger traffic even exceeded
the goal of 10 nillion established for the end of the period. Freight traf-
fic, which a short tine ago was still 230 railroad cars a day, has increased
to 300 cars.

Lastly, in a year and a half. the nether of railroad enployeee has increased
from 30,000 to 35,000.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris, 1982.

8568
C80: 67 19/706

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOI'T'ICIALUSEONLY

Am PURCHASE mu Slam—Swinerland: Kinetic io top meta-or for
em oeloo: According to tho Svioo ninienor of defnoo, tho owntry'e
one oeleo totaled 511.5 nillion 8vieo fronce laet you. tho portion of
that amount bought by Nigoria oddod up to 169.9 nillion fronco. thuo. in
thio aroe Nigoria cane into the lead non; Mtoeoland'o cuetonoro, ahead
of Root Gunny (163.7 nillion trance) and Auetria (76.1 nillion frence).
[Text] [Porto W MIC“)! 31' mm in French No 1892.

12 Feb 82 p 396] (mum: Reno Heron: et Cie Parie 1982] 9631

111881.13 SHIPS mu FRANCE—A core-oniol Nigerian flag-rains; in Chorbourg
on 5 February narked the dolivery of throo niooilo-lennching petrol booto
to Nigoria built by Conotructiono Hocaniquoo de Nomadic. Ihooe patrol
hoato—"Siri." "Ayn.” ond "Blnnn"-reprooont o Aso-nillion-frenc controct.
‘l‘hoy are duo to loavo tho ohovo-nontioned French port in e fen voeko to
get to Legoo at the end of a journey looting 3 vooko, vith etopo in
Spein, the Canorioe, ond Africa. In the event Nigerian nilitory ofticiolo
do not carry out treinin; exerciaeo vith the collaborotion of the French
Navy, tho three potrol croft night-lent Cherhourg toward the ond of
men or in April. Othorvioe, the three ohipe ohould be leoving Franco
leter on. The crew oioo io 50 for ooch of theoe petrol booto. thoy ore
56 notoro in length end 8 netere vido, end thoir noono of propuloion ie
provided by four 6,500-horoopovor enginoo which allow th- to ottoin

37 knote. [root] [Pario W “OPRAH! 31' norm in Fronch
No 1892, 12 Fob 82 p 396] (comm: Bono Moron: et Cie Porio 1982]
9631

POLICB Amount) to SHOOT—In January tho Logoe police co-iooionor,

Alhaji mite-ed Genho, ennounoed that iron now on tho police are euthorioed
to ehoot poroone dioturbin; tho poece by mapping in theft ond under.
Directiveo hovo boon givon to the police concerning thio. The co-ioeionor
etated thet the neeeure hoe bocono nocoeoary following on incroooe in the
m-ber of ottecko.-the viotino of which oro reeidento of tho city. Theee
attache are noot frequently nedo ageinot notoriote and vhon thore are
trotiic accidento. [Text] [Patio mans mum ﬂ “DIM in
Fronch No 1892, 12 Pob 82 p 396] [annual-r: Bone Moron: ot Cie Porio 1982]

9631

31
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
POI! OFFKIAI. USE ONLY

COOPERATION Nt‘m mYn-~On 21 January, Egypt and Nigeria signed an economic,
scientific, and technological cooperation agreement in Lagos. cm that occasion
the Nigerian federal sinister of planning, Hrs Adenike Bbun Oyagbola, who signed
the agreement along with Egypt's ambassador, Nuhausad al-Atif Nawani, expressed
regret regarding the imbalance in trade between the two countries, an imbalance
very much in agypt's favor. Nhile Nigerian sales to Egypt have greatly
declined, going from 143,000 to 17,000 naira just from 1975 to 1979, Egypt‘s
sales to its Nigerian partner went frca 965,000 to 1.1 million naira during the
sane period. In the area of technological cooperation, Hrs Oyagbola made the
additional observation that there are currently some 2,000 Egyptian experts in
Nigeria, mostly teachers, engineers, agricultural experts, and building experts.
i'rext) (Paris Mascaras mpicwx n norm in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82

p 686] [COPYRIGiﬂ‘x Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9631

NE" SALT PRmUCTIm mm-ﬂev Nigeria Salt Coqany, Ltd, a salt-producing
fire with an annual capacity of 120,000 tons. installed on Ogha Reki, in
Bendel State, hm recently entered into operation. This company, established
with the technical participation of a Spanish colpan , Union Saltenera, cost
about 17 aillion nairs. The wanish company is to provide management and ad-
ministration for a temporary period of three years. [Text] [Paris NARCIES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1896, 12 Her 82 p 739] [COPYRIGsz
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 8568

HOG, POULTRY PROMJCTIw--Decline in hog production but increase in chicken pro-
duction: Pork production is currently down in Nigeria, while chicken production
is experiencing an increase. That is what the Federal Livestock Department
states in a report recently made public. In fact, farmers raising aniaals seen
to be more interested in poultry than in hogs, even though the latter are in
great denand. That demand was estinated at about 50,000 tons of neat per year
(which is 1.3 million animals), compared to local production, which is no more
than 38,000 tons. By 1985, demand is estimated to be around 57,000 tons, with
production to be fairly close to 52,000 tons. According to the federal Live-
stock Department's report, hog raisers have not tried to expand their pro-
duction-~58 percent of them liniting themselves to fattening up only about 50
animals maximum, and only 15 percent fattening up 200 or more. [Text] [Paris
HARCHBS TROPICAUX B‘i‘ HEDITBRRANRENS in French No 1895, 5 Mar 82 p 686] [COPY-
RIGNT: Rene Noreux et Cie Paris 1982) 9631

DELEGATION PROM BONG KONG--A mission of some ls members from the Hong Kong
Chamber of Cor-erce paid a visit to Nigeria in January. The members of this
mission were representing the following sectors: construction materials: the
plastics, electric. and electronics industries; watches; toys: and various
leather and aetal goods. It was emphasized that Nigeria is Bong Kong's top
African customer. Its purchases totaled more than 1 billion Hong Kong dollars
in 1980, showing a rise of 180 percent that year coapared to the previous year.
l‘l'ext) [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in Prone}! No 1895, 5 Mar 82
p 685] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Noreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9631

C80: 4719/6“

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POSSIBLE POLITICAL EFFECTS OF ANTICORRUPTION DRIVE
Paris JBUNB APRIQUE in French No 1101, 10 Feb 82 pp 22, 23
[Article by Sylviane Kanara: "Diouf Against the Corrupt")

[Excerpts] The arrest on the evening of 26 January of two Dakar physical thera-
pists for forgery, use of forgery, and swindling, and the placing of two physicians
under surveillance have aroused excitement in Senegalese nedical and paramedical
circles. There is the same excitement everywhere, for the fraud uncovered by the
state inspectorate seems to implicate not only a few doctors and masseurs but also
a good number of officials who are profiting fron a particular social security sys-
ten.

The "affair of the budget charges," as they call it in Senegal. seems actually to
be quite broad. According to the national daily LB SOLEIL. the state has thereby
lost 1 billion CTA francs (20 nillion French francs). ﬂow? The combine was quite
ingenious. An official falls ill: thanks to a letter of guarantee, a ”budgetary
charge," he pays only one-fifth of the eedical costs, with the state assuming the
rest of the cost. Let us suppose that the official in question wishes to make a
little noney. He pays his share and goes to consult an unscrupulous doctor or
physical therapist. The latter reimburses his his costs. adds a snall supplement.
and is paid by the state the remaining four-fifths for medical treatment he never
gave. Since little brooks come together to fore big rivers, certain doctors and
physical therapists are said to have acquired more than comfortable fortunes this
way. One of the arrested physical therapists. Siby faye. owns a housing develop-
ment near the airport consisting of 20 villas. “any Dakarians went there to spend

the last weekend of January.

Dr Albert Bachir, a veteran of the RDA (African Denocrstic Rally), of Lebanese
origin, placed under surveillance on the 27th. and head doctor of a clinic of the
inner city, was known for similar activities. The physicians' Council of Order
launched an investigation of him 3 nontls ago because he was suspected of engaging
in the "charges" business. It was therefore no surprise to the Council. The sur-
veillance of Dr Abdou Niang. on the other hand, seems more difficult for it to ac-
cept. Dr Niang. 72 years of age, is one of the first African physicians. He is

a leading citizen, and a sheihh in addition. and grand master of the Masonic Lodge
of the Grand Orient of France in Senegal. In his case the doctors speak of "nag-
ligence." After the affair became known. the Council of the Order of Physicians
met to decide on what measures to take. But the idea of a communique was reject-
ed, and a coemisaion charged with establishing responsibilities was set up. "We

33
F0!’0I11ClAI.lEﬂE(HVLY
FIMICﬂHHCJAl.lEﬂ£(NNLY

are carrying oat an investigation for our part in order to find out if these or
other doctors have participated in this fraud," explained a member of the council.
The physical therapists immediately announced that one of the accused, Becaye
Diarra, did not have the degrees required by the profession, and that they there-
fore had nothing to do with him.

So much for the incident itself. But what is behind and around it is much more
interesting. The affair has assumed such proportions that some Senegalese af-
firm...that it has been concocted out of whole cloth in order to distract atten'
tion from the increase in the price of rice which took effect on 30 January, going
up from 80 to 105 CPA francs per kilogram. Others take it seriously, however.
Unverifiable rumors of panic speak of quick sales of shares or of real estate in
order to escape the roundup which seems to be in preparation. Because the desire
to lance the abscess comes from very high.

As early as 21 September, President Abdou Diouf had demanded the opening of an in-
quiry into the "budgetary charges." A routine check, it was said. Actually, the
President decided to act after receiving an anonymous letter informing him of the
fraud. A final report at the end of January confirmed its allegations. The chief
of state then decided to make the affair public.

Having done this, Abdou Diouf took another step. The creation in June 1981 of a
Court for the Suppression of Illicit Enrichment, and then the removal of certain
high personalities of the regime known for their "business sense," gained for him
the trust of the little people. Nevertheless, some people still wanted to be con-
vinced of the willingness of the chief of state to hand out punishment. Just how
far will they go this time? This is the question which everyone is asking. "He
will go right to the end," said Prime Minister ﬂabib Thiam, "in conformity with the
instructions of the chief of state." On 26 January, during a meeting of the Coun-
cil of Ministers, Abdou Diouf in fact declared that the Senegalese Government was
willing "to struggle against fraud of all kinds by imposing appropriate punishment,
whoever the perpetrators may be." No one seems to be protected.

Siby Faye is actually the official physical therapist of the wife of the President
and is a friend of the family. He is, moreover, the right-hand man and spokesnan
of the caliph of a Tidjania subbrotherhood. When one knows the strength and im-
portance of Senegalese Muslim Brotherhoods, one better understands this thought:
"It had to be done! Abdou does not lack courage."

Some newly rich men must not feel very well at the beginning of this year. It is
not that corruption is more widespread in Senegal than elsewhere; it is rather
less so. as a matter of fact. The difference is that today the government is mak-
ing it a fundamental problem against which it is determined to struggle, and do it
quietly and legally. "here are they headed? In Africa one usually witnesses this
type of operation after each coup d'etat. The newcomers accuse their predecessors
of having filled their pockets, empty their bank accounts, and shoot or imprison
them. One has seen it in Ghana, Liberia, and in Nigeria after the Biafra war.

In Zaire, embezzlement of funds was for a time subject to the death penalty.

It is also true of countries where discretion is the norm. It is arranged within
the family. In Senegal, too, they gladly kept their eyes closed. Theperpetrators

3h
roe omcm. use ONLY
of the embezzlements in the National Office of Trade in Agricultural Products,
ONCTAD, that were "uncovered" in 1979 have not been severely punished, and no em-
bezzler has ever felt threatened.

There is no coup d'etat in sight, and therefore no bloody purge on the horizon and
no really repressive law. The Senegalese embezzler had been a happy man. The ar-
rival of Abdou Diouf spoiled the game. In 1 year the government, under his stimu-
lus, has set up the structures necessary to suppress illicit enrichment and ember-
zlement. But some people reproach him for not moving fast or firmly enough, and
for not using the instruments which he has created. The reproach is only half
justified. One of the main keys to the personality of Abdou Diouf, like that of
his prime minister, is incontestably his discretion. Discretion, but firmness.
The year 1982 may well contain some surprises, for once the first stage has been
broached, President Diouf will have to confirm his action or risk appearing to
have engaged in deception.

This is not easy, for precisely in the field of the struggle against corruption
he will have to--he has to now--attack man who gravitate around power and who are
even its barons. This economic and moral battle is actually accompanied by a
parallel political battle. By striking hard, Abdou Diouf risks causing damage
within his party which could hurt him in a presidential election year.

On the other hand, it is difficult for him not to act: corruption is a scourge
which undermines institutions and enfeebles an already sick economy. As a chief
of state determined to restore the situation in his country, Abdou Diouf can only
make it his own problem. The struggle against corruption is his fight. a long
and difficult fight which no African chief of state has attempted in similar con-
ditions. Abdou Diouf is walking a tightrope, and this without doubt is the reason
why he is advancing slawly. But surely.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

6108
C80: 6719/678

35
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

WU

mus. SHIBGALBSB COIWEDBRATIOII 8!!!! FOR SW“
Paris 3m: AFRIQUB in French No 1102 17 Feb 82 pp 28, 29

[Article by Sylviane Kanara: "The Free Union")

[Excerpts] It was expected for 1 January, but it was finally on 1 February 1982
that the Seneganbian Confederation was born.

The Senegalese have never valued it. Galbia, they say. is Senegal, and the crea-
tion of the confederation see-s to then to be a matter of course. The first to
rejoice about it are without doubt the Casansncians. cut off from the rest of the
country by Ganbia and forced to undergo vezations and insults inflicted upon then
by custom officials, police, or ordinary citizens every tine they nade the ferry
crossing-u-the Gaabians have always refused to build a bridge over the Galbia River.
"They‘re going to have to respect us now," they say.

0n the other hand, some businessnen and all the saugglers are sad, for the Sene—
galese Government has not concealed the fact that the first problem which the con-
federation should attack is contraband (JEWE AFRIQUB No 1081). But the contra-
band sale in Senegal of products inported in excess of Gambia provides a living
for any small and large businessmen. Worse yet, the Gambian state derives two-
thirds of its revenues from the inort duties it levies on nerchandise with which
it floods Senegal. 0n the other hand, some Senegalese peasants, businessmen, and
religious leaders find it more advantageous to go sell their crops in Gambia,
while subsidies, fertilizer, and so forth have been provided to then by the Sene-
galese state. The letter must, with the help of its Gambian "half," find a means
of putting an end to this vast less. But in defending itself, Senegal risks weak-
ening its partner and cauld in this case feel obliged, while waiting for the re-
covery of the economic situation it Gambia, to sake good the difference. Can it
permit itself to do this? "hat is certain is that patience is the main requisite

for success .

The difficulties do not derive from the econouy alone. while an immense majority
of Senegalese favor the confederation. it is otherwise with the Gambians. Its
opponents fall into two categories: those who are against the principle itself
in the naae of nationalism, and those who criticize the procedure.

Like all the nongovernmental Senegalese parties, the Serbian opposition represent-
ed in the Assembly wanted, without jeopardizing the principle. for the plan to be
submitted to a referendum beforehand. It is difficult to guess the result. This

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJA1.US£‘DNLV

is doubtless why parliament opted for a vote. As a diplomat explained it: "His-
torically. economically, culturally, and socially, the union is indispensable.
Has it necessary to try to bring it about immediately, or to wait while knowing
all the while that there were risks of instability?"

As evidence of its desire not to plunder its neighboring country, Senegal accept-
ed that the Parliament of the Confederation would consist one-third of Gambian
deputies and two-thirds of Senegalese. This in no way reflects the numerical
disproportion which exists between the two populations: 10 to 1. “her will con-
federation bring to the Gambians? Political stability and security. Also, per-
haps a greater democracy, which shoulo benefit the 13 man condemned to death for
the unsuccessful coup in July: their sentences could be commuted to life imprison-
ment. The harnessing of the Gambia River, the developmentofagricultursl research,
and tourism, thanks to Senegalese aid. are also positive points.

It remains to be seen what the future of the confederation will be. There is no
lack of examples of failures. But successes also exist. Tanganyika and Zanzibar
became the Republic of Tanzania in 1960. Hhile relations between Dar-es-Salaam
and Zanzibar have sometimes been tense, the union has nevertheless never been
jeopardized. Nor [has] that of the United Arab Emirates, which have been living
together since 1971. The Cameroon experience is also interesting. The federation
of an English-speaking part of Cameroon with its French-speaking neighbor in 1961
gave birth, after a referendun in 1972. to the United Republic of Cameroon. As is
the case with Senegambia, the two sides officially have different languages.
French and English, but the people actually speak the same languages: Holof and
Handing, in the case of Senegambia. The Cameroonian federation has evolved toward
a unitary state; the Tanzanian union does not exclude internal autonomy for each
party. Although the future of Senegambia also appears to be under happy auspices.
one should note the caution shown by the two partners. Gambia, with its own na-
tional anthem and flag, still exists in the UN and the can, as does a sovereign

Senegal. Provided that realism remains in force, the confederation will probably
become a federation. This at least is what they intend in Dakar. Furthermore,
they do not hide the fact that a union "in which the particular characteristics
of each shall be respected" remains the final goal. This will be the first time
in continental Africa that two sovereign states-Bnglish-speaking Cameroon had a
choice only between federation with Cameroon or with Nigeria-will have reached

a comnon agreement to erase the absurd frontiers inherited from the colonial

period.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique cauma 1981

6108
CSO: 5719/678

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MGM.“

BRIEFS

PPP CANDIDATES—unjul, 13 Apr (mm—Mia's ruling People's Progressive
Psrty (PP?) is fielding csndidstes in all of the West Afrim country's 35
constituencies in forthconing general elections. officials said todsy. As
csndidete lists closed lest night for the thy b and 5 elections, the PPP had
put up 35 candidates, three of then unopposed, the National Convention Party
(NC?) 19 end the United Psrty three. 'naere etc also 16 independent candidstes.
The PPP currently hes 30 of the 35 parlia-ntary seets with the BC? holding
the rest. Presidential elections ere due to be held at the sane tine, pitting
President Duds Jesters sgsinst NC? leader Sheri! Dibs, currently on trial for
his alleged role in a failed caup lut July which 9‘. crushed by troops tron

neighbouring Senegal. [Text] “3131321 London m in English 1068 an
13 Apr 82]

080: MOO/1093

38
mm omcm. use on!
BRIBPS

ELECTIONS DEATHS, INJURIES-Freetown. 12 Apr (Wink-Several people were
injured and some nay have died in clashes in Sierra Leone during recent voting
for candidates for forthcoming one-party elections, according to political
sources. They said 19 people were hurt lat Friday when supporters of rival
candidates clashed in the renote northern constituency of Koinadugu East, add-
ing that unconfirmed reports of deaths and further violence in the ncsth

had reached Freetown. Supporters of loinadugu's current representative, whened
Mara, said those of challenger Shehu Sesay attacked then with nachetes.. iron
hers and sticks. An unspecified mater of people were injured by knives, sticks
and stones in Freetown West One constituency where the son of President Siakn
Stevens, Alex, 1': challenging incdent Sylvamn lasers. the scurces said. Re-
sults of prinary elections held between April 6 and 11, are due tomorrow.

and general elections are due on April 29 and I), the ‘Tirst since Sierra Leone
bees-e s one-party state under the All People’s Congress in 1978. [Text]
[0121032 London mum in English 1015 an 12 Apr 82]

050: 6 700/1095

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

summon

m 001.0 ME TO 32 mm
"1151653 London m FINANCIAL TIMES in mm 15 Apr 82 p 6
[David Harsh report: "South Africa To Sell Rae Gold Bar")

[Text] South Africa. the world's principal gold producer, is about to follow
the ample of the Soviet union, its nain bullion trading rival, by introduc-
ing s super-high quality gold bar into its narkating range.

The new bar-of 99.99 per cent purity cowared with the standard South African
ingot of 99.5 per cent-will be introduced neinly to nest heavy dennd for
high-quality gold fro- Par But narkats.

The Soviet Ihion nanufactures 99.99 per cent bars as part of its nornal refin-
ing process. The Rmsian product is prized particularly by the jewellery and
electronics industry in Japan, which has energad as the single biggest buyer
of gold on the international narket over the past year.

The South African innovation was announced in parlianent by Mr Oven Borwood,
the finance ninister. he said the South African Chainr of lines would sell
overseas this manner standard ‘00 once bars with 99.99 per cent purity.

The chuter will also narket snaller one-kilo'gold bars with the higher purity.

The new bars will be produced at the hand refinery in Johannesburg, with nsrket-
ing probably starting in July.

One-kilo bars are proving especially populsr at the nonent in Far Intern
centres like Indonesia and Japan. where banks have just started to sell bullion
over the counter. Bullion dealers in London report a lengthy weiting list for
orders to consign snell bars to the Par East. It is this gap in supplies
which South Africa will be trying to plug.

The Soviet Union, too. for acne tine has been considering producing one-kilo
bars for sale in the Tar and Middle last.

me world's two nain producers clein never to have contact in bullion narket-
ing. But they are-following broadly sinilar policies in trying to diversify
sales.

ho
roe omcm. use onur
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

South Africa has already bean successful in sprsading sales nay fro. stand-
ard gold bars. 111. Chainr of mass has just announced int-ma (Island for

Kruprrand coins, which March sales of 665335 ounces, the Indus: monthly
figure for two years. [As publishsd]

comm: Th: ﬁnancial Tins. United. 1982
080: 6700/1095

hl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (II-110M. USE ONLY

mm W manna USD ‘10 m sums
Pail ANGIE-1813 in Reach lo 259, 15-28 In!) 82 p ‘5
[Articles ”hire 4 lepreneion Gonetently Stating Up Agein"]

[Text] The Univereity of Kineheee end the llotionel teecher-trnining
Inetitnte (m) hove been cloeed until further notice. the ”ringleedere'
hove been drefted into the erny for "reedneetion," end net of the other
etodente hm been eent beck to thei: honee. theee ere the retelietory
neeeuree, now becone etenderd prectice in Hobntu'e kingdoe, with which the
Zeirien Goveruent bee reeponded to the etudent protect which tiered up
once note in Jennery.

According to Stete Co-ieeioner (Kinietc) for Intonetion tende
ntenbnlete, theee Dreeonien neeenree ere jmtitied by ”the chencter of
the novaent, which ie definitely contirned to be eubveceive. end the
neceeeity of ninteining order end diecipline." however, the and o! the
etrike eterted by the etndente-e etrilne which leeted 2 weeke before the
Dreconien eenctione fell the night of 31 Jenuery-l tebtuery—wee to eupport
mm for beeic neteriel neede. end, in pertiuder. to proteet egeinet
the «out for etndent grente, coneidered ridicnlmely Low.

In the £eoe of eilence on the pert o! the enthoritiee, the m wee
ecoonpenied by etreet d-onntretione'end by ontborete of eoger—enger
turned egeinet en increeeingly deteeted regine. It we going too fer.
not when you ete ecqneinted with the expeditious nethode of liobntu
”justice," yon night well feet the woret for the victine o! the neeeuree
of erreet end o£ "conectiption" into the any.

However. one conclueion ie elreedy .erging. It ie pointlene to uee the
noet «true nethode of repreeeion to try to etifle the voice of e
populetion. Drenetic blowe cen be etrnck, but efter e few weeke or
nonthe of ”c-etery" cell, protest once egein reeppenre right where the
proteet novaent hed been noet eevegely deeepiteted end wiped out. nun,
one res-here the eighty love-onto of etrnggle in 1980-1981 which hed
eheken Zeirien univereitiee end higher inetitnteo. following thoee
outbreeke. the higher edneetion eetebliot-ente hed been cloeed tot eeverel
nonthe, the entire lendecehip of the only etndat union bed been r-oved,
e greet umber o£ proteeeore end etndente bed been erreeted. end othere
hed elrendy been dreited into the ezny. Ten of young people bed "choeen"
the peth of exile to flee the amnion.

1:2
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
l-‘Ol OPHCIAL USE ONLY

Afewnonthe later. howwer, werythingbetertingnpepin, aehee jnet
been eeen, even though nothing in the govern-ent'e intention or nethode
haechenged. Onthecontrary. theetndent etrikeheetakenplnceina
eocial and political context nerked by the continuation if not inteneifi-
cation of what ie circunapettly called violation of huan righta. And the
noet dreadful newe continue to croee the bordere. evading the tight
vigilance of the Zeirian police. More and nore. theee daye, the Zairian
police are heavily eeconded by Ieraeli agente, w‘ooee encience in the

area of repreeeive "tracking down" in well known. 111m. the bodiee of e1:
yomg people arreeted at Wire in Kivn on 17 March 1981, including Satin
and Shindano, were found a ehort tine later in Lake Tanganyika. They had
been ahot in the head and killed by the regine‘e policnen. In Hay. lanetin
Kinnlm and hincent Variwani, n-bere of the underground INC-L (Congoleee
Netionel Hovaent-Lu-nbe wing), enffered a einiler fate. But before they
were killed. their teeth had been broken, they had been whipped with a cable,
and they had been tortured with electric ehocke.

note recently. five etudente at the higher Inetitnte for Applied Technoloc
—Bongo, Ingindu, Lubaki. Mo, end micro-me ehot down in the buildinge
of the Nationel Police (can) [expaoeion unknown]. but 27 October thoae
aane m1 eervicee proceeded to carry off Hoeobda Mack, the traditional
grand chieftain of the Ketango, in Hake-b0. There has been no newe of

hin aince. ‘. inally. in January the arreet of a nilitant Ian-be follower
wee announced, nongo Paul, ”picked up" at hie hone hy Nobutn police.

Nobody knowe where he wee taken.

Theae are only e few unplu, but they are eutficient for thoea promoting
the African Charter of the Iighte of lhn and of Natione, adopted uneninonely
last June in Kairobi, to etart getting npaet in concrete terne about what

in happening in Hobutu'e kingdom
COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afriqne-Aaie

9631
080: #719/616

143
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SUGAR m SEEKS VEHICLES, W '08. mm
Patio W ‘30le 31' mm in French In 1892, 11 Feb 82 p ‘05
[Artielez "Sugar Induetry: Supply of Vehiclea and Mt for bilu-llgongo"]

[Test] In the content of the SDI. [Special braving lighta] 20.2 nillion
(approxinately $24 nillion) granted to Zaire by the International Develop-ant
Aeeocietion (IDA, a World Bank affiliate) to finance the renovation of the

brilu-Ngongo Sugar Conany and inoreaee ite capacity, that coqany propoeee

to acquire the folloving equip-eat (26 oonaignante): I) 10 nan e11-
eurface truoke. 5 «If-propelled firefighting vehiolee (eogarcane fielde),

I «If-propelled firefighting vehicle (induetrial buildingn); 2) 3 four-
axle dieeel looonotim. .60-neter gage. approximtely 250 boreepover;

3) 1 forklift truck; 6) 5 day trucke: S) 7 12.5-kilovolt-elpere generator
unite and 1 eo-kilovolt alpaca generator unit: 6) S velding note: 7) 2 high-
preeeure cleaning apparatueee for cleaning naehinee and engines: 8) 1 chain
preee; 9) 1 cylinder boring naehine and 1 cylinder glaring “chine; 10) l
teat bed for injection mag, 11) 1 univereal grinding nechinee: 12) 1 valve
cutter and equip-ant for grinding valve eeatinge; l3) 2 lubrication
etatione for garage purpoeee; 1‘) nachine toola for eteel vork: l elide lathe
1.5 aetere between centere, l elide lathe 1.5 netere between eentare able to
make eucceaaive cute, 1 (variable) capeten lathe. and 1 vertical turning nill;
15) hydraulic preaa equipent; 16) l lathe for grinding anger refinery
cylindera; 17) 1 univereal nilling naohine; 18) 1 conputer; 19) equip-ant
for office coupler air-conditioning; 20) water eupply equipnent; 21) equip-
nent for renovation of evaporation operation (eteel. tubing, etean and
vacuu- valvee); 22) equip-ant for renovation of boilere (varioue pipee and
coile of tubing, fireproof b'riche); 23) equip-ant for carbon dioxide plant:
1 freon unit, 1 unit for atoring and veighing liquid carbon dioxide. 1 pup
for carbon dioxide «rubbing; and 24) varioue garage equip-ant: a preeeing
nachine for vulcanieation, a tire renoval apparetue. a wheel balaneer. The
equip-eat not originate in an IDA n-ber country or switaerland.

Biddere intereeted in thin invitation to tender can obtain epeeiel ecbedule
003-81-c.8. in return for paynent of 150 aairee or 1.000 lelgian franca to

the following addreaeee: 1) Cowagnia eneriere de nilu-lgongo [nun-limp
Sugar Conpany], 1963, avenue de I‘Induetrie, I? 8816, Iinebaea (Zaire); 2)

Conpagnie eucriare de Mlu-Ngongo, c/o 8ogeeucre [General Sugnr Conany].
13, rue de Irederode, 1000 brunellee [brueeele] (belgiun). Deadline for

delivery of bide : 12 March 1982.

comm: Rene wreur at Ole Parie 1982

9631 M
cm‘ ”19"“ roe 0mm use ONLY
POIOFFICHLUSEONLY

MDEAAID—Isouthbscuhat 1981 umwazsz)npomudmmccha
Auhlnkforuricaammmm nguntdalosaot
$10 simian to Zairs for financing of a prujsct to dsvalop and Iodsruiss
river and rail transportation namrks. This loan is rada-hla in 10
yaars, including a 34m: uses period. and it carrias an annual. iatarast
rats of 8 want. mu neatly put out a rslsass stating that tha
projact, finned as dascrihad shovs, can within tha franc-tori: of the
tivs-yaar plan for iumtasnts in tha transportation and co-mitations
sector. tha projact's goal is to inprovs tha railroad infrastructura
and its links“ to river ports. which should pravida for a batter flow
of uports and particularly for patting coppar out. It should ha pointsd
out that with this spas-ant. tha total mu conic-ant in Zaira goes
up to $36.8 aillion. Zairs has alraady banafitad In. tvo of ths bank's
assistants atforts: $10 union for a water supply projsct, and $4.6
1111101: for an oil pal.- cultivation projsct. Pro- 1973 up to tha and of
the first half of 1981, Arab assistants contributed to Zaira has raachad
3‘46.‘ Iillion. Eighty parcant of that may as givan on libaral tar-s.
[Tut] [Paris mans mum 81' mtmumts in Ranch no 1892.

12 tab 82 p 605] (comm: Rana lbraux at Cis Paris 1982] 9631

0808 6719/6110 END

1:5
FOIOFHCIALllSEONLY