FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10317
10 February 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 761

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with_the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAMS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIHATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRs L/1031
10 February

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT
2000 No. 761

CoureuTs

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Impact. on Africa of Monetary Disorder Studied
(MARCHES TROPICAUX 31' “NEWS, 20 NOV 81) 0000000000..

New Secretary General of ACCT Profiled
(318 513ng AMQUE, 23 we 81) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee'eeceeeeo

ACCT 31 th General Conference in Libreville
somie 398813; Jm mm, 23 mo 81)eeeeeeenoeooeeeeoeen

Black Africa's Relations with Israel Exaluned
(Bechir Ben Yahmed; JEUNB AFRIQUB, 23 Dec 81) ..........'.....

Article Urges Lees Talk, More Action
(Siradiou 111.3110; JEUNE AFRIQUB, 16 Dec 81) .................

ANGOLA

Goals for 1981-1985 Agricultural Season Announced
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEUS, 8 Jan 82) .............
SHIN“.

Textile Industry Undergoing Difficult Period
(W TROPICAUX ET mms, a Jan 82) 000.000.000.00

Briefs
New Sudes Secretary General

TWO

Increased Cooperation With Kuwait Anticipated
(mam TROPICAUX ET “ﬁlms, 15 Jan 72) ooooooooooooo

Briefs '
Cooperation With Angola
Oil Production

Cooperation With USSR
Cooperation With Yugoslavia
Cold Processing Plant

my

Briefs
Aid for Mining Industry

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! (HWWCJAL.USIL(HVLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

mmcr on AFRICA or warm msonnta 5mm
Paris meats Inoncaux s‘r mam-remnants in French No 1880, 20 Nov 81 pp 2925-2929

[Text] In our issue of 20 November (pp 2863-2867), we publish an
analysis on the World Bank report devoted to "the accelerated de-
velopment of Sub-Saharan Africa: alongside with comments on that
report contributed by two experts on the prot‘ams of African
development. The question of the African currencies-oovarvalued
according to the Berg report-is rather complex and the follow-
ing article is an attempt to take stock of the situation.

The state of African currencies has long elicited pessimistic remarks because they re-
ceived the full impact of the world economy's slump and of the disequilibrium in for-
eign exchange markets. In recent months, it has been emphasized that they are often
overvalued, thus creating financial burdens for the International honetary Fund (IMF)
which supports them and does not have inexhaustible financial assets.

The fact that these currencies often have inadequate rates of exchange is hardly sur-
prising since international financial institutions have often pointed out in their
reports—-in general terms and without mentioning any country-that the economic im-
balances of many African countries are aggravated by their unrealistic or overvalued
rates of exchange. The esoteric and, for the noninitiated public, obscure nature of
the many documents published by these organizations, their general analyses covering
Africa as a whole and, even more often, lumping all developing countries together,
and the stereotyped nature of the rectification measures advocated, have contributed
to making African monetary problems be deliberately ignored. This is all the more so
since the problems of the industrialized countries are recognized to be complex and
attract a sustained interest because the foreign exchange markets register large move-
ments of their capitals which is not the case for Africa.

A Difficult Evaluation

With monetary anarchy rampant all over the world, every currency has had, at some time
or other, its value and solidity subjected to disappointing and even depreciatory eval-
uations; this is a normal occurrence for currencies of little or even symbolic impor-
tance which are a reflection of economic situations generally viewed as desperate in
some countries and certainly critical for any country which does not produce petroleum.
In these countries, external pressures (deterioration of the terms of exchange. inter-
ests rates and imported inflation) are compounded by the burden of internal restrictions
of a geographic, economic and even military nature.

1
FOR 0F?1C1Al.USEtDNLY
DUI UPIILIAI. UDI’. VOLI

In any case, establishing the value of a currency lends itself to controversy; the
exact value of a currency can certainly be determined in the foreign exchange markets
but there are so many speculative transactions that the rates quoted only apply for

a short while and do not take into account long tern prospects.

The unreliable factors affecting the currencies of industrial countries are even
stronger in the case of African currencies. There is no official open foreign ex-
change market which determines the volume of the various currencies being sought and
offered in exchange for others and statistic figures, rapidly and constantly avail-
able for a specific currency, are scarce.

In fact, the TH? admits that it is difficult to determine the exact effect of the ex—
change rate on the country‘s situation: this is why in its analysis, the TH? gives not
only short term conclusions but also includes long term prospects such as external in-
debtedness and feasibility of development plans.

All this considered, the decision to change an exchange rate is always difficult; even
when the objectives pursued are clear and realistic, the choice of sectorial measures
required to meet these objectives is a political matter and, therefore, subject to sany
contradictory pressures. Finally, the timing of that adjustment is also very impqrtant
because what might be opportune from a technical viewpoint is not always opportune from
a political viewpoint.

As for passing judgements on the African currencies, one must proceed with moderation
and caution because in the absence of foreign exchanges one cannot rely on the rates
quoted for bills on the free markets of Switzerland, Beirut (before 1975) and in other.
markets. The IMF itself only publishes, on a regular basis, the rates of the South
African rand (only African currency quoted in the London market), the Libyan dinar

and the Nigerian naira giving their par value in SDRi (special drawing rights).

It is only by reading press reports and, more particularly, the le's analyses that
one can get some idea of the position of most of these currencies. For instance, the
international organizations mention, among other things, "the advisability of followb
ing a flexible policy on rates of exchange" in general or for a given country, or the
desrrability "of reforming the regulations applying to foreign exchanges," or else
the effects of "policies resulting in inadequate rates of exchange." But they do not
publish accurate information on the issues and some people deplore that omission.

Through its studies, the 1H? has the task of "monitoring the foreign exchange policies"
of its member countries. The IMF does this on a regular basis through its missions for
consultation. When the situation requires it, additional consultations take place but,
as already noted, these consultations must be approached "with the greatest caution

and display of discretionﬂ'

The IMF also provides financial assistance to countries which are facing or are likely
to face external payments difficulties. This form of assistance consists in allowing
applicant countries to buy "special drawing rights, sun's." or rather their equiva-
lent value in foreign currencies, with their own currencies to meet problems need
immediate solutions or critical situations likely to become dangerous on a short and
medium term and which require the ﬁlmediate implementation of a recovery progras, or
else. to help implement programs of economic and financial stabilization spread over
a 3 year period. The repayment of this assistance is made with the SDR's being

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

repurchased by the fund. The volume of these operations has greatly expanded since

1979 and press reports regarding these operations help to make an undoubtedly cursory
assessment of the difficulties confronting many African currencies.

African Currencies

Independence led each African state to adopt its own currency; the result is a collec-
tion of 51 currencies (not counting the French franc of Reunion), some more important
than others, and 49 of which are registered with the IMP. 0n the whole, these cur-
rencies are not convertible and after the fixed par values were abandoned on 1 April
1978, they do not have a common denominator linking then except for the currencies

of countries in the franc zone. Many of them are linked to a currency, to the SDR's
or to a basket of currencies. Based on the data released on 30 June 1981 by the IMF,
the currencies of African countries can be classified into several groups (the most
recent name of the currency is given in parentheses):

Nine countries with currencies linked to the U.S. dollar: Burundi (Burundian franc).
Djibouti (Djibouti franc), Egypt (Egyptian pound), Ethiopia (birr). Liberia (dollar),

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (Libyab diner), Rwanda (Rwandan franc), Somalia (Somali shil-
ling), Sudan (Sudanese pound). ‘

Ten countries with currencies linked to the SDR's: Guinea (syli), Guinea-Bissau (peso),
Kenya (Kenyan shilling), Malawi (kwacha), Mauritius (Mauritian rupee), Seychelles

(Seychelles rupee). Sao Tome and Principe (dobra). Sierra Leone (leone), Zaire (zaire),
Zambia (kwacha).

Seven currencies linked to a basket of currencies other than the SDR's: Algeria
(Algerian diner), Botswana (pula), Cape Verde (Cape Verdian escudo), Islanic Republic
of Mauritania (ouguiya), Tanzania (Tanzanian shilling), Tunisia (Tunisian diner),
Zimbabwe (Zimbabwean dollar linked to the U.S. dollar before April 1980).

Two currencies linked to the South African rand: Lesotho (maloti), Swaziland
(lilangeni).

One currency linked to the pound sterling: Gambia (dalasi). (The Seychelles rupee
was also linked to the pound sterling before December 1979).

One currency linked to the Spanish peseta: Equatorial Guinea (ekuele).

In the case of Nigeria (naira) and Uganda (Ugandan shilling), on 1 July this year the
IMF had no information on rates and system of exchange.

Three currencies are independently floating or have adjustable exchange rates based
on indicators: the Republic of South Africa (rand), Ghana (cedi), Morocco (dirham).

Thirteen countries are members of the franc zone. Six of then belong to the West-
African Monetary Union as a result of a treaty signed: Senegal, the Ivory Coast,

Upper Volta. Togo. Benin (formerly Dahomey) and Niger. Five countries of central.
Africa have signed an agreement on monetary cooperation: Cameroon, Gabon, Congo, the
Central African Republic and Chad. Mali and the Federal Islamic Republic of the
Comoros are also in this group. The various national currencies issued by four issu-
ing institutes are the CPA franc for west and central African countries, the Mali franc
and the Comorian franc.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM 0”“.th USE ONLY

The franc or the Republic of Madagascar, with an exchange rate based on the French
franc, is simply linked to that franc by the IHP.

Finally, the currencies of Angola (tutors) and Hozanbique (metical) are not quoted by
the I“? because those countries are not menbers of that organization.

Of these 51 countries just mentioned, 21 are included in the category of "less de-
veloped countries" and 6 others have also requested to be classified as such.

On 30 June 1981, some countries had a multiple exchange rate system or a system of
dual exchange market: the Republic of South Africa, Algeria, Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Equatorial Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Mauritius, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Zaire. These
systems which are comon practice among industrialized countries, are merely tolerated
by the IMF because they are preferable to rigid and inadequate rates of exchange.

Barring some error or omission, the following countries have nade changes in the par
value of their currencies with the IHF's approval:

--Sudan: June 1978 and September 1979.

--Chana: July 1978. 1
-Tanzania: January 1979.

--2aire: January 1979, August 1979, February 1980, June 1981 (-40 percent).
--Botswana: September 1979.

--Hauritius: October 1979 and 28 September 1981 (-20 percent).

--Kenya: January 1981 (-S.07 percent), 19 September 1981 (a total of -15 percent).
--Uganda: devaluation (12 June 1981); flotation (26 June).

Therefore, there have not been too many adjustments of exchange rates in Africa and
there is no evidence that those which took place over a certain period of tine brought
any advantage except in the case of Botswana where diamond mining was developed. 0n
the other hand. the advantages of devaluation for export operations in the other coun-
tries were curtailed by the decline of prices for coffee, cocoa and sugar and by the
higher cost of imported goods, mainly foodstuffs and petroleua products.

System of the Franc Zone Countries

The franc zone countries have a special monetary system the main feature of which is
that the convertibility of their currencies is guaranteed by France and this gives
them the same stability as the French franc.

1n the case of the Heat African group, France signed on 4 December 1973 a cooperation
agreenent with meaber countries of the Heat African Monetary Union created by the
treaty of 16 October 1973. whenever necessary, the French Republic gives its
"assistance" to allow that union to "ensure the free convertibility of its currency."

1n central Africa, the agreement on monetary cooperation signed on 23 November 1972,
between France and nember states of the Bank of Central African States (asac). stipu-
lates that this cooperation is based on the former providing "unlimited backing" for
the currency issued by the bank and on the aenber states "depositing all or part of
their foreign exchange reserves with the French treasury."

This guarantee of convertibility, as well as that extended to the Republic of Mali
and to the Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros, operate by means of trading accounts

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which the French treasury opens for use by the issuing central banks and where their
respective transfer operations are recorded. A guaranteed exchange rate applies to
the credit balance of each trading account should there be a change in the par value
of the French franc.

The current par value of the various African francs in French francs is:

1 CFA (African Financial Community) franc or 1 CFA (Financial Cooperation in Central
Africa) franc - 0.02 French franc.

l Coaorian franc - 0.02 French franc.

l Malian franc - 0.01 French franc.

Since 1976, when the issuing system of west and central Africa was reorganized, the
authorities concerned have agreed to follow France's policy on exchange rates Iain-
taining the aforesaid par values of their currencies after each devaluation.

IMF Assistance

Until 1976, the assistance given by the IMF consisted in being able to use SDR's Iade
available to each state within the linits of the credit blocks allocated to than pn
the basis of the "subscription quotas" paid into the fund when they become a somber
of the fund or when the fund's Articles of Agree-ent are revised. As already pointed
out, the member states purchase SDR's or their equivalent in foreign currencies;

they pay interest to the IMF on this kind of loan and cancel their debts by trans—
ferring SDR's or convertible currencies to the fund; at that point, the member state
recovers its national currency and is again entitled to purchase nore SDR'a if the
need arises.

Two aethods of assistance have been in use over a long period of tine:

Standby Arrangements (SBA) which are the credit blocks originally allocated and repre-
sent, in fact, overdraft facilities.

The Conpensatory Financing Facility (CFF) which offers the possibility of applying for
additional drawings to help during a temporary decline in export earnings.

African states have made moderate use of these facilities.

After the oil shock, an Oil Facility was set up between 1976 and 1975 to help 011
importing countries facing considerably heavier energy bills. These countries borrowed
SDR 464 million; later on, a discount fund was established to ease their debt (interest
discounts).

In May 1976, profits from the sale of gold held by the IMF were used to establish a
"Trust Fund" offering loans to countries with a per capita annual income of less than
SDR 300 for periods of between 6 and 10 years and at interest rates equal to the ex-
penses incurred (0.5 percent). As a natter of fact, with the exception of Libya,
Nigeria, Gabon, Botswana and Tunisia, all the other African countries drew from that
fund a total of BDR 943 million between 1 July 1976 and 31 March 1981 which is the
date when the last drawing ended. The top recipients were Egypt, Zaire and Morocco
in that order.

5
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
IV“ Ul‘flklhla WI. Ul‘l—l

In 1977, the Compensatory Financing Facility relaxed the conditions under which coun-
tries exporting co-odities would have access to that facility and. in 1978, the

3-5 year repayment period was extended to a 5-7 year period. The applicant country
must agree to cooperate with the IMF to find a solution to its balance of payment
difficulties. The decline in estimated exports caused by falling prices (iron in the
case of Liberia and Mauritania; coffee in Ethiopia, Liberia, Burundi, Uganda, Mada-
gascar), or by poor harvests (sugar in Mauritius; peanuts in Senegal, Gambia,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali; cocoa in Equatorial Guinea; various products in Tanzania) are
the factors used to determine whether a request is justified or not. This facility
is of a precautionary nature and does not necessarily have to be used. In September
1981, the Ivory Coast was given the option to purchase SDR 114 million in view of

an estinated foreign trade deficit for 1981 due to declining cocoa and coffee prices
(this was obviously the case for its export quota based on the international agreement).

After being used a great deal between 1976 and 1978. this facility was not involved in
many operations in 1979 but after 1980 the volume of its activity has increased

again. In May 1981, it started giving aid to member countries "with balance of pay-
ments difficulties resulting from the additional cost of their grain imports." mlawi
was the first country to make use of this form of assistance (on 17 September this
year it was allowed to purchase SDR 12 million).

Since 1979, conditions have substantially deteriorated in countries not so much due to
temporary deficits in their balance of payments as to structural disequilibrium com-
bined with a decline of the prices of raw tutorials and the second oil shock; they have
had dogged inflation, budget deficits aggravated by poor harvests, an accelerated in-
crease of the external debt, a proliferation of public organizations operating at a

deficit, price policies which are bad for agriculture, a frantic urban development
and so on.

To increase its aid effort, the IMF was forced to expand its resources, which it did
in 1979 by borrowing from the central banks (including 808 220 million from the Cen-
tral Bank of Nigeria), and again at the end of 1990 when it increased its subscription
quotas by 50 percent. then, finally, in 1981 through arranguents to borrow made with
the Bank for International Settlements and with the major industrialized countries.

This constant effort on the part of the international financial cornunity has nde it
possible for the IMF to considerably increase its assistance to countries which are
more seriously hit by the crisis and where prolonged and restricting measures were
required over a period of several years to achieve an economic recovery. But the
increase in the number of recipient states and the heavier burden imposed by this aid
on the fund's resources is offset by the fact that the applicant countries lust adopt

a program known as a stabilization program or program of economic and financial adjust-
ment. This gave shape to the gradually well defined notion of "conditionality," a
rather uncouth word now constantly in use by fund's officials.

Conditionality is criticized by applicant countries when it becomes too strict as is
obviously the case when recomendat ions are made involving the exchange rate, a
measure which could result in accelerated increases of consumer good prices. This
conditionality has different aspects depending on whether the decision to give
assistance consists in a standby arrangement or in an extended arrangement, or more
precisely, an arrangement involving the use of an Extended Fund Facility (EFF). In
the latter case, the country is given the option to purchase SDR's over a period of
3 years with specific dates of payment corresponding to the various stages of the

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -

recovery program undertaken by the recipient country. The IMF explains (in its bulle-
tin of May 1981) that there must be a “detailed list of the policies and measures
planned for the first 12 months and for subsequent 12-month periods." In the first
case (standby arrangement), the applicant state only needs "to produce firm proof

of its efforts to overcome its payments difficulties within a 1-year period."

Since the assistance given under these conditions over the last 3 years has been well
publicised, one can appreciate the frail nature of the economies of many African states
and the monetary difficulties which result from this. Addressing the UN Economic

and Social Council, on 3 July this year, the director of the IMP noted that "three
fourths of the fund's current lending cmitments involve progress of economic re-
covery compared to one fourth a few years ago."

Standby Arrange-ants and Extended Fund Facility

These two methods of assistance are becoming more widespread and their study shows how
serious the situation is for Africa.

(1) Standby Arrangements (standby credita)--0n 31 December 1978, the account books of
the IMF showed four countries under the chapter of standby arrangements: Gabon, Kenya
(later cancelled), Mauritius and chiefly Zambia (250 million of partially used SDR's).
Now, just in Africa, it has standby arrang-ents with the following countries (figures
given in mil-lion SDR's):

In 1979: Kenya (122.48, not used); Zaire (118), eritius (73.03, partially used),
Ghana (53), Malawi (26.3, partially used), Sierra Leone (17), Togo (15), Senegal
(10.5), Gambia (1.6), People's Republic of the Congo and Rwanda (not used).

In 1980: ‘.<enya (in October, 201.5), Tanzania (179.6 of which only 15 were used),
Liberia (65 of which 32 were used), Madagascar (54.65 not used), Malawi (69.88 of
which 22 were used), Mauritius (35 of which 30 were used), Mauritania (29.7 of which
8.9 were used), Uganda (12.5), Somalia (11.5 of which 6 were used), Equatorial mines
(5.5 of which 2.5 were used).

In 1981: Uganda (112.5), Madagascar (109.6), Ethiopia (67.5), Togo (107.5), Sudan
(1.5.7), Somalia (63.13), Zimbabwe (37.5), Senegal (63), Liberia (55), Mauritania (25.8),
Central African Republic (10.6).

The list includes some countries which have adjusted their exchange rates: Kenya and
Uganda adjusted them in 1981 while Tanzania seems to be having problems in its nego-
tiations with the IMF; finally, in Zaire, a flexible exchange rate policy was part of
the stabilization program which that country agreed to implement in August 1979.

All these standby arrangements allow the countries to purchase SDR's over a period of

1 or 2 years. The length of the period depends on the country's ability to introduce
more or less substantial stabilization programs. In 1980, the arrangements were for

2 year periods except in the case of Equatorial Guinea and Somalia. In 1981, the
arrangements announced on 1 October were for 1 year except on the case of Togo (2 years).
Ethiopia (1’. months) and Uganda (13 months).

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI UfI'ILIAL USE W‘Ll

Whenever just ified, these arrangements can be supplemented by purchases under com-
pensatory financing arrangements: this was done in the cases of Uganda, Senegal and
Ethiopia. The case of Senegal shows the IHP's flexibility when it decides to grant
assistance.*

A communique issued by the m? on 16 September 1981 stated that it had approved a
standby arrangement allowing the Senegalese Government to make purchases up to the
equivalent of SDR 63 million until 30 June 1982 on the beds of a stabilization pro-
gram carried out by that government. In 1980. a "medim term program of structural _
adjustment" was adopted by that country where the economic situation had been deterior-
ating since 1978. The results of the 1st year of that program were less satisfactory
than expected due to bad weather conditions. "As a first step in the implementation
of the medium term program" the authorities decided to introduce a "short term stabil-
ization program" aiaed at reducing the balance of payments deficit. This program was
backed by the aforesaid standby arrangement and the extended arrangement made in 1980
has been cancelled. Measures were adopted "to improve and expand the revenue base,"
to "limit the growth of the nominal value of ordinary expenditures," to "reduce the
budget deficit" and “to direct investments toward directly productive projects."

It must be pointed out that one of the conditions was to "set up consolidated accounts
for the transactions of the central administration and to control overdue payments

in the public and quasi public sectors." The Senegalese Government has taken on a
giant task which must be carried out in a rather short period of time.

(2) The assistance given to member states through the "Extended hind Facility" was
first introduced in Africa in 1974 and had only been used in small proportions by
Kenya in July 1974 (with purchases of SDR 5 nillion), by Egypt and Sudan in 1979 and
in 1980 but it was not until 1981 that large amounts were involved as the fund
mobilized additional resources.

This facility is intended to correct structural shortcomings in the balance of pay-
ments. Countries are allowed to make drawings over a period of 3 years and the re-
purchases must be done in 12 equal installments and over a period which varies between
’4 and 10 years after the purchase. This assistance is tied to a 3 year adjustment
program affecting all the economic and financial policies of the applicant state:
agricultural output and prices, retail prices; situation of the industries, even
transportation and opening of isolated areas; investments, foreign loans with recurr-
ing charges and overdue payments; budget policies and particularly the question of
subsidies; proliferation and management of public and quasi public establishments;
regulation of domestic and foreign trade; control over the exchange rate. It is to
be hoped that the problem of the exchange rates will remain confidential.

These arrangements are given quite a wide publicity.

For instance. it was made quite clear that the arrangement made with Gabon on 21 June
1980, involving SDR 34 million, was a precautionary measure and would end on 31 Decem-
ber 1982. After going through a financial crisis in 1977, that country was able to
reduce its internal and external debt and eliminate all its overdue payments. since
the 1980-82 interim plan calls for large investments, the purpose of the credit arrange-
ment is to fill the gap of any foreign trade deficit which may occur.

* Details of the programs are taken from M's comuniques.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the case of Sudan, an arrangement made in hovember 1980, and involving SDR 227
million, came to reinforce the effect of a previous arrangqaent signed in May 1979
involving SDR 200 million of which 75 million were purchased. Therefore, until

5 March 1982, the government of that country will draw or can draw a total of SDR
352 million. On 30 April 1981, large sums were still available. After poor crops
which made inroads in their external resources, that country was in debt due to
"expansionist financial policies" and to a budget deficit. In addition to a program
to fight inflation and cut back on budget expenditures, the country must carry out a
reform of regulations applicable to foreign exchanges and to foreign and domestic
trade. 0n the other hand, the implementation of reforms in the agricultural sector
was slow during the 1st year and the authorities have adopted additional measures to
promote cotton farming while they continue to reform their foreign exchange regula-
tions and to curtail the expansion of credit. This program will soon be completed
and additional funding has been given through a compensatory financing arrang-ent of
$011 65.7 million because cotton exports declined in 1980 (permission to purchase
SDR's was given on 10 April 1981).

In Morocco, the method used was slightly different; an extended arrangement approved
in October 1980 for SDR 810 million was replaced on 9 March 1981 by an arrangement for
the equivalent of SDR 817.05 million valid until October 1983. Despite efforts made
in the framework of a 3 year program, the balance of payments' final figures were
affected by a decline in phosphate exports.

Very special circumstances apply in the case of the Ivory Coast, a country which also
received on 22 February 1981 an extended arrangement to draw SDR 484.5 million valid
for 3 years. It will carry that country through to 1986 when it will no longer need
to import petroleum. A "massive investment program," originally due to be financed
with earnings from higher coffee and cocoa prices, had to be funded with "loans and
by drawing from its reserves" after 1977. Meanwhile, there was a significant increase
in public expenditures which went up by 115 percent between 1977 and 1980. This re-
sulted in balance of payments deficits and in a deficit of the "overall balance of
the public sector." A stabilization program was introduced to "reorganize public
finances," to eliminate the balance of payments deficit by 1983, to reduce the budget
deficit and to cancel out overdue payments.

Since 30 March 1981, Sierra Leone has been the recipient of a less important extended
arrangement which was required to support a medium term program including, among other
things, a 3 year investment plan for mining and hydroelectric projects. This arrange-
ment involves SDR 163.7 mill ion, is valid until 22 February 1986 and supplements a
standby arrangement which had not been able to correct the external payments situa-
tion due to a decline of exports and an increase of food imports.

In Zambia, where the economy has been in bad straights for many years, due to the drop
of copper prices and to export difficult ies, an arrangement to draw $011 800 million is
tied to a 3 year economic and financial program mostly based on modernizing existing
plants and carrying out "proj ects likely to produce returns within a short period of
time." Published on 11 May, this arrangenent is valid for 3 years.

Finally, on 23 June 1981, Zaire was allowed to purchase up to SDR 912 million through
the Extended Fund Facility, in addition to that country's outstanding obligations
with the IMF amounting to 509. 162.2 million. The authorities of that country have
adopted a 3 year program (1981-83) intended to "ease the structural problems of the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H1“ UH'ILIAL USE ONLY

econony while helping to correct the domestic balance and to bring the balance of
payments to a bearable position." After making adjustments in the exchange rate of
their currency and liberalizing some imports, the authorities are now planning “to
introduce a flexible policy of exchange rates."

It is useful to remember that Zaire's currency is practically controlled by the IMF

with a director of the Central Bank placed at the disposal of that country by the fund
on a regular basis.

So far, the amount of assistance given to Africa during 1981 by the IMP under these
extended arrangeaents totals in excess of SDR 2.3 billion.

An Important Contribution Requiring Caution and Pragmatic:

After reading this analysis, which makes no attempt to classify the African states, it
is obvious that the IKP's contributions to the currencies of that area have been very
significant. Apart from the three major oil producing countries and a few others,
Tunisia in particular, the governments who face balance of payments difficulties or
fear that they will have than in the future, have thought it useful to turn to the I'M?
for assistance. When the fund receives their requests, it must demand that these gov-
ernments adopt strict measures which can disturb their political options and their
development projects. This has happened even in the case of countries of the zone
'tanc, at least in certain better off countries and not in the poorer ones, which were
..it by the decline of coffee and cocoa prices, by the drought and by their dynamic
investment policies. The convertibility of their currencies helped them to get the
economy on the right track and allowed than to continue to have an open trade policy
and access to the investment markets.

The IHF's increasing assistance to Africa remains a very special one given the diver-
sity of situations and different degree of development of the countries concerned some
of which are particularly underprivileged from a geographic viewpoint. The variety
of methods available to the fund is particularly suited to the new probl-s con-
fronting that continent.

However, it often happens that prospective recipients of that assistance feel that the
fund is offering them general solutions in the framework of stereotyped programs. The
answer to this lies in the choice of financial factors which can be effectively con-
trolled (volume of domestic credit, foreign assets, foreign debt, position of the pub-
lic treasury, interest rate and so on) and which basically reflect the policy of the
petitioning government. But "the distribution of the burden of the adjustment" re-
quired depends on every aspect of that policy and, more particularly, on the political
and social aspects.

The exchange rate system which "is monitored by the fund" is subject to a careful
study to determine its effect on the entire economy of the country concerned in situ-
ationa where there is a serious disequilibrium in the balance of payments. It is im-
portant to understand the significance which the IMP attaches to exchange rates as
indicated in an article carried by the IMF's bulletin of ll Hay 1981, and devoted to
the adjustment process in Africa, from which we quote a rather obscure passage deal-
ing with the relationship between exchange rates and the policy on production prices
(page 140):

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Rigid exchange policies have often had similar effects (meaning, a stagnation of
production) in several African countries. Many of these countries have overvalued
exchange rates which are linked to articislly low commodity prices and to very strict
restrictions applied to exchange rates and to imports of goods listed as nonessential.
Such policies have a deterrent effect on the production of export commodities and of
substitute products to replace basic imports, particularly food supplies and in-
dustrial raw materials, and they are very bad for the growth of the balance of pay-
nents."

This analysis is obviously applicable only to specific cases which are not identified.
But it is grounds to fear that the fund has a tendency to recon-and monetary adjust-
ments.

The same can be said of the fund's views regarding frequent adjustments of the ex—
change rates since on page 50 of the 1981 Annual Report, it is stated: "As long as

a country is battling with serious difficulties associated to a chronic inflation,

the only realistic solution for that country is to adjust its exchange rate constantly
or at least frequently." lbrtunately, the report immediately mentions the conditions
which must be met if that operation is to be successful: wages which are not indexed,
s not too expansionist monetary policy, an absence of regulations curtailing "the
redistribution of available productive resources."

But none of the African countries really meet these conditions. The report also
acknowledges that a change in the exchange rates of developing countries "does not
occur...without some particularly serious problems arising" and night require the
introduction of "auxiliary measures." This is probably the reason why many precau-
tions are taken in negotiations with African states and why the decision to adjust

the exchange rate is rarely made. As for the practice of having very variable rates

of exchange, used in South America (Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay), in Asia and in Turkey,
it is not certain that this is a good solution for the profound disequilibrium affect-
ing most African countries even if some of their currencies are not convertible.

Generally, the increased value of exports in these countries after a devaluation takes
place is greatly outstripped by the higher cost of imports and the resulting increase
of their foreign debt. The unstable nature of the prices of tropical products is,

in fact, a good enough reason to dismiss any hope of having a stable revaluation.
Finally, as it happens almost everywhere else, the governments have not been able to
avoid subsidizing consumer goods or providing public services at reduced rates. A
devaluation must not have the effect of increasing budget expenditures but the range
of fiscal resources which can be tapped is very limited since most of them originate
from indirect taxation not to mention quasi taxation. Even in the case of politically
solid governments, the options in this sphere are very limited.

In Africa, one must also consider the behavior of what could be called, using a 0.5.
terminology, the "underground" sector of the economy; this is a very important sector
which cannot be easily assessed. It consists of all transactions or operations which
are not officially recorded or included in the statistics. Indeed, factors such as
the overlapping of frontiers, the geographic isolation and poverty of some areas, the
diversification and effectiveness of traditional trade and rural cottage industries,
are all factors which complicate an economic analysis particularly when based on
figures.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally, since industrialized countries continue to have doubts regarding the rel
effectiveness of a devaluation and on the subject of how to select the right rate of
exchange. it is normal that the danger of making a mistake in this type of decision
becomes greater in Africa; even moderate measures can turn out to be a disaster
given their effect on an economic environ-ant which is not well known.

It is therefore wise for the IMF to be "cautious and pragmatic" in its dealings with
developing countries and to favor long tern economic and financial adjustments while

it continues to support countries with temporary balance of payment difficulties. In
return, the recipient countries must implement the proposed measures if they do not

want to be instrumental in dininishing—indirectly and by reason of their reluctance

to keep their conitnents—the options of the IMF to help the poorest of these countries.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

8796
050: 4719/2310

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

NEW SSCRETARY GENERAL 0? ACCT PROFILE!)
Paris JEUNB APRIQUE in French 23 Dec 81 p 59

[Article by Ela Pia]

[Text] Francois Owono-Nguema, the new secretary general of the mltural and Techni-
cal Cooperation Agency (ACCT) , was born in Oyem (Woleu-Ntem Province) in Gabon on

23 January 1939. He will therefore be 43 years old when he takes office on the Quai
de Javel in Paris early in January.

After coupleting his secondary education at the Savorgnan-de-Brazsa Lycee in Corgo's
capital. he won his university stripes with no trouble at all. After earning a li-
centiate in physical science and mathematics at the Lille and Strasbourg Universities
(France) in 1962. he successfully cospleted work for his advanced studies diploma in
theoretical physics in 1964 and his doctorate in nuclear physics in 1968. He was

29 years old. In scientific matters, he was described as a sprinter with the con-
sistency and ability of -a long-distance runner. Always open and available. he was
able to confirm the hopes ‘aroused by his promising start.

Amng other things, his research work concerned field theory (mathematical physics)
and nuclear models and reactions.

hat was the visible peak of an iceberg whose submerged portion he was also construct-
ing at the same time. With the help of his intellectual curiositm'he enriched and
deepened a general eclectic culture which, out of mdesty, he never displayed. At
most, one glimpsed it in the turn of a phrase or on hearing one of his course lec-

tures. Professor Oweno-Nguema has a gift for explaining the most couples matters in
a way that makes his listeners feel that they have known than for a long time.

Recalled to his country. he was cofounder of the National University of Gabon, where
he held the post of vice rector from 1970 to 1971 and then became rector in 1971,
holding that position until 1975. A full professor of physics, he divided his teach-
ing time between the Libreville university and those in Lille and Strasbourg.

He was high connissioner for scientific research in 1972, then secretary of state
for culture and arts for the next 3 years. In 1975, he had to "sacrifice'I his sci-
entific career to take over the Ministry of Research, which is also responsible for
environment and the protection of nature. He left thatpost in February 1980 to
become minister of state for culture. popular education, and arts.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This father of sevenis experienced in international affairs as a result of having
headed the Gabonese delegations to the political. cultural. and scientific meetings,
colloquium, and conferences held by the United Nations, UNESCO, and the ow. Il‘he
agency he is taking over is not unfamiliar to him. He has participated in ministe-
rial conferences on the scientific policies of the member states and has worked as

top adviser on their harmonization. He became chairman of the ICA (African Cultural
Institute) in 1974 and has headed its Executive Council since 1980.

Were it not for his strong personality and his comitment on behalf of everything

affecting Africa, one would be tempted to ask what this fortunate and well-known man
is going to do in the chaos of the ACCT. He will need the flair he is known to have
and his know-how as a nuclear physicist to master the uncontrollable particles of an

agency whose escutcheon has recently been sullied through the carelessness of the
African countries.

He will need his willpower free of authoritarianism, his rigorous way of thinking,
and his reserve, as well as his gift for listening and for human relations if he is
to impose the moral authority of an office that has been tarnished.

we wager that Francois mono-Nguema, for when "managing" requires human qualities as
much as knowledge, will be able to raise the tone of debate within the agency. tran-

scend the office, and give inspiration and a new face to the ”business.” That is
the least of our hopes for him.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique 680?th 1981

11798
C80: 4719/402

1h
ma OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ACCT HOLDS EIGHTH 6mm mam IN LIBRWIHB
Paris Jams APRIQUB in French 23 Dec 81 pp 58. 60
[Article by Sophie Bessie]

[Text] On Monday morning, 7 December, the scene took place at the Convention Hall
in Libreville. All the actors were ready for the last act of a play fraught with
intrigue and new developments. The first two acts, played in Paris, had served to
set the stage and present the chief roles without giving any indications as to the
ending. That explains why the actors with top billing,‘ those with walk-on parts,
and the producers were nervous at the opening of the Eighth General Conference of
the ACCT [Cultural and Technical Cooperation Agency]. One question was on every-
one's lips: who will be elected secretary general of the ACCT? The spot was coveted
by half a dozen candidates, all of who. firmly intended to fight to win.

The first was the outgoing secretary general. Dankoulodo Den Dicko of Niger, whose
teaperalaent led him to fight to the end to retain his seat. But his 8 years of un-
divided rule had brought a lot of ill feeling. The words of thanks addressed to his:
during the first plenary session by Jean-Pierre Cot. speaking on behalf of France,
which he had come to represent as a stand-in for Claude Cheysson. mounted to a dis-
missal. But it was 24 hours later before Niger officially withdrew its candidate.

that left six candidates in the running. and that was a lot, all the more since most
of them were in a good position to block an election of their rivals. 'me were
bylaws state that the secretary general must receive 90 percent of the votes to be
elected. Opposition to any of them by four neuter states could have resulted in a
deadlock that some were secretly hoping for. So the game was a difficult one. The
French minister delegate to the minister of external relations for cooperation [Jean-
Pierre Cot], who was scheduled to leave Libreville at 0800 hours on Tuesday morning,
decided to stay on in the Gabonese capital until the end, scheduled for the evening
of the 9th.

Along with his delegation, Cot went all out. He had. to show that Prance takes the
agency and the French-speaking world seriously and that while it is the organisation's
most important financial backer, it does not want to be the absolute master, but de-
sires instead to reach a consensus while honoring its comituents. It was' not an

easy task. considering that in order to succeed. Jean-Pierre Cot had to erase the
bad impression left by his colleague in the Ministry of External Relations, who had

15
ron omcuu. use onu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apparently ignored instructions from the Elysee Palace and tried without much tact
to impose his own candidate, Raymond Chasles of Mauritius.

That embarrassing support was a poisoned gift for Chasles: having been dropped by
France, that courteous and coupetent man received only three votes in the first round
of balloting. Exit Mauritius, along with the Haitian candidate, Mr Guerrier, who re-
ceived only 2 votes, caspared to 10 for Gabon, 8 for 'mnisia, 8 for Benin, and 4 for
Zaire. It was in the second round, during more long and arduous meetings between del-
egation heads behind closed doors, that the real battle took place. those still in
the running were Bokanga of Zaire, Ahmed Zeghall of Tunisia, Basile Koesou of Benin
(director of the African mltural Institute (ICAH , and Francois anno-Nguema, Gabon's
minister of state for culture, popular education, and arts, who had long been an unof-
ficial candidate but who was officially presented by his country at the last minute.
Bokanga received four votes and withdrew in favor of Gabon following a telephone call
between Presidents Mobutu and Bongo. Zeghall received eight votes-mot many, consid-
ering that 'Nnisia entered the competition as the favorite. Several factors were be-
hind that semidefeat, one being the lastdminute choice of a candidate who was unknown
to Africans south of the Sahara.

There were defections as well: while France voted for 'mnisia in the second round of
balloting before switching its vote to Gabon, Canada--deepi\:e the assurances it had
given previously—launched into a noisy and insistent caspaign on behalf of meo-
Nguema as soon as the official announcement of the Gabonese candidate was made. Some
people claimed that Canada’s economic interests in the region had something to do
with its action and that the choice of the minister of foreign trade to head the
Canadian delegation was not a matter of chance.

There were also defections among Arab Africans: Djibouti and especially Morocco, a
new menber of the agency and one whose excellent relations with Gabon determined the
decision. So the curtain fell on the Tunisians, who were good losers despite some
bitterness. In the third round of balloting, there remained only Basile Kossou, whom
no one at the start had expected to get that far, and the Gabonese, the increasingly
probable winner of the contest. President Bongo spared no effort to lead his favor-
its to victory. Did he do it as a neat way of getting rid of the man, as persistent
rumor would have it? In any case, the chief of state received each delegation to
praise insistently the merits of his minister.

In the final duel, he received 21 votes to 14 for the man from Benin. Does this in-
dicate a cleavage between moderate Africa and progressive Africa? 'rhet factor un-
doubtedly played a role. but it does not seen to have been a decisive one. In any
case, Benin was not unhappy to be able to take some small revenge on Gabon, which had
unceremoniously expelled its nationals in 1978. The director of the ICA, too young
and not enough of a "statesman" to do the job-~deepite brilliant intelligence and an
invigorating dynamism-nevertheless persuaded his minister to play the consensus glue.
After all, Africa could not afford to present the image of too bloody an arena. So
after a final closed meeting, the tired but relieved delegation heads officially an-
nounced Omno-Nguema's appointment as head of the French-speaking agency. Visibly
happy, he took charge of the rostrum. It was time to begin the speeches.

There was a succession of tributes and congratulations to the cadence of rhythmical
and noisy singing by the national entertainment troupe called in for the occasion.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Morocco and St. Lucia as associated members, thus bringing the number of member
countries to 38. It was also decided to open a regiOral office for the agency in
Dakar, but the proposal to open one at the United Nations in New York was turned down.

the budget for the next few years carries the stamp of austerity, it would be appro-
priate to place the budget restrictions on the agency's operations rather than on

its programs. Also examined were the requests for a show of solidarity as presented
by the Central African Republic, Chad, Laos. Lebanon, and the Seychelles. Just be-
fore the closing ceremony, Jean-Pierre Cot gave a brief presentation of the new French
policy toward an organization which is taking on “new importance“ for the Prench Gov-
ernnent. By stressing the “weight of the Western model,“ the need for South-South

Thus it was that at the last minute, some of the real problems that should have been
brought up during the conference were discussed after all, although too quickly.

will the agency find in that fact something to think about? Beyond the political
stake it represents--one which was well illustrated by this meeting-will its new
secretary general and the team he puts together--taking into account not only re-
gional balance. as he is constrained to do, but also, one hopes, competence-~do some-
thing with that poorly utilized instrument? what we have is a real structure and
one that has money, cadres, and possibilities, but one which has scarcely been really
used so far. Will that fine machinery finally be put to profitable use before it
rusts?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

11798
CSO: 4719/402

17
FOR'OFFKJAL.US£4ONLY
EOE OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

sucx armors newness wrm 15ml. gxmm
Paris JEUNB marque in French No 1091:, 23 Dec 81 p 13
[Commentary by Bechir Ben Yahmed]

(‘l‘extl As this year ends, the major countries of Africa, both French-speaking and
English-speaking, are being subjected to intense pressure. 'me United States and
France are each telling them: "me time has come for you to roam diplomatic and
political relations with Israel. no so, and we will be grateful."

There are 29 countries that broke off those relations in 1973, thus joining the eight
Arab states of Africa which have never had such relations. The countries that became
independent after 1973 have brought the harbor to over 40, with the result that as
1982 begins, Israel maintains open relations with only two imartant countries in
Africa: South Africa, which is not a neither of the United Nations, and Egypt, which
is one of its founding members (and, incidentally, of the Arab League as well, al-
though it was “suspended” by that organization following the Can David accords).

It should be recalled that the State of Israel has relations with more than 100
countries belonging to the United Nations. Only the Arabs (with the notable excep-
tion of Egypt) and the columnist countries (with the exception of Romania) do not
recognize it or have broken off relations with it. All this is a way of saying that
by breaking of! relations with the Jwish state in 1973, the countries of black A!-
rica set themselves apart frou the majority of nations. That explains the pressure
being placed on them at present by Israel itself, which is stepping up its senisecret
missions to those countries, and by ihe into big powers, which support the Cap David
accords.

The problem is not so much that the states of black Africa would be resulting their
relations with Israel-after all, mote than halt the nonaligned states do have re-
lations with that country. The danger is that they will divide into two cups.

The Atrica of the ow is in danger of splitting into the "softliners' (those that
give in to the pressure first and thus bring upon thenselves the accusation of ”pro-
Anericanism,“ as though the majority of the Arab governments were not pro-Amrican!)
and the "hardliners" (of whom it will be said that they “preterred Arab money").

As for the Arabs, who are very busy at the assent with their diesensions, they are
shaken by Begin's initiatives and, as usual, are reacting rather than acting. 'mey

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

will wake up when it is too late, and then all they will be able to do is complain

or hurl abuse. The truth is that for the Africans, the root of the problem is not
whether or not to resume relations with Israel. It is one of whether or not to do

it together and for their own reasons, which are not the American or French reasons
or those of the non-African Arab countries. Even if they are helped financially by
the Arabs, the African states must not for that reason allow the Arab world to demand
from than what it cannot obtain from others. Even if they need Prance or have points
of agreement with it, and even if they expect protection frat Washington, they do not
have to accede to the wishes of either. If they are sovereign, they must make their
decisions in full sovereignty, in accordance with their interests, and together.

The Africans are weak, and when they make a decision in extended order, they euphe-
size that weakness. In doing so, their governments show-to their own people and to
the world--that they are “clients." Under the circumstances, elementary wisdom and
a sense of dignity ought to dictate that the issue of relations with Israel be dealt
with by the 0A!) Council of Ministers, which will meet this February. In the mean-
time, those pushing for a resumption of relations and those opposing it will have
plenty of time in which to develop their arguments. For the moment, the Africans
have nothing else to do except listen.

And not only to listen, but also, and at the same time, to decide together on a cri-
terion. Brief reflection is all it takes to see that that criterion can only be the
attitude toward South Africa and apartheid.

To those who are asking us to resume relations with Israel, whether it be the Israelis
themselves or the Americans, we should ask: "What is your policy toward South Africa?
How do you intend to change its attitude in favor o! the oppressed black majority?
What are you doing to compel the oppressive minority to change?" To those who would
tell the Africans not to resume relations with Israel, we should ask exactly the same
questions. And this one as well: ”If you are asking us to do what you cannot 'get _
the Asians or Latin Americans to do, it means that there are special relations between
you and us. Do you want us to make them explicit?"

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

l 1798
C80: 4719/40}.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR!OI1NCJAl.lﬁﬂB(HﬂLY

INTER-AFRICA” AFFAIRS

ARTICLE URGES LESS TALK, MORE ACTION
Paris JE'UNE mmus in French 110 1093, 16 Dec 81 pp 18, 19
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Let Us Move Into Action"]

[Text] Is it a coincidence that-the year is ending in Africa with a series of
meetings of regional and subregional organizations? In Heat Africa during this
month of December, Dakar (Senegal) is welcoming the summit meeting of the CEAO
[West African Economic Community] and the UMOA [Heat African Monetary Union];
while another meeting, planned to follow them, for the OMVS (Senegal River Devel-
opment Organization) was postponed at the last moment. In September, the Eco-
nomic Council for Livestock and Meat met at Lone (Togo) while, in January 1982,
Yamousaoukro (Ivory Coast) will be host for the sum-it meeting of the Alliance
Council [Conseil de I'Entente]. The truth is that the states of this region are
tied to the chariot of no less than 26 Inter-African organizations.

Also at the end of 1981, Libreville (Gabon), in Central Africa, was first host to
the ministerial conference of the African Hood Organization, and then to the sum-
mit meeting of the UDEAC [Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa]. The
summit meeting, moreover, was enlarged to include two countries (Zaire and Equa-
torial Guinea) who, until now, were not members of the organization, not to men-
tion Chad which has been cooling its heals at UDBAC'a door, waiting to be admit-
ted some day. -

The annual session of the Association for Managing East African Ports (including
11 countries of the region) was held from 30 November to b December at Djibouti.
And a few days earlier the coordination conference for Southern African develop-
ment, involving nine countries from the Zambezi basin, was concluded at Blantyre
(Malawi).

Some people will say that there is nothing surprising, quite the contrary, that
Africans born and raised on endless discussion, should increase the occasions

for gossip-sessions. Since they are unable to act, they at least must talk, if
only to give themselves the illusion of doing (or being) something. To be sure,
like all bureaucracies overseeing the functioning of international organizations,
ours should increase the number of summit meetings, ministerial conferences, col-
loquia, and other seminars. They certainly must justify, along with the sky-high
salaries, the large investments their establishments entail. But that is not the
essential thing. If Africans increase the number of the interstate meetings, it

20
IN3R 0!ﬂﬂ(1Al.ll§li(ﬂVLY
FOR<0F1ﬂC1AL USEICHVLY

is not because of their love for long speeches, nor their need to travel, nor

to amuse themselves. Rather, each day our political leaders, managers, and in-
tellectuals of all views become better aware of the inadequacies and limitations
of the microstates inherited from the colonial system and, therefore, they feel,
more or less confusedly, the strong need to unite to confront the needs of the
hour. The number of states no longer able to fulfill their commitments is ac-
tually growing year by year. Some no longer have the means to maintain the in-
frastructures inherited from the colonial regime, much less develop new ones.
Others can no longer pay their dues (and this happens with increasing frequency)
to the regional and subregional organizations to which they belong. Some even
pay their civil servants 2 or 3 months late! Everything is happening as if, hav-
ing consumed the political marrow of our liberationa, we now are reduced to gnaw-
ing the dry bones of our economies. Meanwhile, laughing up their sleeve, the
colonizers who had cynically undermined the terrain watch us from the heights of
their confortable skyscrapers, convinced that, sooner or later, we shall be forced
to call on them for help. 'ﬁhere is no other solution but to recall the whites
if you want to develop your countries," Hr Franz Joseph Strauss, leader of the
Christian Democratic opposition in the Federal Republic of Germany, bluntly sug-
gested to several Africans who were talking with him.

Assuming that whites in fact did leave immediately after the independence of these
countries (which is questionable) it is obvious that the solution to our problems
does not depend on their return. Rather, it depends on regional and subregional
understandings and cooperation by the states. Since it has been found ineffective
to walk with only one leg, even with crutches, it is preferable to help each
other, even lean on each other, in order to make a fresh start. Even Nigeria,
whose population will fluctuate at about 135 million in the year 2000, needs this
regrouping of lands. The other countries, who in about 20 years will have only
an average of 12 million inhabitants, will need it even more. Only a real soli-
darity contract, linking the 50 states, even if only at the level of the five or
six great regions sketched out at the economic summit meeting at Lagos (April
1980) could help us out of the rut.

But this regional cooperation should not be limited either to childish propaganda
or incantations on the theme of unity and dignity. It should be conceived and
applied with a real concern for effectiveness and with no tricks or dodges. In
other words, if it is true that such an action must be based on a genuine politi-
cal conviction, it is no less true that it is too serious a matter to be left
only to the Judgment of politicians.

Today everybody sees where the latter's actions have led Africa. whether they
wore a felt hat or a helmet, few undertook the battle, or followed the direction
needed, against underdevelopment, or encouraged the enthusiasms and dreams of
youth so as to better invest them later on. Most spent these last 20 years ex-
hausting themselves in futile ideological quarrels, setting off to war, like Don
Quixote, against windmills, or to wring the neck of their fellow citizens; and
all this took place while seizing power for the benefit of a group, clan, ethnic
group, region, or even a mere village.

However, the real and only battle Africa must now fight is the one against under-
development, illiteracy, poverty, and sickness. Such a battle can only be won

21
FOR 0F11C1A1.lﬂHE(HVLY
FOI:0F11CIAI.USEIDNLN

with the support of managers, intellectuals, young persons, dynamic businessmen,
technicians, and workers in the towns and countryside regardless of their reg-
ional, ethnic, and even more so, political origins. The state, and even more so,
the nation belongs to no single person. Each citizen should feel perfectly ae-
cure for his physical and moral being as well as for his property. The strategy
could consist of building solid and lasting infrastructures tending to bring
African populations a little closer to each other each day. It should begin with
those populations of the sane region, within the meaning set forth by the 0A".
For that, it is advisable to develop lines of communication (roads and rail-
roads); air, maritime, and telephone connections; interconnect the electrical
networks; simplify entry formalities at frontiers; multiply cultural and ath-
letic meetings; coordinate educational programs. The aim is to raise the inhu-
man barriers and all the administrative constraints so as to make each of our
great regions (North Africa, West Africa, Central Africa, East Africa, and South
Africa) a vast homogeneous and open space where circulation of peoples and goods
takes place in total and perfect freedom.

No doubt the treaties and conventions signed by the African states contain clauses
of that nature. But everyone knows how things are in practice. What can be more
shocking than seeing Africans provided with passports and visas turned back at
the airport of such and such an African capital, if not imprisoned for several
days without food or drink. and even sometimes savagely beaten. Is it not upset-
ting to witness massive expulsions, under false excuses, by African states, of
citizens of other African countries, leaving behind broken families and pillaged
possessions! Former President Leopold Sedar Senghor objected in the DAB to these
practices which dishonor Africa. But the commitments made by his colleagues at
that time have by no means been fulfilled. Moreover, the procrastinations noted
during certain negotiations for the construction of hydroelectric dams of subre-
gional or even regional interest in the frontier zones are out-of-date. Now that
a generation of competent and aware African managers and technicians is growing
up, political leaders should place confidence in them to draw up and study solid
and reliable regional projects, resolutely directed toward the satisfaction of
the people's needs and aspirations.

He have spoken (and written) too much for 20 years. Now let us move into action,
the more so, since the framework for action is no longer missing-not even really
the human and financial resources. It is enough to use the regional organiza-
tions, not as tribunes for political agitation, but as real instruments for
Africa's only real struggle, the struggle against underdevelopment.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9772
cs0: 4719/369

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GOALS FOR 1981-1985 AGRICULTURAL SEASON ANNOUNCED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 100

[Text] The basic objectives for the 1981-1985 period, defined at the First Spe-
cial Congress of the MPLA-Labor Party. vere reiterated by Angolan Minister of
Agriculture Artur Vidal Gomes. Those objectives are the following: to increase
the production of agriculture, livestock raising and forestry in order to meet
national needs for food products and rev materials for industry, so as to reduce
the country’s dependency on imported products that can be obtained locally by

the end of the 5-year period, and increase production of export products, parti-
cularly coffee; to raise the standard of living and improve working conditions of
farmers and farm workers; and to consolidate the socialist agricultural sector
(national companies and cooperatives).

within this framework, production objectives have been set.' They concern market
production alone -- that is, that share of production destined for marketing and
distribution circuits, to the exclusion of quantities produced for local consump-
tion in rural areas (the amount of which cannot be estimated, moreover) and
tonnages reserved for the building of seed stock.

It is difficult to trace guidelines for cotton, a sector almost solely in the
hands of the government which is experiencing difficulties in the region of Catete
and Porto Anboim, where the harvest has dropped to nothing because of the lack of
rain. This situation is not at all abnormal in a zone which, for that very rea-
son, produces only every 2 or 3 years. National cotton production is going to be
transferred to the region of Melange, where climatic conditions are such that a
harvest can almost be guaranteed.

Manioc is a crop grown by the private sector in Halange and Ulge provinces. Pro-

duction planned for the 5-year period amounts to 65,000 tons. For palm oil, the
goal for the 5-year period is 8,000 tons.

Concerning the new 1982 season (September 1981 to September 1982) in particular,
it is already known that some of the objectives set forth will be difficult to at-
tain, considering the poor condition of agricultural equipment and the instability
in certain regions because of the South African attacks, which have caused people
to give up their crops and livestock.

Coffee production in the northern part of the country, far from Pretoria's attacks,
has obviously attracted the authorities attention because it is a major source of

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
foreign exchange income. This sector is now being reorganized, with the establish-
Ient, approved by the ministers of planning, finance and agriculture, of 26 terri-
torial enterprises with an area of 185,000 hectares.

These state-owned enterprises are to put coffee plantations abandoned in recent

years back into production and take over areas cultivated by mam: [National Cof-
fee Conpany], most of which are in poor condition. Work planned (clearing, ruins,
replanting, and so on) will be spread out over the next two or three years. There

are also plans to improve coffee preparation and processing starting this year.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena: et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
CSO: 4719/1073

2h
ma omcm. use ONLY
no: osv1c1A1.uss¢MVLv

decree concerns superior grade Robusta coffee, whose price per kilogram goes from
320 to 330 CPA francs. The second concerns washed, comercial grade Arabica cof-
fee. which will be purchased at 350 francs a kilogram during the 1981-1982 season,
compared with 360 francs for the previous season. an increase of lo CPA francs

in each case. A bulletin from the Cameroonian Ministry of Bconony and Planning
indicates that as the result of the conclusions of the nesting of the emission

on the distribution of Arabica coffee rebates for the 1980-1981 season, the govem-
nent has set the rate of the Arabica coffee rebate for the 1980-1981 season at

40 francs, compared with 20 francs for 1979-1980, thereby increasing the total
payment for washed, comercial-grade Arabica coffee to 380 francs e kilogram in

in prices which, despite inflation, have fallen to their level of 5 years ago.

[Text] [Paris WES TROPICAUX 51' “301mm in French No 1888, 15 Jan 82
p 149] [WPYRIGH'n Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464

cso: '4719/477

FOIOFHCIALUSBONLY
POLITICAL 'RADICALIZATION' ANNOUNCED-In his New Year's address, Aristides Pereira,
president of the Republic of Cape Verde, stated his deternination to radicalize
the political process after the congress of his party. the PAICV [African Indepen-
dence Party of Cape verdel, uhich has outlined the guidelines to be followed for
the coming years. The Cape Verdian president said that the agrarian reform will
be carried out in order to rationalize agricultural production and fight the coun-
try's food dependency. Cape Verde suffers from a chronic drought. The president
announced measures aimed at guaranteeing jobs for 30,000 persons (10 percent of
the population), affected by the drought this year. They will work on construc-
tion projects ai-ed at deriving greater benefit from the soil in case of rain and
at expanding the area irrigated. Finally, Pereira enphaeized the need for proper
organization and aoral and political determination in the fight against the'
drought, which cannot be won solely by projects and the millions invested, he

said. {Text} [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French “0 1887,
8 Jan 82 p 80] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

C80: 4719/473
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1HVLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

AHNESTY 0RDBR-0n 31 December in Bangui, Gen Andre Kolingba signed an order con-
cerning amnesty for certain violations cosmitted between 13 August and 31 Decesber
1981. Excluded from the amnesty order are those responsible for assassinations,
murders, killings, the misappropriation'of public funds, and so on. Amnesty does
not include reinstatement in public offices or jobs and in no case entails the
recovery of one's career. Furthernore, persons sentenced before 1 January 1982
will have their sentences reduced by half. If the sentence is under 5 years in
prison, it is nullified. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in
French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 88] [COPYRIGBT: Rene Hereux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

HEPC PRESIDENT'S CHARG£s-Ange Patasse, president of the MLPC (Central African
People's Liberation Movement), recently accused leaders in Bangui of planning.
"along with foreign mercenaries," the "liquidation" of his supporters, using the
pretext of "attempted coups d'etat." [Text] [Paris HARCEBS TROPICAUX ET MEDI-
TERRANEENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 pp 88e89] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et
Cie Paris 1982] 11,666 '

SETTLEMENT OF PYGMIEs—-The most recent BULLETIN DES OBUVRES HOSPITALIERES FRAN-
CAISES DB L'ORDRB DB MALTE states that in the Central African Republic, the
village of Belenboke, set up nearly 10 years ago by a priest and two nuns at the
request of Pygmies in the region, now has 800 inhabitants. These sedentary
Pygmies have remained autonomous. Another 600 live 60 kiloneters from the set-
tlement, while another group of 1,000 are found 20 kilometers away. According
to the village founders, the shift froe nonsdic life to crop growing is gradual
because it takes several years to obtain sufficient yield from what is planted.
In addition, with respect to health, settlement has reportedly tended to aggra-
vate illnesses and classic parasitosis in Africa. That is why the sedentary
Pygmies regularly leave the village they have built to return to their secular
forest life for a few months. Nevertheless, 190 pupils regularly attend school
in Benelboke. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TRDPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French

No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 89] [CDPYRIGHTz Rene Moreux et Cie Parts 1982] 11,666

080: 6719/671

27
itﬂltlﬂHCJAl.lliE(H'LY
I'm OI'I‘IUAL USE ONLY

cum.

BRIEFS

COOPERATION RITE GDR--The first meeting of the Guinea-East Germany Joint Commis-
sion was held in Conakry 16-18 November and ended with the signing of a protocol

agreement. The commission reviewed the various items on the,agenda: examina-

tion of the possibility of reducing the GDR's clearing balance; analysis of the
state of commercial relations between the GDR and the People‘s Revolutionary Re-
public of Guinea and examination of ways to augment trade; the possibility of

the GDR participating in the final stages of the work on the GAO [Organization

of African Unity] Palace and the development of the PAPA [Agra-Pastoral District - _
Farms] and agricultural cooperatives; cooperation in the field of higher educa-
tion, technical and scientific training, and in the field of public health; as

well as establishing the by-lavs for the joint commission on ecstomic, scien-

tific and technical cooperation. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUK ET MEDITBRkANBBNS
in :rench No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 3303] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1981]
951

OIL PROSPECTING-Guinea and the Australian group "Bright Oil" have recently con-
cluded an agreement for prospecting oil and natural gas in Guinea, both on land
and offshore, as was announced 2 December in Conakry. By the terms of the agree-
ment. the Bright 011 group is committed to investing $15 million per year for

the next 3 years and to begin drilling in 1983. {Text} [Paris MARCHSS ruorlaaux
ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 3303] [COPYRIGHT: Rena Moraux
at Ole Paris 1981] 9516

080: 4719/355

28
INJR‘OFIICJAI.IISI:(IULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

BRIEFS

CCCB AGRICULTURAL LOAN-«The Italian Council of Ministers haa recently approved a
proposed order ratifying the loan agree-ant signed 18 August 1981 by the Italian
ministry of foreign affairs and international cooperation and the Central Fund

for Economic Cooperation [0603]. The agreement relates to providing 270 nillion
Malian francs toward the financing of a subsidized loan progran being undertaken

by the National Agricultural Developent Bank (310A). [Text] [Paris HARCHBS
TROPICAUX ET WHERMNEENS in French No 1883. 11 Dec 81 p 3303] [COPYRICHTz
Rene Horeux et'cie Paris 1981] 9516

JAPANESE RICE LOAN—Alioune Blondin Beye, Hali'a minister of foreign affaira and
intermtional cooperation, and Chiyuki Biaroka. the Japanese ambassador, signed
an exchange of notes 30 Novaber in Banaleo to consul-ate an agree-ant whereby
the Japanese goverment will provide Mali with 370 million yen (about 900 nil-
lion Malian francs) to finance the purchase of rice. The agree-ent also pro-
vides that Japan will contribute close to 1.29 billion Malian francs "toward the
implementation of plane to exploit subterranean water resources." [Text]

[Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET mommussrs in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 3303i
[COPYRIGi‘h Rene breux et cie Paris 1981] 9516

cs0: (019/355

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lillllﬂﬂtlkl.lﬂﬂ£(l‘b¥

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

OIL PRODUCTION-According to the periodical PBTROLB ET 0A2 ARABES, Nigeria's oil
production in 1981 reportedly amounted to an average of 1.39 million barrels a day
and, according to oil circles in Lagos, to 1.45 million barrels a day. Nigeria's
official figures were 2,068,165 barrels a day in 1980 and 2,308,822 barrels a day
in 1979. Consequently, 1981 will be marked by a drop in production, with the
historic slump of the month of August (708,000 barrels a day). Furthermore, the
average for the nine months was lower than that of the first six months: 1,473,500
barrels a day, compared with 1,707,300 barrels a day. The recovery occurred during
the last quarter, with an estimated average during those three months of 1,554,000
barrels a day, but thanks also to successive price reductions. It should be noted
that in 1981, Nigeria was not the only country belonging to OPEC (Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries) to experience a drop in production. For all of
these countries, the drop was some 16.4 percent compared with 1980, with a general
average put at 22.48 million barrels a day. Indonesia was reportedly the only
OPEC member not to have had a slowdown in production. [Text] [Paris HAICEES
TROPICAUX 3T HBOITERRANEENS in French No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 147] [COPYRIGET:

Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION STAGNATING-It is believed that the general industrial pro-
duction index did not progress significantly in 1981 compared with 1980. It
should be recalled that, on a basis of 100 in 1972, the figure went from 167 in
1979 to only 180 in 1980 (up .6 percent), while from 1978 to 1979, growth was much
greater (up 15.2 percent), from 145 to 167. The manufacturing industries, which
occupy an ever larger place in the makeup of the index, alongside the mining in-
dustries (in a continual decline for years) and electricity (increasing, but with
a tendency toward a certain compression), have in fact experienced different for-
tunes. Among the 20 sectors taken into account, several were in a clear decline
in the middle of the year, particularly the sugar, beer, shoe, paint, refined
petroleum product and pharmaceutical sectors. Those sectors showing growth:

radio assembly, roofing materials, cement, textiles, cigarettes and soft drinks,
scarcely balanced those in a decline. however, spectacular growth should be noted
in the area of automobile vehicle assembly. In this sector of activity, the index
(still employing the base figure of 100 in 1972) reportedly went from 1,363.9 at
the end of 1980 to 3,515.7 at the end of the first half of 1981, or an increase in
6 nonths of 157.7 percent, while from 1979 to 1980, growth in this sector was only
19.75 percent (from 1,138.9 to 1,363.9) and only 14.72 percent between 1978 and
1979 (from 992.7 to 1,138.9). [Text] [Paris Haacuns TBOPIOAUX ET MEDITERRANBBRS
in French No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 147] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982]
11,464

C30: 4719 477
’ 30

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USB(MULY
lllltlﬂﬂCJAl.l!ﬂi(ﬂVLY

SENEGAL

TEXTILE INDUSTRY UNDERGOING DIFPICULT PERIOD
Paris HARCBBS TROPICAUX ET HBOITBRRANEENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 pp 78-79

[Text] Despite important development potential (domestic market and national cot-
ton production), the Senegalese textile industry is going through a difficult
period. Exports are down, the domestic market is in a decline, multifaceted fraud
is taking place to the detriment of national production, local industries have not
succeeded in taking consumets' real needs into account and equipment has not been
replaced by newer machinery.

Senegal's textile sector employs some 5,000 persons and contributes 5 billion CPA
francs to industrial added value. It includes SODBFITEX [Textile Fibers

Development Company], which is both an enterprise to organize rural cotton produc-
tion and an industrial ginning unit, and purely industrial enterprises which pro-
cess cotton from the spinning stage to garment making.

However, for the past several years, out of the nine main industrial units in the
sector, nearly two-thirds have experienced difficulties. The SIV (Industrial
Garment Company) has financial problems and difficulty collecting government debts.
For its part, ICOTAP [African Cotton Industry] has had extremely high losses for

5 years. The Senegalese Textile Company is also faced with financial troubles.

At the same time, its production is dropping and sales declining.

Since 1979, enterprises that had previously been successful have begun to mani-
fest signs of weakness. These are the TMS (HechsnicalknittingCbmpany of Senegal),

the SCT (Cover and weaving Company) and the Cape Verde Cotton Company (CCCV).

In the face of this situation, the government and manufacturers have drawn up a
recovery plan. For the government, it will be a matter, according to LB SOLEIL
of Dakar, "of reconciling the interests of SODBPITBX and those of the industrial-
ists, while maintaining employment and seeking long-term solutions for the re-
covery and development of industries."

For the government, "reconciling the interests of SODBPITEX with those of the
manufacturers" means applying a reasonable cotton price that will enable each
side to derive a profit. It has therefore increased that price by 16 percent,
for it had been far below the world price. However, the government will continue

to subsidize cotton for 2 more years. After that time, new discussions will take
place based on the evolution of the situation.

31
I!"l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂli(MﬂLY
I“ “I'M“ U“: \IIVhI

Another measure taken by the Senegalese Government is an intensification of the
fight against fraud. Together with customs, the National Textile Commission will
establish a scale for the main imported products in order to fight the practices
of some importers of limiting the amount of duties they have to pay. Overseeing
import applications will continue, even be stepped up.

In order to protect the market, certain forms of imports will be ended. It will
no longer be possible to import articles found locally unless they cone from
CBAO (Heat African Economic Community) nations. Along the same line of ideas,

the Ministry of 2conony and Finance is in the process of studying the possibility
of lowering entry duties and taxes on textile products in order to discourage

fraud. -The domestic market on which the textile industry seems to have lost a
great deal of ground will be revitalized.

Finally, as part of the recovery plan. a typical contract program is included.
According to their contract, manufacturers will, at the sane time they guarantee
jobs, pledge to inprove productivity. Hith government aid, they will renew their

infrastructure in order to produce higher quality articles that can penetrate the
international narket and halt the drop of Senegalese textile exports.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
cs0: «719/471

32
IIIRCHHHCJAI.UBEGMULY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

NE" 80038 SECRETARY GENERAL—Nadia Diouf, professor of French and African litera-
ture at the University of Dakar, has been elected secretary general of the Sole
Democratic Trade Union of Senegalese Teachers (SUDBS), at the close of the Third
Congress of that trade union, held in Dakar at the end of December. Diouf re-
places Hanadou Ndoye, inspector of education. The National Executive Board of the
union (19 members) also chose all new officers. sums is one of the three unims
of teachers in Senegal. It essentially draws its nenbers from the eight leftist
and extrene leftist parties in the country. [Text] [Paris HARGBS TROPICAUX BT

HEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1887. 8 Jan 82 p 78] [COPYRIGBT: Rene Horeux et
Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

080: 4719/1071

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INCREASED COOPERATION WITH KUHAIT ANTICIPATED
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1888, 15 Jan 82 p 145

[Text] From 4 to 6 January, Gen Gnassingbe Eysdema, Togolese'chief of state, made

an official visit to Kuwait. accompanied by a large delegation from the Togolese
Government.

During the discussions that took place between the two parties. Togo submitted a
number of development projects, including the program to develop Mono, expansion
work on the port of Lone, the repair and paving of the transversal Natchanba- .
Kabou-Awandjelo, Kara-Ketao—Benin border road, with a branch road to Pagouda,
and the proposed phosphoric acid plant.

Kuwaiti authorities and the Kuwaiti Development Fund indicated their intention to
participate immediately in the financing of some of these projects, mainly the
Mono development project and the transverssl road project.

In order to speed up the latter, authorities from the Kuwaiti Development Fund
asked the Togolese Government to publish notice of the preselection of enterprises

and to send to Togo, by the first quarter of 1982, experts to evaluate the project,
whose estimated cost is 6 billion CFA francs.

Regarding the Mono development project, Kuwaiti authorities clearly indicated their
intention of taking part in the financing of this regional project, which brings
together the nations of Benin and Togo. These two countries have decided to devel-
op their common river in order to produce the electric power they need. The cost
of the hydroelectric portion of the project is $180 million, or around 60 billion
CPA francs.

Regarding the proposed expansion of the Lone port, it would consist of the con-
struction of a second pier that would increase the handling capacity for various

types of goods from the current figure of 600,000 tons to some 1.5 million tons.

This project is divided into two sections and work on the first will begin this
year. The Togolese Government has asked Kuwait for additional financing for the

second portion of the project. Both phases will cost some 16 billion CPA francs.

31:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The fourth project, the phosphoric acid plant. is ained at increasing the indua~
trial capacity of the OTP (Togolese Phosphate Office). In order to do so, the

Togolese Cavemen: has decided to begin to work other deposits, which would, in
an initial phase, per-nit the conversion of phosphate into phosphoric acid and, in
the second phase, into fertilizer. The total cost of the project. some 75 billion
CFA francs, will require the participation of several sources of financing, includ-
ing the Kuwaiti Development Fund.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,464
050: 6719/1077

35
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
ZAIRE

BRIEFS

COOPERATIGI um! ANGOLA—The Zairien—Angolan joint commission met in Kinshasa

from 21 to 29 December 1981. Its work led to the signing of two agreements, one
instituting the joint grand comission on cooperation and the other dealing with
cultural and scientific cooperation between the two countries. In addition, both
parties agreed to reactivate the tripartite commission on refugees, which includes
Angola, Zaire and Zambia, and to strengthen cooperation in the fields of comerce,
fishing, the merchant marine and oil. Lengama Dalia, Zairian secretary of state
for international cooperation, and Paulina Pinto Joao, Angolan secretary of state
for cooperation, said after the signing of the accords that they were satisfied
with progress made during the Kinshasa meeting. They added that the meeting
enabled both parties to intensify their dialogue. Another meeting of the Zairian-
Angolan grand commission was set for 1983 in Luanda. The precise date remains

to be determined. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX B'l' HEDITBRRANEENS in French
No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 91] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,564

OIL PkowCTION—According to a bulletin from Cometra Oil, crude oil production in
Zaire's maritime zone, in which the subsidiary Muenda Oil Company has a 17.2-
percent participation, has reached an average of 22,568 barrels a day for the
months of September to November 1981, capered with 19,987 barrels per day for
the first quarter, 18,089 for the second quarter and 20,1083 for July and August.
Total production for the first 11 months of 1981 amounted to 6,755,547 barrels
and production for the entire year is an estimated 7.4 nillion barrels (average
of 20,274 barrels a day), compared with 6,498,000 barrels (average of 17,754 in
1980). This increase essentially stems from an improvement in productivity at
the Hibale structure, which is now on the order of 22,000 barrels per day out of
a total of 23,600 for the entire maritime zone. The drilling of an initial well
in a structure located some 20 kilometers offshore, announced in September as
scheduled for mid October, was delayed because of the inavsilability of the plat—
form. The most recent information indicates that it would begin at the end of
December 1981. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MBDI‘I'BRRANBBNS in French

No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 91] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464

COOPERATION WITH USSR—The Soviet-Zairian joint comiasim on maritime transport
held its third meeting frat 23 to 25 December 1980 in Kinshasa, attended by the
Zairian secretary of state for international cooperation, Lengema Dulia, and the
Soviet deputy minister of the merchant marine, Vladimir Beletaky. As part of

the framework of the cooperation agreements linking the two countries for over

5 years, this joint tomission, whose previous meeting was held in Moscow in 1980,

is entrusted with the task of promoting the operation of maritime connections

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'v- “OMB WI. Vl‘lsl

between the port of Hatsdi and Soviet ports to the benefit of vessels from the
merchant fleets of the two countries. The first meeting, held in Kinshasa in
1979, was essentially devoted to the establishent of solid foundations and the
by-laws of the joint commission. The second session, in Moscow, dealt with
training and technical questions relating to maritime transport and maritine
consultants. [Text] [Paris MARCBBS TROPICAUX s'r MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1887,
8 Jan 82 p 92] [COPYRIGHT: Rane Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11, ‘64

COOPERATION WITH YUGOSLAVIA—According to Kondov Djordji, Yugoslav charge
d'affaires in Kinshasa, Yugoslavia, one of the partners in the international
consortiu- Aluzaire, plans to participate in the project to build the high-tension
line between Bukavu, Katana and Gone and in construction of the electrical equip-
ment plant financed by the Executive Council. It also plans to help with comple-
tion of the construction of a hydroelectric plant in Katende, in Western Kasai.

In order to intensify cooperation in this field, Yugoslavia proposes to send
experts to the National Electric Company (SNEL) to engage in energy research. In
the field of agriculture, Yugoslav cooperation with Zaire concerns corn and soybean
production on the Bateke plateau. Construction of a research center for seedcorn
production is planned there. Some 30 young Zairians are coupleting training a;
Yugoslavia' a university and advanced institutes. Several Zairian cadres have
already completed training programs there. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 92] [COPYRIGE'N Rene Moreux et

Cie Paris 1982] 11,1064

GOLD PROCESSING PLANTwOfficials of the Kilo-Mote Gold Mine Office (OKDD) believe
that rehabilitation of the Office's gold processing plant is an indispensable in-
vestment, not only in order to improve production, but also in order to guarantee
the very survival of the enterprise. Coat of the project is an estimated $6 mil-
lion. OKIHO officials believe that they will be able to cover the financing of
the project without outside aid provided the sum allocated to them in foreign exh-
change is sufficient. Moreover, in their opinion, this problen of foreign exchange
is the main difficulty the conpany faces. Officials also recognize that the
Office has never had a medium— or long-term development program and that its
administrative management has always been faulty. OKIMO's future therefore de-
pends on an increase in foreign exchange resources, the drafting of a development
policy and a fight against fraud and clandestine gold mining. [Text] [Paris
MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS in French No 1887, 8 Jan 82 p 92] (COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11, 464

680: 4719/1067

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

BRIEFS

AID FOR MINING INDUSTRY—-Polloving a favorable decision by the steering commit-
tee of the EDF [European Development Fund] (mm of 9 October 1981, p 2549),
Zambia is going to get 55 million ecus for SYSHIN [expansion unknown]. The
agreement, which use reached after s visit to Zambia by the director of devel-
opment for the EEC, Hr Maurice Foley, calls for the funds to be used for train-
ing and technical projects relating to the copper and cobalt industries, two
vital pillars of the Zambian economy. Lusaka should be able to come up with an
initial inventory of its needs by February. It will then becone the first bene-

iciary of SYSMIN, which was established as part of the Lane 11 Convention.
[Text] [Paris mamas TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81

p 3316] [COPYRIGl’h Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1981] 9516

680: 4719/355 END

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY