FOR OFFICIAL l-‘SI-I ONLY

JPRS L/10256
13 January 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No.75?

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by scurce.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARA?! AFRICA REPORT
rouo No. 757

CONTENTS
ANGOLA

Measures Taken To Develop Fishing Sector
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HRDITERRANBENS. 27 Nov 81) .........

Briefs

HPIA Economic Decisions
Spanish Missionary Kidnaped

HF? Aid
CHAD
Report on Composition of OAU Peacekeeping Force
(Sennen Andrianirado; JBUNE AFRIQUE, 18 Nov 81) ..........
Chad Said To Have Been Good Training Schocl for Libyan Army
(mum-z AFRIQUE, 18 Nov 81)
Briefs
Libyan Losses in Chad
OACI Aid for Airport
LIBERIA
Briefs
Austerity Measures
Saudi. Israeli Relations
Reduction in Commercial Fleet
French Loan
MOZAMBIQUE
Briefs

Measures Against Rural Exodus

-a- [III-N38A-l

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEZONLJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENFGAL

ZAIRF

Relations Between Two PDS Leaders 'Not Doing Hell'
(Sennen Andriauirudo; mm: AFRIQUB, 25 Nov 81)

PDS Secretary Interviewed Concerning Party's Condition
(Fara N'Diaye Interview; JEUNB APRIQUE, 25 Nov 81) .........

Data on Industrial Firms in Dakar Free Zone
(HARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBBNS, 4 Dec 81) ............

Briefs
Senegalese-Kuwaiti Bank Year

Economic and Financial situation at End of June 1981
(NARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS, 6 Rev 81) ............

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJI¢OIFTCJAI.IhSEZ(HVLY

ANGOLA

MEASURES TAKE“ TO DEVELOP PISRING SECTOR
Paris MARCHZS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in PteRCh No 1881, 27 Nov 81 p 3196

[Text] Fishing, one of Antola's main sources of animal protein, is a key sector

for the country. Hith 1,650 kilometers of coastline and favorable hydrographic
conditions. Angola has abundant water resources, resources poorly and inadequately
developed. especially since independence, which was accompanied by the exodus

or sabotage of most means of production and the departure of nearly all officers
and specialized personnel. In fact, while the level of the catch exceeded 700,000
tons a year during the colonial period, it has been but 35,000 tons in recent years,
although it did climb back up to some 90,000 tons at the present time.

Combined with the essential need to improve the terms of the national supply of
food products, this situation has caused authorities to grant top priority to the
rehabilitation of this sector of activity and, within such a framework, to invest-
ments oriented toward production and the processing of fishing products.

The recovery will take place in stages. The first will be completed through the
startup of a project whose total cost is an estimated $27.7 million and whose
financing is provided by: _a SID-million loan from the Arab Bank for African Eco-
nomic Development (BADBA), repayable in 15 years, including a 5-year deferment, and
carrying an annual interest rate of 6 percent; $12 million in aid from the Kuwaiti
Arab Economic Development Fund (FKDEA); and the assumption, by the government in
Luanda, of the cost difference, or $5.97 million.

The main stages of the project are as follows: the purchase of ten lb-meter fish-
ing boats and the repair of ‘6 existing vessels; the purchase of a training vessel

in order to teach fishermen, a freighter to supply fuel to boats on the high seas
and other equipment and materials; the construction of ten piers to improve and

expand possibilities of accommodating and unloading boats; and the purchase of
transport vehicles, mechanical drying equipment, cold storage chambers and freezing

units.

The project will have a positive effect on employment, professional training,
processing industries and the commercial balance. It will be spread out over 4
years, beginning early in 1982, and will be supervised by the Ministry of Fishing.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
cso: a719/339

1
FOI'OFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FOI‘OFFICIAI.USEGNVLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

HPLA ECONOMIC DECISIONS-The Central Committee of the “FLA-Labor Party met in regu-
lar session from 17 to 20 November, presided over by Jose Eduardo dos Santos.

chief of state and chairman of the party. Subjects taken up at the meeting included
Angola's economic problems. The Central Conmittee resolved: "to follow the prin-
ciple of paying wages in keeping with work done and to use material and moral in-
centives for workers at enterprises turning a profit and for technicians and cadres
completing additional work"; and "to protect products of national industry by
setting higher prices for similar imported products in order to make up for the
deficit of certain nationalized enterprises." [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET
HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3259] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et

Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

SPANISH MISSIONARY KIONAPED—-Cistercian Father Benjamin Fernandez Manzanal, a

Spanish missionary, was kidnaped on 15.Novamber in Alacupa, Angola, by a group of
guerrillas, shortly after he had celebrated mass. [Text] [Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX

ET MBDITBRRANEENS in French No-l882, 6 Dec 81 p 3259] .[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et
Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

HF? AID-Persons displaced because of the South African intervention in southern

Angola will receive emergency food aid from the Horld Food Program (HF?) amounting
to nearly $4 million, according to an PAO bulletin. The HP? will send 10,140 tons

of corn and edible oils to aid the 131,000 persons most affected for 6 months.
In July, the WP? sent food aid worth $2,368,500 to the people of southern Angola
hit by the drought. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBENS in French
No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3259] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horcux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,664

cso: 4719/339

2
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USU-I ONLY

. «I

CHAD

REPORT ON COMPOSITION OF OAU PEACEKBBPING FORCE
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1089, 18 NOV 81 pp 35, 36
[Article by Sennen Andriamirado "The Triangle of Peace")

[Text] The Inter-African Force will be equipped by Paris,
financed by Riyadh and commanded by Lagos....

Two battalions of Nigerians, one of Senegalese and one of Zairiana, or note than
2,000 soldiers of the "Inter-African Peacekeeping Force" are set to nova into Chad

within the next 2 weeks. Three thousand nan in all will arrive between now and the
end of the year.

Eden Kodjo, the secretary general of the OAU [Organization of African Unity], has
been preparing to go over the final details on 11 Novenber. in Lagos, with Nigerian
President Shehu Shagari. Nigeria's top diplomat. Ishaya Audu, and Gebre Bgziaber
Dawit. an Ethiopian who is the OAU's special representative in Chad, flew in
specially froa Nairobi. on the eve of the talks. to participate. And let us not
forget the Kenyan minister of foreign affairs, Robert 3kou. representing his head
of state. Mr Daniel Arap Moi, acting president of the organization.

So the first elements of the Inter-American Force will thus arrive less than a
month after the departure of the first group of Libyan troops.

Other states. in addition to Nigeria, Senegal and Zaire. agreed to participate in
the force as a result of strenuous negotiations held on the sidelines of the Franco-
African conference in Paris. Gabonese President Onar Bongo, for example, let himself
be convinced by his more senior counterparts Felix Houphouet-Boigny (Ivory Coast) and
Hobutu Scsc Seko (Zaire) to contribute to the force, though previously he had been
hostile to the idea. preferring a UN force. His contribution was not troops, how-
ever. but putting C-130 transport planes at the disposal of the 0A".

Egypt, according to ninister Butrus Chali, will make a symbolic contribution of
military medics: regular troops would be perceived as a provocation to the Libyan
adversary. Benin and Togo have also decided to contribute since the time the Paris
sun-it was held. Also. Algeria has reportedly at last agreed to provide some of
the logistical support.

3
FORTOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What is it that has suddenly put an end to the equivocation which has paralyzed

the African states since 1979? For one thing, the decision made by the GAO summit
in Nairobi in June 1981, to be sure: for the first time, a direct appeal was made
to all member states. Doubtless, also, the campaign Eden Kodjo has undertaken since
then to get the support of various heads of state. Above all. it cannot be denied,
reluctance was overcome by the agreement of non-African countries to furnish mater-
ial support (equipment, transport and even armament) and financial backing.

Thus, by an ironic twist of fate, former French president Valery Giscard d'Bstaing's
cherished idea of a "trialogue," which the OAU had always rejected, is now being
realized in the most spectacular way--but in the domain of military materiel. Por
in the case at hand the Africans are supplying the natural resources (human beings,
since we are speaking of soldiers , an industrialised country (France) will provide
the technology, and--at least according to some reports—Saudi Arabia will finance
the expedition, particularly the maintenance costs of the force.

Paris's contribution was directly negotiated between France on the one side and
Senegal and Zaire on the other-Nigeria needed no assistance, and the OAU says it
has not asked anyone for technical assistance. The OAU, however, will resume sole
responsibility for coordinating financial contributions. For the OAU will be in
charge of all operations. The accord signed 6 November by the president of Chad,
Coukouni Oueddei, and Eden Kodjo when the two were passing through Paris (in reality
both men had agreed beforehand to meet there), laid outthe principles which would
guide the force, principles modeled on those which govern United Nations forces.

The first principle is that the Inter-African Force will be under the authority,

not of the cum (Transitional National Union Government), but of the secretary
general of the OAU. He has already designated his special representative in Chad,
Ethiopian Cebre Egziaber Dawit, who is to be assisted by a committee formed from
representatives of Benin, Congo, Guinea, Togo and Kenya. Under the political-
adninistrative control of the OAU, the force will be under the military command of

a high-ranking officer-presumably a Nigerian--backed up by a "committee of officers"
from all of the various national contingents who will make up the general staff.

The second principle is that the Inter-African Force will not be coercive, in
Other words it will use its weapons only in slef—defenae and not take its fighting
orders from the GUNW. There is, however, one subtle variation from the UN rules:
the Inter-African Force in Chad will do more than just defend itself, since it may
he led to defend the CUNT's authority.

The same nuance should also have the effect of amending the third principle, which
under UN rules is that an international force must be purely for preservation, in
other words absolutely neutral between the possible antagonists. In Chad. such a
restriction would not be in conformity with the spirit of the OAU decision. Of
course, the principal mission of the Inter-African troops will be to prevent con-
frontations between the rival Chadian factions, and it is in this sense that the
term "peacekeeping force" was used.

One UN principle was not maintained: the nonparticipation of certain states in
crvatlnn the force. Since the Korean "er, the UN has made it a rule not to allow
the two most influential members of the Security Council (the United States and

h
FOR OFFK1AL.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. 09..
the Soviet llnion) to participate in an international expeditionary force. No such
immu- exlsts (yet) In the MU. but the Lagos accords (August 1979) excluded the
participation of neighboring states (Cameroon, Central Africa, Egypt, Libya, Niger,
Nigeria and Sudan). As it turns out, Nigeria is supplying the bulk of the two”;
According to the special representative of the 0M) secretary general in Chad, Gebre
Egziaber Dawit, "the Nairobi resolution, adopted unanimously by the Ila-her countries
of the OM]. a resolution more recent than the Lagos accords, does not contain that

restriction. As far as the OAU is concerned, this makes the Lagos accords inopera-
tive." - .'.

Thus there is nothing to prevent Libya from participating in the Inter-African Force.
But it seems unlikely that it will. For one thing, because Qadhdhafi has been too 0
deeply involved to have credibility as an arbiter. For another, and sore impor-
tantly, the prospect of hosting the next OAU sun-lit in 1982 is forcing Tripoli to

take a more diplomatic tack. Nigeria—which is deter-ined to assert itself as
"Africa's great pover"-understands this quite well.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9516
630: (0719/3110

5
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

CHAD

CHAD SAID TO HAVE BEEN GOOD TRAINING SCHOOL FOR LIBYAN ARMY
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1089, 18 Nov 81 p 36

[Article by M.S. "Farewell to Arms"!

[Text] Col Qadhdhafi has certainly made up his mind to get out of the Chadian
ishrogiio. One week after giving the order for his army to withdraw (Tuesday, 3
November), more than 5,000 soldiers-~out of a total of 8,500—-have already returned
to their barracks at Sehha and Tripoli. Over the same period fully half the military
equipment has been sent back, including the armored equipment and armored cars.

Day and night the big Ilyushin-76 and Hercules 0-130 transport planes and a Boeing
707 belonging to Air Rwanda have been filled with men and machines to be flown

back to Libya.

All these operations are being carried out in an orderly and disciplined way.
hdjamena was emptied of Libyan soldiers in scarcely 3 days. The only one left is
Col Radwan Salah dewan, commander in chief of the Libyan expeditionary force, who
must coordinate the countrywide evacuation from the Chadian capital.

Guereda, Adre and Iriba, three towns along the Sudanese border, have also been
evacuated. The ceasefire proclaimed by Hissein Habre several hours after the an-
nouncement of the Libyan withdrawal made this possible. On Monday, 9 November it
was announced that the bases at Douguia. Mao and Ari. midway between Ndjamena and
Aheche. had been evacuated. Then it was Abeche's turn. By leaving, the Libyans
showed their determination to abandon Chad completely. At least almost completely,
for Qadhdhafi has no intention of quitting the Aouzou Strip. Goukouni Oueddei
would in any case not be in a good position to claim a region which was reportedly
the subject of a deal made between Qadhdhafi and himself. In exchange for Aouzou
Tripoli is supposed to have agreed to help Coukouni stay in power as president of

Chad.

The Lihyans would thus appear to have fulfilled their side of the contract. In
addition to their support for the Chadian head of state, they created a sort of
stability in the country, even if their prolonged presence was scarcely to the lik-
ing of a number of Chadians, particularly in the southern part of the country.
People in the north, by contrast, welcomed the Libysns as "liberators." And soon
every month more Chadians would arrive to fill up the hotels of Tripoli, later
returning with pockets well-filled. They must not have been happy to see the
Libyan withdrawal. Qadhdhafi's soldiers were doubtless relieved. The war was
over. Because for then it really was a war. That was the word used in Tripoli to
describe the Chadian expedition. The soldiers got double pay and their families
received indemni ties.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"We will all be gone within 2 weeks," said Col Radwan on 4 November. A graduate
of the Sundhurst academy (Great Britain), the 36-year-old commander of the Libyan

troops in Chad is one of Qadhdhafi's trusted confidants. His predecessor was
Abd-al-‘Aziz Has'ud, who made the "trimphal entry" into Ndjansna.

The majority of the 8,500 soldiers under his orders were Libyans. The rest of the
contingent was made up of Arabs, Africans and a few European mercenaries responsible
for bolstering and training the Libyans.

Chad was thus a good training school for Qadhdhafi's army. The military authorities
of the Jamahiriya in fact plan to transfer the "veterans" of the Chadian expedition
to the Egyptian and Sudanese borders.

While awaiting their new posting. the repatriated troops have been given 2 weeks'
leavo. It was only when the Libyan people saw them return that the Libyan people
learned how the expedition turned out. For none of Tripoli's press organs had

spoken of the outcome. The withdrawal was as mysterious as the intervention that

began Sunday, 14 December 1980.
COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique CRUPJIA 1981.

9516
C80: 1. 719/311.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY

BRIEFS

LIBYAN LOSSES IN CHAD--0n 28 November, Colonel Qadhdhafi' stated in Sebha that "Libya
will remain neutral if fighting breaks out again in Chad." lie indiwted that "Libya
lost 300 martyrs, officers and soldiers in its operations in-Chad and that another
700 were wounded. Some 60 are still hospitalized." Qadhdhafi added that Libyan
losses represented only 2 percent of those taking part in the operations, "insigni-

live munition may go as high as 5 percent of those involved." Qadhdhafi announced
that the Libyan troops back from Chad would not be dissolved, but converted, "be-
cause of their performance. into rapid intervention forces." {Text} [Paris

MARCHFS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3250] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1980] 11,666

a1 Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). In a bulletin published by its headquarters
in Montreal. the man states that the projects were approved within the framework
of the UN Development Program (UNDP) and include, in addition to Chad, Bangladesh
(two). Colombia. Ethiopia and Nepal. [Text] [Paris KARCHES TROPICAUX B'l' MEDITER-

RANEENS in French No 1882. lo Dec 81 p 3250] [COPYRICH‘rz Rene Moreux et Cie Paris
1980] 11,464

CSO: 4719/3/40

FOR OFFICIAL I.“ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ban on the purchase of new vehic
went and public enterprises.

bankers, economists and business-en, it was to study the affects of the reconstruc-
tion tax instituted in August and of

the higher prices for certain products. [Text]
[Paris HARCHBS TROPICAL”! ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3245]
COPYRIGKT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1980] 11,466

normalization of relations
with Israel. The statement was made before the In General

Matthews participated. [Text] [Paris HAROIBS TROPICAUX ET aromas in French
No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3245] (COPYRIGHT:

, an comissioner of the Merchant Marine, the
Liberian comercial fleet has reported

1y dropped from 8 to 10 million tons (10 to
[2 percent) since the coup d'etat of 12 April 1980. The fleet now reportedly

:otals no more than 75 million gross tone. The reduction is said to be the result
)f. the world shipping recession and of str

anger regulations ordered by authorities
l8 part of the framework of international conventions aimed at preventing accidents.

momchweomr
POI OHIO“. USE ONLY

Ilowcver. It is also the rcau‘lt of the uncertainty caused by the change in the Liberi
inn rcglnczmul part lcularly by the attitude of banks, which advised owners to cease
registering all their vessels in Liberia so as to "spread out the risks." Never-
thelesa. Bowen says that there is renewed confidence and the fleet is reportedly
beginning to grow, although more slowly than at the beginning of the last decade.
The Liberian fleet nevertheless remains the world's largest, even though its growth
is not the annual 5 to 6 percent that the country's authorities had predicted.

[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1882, 10 Dec 81
p 3246] [COPYRIGlﬂ'z Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1980] 11,664

FRENCH LOAN—At the end of November, France granted Liberia a $175,000-loan to help
it finance the Sinoe oil-palm project. The. project, begun in 1976. covers some
3,500 hectares. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX BL HBDITBRRANEENS in French

No 1882, lo Dec 81 p 3246] [COPYRIGH'h Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1980] 11,466

CSO: 4719/3100

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORtDFFﬂJAl.USE¢NULY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

MEASURES AGAINST RURAL EXODUS-—In Mozambique, as in most other African countries,
the rural exodus has taken on major proportions. Without mentioning the attraction
of city life. the movement of the rural population to urban centers is explained by
difficulties born of natural disasters (drought, floods, and so on), which reduce
the resources of rural areas. In order to check this situation, the government in
Maputo has tried since independence to solve material problems and to give rural
people resources as nearly equal to those of their city colleagues as possible,

by raising the price of livestock and corn, setting up marketing structures for

cooperatives' farm products. establishing coununity villages, and so on. It would
appear that these measures are about to bear fruit and we are witnessing a reversal

of the trend - that is, the beginning of a novenent from cities and a return to
the land. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS in French No 1881,
27 Nov 81 p 3196] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Raris 1981] 11,464

CSO: 4719/4719/339

11
IOI1DFFKJALIEIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}: ONLY

SENEGAL

RELATIONS BETWEEN THO PDS LEADERS 'NJT DOING VEL'
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE 1.1 French No 1090, 25 Rev 81 pp 62-103
[Article by Sennen Andrianirado "Fara N'Diaye Versus Abdoulaye Hade"]

[Text] No area have been discovered in the investigation of several PDS [Senegalese
Denocratic Party] militants "for" national security violations. Andou Fall's
statements (subsequently retracted, adeittedly) that he had brought a shipment of
arms fro- Libya into Senegal via Mauritania (LA. No 1085) are thus unsubstantiated.

Despite the official silence, it seens that the serious charges hanging over several
P'DS nilitants~including parliamentary deputy Doudou Camera—have not been dismissed.
Judicial interrogation began 1. Novaber in Kakar, at which time it was asked that
the principal defendants be released on bail. According to intonation corroborated
by several sources, it has reportedly been established that, while arns nay not
actually have been brought into the country. the investigators have uncovered a

plan to transport and distribute military equipeent throughout the country. It has
reportedly also been established that the six bodyguards of PBS secretary general
Abdoulaye Wade, who went to Libya for training between March and Hay 1981 (J .A. No
1086), received more than just instruction in "close-in protection." Contrary to
the assertions nade by Mr Wade, the goons were supposedly initiated into sabotage
techniques: use of explosives and destabilization techniques, in particular.

However, no official confirmation can be expected before the trial, which is expected
to begin without delay. In any case the PDS. whether the victin of entrapment (as
Mr Wade says) or of its own ill-considered action (as its opponents believe), has
been weakened by this affair, perhaps even torn to pieces. There are note and nore
defections in the ranks. Early in October a deputy, Youssouf Diene. resigned.

Other militants followed suit, at holds (the fiefdon of Doudou Camera, one of the
principal defendants) and M'Bour, the electoral district of Fara N'Diaye, deputy
secretary general and nunber two man in the PDS.

Relations between the number one and nuber two men—Abdoulsye Pads and Fara N'Diaye
(J.A. No lO37)--are themselves not doing very well, despite the protestations of
friendship and solidarity they both have Iade. The deputy has taken over the reins
of the party after convincing the leader to rennin outside the country.

He met Fara N'Diaye as he was passing through Paris in early November. lie does not
tell precisely the same story as Wade. Circunspect in his statsnents about the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

government. artful in dealing with the party whose "savior" he has suddenly become,
Fara N'Diaye is keeping his composure and views the situation such like President
Abdou Diouf does: that the case should be decided in the courts, and that the only
question is whether or not there was a violation of national security. Beyond that,
the action head of the PDS--a title he rejects-~ssys he is confident about the party's
future. Doubtless because he is organizing a special national convention to consider
the lessons of the "affair" between now and the end of the year. Presumably, it will
also render judgment on the actions taken by Abdoulaye Hade, who theoretically should
preside at the opening session in Dakar. Hhethe: he will preside at the closing
session no one knows--except perhaps Fara N'Diaye who has the advantage of being on

the scene, and the handicap of being neither as good an orator nor as well-off as
Wade.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9516
080' 6719/314

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

PDS SECRETARY INTERVIENED CONCERNING PARTY'S CONDITION
Paris JEUNE APRIQUE in French No 1090, 25 Nov 81 pp 63-66

[Interview with Fara N'Diaye. acting secretary general of the PDS [Senegalese
Democratic Party], by Sennen Andriamirado, date not given, in Paris]

[Text] [Question] You met President Abdou Diouf in Paris, at the Senegalese Embassy.

on 4 November. .Doubtless you talked with him about the accusations leveled against
some of your party militants.

[Answer] Yes, I saw him. He thinks that it is a tiresome affair. that as far as
he is concerned, he only wants to exercise his rightful authority and it is up to
the courts to determine whether there was in fact a violation of national security.
I think. like he does, that it should be taken care of in the courts.

[Question] Hr Wade, who has been in Paris now for close to 2 months, did not see
President Diouf. Has he fully informed about your meeting?

[Answer] I do not initiate anything without first consulting with my superior.

[Question] Do you know whether Bade net with certain African heads of state during
the Franco-African summit in Paris to ask their good offices in this affair?

[Answer] I only know that he met President Omar Bongo at the Hotel Crillon, but I
am not certain that he asked for any kind of good offices.

[Question] Do you think it would be improper for Abdoulaye Hade to ask the French
PS [Socialist Party] to mediate or get involved?

[Answer] Yes. Absolutely improper. But I do not think that what you say has
happened .

[Question] Why is your secretary general not returning to Senegal? Could he be
accused of something?

[Answer] No. He in the national secretariat of the party believe it is essential
for him to remain abroad to explain our views on the situation.

[Question] To whom, for example?

1h
FOR ommt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] To you!
[Question] Has it his own decision to remain abroad?

[Answer] To the contrary. He wanted to come back. But he was in the minority.
The party leadership decided otherwise.

[Question] What was your personal opinion?
[Answer] I was one of those who thought he should not return right away.

[Question] On Thursday, 1 October. when I telephoned you. though, you told me
that you were expecting him that day in Dakar.

[Answer] It was not my place to confide in you at a time when the government did
not know whether wade was going to return or not. But the national secretariat

had made the decision the night before.

[Question] In Mr Hade's absence, the PDS is in your hands, since you are the
deputy secretary general. His absence seems to suit you....

[Answer] Not at all! Not if we are speaking of ny personal interests. “hat you
are saying there credits the rumors of rivalry between Wade and myself.

[Question] To hear you talk, everything between you two is "peaches and cream!"

[Answer] We have two different personalities, our methods may be different, some
of our ideas may be different.

[Question] So what are you ooing together?

[Answer] we are different, but we counterbalance each other.

[Question] There is certainly no shortage of "counter" right now!

[Answer] I do not know whether the problem should be viewed in those terms. The
party is functioning. certainly. We hold meetings regularly; two or three times a
week. I send missions into the country. But I do not think the question is well
formulated. Presently, for example, Hade is absent, and I too an absent from
Senegal, and someone has been named to head the party in the interim.

[Question] Have you asked Mr Hade to return soon?

[Answer] Not yet.

[Question] It might be a long time!

[Answer] And it might not! It is up to the national secretariat to decide.

[Question] Does not this prolonged absence of the secretary general also tend to
lend credence to the charges against some of its leaders, if not the party itself?

[Answer] There are some people who think so. But our feeling is that it is in
the party's interest for Abdoulaye to continue the work he is now doing. While

out or the country he is making contacts that he alone can make.

15
ms omcw. use ONLY
l-‘Oll OFFK 1AI. “SI-Z ONLY

[Question] Are the militants not disturbed by this absence? Are they not worried
seeing the P08 in trouble?

[Answer] The PDS is not in trouble. Some leaders and acne militants have certainly
been arrested, an accusation hangs over the party, but that is as far as it goes.
They are not worried.

[Question] There have been a large nmber of defections from your ranks.

[Answer] The number of these defections has been exaggerated. L8 SOLBIL wrote;"
that 60 militants had resigned at Kolda and 300 at H'Bour. That is absurd! People
will say anything. That aside, these defections were not political in nature. "

[Question] Is Wade himself not in trouble?

[Answer] That is a question for the leadership of the party and its militants.
He are sending enissaries to explain the absence of the national secretary general.
But the question, I admit, is raised at every meeting of the secretariat.

[Question] Are you sure that Wade will come back to Senegal when the party decides
it is time for him to return?

[Answer] Hell! I do not think he can do otherwise if the party leadership asks
it of him! He can come back with nothing to fear either as a citizen or as the
secretary general of the party.

[Question] Does the party not think that Abdoulaye Wade may have acted on his
own, unbeknownst to the secretariat, in that business of trainees being sent to
Libya? Did you yourself know about it?

[Answer] it is an interesting question, and one which night well be asked. But,
as far as the party is concerned, the majority of the leadership is not doing so:
the secretary general has a certain latitude in taking initiatives. There is no
necessity a priori for us to monitor his actions. If by his actions he should
harn the party. then we settle accounts with him a posteriori.

“huuninnl in the case at hand, has he hurt the party?

[Answer] I do not think so. I an sure that if he had subnitted that decision to
our national leadership, it would have been approved.

[Question] So, the decision was not submitted to your leadership?
[Answer] (Laughs) You have to go by what he tells you! Abdoulaye Wade has told

us that he did not have advance knowledge of the decision made by Doudou Camera to
send his goons for training in Libya.

[Question] Do you know what the trainees did in Libya?
[Answer] No. I had no access to the instructional materials. But if one believes

the government, they were taught to handle arns, explosives, and instructed in
techniques of destabilization.

16
FINIC”HW(JAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] What do you think?

[Answer] Well, it is certain that we did need a party militia, bodyguards.
[Question] The word militia has very military connotations.

[Answer] It's a matter of semantics. The (Senegalese) Socialist Party [PS]
certainly has its vigilantes.

[Question] It is one thing to be a goon, and quite another to be a demolitions
expert.

[Answer] Are you certain that those men learned how to handle explosives? I am not.
[Question] Have you ordered an investigation within the party?

[Answer] Absolutely not. I met with Doudou Camera only a few hours before his
arrest. He told me that he had gone to Libya for a course in ”close-in protection."
And the instruction manuals found are the usual documents found in all military and
parmilitary organizations. That aside, speaking objectively, I do not think that
people can be taught military techniques in 2 months.

[Question] Does the Senegalese Government have good reason to be worried?

[Answer] It is legitimate to investigate to determine whether or not there has
been a violation of national security. If I were in the governemnt, I would have
acted the same; I would be derelict in my responsibilities if I did not order such
investigations. It remains to be seen whether the measures taken to ascertain the
truth were completely legal.

[Question] You seem to doubt it. Is Senegalese democracy perhaps in danger?

[Answer] Senegalese democracy has a cold! Coming right after Senghor's departure
and the establishment of a multi-party system. we did not need all this. It is a
pity. this attack against the main opposition party.

[Question] But what if it were the result of some blundering or ill-considered
actions on the part of the PDS itself?

[Answer] Democracy should not be viewed in terms of blundering or artfulness on
the part of any one political leader.

[Question] Hill Abdou Diouf respect the democratic rules of the game?

[Answer] I have no reason to think he is not a democrat. When I met him in Paris,
the first thing he asked me was whether our militants had been tortured. I was
naturally obliged to say no. I also know that some members of his party had urged
him to transfer the matter to the state security court, and that he refused.

[Question] Do you believe there will be alternation [of ruling majorities] in
Senegal?

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I an in the ms in order to win power democratically. And I think the;
It. Is posslblc.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9516
C80: #7191311.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
$0. OFFICJAI.U§I:(HﬁLY

SENEGAL

DATA ON INDUSTRIAL FIRMS IN DAKAR FREE ZONE
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1882, 4 Dec 81 p 3239

[Text] The General Directorate of the ZPID [Dakar Industrial Free Zone] recently
drew up a balance sheet of promotion for the ZPID, showing the enterprises estab-

lished in the Free Zone and the various projects for the establishment of other
industrial units.

Pive years after it was set up at the end of July 1980, only six enterprises have
carried out their industrial projects:

The African Rubber, Automobile and Cycle Company (SAICAC), a limited liability
company with capital of 120 million CPA francs, made an investment of 1,116,130,000
CPA francs and employs some 150 full-time wage earners. to whom it pays over

100 million CPA francs in salaries a year.

The Technical and Commercial Union (UTC). a limited liability company with capital
of 100 million CPA francs, was originally supposed to bring together five different
enterprises. It is currently made up of Transcogants (glove-manufacturing company)
and Transcodi (lighter-manufacturing firm). Its investments amount to 220 million
CPA francs and the company employs 175 persons.

With 35 employees, the French-African Metallurgy Company (SAPAH) manufactures
trailer shops and metal frames in particular. A limited liability company with

capital of 150 million CPA francs, its investments total 620 million.

with about 100 employees and investments of 180 million CPA francs, Senegal-Belgique-
France (SEBEPRA). approved in 1980. makes sports clothes.

The African woolen Mills (PILAP) employ about 100 persons in a small-scale rug-
mnking factory. In its second phase. PILAP could employ up to 2,000 persons and
make investments of 465 million CPA francs.

Finally, the Industrial Food Products Company for Best Africa (PAP-Afrique) is con-
sidering the establishment of an industrial tomato and canning plant. There would

be 101 Senegalese employees after 2 years of operation and investments would total
some 1.7 billion CPA francs.

Since the end of July 1980, in addition to Tamaro, Inc. (sugar milling plant with

investments of over 1 billion CPA francs), the ZPID has given its approval to five
other projects in 1981:

19
FOI‘OFFKIAJ.USI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Parke Davis of Rest Africa. which will make pharmaceutical products and cosaetics,
will have investments of 1.10 billion CPA france and employ 80 Senegalese in the be-
ginning. Its capital, 250 million CPA francs, is held (99.98 percent) by the West
German firm Goedecke AG, which is itself looepercent owned by the American company
turner-Lambert. work was scheduled to begin in November 1981.

Semail, with a capital of 150 million CPA francs (Hong Kong investors), is to make
investments of 320.75 million francs and employ 120 Senegalese initially.

Rapi, a company with a capital of 40 million CIA francs, proposes to invest 360 1:11-
lion CPA france and enploy 25 Senegalese for the manufacture of plastic products

for industry. Rapi, which is Belgian-owned, was to begin its activities in November
1981, on premises loaned by.the Free Zone. '

International Housing Company Senegal, an American company, has just joined with
the Senegalese minister of economy and finance in signing an agremnt to buy back
facilities that belonged to the former lissyda. lac-Senegal will employ about 50
Senegalese full time. The number will grow very rapidly because of the company's
markets in Saudi Arabia, Mexico and a number of countries in BCOHAS. In addition
to the purchase of the former Hasyda, Inc-Senegal provides Senegal with $500,000
for the rehabilitation of facilities and raw materials in order to successfully
manufacture prefabricated housing components.

Hedical Equipment (HEDIMAT) is a company that produces several products used in the
medical field. Initially, the company will produce only atoxic and sterilized pro-
pylene syringes. ‘

Finally, the Dakar Industrial Free Zone is closely following some 40 industrial
projects, most of which are in the feasibility study stage. They should permit the
creation of 3,200 jobs and overall investments of some 12 billion CPA francs.

Out of these 1.0 projects, 12 are Italian (woolen blankets and synthetic furs. toys,
electrical household appliances, glass bottles and glasses, containers, shoes,
materials for the chemical industry, fish flour, prefabricated construction elements
and cultured pearls), 9 are Brazilian (bicycles 'and motorcycles, calculators and
registers, canned chicken and margarine, watches, audiovisual equipment, lighters,
telephones, television sets), 6 are Senegalese (razor blades,-cosnetics, canned
fruits and vegetables, diesel motors, tractors and agricultural equipment, carbon-
ated beverages, leather and fabric items), 6 are French (insect exterminators,
quick freezing of seafood products, spark plugs, processing of expanded polystyrene,

table peanuts, livestock feed), 2 are from UASC countries (railroad cars and hurri-
cane lamps, the 1atter project initiated by the Heat African Development Bank,

BOAD). 1 is Portuguese (liquors), l is Indian (rope and woven bags), 1 is American
(cosmetics), l is Dutch (cigars and cigarettes) and finally, 1 is Canadian (fishing
nets or industrial cotton).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1980.

11,464
cso: 47191340

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOIGUFFKJAL.USE<DNLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

SENECALBSE-KUHAITI BANK YEAR—-The 1980 fiscal year of the Senegalese-Kuwaiti Bank
was marked by noteworthy development of activity, both domestic and international.
On 30 Septenber 1980, the balance sheet'totsled 17.2 billion CPA francs (up 39.62
percent over September 1979). CUstoner resources (demand and term deposits) make
up 2.8 billion CPA francs (up 21.6 percent). Independently of these local resources.
the bank enjoys aid from the Kuwaiti Development Fund and foreign financial insti-
tutions (2.6 billion CPA francs). Total credits to the economy (comnercial port-
folio and advances) represent 12.5 billion CPA francs (up 64.02 percent). with
ONCAD [National Office of Cooperation and Assistance for Development] providing

2.6 billion in credits. Not included in the balance sheet, commitments for guar-
antees and backing and openings of confirned documentary credits total 6.5 billion
CPA francs. compared with 1 billion on 30 September 1979. In addition, the balance
sheet on 30 September 1980 included 1.7 billion CPA francs in advances and loans to
the government and financial institutions. Thanks to bank aid, the Sotiba Textile
and Industrial Complex was Senegalized and the Sabe plant, which specializes in
prefabricated industrial construction, expanded its means of production. In addi-
tion, the bank participated in the capital of the Senegalese Housing Bank. After
anortizations, provisions and taxes, the fiscal year showed a net result of 17b.3
nillion CPA francs (up 22 percent), on which the general assembly meeting of 23

23 March 1981 decided to distribute a 7-percent dividend for capital of 2 billion
CPA francs. The Senegalese-Kuwaiti Bank is headed-by Babacar Kebe and Slaheddine
Mnunlhl is the general manager. [Text]_ [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS
in French No 1882, 6 Dec 81 p 3239] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et 01: Paris 1980]
11,466 -

CSO: 6719/360

21
FIIICIHWCJAI.IIHE(IULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL SITUATION AT END OF JUNE 1981
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1878, 6 Nov 81 pp 2806-2807
[Text] The stabilization phase of the Hobutu Plan ended 31 December 1980.

After a final visit to Kinshasa in December 1980 the International Monetary Fund
seemed satisfied with the "performance levels" achieved by Zaire in the framework

of the Hobutu Plan. Therefore the year 1981 was starting off with an enormous
hope-the hope of being able to rapidly benefit from IMF extended facilities which
were meant to make it possible to start up the real economic recovery plan. with
this outlook in view a 13 April 1981 regulation-law approved the 1981-1983 public
sector investment program which constitutes the Executive Council's recovery program
during the period being considered.

The overall cost of the 3-year program added up to 6,867.3 [million] zaires of which
approximately 4,688.1 million were in foreign currency.

In actuality it was not until 23 June 1981 that the IMP announced its decision to
grant Zaire the "extended facilities" under discussion for several months. The

total sum of this credit is 9i2 million SDR which is the equivalent of $1,058 million
or about 61 billion Belgian francs. It is being made available over a period of

3 years. The IMF stated that this credit, the largest ever granted by that institu-
tion to an African country, was intended to "permit a gradual revival of the economy,

a reduction in inflation. and balance of payments improvement."
The Monetary and Financial Situation

The 1981 Budget-~The budget plan for 1981 was filed in October 1980 and initial
alterations were made on 27 December 1980. (See the 6 March 1981 issue of HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, page 568.) In March 1981 the government found itself
forced to once again adjust that budget (Regulation-law [81-106 dated 13 April 1981
set new definitive provisions.)

The budgetary law authorizes a 500 million zaire deficit but the new projected
deficit was going to amount to the sum of 521.3 million. In order to cover this
extra amount, the state commissioner for finance and budget was authorized to take
out one or several loans during 1981.

Portfolio Hanagement--The protfolio department, which had collected some 67 million
zaires in 1980 according to figures given by the Zairian press, declared that it
anticipated realizing nearly 81 million zaires of dividends in 1981.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘I-‘K 1AI. USE ONLY

The Reorganization of Customs--Various measures have been and will be taken with a
view towards changing Zalre'a customs policy which was previously "tax" policy

into "economic" policy pressing for revival of the country's economic activity.1
The "Customs and Excise of f ice" (OPIDA) has received sizable assistance from Belgium
in terms of finance and personnel.

Currency-419 until 19 June the zaire rate remained stable; changes in the value of
the SDR, the SDR being greatly affected by the rising dollar rate, even caused a
short-lived rise in the official quoted value. On 19 June the Executive Council
decided to once again devalue the zaire by 4 [as published; 60?] percent, bringing
it down to 0.1575 8le (compared to 0.2625 ever since the last devaluation in March
1980). On 23 June the zaire was averaging 7.0707 Belgian francs on the Brussels
money market. A new unofficial rate was imediately established on 30 June at
around 4 Belgian francs on the Zurich market.2

It is still too early to talk about the repercussions of this devaluation measure
on the country's economic and social environments. while exports will certainly be
given an advantage, the cost of living might well be affected and the working masses
might well be faced with tough problems.

Inflation--During that same 6 months Zaire's two standard indices (the index in
Kinshasa stores using a base of June 1960-100, and consumer goods in Kinshasa markets
using a base of December 1964-100) show the continuation of the slowdown recorded
during the last few months of 1980. However, it will be necessary to wait for the
results of the second 6 months of this year before being able to arrive at more
definite conclusions in view of the aforementioned devaluation.

SAD Imports [Imports Without Purchase of Foreign Exchange]-Zaire's entire economic
system has for many long years been suffering from a tragic shortage of foreign
currency. Because that shortage served to check commercial and industrial imports,
it has weighed heavily on the productivity of agribusiness firms, mining firms, and
other firms, causing a reduction in the country's exports for that very reason.

In order to get out of that vicious circle there ended up being administrative tolerance
for the use of SAD (no purchase of foreign exchange involved) licenses. In actuality
this t'ucnllrugud smuggling and gave rise to an incredible series of schemes which

made a highly placed class of profiteers very wealthy.

In January 1981 the Bank of Zaire via its circular 9175 legalized this curious system
with a two-fold aim: l) to alleviate the country's shortages in supplies of consumer
goods, raw materials, spare parts, etc.; and, 2) to enlarge the customs tax base

and thereby increase budgetary receipts.

While this system has been presenting certain advantages for the time being, in the
lung term it unquestionably risks gradually corrupting the Zairisn economy and
partially emptying it of its substance. Curiously enough this business occurred
during the recent probation period imposed on Zaire by the IMP (from January to the
end of June 1981) which institution dauntlessly helped to set up a legal system
running counter to the entire policy imposed by it up to now.

Zaire's foreign trade has been rescued (at least in part) by legalized fraud: this
is one more paradox to add to the long list of them which have seen the light of day
in ’/.alre thoughout its first 20 years of independence.3

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Economic Situation

At the end of 1980 a certain hope was emerging of seeking the economic situation

improve gradually and slowly but steadily. By 30 June 1981 it seems that the facts
did not entirely match that hope.

He are taking the following quote, which is--do believe ua-revealing, from a

23 June 1981 press statement published in the 1M? bulletin: “Important progress had
been made in 1980 in the framework of the stabilization program. However, the external
position has continued to be subjected to pressures and marked structural imbalances
have persisted within the economy. A drop in the prices of Zaire's principal exports,
namely copper and cobalt, as well as the growing burden of external debt service,

have intensified this problem."

The Mining Sector

Copper-~The production of GECAMINES [General Quarries and Mines Company] for the
first 6 months amounted to 225,000 tons. For the same period amounts transported
out reached 219,029 tons via the following routes: 111,121 tons via Matadi (z. a);

8,808 tons via Dar-es-Salaam (Tanzania); 44,401 tons via Durban (South Africa);
and 54,699 tons via East London (South Africa).

No figure is available with respect to SODIMIZA [Industrial Development and Mining
Company of Zaire].

Once again there was the matter of reviving the Tenke-Pungurume Mining Company located
in the southern part of Shaba between Likasi and Kolwezi. Mining that deposit will

depend on completing the high tension line which will bring electricity from Inga to
Shaba.

To finish off let us observe that France's BRGM [Bureau of Geological and Mining
Exploration] which has an interest in the possible mining of a deposit located at
Bikulushi, has been able to make progress because of mineralogical tests of large
samples and a study of the possibilities for getting out concentrates.

Cobnlt--l980 cobalt production amounted to about 14,480 tons. Since 1980 sales
were between 6,500 and 8,000 tons, and faced with the aforementioned output, Zaire

rapidly found itself sitting on top of a 14,000-ton stock (which is the equivalent
of a year's production).

1he output of the first 6 months of 1981, which rose to 7,500 tons, has not been
shipped out except for 4,751 tons, 3,630 tons of that by sea (Durban) and 1,121 tons
by air. This is in spite of the fact that as of 2 March 1981 Zaire had reduced its
product price by 25 to 30 dollars a pound.

Diamonds--The first 6 months' production of MIBA [Bakwanga Mining Company] amounted
to 2,550,000 carats and it was possible to export 2,720,000 carats.

On 26 May a statement by the Zairian Company for the Marketing of Ores (SOZACOH)
announced that the valuation and sale of Zairian diamonds would be carried out hence-
forth in Kinshasa under conditions specified by that company, a state enterprise

in charge of handling the marketing of the country's ores and mining products. An
initial sale was carried out on 29 May. It involved 620,000 carats, acquired by
three purchasers approved by the Republic of Zaire.

2h
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Casslterite (Tin)--As was the case in our preceding summaries, the only available
figures are those which have been conveyed to us by SOMINKI [Mining and Industrial
Company of Kivu] which for the first 6 months of the year has shipped out 1,693
tons of cassiterite, 36.75 tons of wolframite. 45.5 tons of coltan and 21.6 tons
of monazite.

BRGH is planning to expand the operations of SOHIKA [Karongo Mining Company] in Rania,
in northern Shaba. BRGH holds an 80 percent share in SOHIKA via its mining sub-
sidiary CONFRAHINES [expansion unknown; French Mining Company?]. Bork on the facilities
has begun; production was to start up in spring 1981 and might reach 750 tons a year.

Co1d--1t is not possible to find an overall statistic any more than it was for the
two 6-month periods of 1980. The only indication is from SOHINKI which exported
232.7 kg of pure gold via Kinshasa (N.B.: in 1979 SOHINKI's production represented
20 percent of the total).

According to unofficial Zairian sources the situation of OKIHO (Kilo-Hoto Office)
a state enterprise, is said to still leave much to be desired; nearly half of its
output is said to be smuggled.

oil-~0n 9 and 10 May SOZIR [Zairian-Italian Refining Company] carried out tests of
the desalinization unit it acquired at a cost of $800,000 in order to be able to
process Zairian crude oil. SOZIR's director-administrator declared himself satisfied
with the operation of the facility. ‘

Sometime in June 1981 the director general of Esso Zaire stated: 'ﬁhe Hbandaka
geological drilling has not given any indication of the existence of hydrocarbons

in that region. However, that does not call into question the potential of the
central basin. A second drill hole was started in a place located 15 km from Lokolama
(Bandundu). That second operation will make it possible to know if work can be
continued in the central basin (that work being a seismic operation which in the

event of continuation would take place in 1982/1983)."

Rrgarding ZAIREP, the experimental production effort which started up in April 1980
‘52,228 barrels exported in December) will be continued in 1981. Three new shafts
will be drilled in the second half of the year. If the results prove to be positive,
large—scale production of that facility can be considered.

Agricluture and Forestry

Rural Environment Crops--The third section of the Hobutu Plan included an important
item devoted to the FHA (Minimum Agricultural Plan) (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS issues of 1 August 1980 page 1894 and 6 March 1981 page 601).

1he results of this FHA taken as a whole have been disappointing: the "absence of
financing" for agriculture was one of the principal causes. In order to alleviate
these difficulties the Executive Committee decided on the creation of an Agricultural
ank which will channel all the resources meant to support the effort to revive
agriculture. The purpose of the bank is to make it possible to achieve the new PMA
establlshcd on 15 March 1981 by the Agriculture Department.

2
FOR<OFF1C1£i.USE4)NLY
FOR ()Fl-‘K'IAI. USE ONLY

An important development is that the Agriculture Department's budget for 1981 has

been quintrupled: it now amounts to 200 million zaires. The state's effort on

behalf of the agriculture sector for the period 1981-1983 is amounting to 1,330
million Zaires, 731 million of that in local currency and the rest in foreign currency.
Additionally, state interventions on the order of 35 million zaires are planned via
SOPIDE [Finance Company for Development].

while there is much talk in Zaire about "priority for Agriculture" and "agricultural
revival," in practice it is impossible to get a more or less accurate idea of the
efforts made and results achieved.

Agribusiness--In the agribusiness area, about which information is scant if not
nonexistent, we would be tempted to apply an old saying, "no news is good news."

When this sector's companies like many other companies were suffering the unfortunate
consequences of the deterioration of the Zairian economic system and were making
desperate efforts to put some order back into the business concerns hurt by Zairian-
ization, justified complaints made themselves heard. For months now a cocoon-like
silence has been enveloping their activities which allows one to think the efforts
which have been made, combined with a certain number of measures taken by the Zairian
Government, particularly in the area of foreign currency allocation, are having

their effect.

One thing is certain. That is that there have not been cases of abandonment recorded
and that is more than just a favorable indication. For the second 6—month period

this year we will attempt to gather a maximum number of statistical facts to back
up the foregoing assertions.

Coffee-in the area of coffee, which still constitutes one of the country's most
important agricultural outputs, the government has still not succeeded in stopping
smuggling estimated at 20,000 tons a year (compared to around 60,000 tons exported),
which is a quarter of total production. (g. 8.: for certain grades of coffee it
sometimes goes up to half of the harvest).

Forestry lkouﬂlqmenI--Dnring February the state commissioner for environment,
runsorvntiun and tourism drew the attentiontu'farmers to the implementation of the
reforestation policy decided on by the country's authorities.

He reminded them of the alternatives of which they were advised: either the enterprise
itself carries out reforestation within the boundaries of the area where it was

granted guaranteed timber supply. or it supplies the logistics needed for reforestation
teams in the region. Hecause of that logistical support (opening up tracks, light
tilling, transport of seedlings) the teams will provide for reforestation within and
sometimes outside the enterprise's supply area.

So the granting or renewal of any permit for cutting timber is a function of the
implementation of this reforestation program.

industry

while Zaire is still potentially one of themostindustrialized countries in black
Africa (before June 1960 it had taken a very distinct lead over the other "colonies")
its enterprises too often still run at levels from 20 to #0 percent capacity and in
a great number or cases no longer manage to satisfy the domestic market's demand.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The causes are well-known: too little foreign exchange and credit; no spare parts
and raw materials; working capital constantly loses value. In this situation how

is the burden of fixed costs to be distributed over fluctuating production and how
is one to continue to insure an enterprise's profitability?

There is no recent piece of statistical data for this sector. While efforts have
been made to improve the situation, the task is so difficult that results are
slow in making themselves felt in a noticeable and continuous fashion.

Foreign Aid, Financial Assistance, Investments

The considerations put forward in the examination of Zaire's economic and financial
situation at the end of 1980 (13 March 1981 issue of HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS)
under the heading "Foreign Aid and Financial Assistance" are still valid.

Regarding "multilateral aid," AID, the world Bank, the EEC and UNDP have continued
their activity benefiting Zaire.

In the area of "bilateral aid" Belgium's role remains quite considerable. The same
goes for France's role. Among the other countries contributing to the country's
economic recovery, very special mention should be made of Canada, Chile, China, the
People's Republic of the Congo, Japan, the PRC, and the United States.

investments (Private)--As we have written before (1 April 1980 and 20 March 1981
issues of MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS), reference made to the files published
by SOPIDE (which are regularly reprinted in these columns so we will not go back over
them any more here) gives a good idea of average current investments made via self-
financing either by nationals or by foreign firms.

As of 19 June 1981 the total credit given amounted to 33,096,000 zaires (level of
subsidies: 50 percent). "Classic" investment is still rare: if there are plans

along those lines only the future will tell us when and to what extent they will
be implemented.

:slahlishmeot of a Free Trade Zone System--Regulation 181-066 dated 30 April provides
for the establishment. organization and operation of ZOFI (Inga Free Trade Zone).

its administration will be set up in Hwanda with a permanent office in Kinshasa.

it should be noted that according to the map appended to the aforementioned regulation-
law the Inga geographical zone in which the free trade zone is being established
overlaps with the has-Zaire region and the Kinshasa urban region (see 22 Hay 1981

issue of HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS, page 1429).

Transportation, Energy and Telecommunications
The rehabilitation of the various communication networks is one of the basic conditions
for the success of the economic recovery plan. All aid and assistance programs quite

special importance to it.

Air-Transport--The situation is still difficult. Belgian and French Assistance to
Air Zaire has not succeeded in preventing the deterioration of that company.

Sea Transport--The expansion of container transport is continuing. By 2 years from
now Matadi will be provided with a second terminal, after Kinshasa.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Banana‘s deep-water port is still being studied. The updated cost of the work is
estimated at 92 billion Belgian francs. Building it will require the extension of
the Kinshasa-Matadi railway line to the sea.

River Transport--Tonnage transported during the first 6 months of 1981 amounted to:
166,644 tons upriver with a monthly average of 27,742 tons; 231,713 tons downriver
with a monthly average of 38,619 tons; a total of 398,157 with a monthly average of
66,361 tons. The situation was the same for the first 6 months of 1980.

Provision is being made for new towing equipment for the port of Kinshasa and the
River Lines Administration (buoyage in particular). -

Railway Transport--Thanks to loans from various sources a big effort is being made
for replacements of track and track ballast, particularly in Kasai (700 km of track
to put in again).

1he issue of electrification of the Matadi-Kinshasa line is not yet resolved (see
1 August 1980 of HARCHES TROPICAUS ET HEDITERRANEENS page 1896). Opinion is not
unanimous as to the absolute necessity of the contemplated conversion.

Road Transport-—After a fourth highway plan,-with an estimated cost of $156.5 million,
Zaire prepared a fifth plan totalling $600 million meant to improve and maintain
20,000 km of primary roads and 30,000 km of secondary roads. Rehabilitation of the
Lubumbashi-Kipushi and Hatadi-Boma main roads has begun.

Urban Transport--The Kinshasa Transport Company (STK) has worked out a program for
fixing and replenishing rolling stock estimated at 229 million zaires, 120 million
of that in foreign currency.

ONATRA [National Transportation Office] Program-A 5-year investment plan has been
worked out for the 1980-1984 period. We gave all the details concerning this plan
in two tables published in our issue number 1868 of 28 August 1981 (page 2728).

Water Distributinn--A new rehabilitation program for REGIOESO [Hater and Power
Distribution Administration] has been set up for a 10-year period costing 217 million
zaires. The first stage (1980-1985) will be divided into five phases at a cost of
ll7.251,000 znircs, of which 63,090,000 zaires is in foreign currency.

Electricity--SNEL [National Electricity Company] (Zaire) and SNE [National Energy
Company] (Congo) have signed an agreement whereby SNE guaranteed SNEL energy purchases
for 7 years. Specific price agreements have been made.

SNEL will be benefiting from 75 million French francs of financing for extension
uf the Kinshasa network. 1hc IBRD [International Bank for Reconstruction and Develop-
ment] will he financing the development of a similar program in Sheba.

Energy Polley--Zaire is concerned about its energy problems since the successive
oil shocks are a heavy burden on a very unbalanced balance of payments. So Zaire
has established an energy policy able to help change the disastrous current situation.

The Energy Department recommends the use of renewable forms of energy like wood (gas
generating power stations or using wood as fuel) and hydroelectricity (Inga and
hydropower mini-plants). Also being contemplated is the mining of the Lukuga

conl deposits.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New forms of energy (wind, solar. geothermal and nuclear) are supposed to be
limited to specific and small-scale applications. Other sources of energy such
as biomass, oil shale. tar sands or methane gas are not inconsiderable resources
to be developed.

Telecommunications--In as vast a country as is Zaire the existence of an extensive
network which performs well is not only an economic but also a social and political
necessity. The Banana coastal station which should be finished in the course of the
year will play an important role in the traffic and maritime security areas.

Semi-automatic switchboards have been installed linking Kinshasa and Kisangani. The
new telex exchange installed in the capital will provide for connections with Zaire's
interior and abroad.

The only risk what with all these projects is not having the capability to maintain
the existing equipment which assumes regular supply of spare parts and continuOus
maintenance service by competent technicians.

Social Issues

Transfers; Payments; Social Security Contributions--The situation had improved
somewhat during the second 6 months of 1980 but it has been tending to deteriorate
again Just as it does every year at the same time. According to information gathered
from the best sources, the implementation of the measures taken by the Bank of Zaire
leaves much to be desired, which again puts a goodly number of employers, and not

the smallest ones, in difficult situations.

The measures taken by the Bank of Zaire regarding giving back foreign currency are
insufficient and lack the flexibility which would permit entrepreneurs to adapt
without difficulty to constantly evolving situations.

Prices--in the context of its new socio-economic policy the executive Council decided
last 13 March to ease restrictions on the prices of luxury goods, which is to say
limited consumption items. The prices of basic necessity goods remain under the prior
:pprovai regulations. In this last category are listed water. electricity. fuels,
public transportation. food products, and pharmaceutical products.

The Economy and Industry Department drew attention to the fact that even if price
restrictions are eased very strict control will still be carried out a posteriori
by its specialist services to penalize those not respecting legal price structures.

we find ourselves faced with an interesting initiative here. But experience compels

us to uncc again ask ourselves the eternal question: will those in authority be
capable of making their decisions respected, and will not the laxity of a government
which is still weak--a laxity which is unfortunately too well known-authorize mistakes
which would ruin the mechanism?

Wages and Purchasing Power--The real income of Zairians has gone down at the pace of
the successive devaluations of their currency. At the end of June the legal minimum
wage was on the order of 15 percent of what it was in 1970 and 5 percent compared

to what it was in 1960.

29
ma omnu. use ONLY
Hill (WI-VIM. USE ONLY

in the cities the Draconian restruction on imports has reduced supply, giving rise
to sudden price hikes and black market practces. Though the situation in the country's
interior is different it is certainly not better. Far from it.

ihis reduction in purchasing power ends up having a negative impact on the economic
system. Recovery in production could be jeopardized by a constant weakening of demand.
Already in places one can observe declines in demand in certain sectors which had
remained strong until now, like beer, textiles, cement, etc.

Miscellaneous Issues

Zairianization; Compensation--According to an official information source, Zaire is
making a serious effort to compensate PHE [small and medium enterprises] (individuals)
who had in fact been Zairianized. A fifth portion of compensations has already been
paid to the Belgian Government under the terms of the 1976 agreement. The wronged
owners must be pleased with these payments; many owners had at one time stopped
believing in them.

Hhiie it is a good idea to give Zaire credit for the efforts it has made in an area
where its credibility had been seriously at stake, it is impossible to forget that
regarding compensation for "corporate" persons (by far the most sizable amounts)
there are still many lawsuits and no clear resolution is to be anticipated at this
time.

Conclusion

0n 1 January 1981 the country found itself almost on its knees as a consequence of

the shock treatment which had been imposed on it by the IMF and which it had tried

its best to keep to. However, at the beginning of 1981 some stances of the Zairian
authorities cost them a disagreeable and unexpected extension of the probation

period which did not finally end until the end of June in Paris after a new devaluation
of the zaire.

After the extended facilities were granted which were mentioned at the beginning of
this article, the "Club of Paris" meeting was held on 8 and 9 July and brought Zaire
now satisfaction: the "friendly countries" who were undoubtedly influenced favorably
by the lMF's derision granted Zaire a sizable readjustment of its external debt

($300 million in payments deferred for each of the years 1981 and 1982).5

Ar this mnment Zaire presents two different pictures to the eyes of observers. The
first is that of a country which has just had the benefit of a sizable amount of IMF
assistance which is thereby no expression of a revival of confidence in Zaire's
capacity for recovery which had been questioned for a long time. The second is that
of a nation which still gives rise to definite anxieties in all those, Zairian
nationals or foreigners. who closely follow the changing socio-economic situation
developing there from day to day.

Mus nut Minister Bomboko henrd in Paris painting a picture of a not very encouraging
short-term future for the Znirian economy and finances? (See 3 July 1981 issue of
MARiiIIl-ZS TROPICAUX I-I‘l‘ MEDITERRANEENS, page 1756).

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 3 March 1981 issue of the international banking periodical INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR
printed certain figures which in their harshness are very rough on Zaire: "In a
ranking based on economic credibility, in the Africa sector Zaire occupies 22nd place
out of 23 while in the world it is ranked in 99th place, Uganda being last in both
instances. Its 'Institutional Credit Rating' is 6.8 while South Africa is given
61.7.“

In Zaire itself one finds oneself faced with two attitudes: that of the governing
circles who, after a series of efforts the consequences of which they are undoubtedly
the last to suffer, are doing everything to preserve the assets they have acquired;
and that of a mass of Zairians which is becoming increasingly tired of the living
conditions produced for it and which is evidencing a disillusioned apathy in the face
of the continuing "Zairian disease," denounced by a president who is not succeeding
in eradicating it.

Last 23 June the Permanent Council of Bishops had the courage to denouce an economic
and social situation in which "men are particularly abused." They added, "Silence
would make us a party to the decadence and misery which some already consider likely

to lead our country to an apocalypse situation." ’

In view of all of this a question quite naturally arises: in spite of the efforts

which have been made, in spite of the results which have been achieved, and in spite

of the considerable amounts of money which have beenpouredinto the country from all
sides (multilateral and bilateral assistance). can Zairian economic recovery really

be achieved without prufnundalteration of the overall situation and the mental attitudes
of its leaders?

Even if we do not have available to us the specific economic indicators which should
permit us to exactly assess what progress has been schived, we must recognize that
an improvement has been chalked up in certain areas. Moreover, we cannot forget that
in November 1965 via a bold intervention President Mobutu saved the country from the
chaos in which it was foundering, and that he succeeded in gradually establishing
order In the country and maintaining it throughout 15 exhausting years.

ro he sure, not all the initiatives taken by him, above all in the economic area,
were beneficial for the country (the best example is that of Zairianization-radicali-
zation). But, on the other hand, he had the courage to take measures which had
fortunate consequences for the national economy (for example, the appointment of a
high-priced Belgian Ospcrl to head ONATRA where the catastrophic situation has
distinctly improved).

without wanting to launch ourselves into political considerations, we are forced to
recognize that in spite of the officially instituted democratization of the regime
there is an Increasingly marked concentration of all power in the president's hands.
While this is perhaps in accordance with a "Bantu" conception of democracy and
power, this is not necessarily likely to facilitate the solution of the big problems
the country is presented with and to inspire total confidence in those who want to
take an interest in its development.

For this president. whom people too easily venture to call a dictator, is not as free
in his movements or as all-powerful as one might believe. In this daily exercise
of power he is at odds with an entourage (largely family) which tries in every way

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to prevent decisions being made which are likely to interfere with its interests.
This is to the detriment of the mass of workers (urban and rural) whose social
condition is becoming increasingly shaky.

This mass of workers, without whom it is in practice impossible to bring about
profound changes, has less and less of the necessary fervor and the confidence in
a "guide" who feeds them more than fine promises than with good bread.

In order to get his recovery to succeed the president must as rapidly as possible
accomplish a whole series of reforms. He is fully aware of this as his last speech
shows. Hill he have the courage to impose the necessary decisions, in order to
finally give "his" people, of whose miserable situation he is aware, reasons to
hope for real improvement in their way of life?

The announcement of the "privatization" of certain entities is something which is
essential in view of the chaos which is developing. But will the schemes already
being plotted to try and hinder that privatization be able to be broken up by the
government before it is too late? It is up to President Hobutu to prove that he
still has the courage and the grip to triumph over this kind of obstacle. For if
he does not he could find himself confronted one day once more with the distrust
of the international financial circles without which Zaire is incapable of getting
out of its impasse.

There remains a major unknown for Zaire along with a good number of other African
countries. That is the attitude of an army whose officers, who are undoubtedly
overeducated, are often dissatisfied with the lot which falls to them, and of an
army in which certain troops are dissatisfied who are not part of the units made
privileged by the presidency. It is very much to be desired that the current
government, after having become aware of its own shortcomings. get over them quickly-
very quickly. Because that is for the greater good of a Zaire which is still rich
with enormous potential, a Zaire which the West is ready to support on the condition
that it sacrifice once and for all the elements which are eating away at the health
which it could now recover. Chaos never profits anyone.

FOOTNOTES

I. The ”Customs and Excise Office" has made it known that total customs revenues
realized in 1980 amounted to 2,377 million zaires as against 1,165 million in
1979. Import revenues amounted to 968.75 million, export revenues, 1,402.2
million.

2. Since that date the rate is said to have fallen back to around 3 Belgian franc
according to unofficial sources.

3. For more details see the 6 March 1981 issue of HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MHDITERRANEENS, page 624.

4. According to other sources (see 17 July issue of HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANCENS) the figures for 1980 are: 68,000 tons of Robustag 6,000
tons of Arabicn, and smuggling reaching only 10,000 tons.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. These first two meetings were to have been further supplemented by the meeting
in September in Britain's capital of the "Club of London" (the group of
private banks working with Zaire).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

9631
C80: 4719/2102 END

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY