FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10131
20 November 1981

Worldwide Report

TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(FOUO 15/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS Publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FORIDFFNJAL.USEIONLY

JPRS L/lo
20 Novemb

WORLDWIDE REPORT
TELecomumcmous Poucv, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(P000 15/81)

Coureurs
LATIN AMERICA
BRAZIL
Briefs
Radio Broadcast Threat
SUB-SAHARA” AFRICA
NIGERIA

Country's Telecommunications Network Detailed
(Tunde Pagbenleh; NEW AFRICAN. Aug 81) ...................

Briefs

Foreign Contracts Noted
International Bank Loan

ZAIRE
Master Plan for Telecommunications Develop-ant
(Hancnzs TROPICAUX ET umnirzannnrrus. 25 Sap 81) .........
H28? 3030?:
FRANCE

'Pirate' Radios To Be Joined Soon by 'deio Chirac'
(Philippe Aubert; L'Exrnnss, 16 Oct 81) ..................

UNITED KINGDOH

Briefs
Conumnications Satellite Funding

- a - [III - WW - 140 PC

“A. Am“ I ' V'" 0". ‘I
F0]! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRAZIL

BRIEFS

RADIO BROADCAST THREAT-Juan ia worried about a plan of [French Foreign Minister]
Claude Cheyaaon'a. Cheyaaon vanta to inatall a powerful radio trananittar in

Guyana that will cover Central America and part of South Alerica. The Brazilian
Government is afraid that thia station will becone a "relaia gauchiate" [leftving
voice]. The French Ministry of Foreign Relations haa made 60 nillion franca available
to the TD? [French Broadcaating Corporation?) for the operation of auch a station.
[Text] [Paris VALEL'RS ACTUELLES in French 12 Oct 81 p '31] [comma-r: 1981

"Valeurs actuellea"]

(230: 5500/2018

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR COW“ USE ONLY

COUNTRY'S TELBCWICATIONS mu DETAILED

Paris m AFRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 pp 72. 75

[Article by Tunde Pegbenleh:

[Text]

In the pest five years there

NIGERIA

"The Cotmtty'e 'lerve' newt-1W]

hee been n his ieprovenent in teleco—inicetione

in Nigeria, despite the difficulties in thin field experienced by noet African

countries. Here, ‘hmde Pegbenieh review the etmggle behind Nigeria's

ter comnicatione.

THE IMPORTANCE of telecommunia-
tione in the development: end continued
youth of so million people in Nigerie
cennot he ovee-empheeieed. The ntion
oennot enmed'ully indumielieeend run
eweil oiled utemechinerywithout e
functioning end co-otdinetcd communi-
cetione network.

Black Africe hee been peniculerly
unfottunete end meine letuely bed-
veldin thievitelereeeeeneultofe
oonthinetion of hietot‘ial. politioel. end
economic futon which heve enoouxnged
thie eituetion rot deadee. It pointe
directly to the uphill emgle of may
.An'icen countriee which. impoveriehed
by yeen dexploiteiive ooloniei domine-
unmountedwlthemdedotpdoritiee
toettendtointheiteoonotnioendeooiel
development.

Nigeeie hee W in the leet 10
yeen to be en economic end politicel
(lent in Ail-ice. The country ie of
incueein; Inﬂuence in the globe!
ecenerio end the Inteller end eilin‘
Akioen countriee looh' up to it for
leedenhip.

ltleecounttythetthereetoi’theworld
would like to nee ee the model for
enelyeie ofwhet potentlel Afrioen coun-
triee heve to recon-tutu theit own
development end guide their own dee-

Until 1976 the telecommunioetion
pictun in Nigerie wee one of the
gloomieet in the continent. The eynent

2
FOR 00W"? US! ONLY

bid for bet-
iveenodutendeMeleMuﬂm
theooioeiel W over

heed oeblee :1 en nightly moo
ehlhe. end like not the public
mummmwhenthe
eelqhueeworkedmndnottheotherwey

heenotnedetheil «(one
Hmnunetdpwthmthe

leuﬂveyeerecennothedeniedin the
telephone communicetione eettot. In
1976 Ceble & lede. m. ofthe UK
weeewe:dedeNi.9m.(Usum.)owtnct
for the twophe- emply. inuelletion
end neintenenoe oi eutotnetic telee
«chem.ptovidin¢enedditionei 1.440
Winﬁemlowinyeu theme
ﬁn won e oonetiltency oonttea from
Nicerie lwnel Communiutione Ltdu
(NET). for the km of 460 neuticel

ween Ahidien end legal as pert of e
tune-Nicene Moth eponeored by
Pen-Africen Telecommunicetione
www.mmmm
Pee-etch in hence to W vie.

Wendbehrz‘hiellnk-upiee
mltofaoerieed‘agreementeon
teleounlnunioatione cooperation Ow
between ivory Coed. France. Morocco.
Senegal. and Nigeria.

So far. more till: 20 new autanatic
telephone «cheapo have been commie.
aioned to inmaee the iineo by another
66.560 with Subarriber Trunk Dialling
(STD) focilitiea whereby peraon-to-
per-eon calla can be made without an
operator. Caiiacannowbemadedinotto
london from Lagoe by private alien.

All Nigeria’e international communi-
cation are handled by NET. and. to
improve connection with diﬂ‘erent pane
ofthe country. Nigeria haa embarked on
construction of the aeoond international
Gateway Complex. (ICC). in Kaduna
which will extend the home network ae
far aa the northern “I.

Nigeria External Communication
Ltd. hae alao recently commieaioned a
computerieed Menace Switching Centre
which automatically deliver: telegram
tothecioeeotomcetothedeatinatim.“
whidi alaoroutaa meeaagea from aaleaed
centrotooveraeaaddreaaaeawithoutthe
aid of an operator.

Vital nerve
Telephone facilitiea are gradually
being dietributed to more rural areaaend

COPYRIGHT: 1981 IC Magazines united
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

FOREIGN CONTRACTS NOTED-~Along with roads. telecommunications is one of the sec-
tors presently in full expansion in Nigeria. It is thus that during the past
months, many contracts have been concluded by French, American, Nest-German, and
Japanese companies. An official Nigerian source indicates that: the European
Teletransmission Company, subsidiary of Thompson-CST, will install by the begin-
ning of 1985, a centralized system to "telesupervise” the microwave telecommunica-
tion network (cost: approximately 90 million francs); Siemens AG received an

order for the expansion of the telecommunication network (cost: 628 aillion DM,

or approximately 1 billion francs); La Signaliaation [sane of company], subsidiary
of General Telephone Engineering Company (ITT group) is in charge of installing by
1982 three local networks of telecommunication cables at Ibadan, Ado Ekiti and
Akure (cost: 200 million francs); the Japanese companies Harubeni, Nippon Electric
and Sumitomo. will build a shortwave telecommunication network at Ibadan (cost:

16 million yen, or 60 million francs); Cables and Wireless will furnish an
electronic Eltrex V telex center of 996 lines (cost: $3.5 million. or approximately
20 million francs); finally. the United States will deliver to Nigeria a communica-
tion satellite station (cost: $5 million or 28 million francs). [TExt] [HARCBES

TROPICAUX ET NEDITERRANEENS in Frmch No 1870, 11 Sep 81 p 2335] [QMIGB'R
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.] 9670

INTERNATIONAL BANK LOAN--The Nigerian Federal Govern-eat has recently signed two
loan agreements with an international banking consortiun for its telecomnunications
development program. It should be recalled that several contracts have been signed
in recent months with foreign firms for the execution of the program (see NARCHES
TROPICAUX, 11 September, p 2335). [Text] [Paris HARCNES TROPICAHX ET “EDITERP
RANEENS in French No 1871, 18 Sep 81 p 2385] [covrnicarz Rene Moreux at Cie Paris
1981] ll,la6lo

USO: 5500/5080

lg
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFFICTAI.IESE OW'LY

ZAIRB

MASTER PLAN FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX 8T HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1972, 25 Sep 81 p 2‘53

[Text] The master plan for the proposed systenatisation of Zairian telecommunica-
tions has now been prepared. It includes a long-term development plan (more or less
20 years) as well as a short-term plan (about 5 years).

One of the immediate objectives of the project is to strengthen the planning division
of the Zairian National Office of Posts and Telecommunications (ONPTX) by overseas

training of Zairian employees. Three foreign experts--a telecommunications consultant,
a telephone systeas consultant. and a transmission consultant-have been in Kinshasa
for several months to help the Zairian authorities take steps necessary to the
implementation of the master plan.

Over the long term, the project envisions covering the whole of Zaire with a complex
transmission network as well as a network of telephone exchanges. with access to
inter-city direct dialing. The International Telecommunications Union (ITO) is the
agency carrying out the project, preparation of which was in large part financed

by the UNPD [United Nations Development Program].

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

9516
CSO: 5500/5608

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OFIWCJAl.l!ﬂE(HVLV

FRANCE

'PIRATE' RADIOS TO BE JOINED SOON BX 'RADIO CHIRAC'
Paris L'EXPRBSS in French 16 Oct 81 pp 122-123
[Article by Philippe Aubert: "The Mayor's Transmitter Is Up"]

[Text] Radio Service Tour Eiffel ("Radio Chirac") will start
broadcasting as of 1 December-—"within the law and without
propagande—uhilebeing an outpost of the opposition.

Muzzled by the law on local private radio stations. the pirates of the radio waves
are beginning to rebel. They are not short of ammunition; the strongest among them,
Patrick Meyer and his RPM. broadcasting from Veliry, in Yveline, are coming out
with surprising Surveys.

This private station. run for undisguised commercial purposes is most frequently
listened to by young people in the Paris region and by several hours exceeds the
listening public of France-Inter! One can thus make oneself understood with high-
quality and perhaps some average programs. But RPM. which wants to live on publi-
city, is operating outside the law.

At the end of October RHB (Radio Mont-Blane) will begin to broadcast. It is a big
station launched on Italian territory, aiming at a heavily populated zone from

Lyon to Geneva. Its manager is Roland Dhordsin. Its budget is Fr 15 million.

By installing its powerful transmitter on the other side of the border, in the Aosta
Valley, at an elevation of b.000 meters. RIB manages to get around the law. Along
with Radio K, on the Cote d'Azur, this will be one more "peripheral“ station.

The nest spectacular new radio station will set up its antenna only to a height of
290 meters but it will be tied to the girders on the third floor of the Eiffel
Tower. Its manager is Jacques Chirac who intends to speak for the opposition while
staying within the law. Radio Service Tour Eiffel, a name preferred over Radio-
Paris. which brings back some bad memories, will give the Tower back its status as
the audiovisual high point. Telediffusion de France (TD?) already legally occupies
the fourth floor with its armful of needle-sharp antennas and its jamming system.
Just a few meters below, workers, outfitted like Alpine mountain climbers, are
marking the place where the transmitter will be installed; starting on 1 Dace-her,

it will send the first programs ofRadioService Tour Eiffel.

FINI(MNHCIA1.USEthLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chirac had been thinking about can "Radio Hairis" [the Mayor's radio] for 4 years
now. It was impossible under Giscard; any broadcast would have been janmednand
it would also have been considered illegal.

Hope was reborn with Hitterrsnd. During the first few days of July, the mayor
of Paris asked Denis Baudouin to bring the project up again.

Baudouin, the director of foreign relations of the City of Paris and the mayor's
right-hand man in the matter of comnications. elegantly plunged into the troubled
waters of the hertziar. waves. This is a field which he is quite familiar with;

for the past 6 years he has been running Sofirad, that powerful government company
which owns M (Radio Monte-Carlo) and Sud-Radio, controlled by Europe 1, extending
to all fields of the audio visual industry. It did not take him long to take
action; in August. a 3-kilowatt transmitter was ordered from Telefunken Company.

Between Radio-Lumiereand Radio-Jet

This is one way of waiting without losing any time due to the details of the law on
the free radio stations promised by Georges Pillioud, the minister of communications.
In September. Baudouin however faced a major problem: the crowding of the m band,
where it was impossible to place even the smallest transmitter without stepping

on your neighbor's toes. The engineers advised him to move fast and to install
himself on 101.5 MHz, right between Radio-Lumiere 101, with its well-developed
program, and a newcomer. Radio-Jet. The slot is very narrow, even if you have to
nudge some of your less powerful neighbors.

To hold on to this spot, a provisional transmitter since 1 October has been broad-
casting on a pre-recorded band, containing appeals for listeners and severa1 care-
fully selected records, such as "Paris Is Raking Up." The final transmitter will
be installed on 25 October. It will have cost Fr (090,000 and its power of 3 kilo-
watts will be divided in two. with each 1.5-kilowatt transmitter capable of re-
lieving the other in case of failure. The office of the mayor of Paris definitely
wants to stay within the law. "We want to slide along," Baudouin says rather in
a jolly fashion. This will be done under the auspices of an association for the
developmt of communications, with Jacques Chirac as president and Denis Baudouin
as secretary-general. The offices and the studio are far from City Hall, just a
couple of steps from the Eiffel Teur. Everything is entirely legal. So long as
the EiffelTower Company is the owner of the transmitter, the association will only
be a tenant.

Radio Service Tour Eiffel will broadcast about a dozen hours per day but never on
Sunday, the people at the mayor's office expect. This will be a "radio service"
which, for example, will broadcast "information on traffic bottlenecks in the
morning between 0700 and 0800, section by section, minute by minute." There will
also be purely local news. on the life of associations and cultural events. "No
propaganda" Baudouin emphasizes once again. Still...when Jacques Chirac does some-
thing that is good for the people of Paris, will he nor also coIIment on his into
the microphone?

But the socialist camp is ruffled. Georges Serra, the public relations advisor
for Paris, comented angrily: "This radio station is a real fast move on their

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINR13FF1C1Al.lﬂ5EZCNULY

part. He said that during a cabinet meeting. It is true that the fight for
municipal elections is drawing near and he who controls a radio station has a
big ace in the hole.

Ridiculously Small Budget

For the time being, the government remains undisturbed. "He received an application
for the amendment of a monopoly rule, we will study it. and, if it is within the
law, then there will he no reason for this radio station to be jam-ad," it was said
at the Communications Ministry.

"People will judge me by my actions," Baudouin said. "If I violate the law, well!
It would suffice for TDF jamming, 10 meters above our heads, to get us within its
range." is "fair play" however is not entirely innocent: the radio station of the
mayor of Paris, like half a score of others in France, operated by opposition town-
ships, is one of thc outposts in the political struggle. The law on local radio
stations was drafted to prevent precisely that which is happening now: a mayor's
office is getting itself a radio station while remaining within the law.

With a ridiculously small budget (Fr 2 million), sheltered by legality, an opposi-
tion leader is now speaking out on the radio waves. "Elysee Palace is already
trying to find out whether this yacht of the City of Paris will become a torpedo-
boat," said Baudouin, not really caring whether or not he gets an answer to that.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 s.a. Groupe Express

5058
680:5500/2020

8
IN)R‘0F1WC1AI.I£SEL(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED KINGDGI

BRIEFS

COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE FUNDING--Britain is to take a one-third share in the
European space agency's 230.! pound project to launch an experinental satellite
which will beam comunications and broadcasting signals across the whole of
Europe. The project, known as L-Sat, is intended to put Europe in the running
in the world market for a new generation of big multi-purpose satellites, of
which about 150 are expected to be in orbit by the end of this century. L-Sat
is due to be launched in 1986 and British Aerospace has been appointed prime
contractor. Britain agreed to finance a third of the cost after persuading

the eight other countries involved to allow the companies building the satellite
maximum freedom in its design and management and in the procurenent of components
for it. Italy and Canada are being asked to take shares of a third and about a
tenth respectively. The other participants are the Netherlands, Switzerland.
Austria. Belgium. Spain and Denmark. France and Heat Germany, though n-bers
of the European space agency, have decided not to participate. They are collab-
orating instead on two broadcast-only satellites. [London FINANCIAL TIMES in
English 3 Nov 81 p 1 PM] [COPYRIGHT: The Financial Times Ltd, 1981]

C80: 5500/ 2036 EN!)

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY