FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10413

25 March 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

(FOUO No. 767)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the scurce. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA REPORT

(F000 NO. 767)

Coureu'rs

ANGOLA

Successes, Difficulties in Economic Situation Reviewed
(mans TROPIGAUX ET mm, 5 Feb 82)

Bsdes Loan Granted for Fishing Ports Improvasents
(MARCEE TROPICAUX ET mm, 19 Feb 82)

Briefs
Delegation to Brussels
Cooperntic: With Italy

HIRUIIDI

Budget for 1982
Tanzanian Border Talks

CAPE VERDE

Briefs
Hater ProJ ect Loan

CMRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Situstion Described s3 Still Far From Stsbilised
(Mariam 3y31e; AFRIQUB-ASIE, l’lh Feb 82) o o o e o v s o s s e s s s

Civil Servants' Salaries Reduced
(MABCHES TROPICAUX rr BMW, 12 Feb 82) ..

Briefs
Important Appointments
Iraqi Cooperation

CHAD

Council of Defense, Security Established
(MARCHE TROPICAUX m m, 1 Jan 82)

-s- [III-Nach-

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France Said To Consider Inter-African Forces Role Ambiguous
(Antonia Blis; AFRIQUB-ABIE, 1-11. Feb 82)

Briefs
HPP Food Aid

Yugoslav, Romanian Cooperation Offers
EDP Aid

CONGO

Prime Minister Gives Broad Outlines of 5-Year Plan
(MARCRES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANMS, 1 Jan 82)

Briefs
French Sugar Loan
Agreanect Regarding Petroleum Company

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Briers
RDLGE Requests Recognition

ETHIOPEA

Briers
Mariam Receives Congolese Minister
No Cement on Eritrean Statusent
Eritrean Guerrillas Report Losses

GABON

Wage Negotiations, Workers Demands
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET mmmms, 5?eb 82)

Briefs
Solar Energy Experiments
SEES ProJects-
SEEG's Production Increases
Brazilian Rail Cars Received

GHANA

Foreign Debt Rises, Economic Measures Still Awaited
(MARCBES TROPICAUX 31' MEDITERRANEENS. 12 Feb 82)

GUINEA

Briefs
Resumption of Abidjan-Conakry Flights
French Cooperation Agreanent
Canadian Cooperation. Agreement
New Ministry of Development
Conakry Airport Expansion

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-8138A!)

Briefs
Grant to Portuguese Magazine

“MICE!!!

Government Secrecy Reportedly Hampers Economic Development
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEWS. 12 Feb 82)

Briefs
Demands in Hostage Case
Cashew Rut Crop
Aerial Survey
Coal Mining Aaeenents
Serious Pood Shortages

NIGER

Saudi Aid To Development ProJects Reviewed
(MARCHE TROPICAUX 9r mxmmms, 12 Feb 82) . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Malian Frontier Talks
Road Construction
Peanut Production
Saudi Road Construction Loans
French Aid in 1981

NIGERIA

Nigerian's Article on Trade Appears in Moscow Publication
(8. c. Iheonunekvu; FOREIGN TRADE, Feb 82) W.

Relations With Cameroon Reviewed
(MARCHES EPOPICAUX ET MEDITERRAIEERS, 22 Jan 82)

President's Visit
Agreement To Be Conducted

Briefs
Offshore Oil Discoveries

3MGAMBIA

Estimted Harvests of Various Crops Noted
(MARCEES TROPICAUX er hams. 1 Jan 82)

Briefs
Rice Price Increase

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TOGO

Briers
Debt Rescheduling

UGANDA

Clashes Reportedly Leave 90 Dead Hear Kampala
(Bear-mi Debmmann; mans, 26 Feb 82) .................

First-Hand Account Describes lax-anode Situation
(Jacqueline d'Barcourt;. mar, Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

UPPER VOLTA

Briefs
Rev Labor Regulations

ZAIRE

Diamond Cutting Industry anvisaged
(MRCKE TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAIKERS, 29 Jan 82)

Brie:s
Inga II Progress
State Enterprises Reversion
Rev Hater Supply Program
Irene): Military Aid
Italian Aid for Refugees

.. d -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SUCCESSES, DIPFICULTIES IN ECONOMIC SITUAIION REVIEHED

Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBENS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 pp
339, 340

[Text] A characteristic feature of the econonic situation in Angola is the
sharp contrast between the prosperity of one sector. the expanding oil sector
which has played a vital role in the economy of the country since its
independence in 1975, and the decline or stagnation of most of the other
sectors. Even at that, it is a question of nuances in both cases.

Up to the last year, the petroleum sector was thriving. It is less so today.
The world economic crisis, the declining energy consumption by client
countries due to the prices of crude oil increasing tenfold in the space of a
few years, have created an oil glut in the world market. Like other pro-
ducing countries, last year, Angola pumped less crude oil and sold it cheaper;
at the beginning of 1981, the official asking price was $38.75 per barrel;
now, it has dropped to just over $34 per barrel.

Since petroleum is the mainstay of the Angolan economic structure, the loss in
earnings was important. The decline of oil revenues meant in practice that

last year, for the first time since 1975, the balance of payments registered
a deficit of about $100 million.

The authorities in Luanda had counted on having total export revenues of about
$2 billion in 1981 (petroleum represents 80 percent of all exports) but
earnings in foreign exchange were, in fact, almost $600 million short of that
figure. Yet government circles remain optimistic about the future of the
petroleum sector where a production level of 15 million tons could be reached
by 1985 according to seemingly realistic figures or 25 million tons according
to figures which appear to be optomistic. In any case, this progress pre-
supposes that Angola will increasingly resort to Western technology. Angola
has obtained large loans from 0.3. banks and its current efforts to normalize
its relations with the United States are acknowledged.

In sectors other than petroleum, the situation is not very good for three
different kinds of reasons, two of which are beyond the control of the govern-
ment. First, we have the war effort which Angola must maintain against
constant attacks from South Africa; there is every reason to believe that

this situation will continue as long as the Namibian problem remains unresolved;

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0531C1ALIISEGDNLY

military expenditures absorb between 30 and 50 percent of the national budget.
There is also the fighting inside the country and more particularly the
guerrilla operations carried out by the opposition movement UNIIA in the
central part of the country, operations which are more or less openly linked
to the conflict between Angola and South Africa.

The consequences of this double conflict situation, as far as the Angolan
economy is concerned. are many. Each day, Angola must staunch its wounds; it
must rebuild and repair the damage caused by war or by acts of sabotage within
its territory (among the sabotage, let us mention in particular, the damage
inflicted on the Luanda petroleum refinery in November). Angola must also
satisfy the needs, mostly in terms of food, of both the local populations and
the refugees from the south. from Namibia; while its agricultural production
cones mainly from the unsafe central part of the country and has been declining
due to the impact of a big exodus from the rural areas (the population of
Luanda, for instance, has climbed from £5,000 inhabitants in 1976 to 1.2
million at present). To compound the problem, the transportation of food
supplies suffers from disruptions and disorganizations.

But the war situation does not explain everything and we come to the other
reasons for Angola's economic difficulties. The public authorities have not
always been capable of efficiently managing the country's potential resources.
This is understandable in view of the fact that it is a newly established
republic where its leaders "have experienced a lot of teething troubles” after
the mass departures of the former colonizers and have had to learn by trial
and error.

Several factors constitute drawbacks for the government and for the sector

under it. Undoubtedly, the most significant one is the course followed in agri-
agricultural policy. In this sphere, the Herxist-Leninist state of Angola

has failed as have all the other Harrist-Leninist countries of the world and,
most of all, the most important of these countries, the Soviet Union, is still

a long way from being able to grow enough food to feed its population.

The Angolan agricultural policy, which has resulted in food shortages and the
subsequent thriving blackmarket, is based on setting up state farms without
giving enough thought to motivating the farmers and marketing what they pre-
duce, in other words, to the question of paying them for what they grow.

Under these circumstances. cash crops are no better than food crops; this is
why the current coffee crop came to 21,000 tons while, before independence, it
was 10 times higher. A "back to the land" drive is under study.

While in the agricultural sector there has been an initial error in the course
taken, in other sectors it would be more accurate to speak of shortages. It is
so for trade. First, there is the domestic trade sector where the bad distribu-
tion of foodstuffs and goods results in endless waiting lines outside the shops
and practically empty markets; to get around this problem, they are now talking
about encouraging small merchants by giving them tax breaks. Then. there is

the foreign trade sector where practical steps. mainly involving a change of
direction, have been taken to unclog the port of Luanda which is so badly run
that it is costing the state $5 million in payments to shipowners. A more

2
INJR OFTHCEAL USEZCNVLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

centralized management of consrcial exchanges is also being considered with
the introduction of three requirements: a ministerial authorisation before

any contract is signed, a stricter control over imports and priority for cost
efficient investments.

The last drawback explaining the econonic problems of Angola is the lack of
enough trained technical personnel; todsy, 60 percent of the vehicle fleet and
’00 percent of the tractor fleet are idle for lack of qualified uchanice and
repair shops. A decision has been ads to remedy that situation.

We conclude this brief survey by quoting an Angolan official: "With better
management and new discoveries of oilfields, we are going to inrove the situa-
tion. But, first of all, there lust be peace again."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
680: 6719/565

FOROFHGALUSEONLY
[WMROFFKJAL.USE(NWLY

ANGOLA

BADBA LOAN GRANTED FOR PISRING PORTS IMPROVEMENTS
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French “0 1893, 19 Feb 82 p 579

[Text] An agreement was signed in Khartoum between the National Bank of Angola,
represented by its deputy governor, Jose Agostinho Neto and the Arab Bank for
African Economic Development (BADEA), represented by Hassan Omar Ahmed, legal
counsellor. According to the terms of this agreement, the BADEA is to grant
Angola 3 $10 million loan to finance a project to improve Angolan fishing
ports.

This investment is a first step taken by Angola in its attempt to reorganize
fishing activities in a long—term program. More specifically. the project is
aimed at reinforcing the catcn capacity of the fleet, as well as at rebuilding
port and processing infrastructures. It will also contribute to the promotion
of professional training.

This loan is repayable in 10 years, at the end of a grace period of 5 years
and bears an annual interest rate of 6 percent. The Kuwait Fund for Arab
Economic Development will also contribute to this project with a $12 million
loan. Total investments have been estimated at $27. 7 million and will take
effect over a 4-year period beginning in 1982.

It should be noted that the BADBA loan is the second one to Angola. The first
was related to an important railroad project. The country has so far benefited

from various Arab investments. totaling about $68.8 million (including the
BADEA assistance).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et cie Paris 1982

680: 4719/640

h
FOR(MHWCLALIEEZONLY
BRIEFS

DELEGATION TO BRUSSELS—An Angolan delegation made up of planning and energy ex-
perts traveled to Brussels at the end of January in order to hold talks with BBC
officials. Led by Florencio de Alneida, head of the Departnent of Western Na-
tions in the Office of Secretary of State for Cooperation, the delegation's trip
ties in with the visit which Edgard riseni, European comissioner for development,
is to make to Luanda in February. [Text] [Paris mass TROPICAUX ET MEDITER-
RANBENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 513] [COPYRIG‘R Rene Horeux et Cie
Paris 1982] 11,664

COOPERATION arm ITALY—The third meeting of the Italian-Angolan joint commission,
which has just completed its work in Rene, hes resulted in "a consolidation of
economic ties between the two countries." according to a joint connunique pub-
lished on 27 January, which states that an iaportant oil prospecting contract was

concluded by the Italian govern-eat tir- hnown as the an (National Hydrocarbons
Agency). [Text] [Paris mamas TROPICAUX ET HBDITEMEBNS in French 110 1892,
12 Feb 82 p 413] [OOHRIGB'D Rene Koren: et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

680: 5719/603

5
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

BUDGET FOR l982—At the beginning of January. the finance minister of Burundi
presented the Burundian state budget for 1982. That budget is set at 20.45 million
Burundi francs, a 20 percent increase compared to 1982 [as published]. Operating
expenditures represent 16.36 million Burundi francs (21.6 percent higher compared
to the previous budget) and are distributed as follows: 8.82 billion (61.5 percent)
for general services; 3.46 billion (26 percent) for social services; 2.06 billion
(14.36 percent) for economic services. Expenditures on investments total 6.08
billion Burundi francs with 28 percent of this sum going to production. 28 percent
to rural development. 38 percent to basic infrastructures and the balance to
industries. communications and so on. In 1982, current revenues are budgeted at
13.2 billion Burundi francs deriving from taxes (5.2 billion). custom duties (6.8
billion) and from "administrative receipts" (close to 2 billion). Payroll

expenses represent 53 percent of the total expenditures. This is due to the
abolishment of free housing for civil servants which had led to granting housing
allowances amounting to:27 percent of the budget. [Text] [Paris Willis TROPICAUX
ET HBOITERRANEENS in French No 1889. 22 Jan 82 p 209] [COPYRIGH‘h Rene Horeux

et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

TANZANIAN BORDER TALKS-Jollowing a visit to Burundi by a Tanzanian delegation led
by Mr Nyanganyi. minister of lands. housing and urban development. a joint
Tanzanian-Burundian com-unique. published on 9 January in Bujudiura, notes that,
during the visit. the Tanzanian minister and acconpanying delegation had talks with
Lt Col Stanislas Mandi. Burundian minister of interior. on matters concerning the
Tanzanian-Burundian border and had an opportunity to visit several development
projects. Both parties reviewed the situation which has existed on their coupon
border since the meeting held on 15 September 1981 in Kibondo (Tanzania) between
the governor of Ruyigi and the regional couiasioner of Kigoma and the meeting
held on 21 October 1981 in Canazi (Burundi) between Burundian and Tanzanian experts.
Both sides studied the Anglo-Belgian agree-ant establishing the boundary line
between Burundi and Tanzania and accepted that agreement as the real point of
reference in matters relating to the border between the two countries. Then they
analyzed the conclusions reached at the Kibondo and Camasi neetings and. sore
specially. the question of matching maps of their con-on border area. Regarding
the destroyed boundary markers, both sides have agreed to rebuild them as soon as
possible and while their location is still easily ascertained. After this is done.
the two delegations will meet again to update the addendum to the draft treaty
setting out the comitments made by each country on the setter of protecting and
respecting the boundary markers. [Tent] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUXETHBDITERRANEENS
in French No 1889. 22 Jan 82 p 209] women: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982]
8796

C50: 4719/560 6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPE VERDE

BRIEFS

HATER PROJECT LOAN—The African Development Bank (ADB) group has granted Cape
Verde loans totaling $15 million to finance water projects for the town of
Hindelo. The first project is a 6-year program to build a water distribution
system and a sewage system. The project will take 6 years to cowlete and will
cost $8 million with the ADD providing 67 million. The second project, with a
total cost of $10 billion of which $8 million will come from the A03, involves
a 5-year program to improve the health services in Cape Verde and to increase
its health personnel. These loans bring to a total of $37 million the contri-
butions of the ADB group to Cape Verde. Previous loans were for projects in
the spheres of telecommications, agricultural development, shipyards and
economic studies. The loan agreements were signed on 28 January, in Praia,

by Babakar Ndiaye, vice president of the All), and by Corentino Santos, governor
of the National Bank of Cape Verde. [Text] [Paris moans TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANBBNS in Reach No 1891. 5 Feb 82 p 318] [OOPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux
et Cie Paris 1982.] 8796

C80: “19/565

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SITUATION DESCRIBED AS STILL ma FROM STABILIZED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 258, 1-11; Feb 82.pp 15-17

[Article by Mariam Sysle: "The Joys and Sorrows of the Military Committee for
National Recovery"]

[Excerpts] To judge from its statements and also its initial actions, the Mili-
tary Committee for National Recovery (CHRN) in power in Bangui since last

I September lacks neither good will nor candor. If in his message of greeting to
the nation on 31 December, the new chief of state. Gen Andre Kolingba. proclaimed
his intention to make of 1982 a year of "real change" in national unity and con-
cord, the measure. he believes. of a stability which "should assure the Central
African Republic of the confidence of its sons and its friends,“ he does not
promise imminent abundance. 0n the contrary, he announced a period of austerity.
Which is not surprising when one realizes the situation of delapidation and re-
cession in which more than 20 years of underhanded dealings have plunged the
country's economy, and when one realizes also that the International Monetary Fund
is not unfamiliar with the orientation of solutions and remedies planned in an
attempt to correct this situation.

In a statement carried over radio and television on 1 November. the chief of state
gave some indications, supported by figures, of the critical nature of the situa-
tion. The gross domestic product has dropped by five percent per year since 1977,
he said, and there is every reason to fear that it will drop still more dras-
tically in 1982. Since 1979, one worker out of five has lost his job. More than

a third of the budget requires foreign aid support.

"This situation." stressed General Kolingba. "deals a serious blow to our dignity
and threatens national independence and any recovery for our economy." Therefore
the chief of state announced that austerity will prevail in the drafting of the
next budgets for the Central African Republic and that public expenditures will

he drasrically curtailed. "There will be no increase in wages for government
employees in I982." he warned, and in the private sector, priority will be given
to the creation of new jobs. Urging Central Africans to accept lasting sacrifices,
Army Gen Andre Kolingba concluded: "It is only at the cost of substantial effort
that we can hope to enjoy modest prosperity in a few years' time.

Shortly after its establishment, the CMRN established the main guidelines for
reform in public life and the management of affairs of state. For example, it had
decided to reduce military personnel from 5,000 to 6.000 by the end of 1981 and

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to undertake a simultaneous "pruning" of government employees, a sector in which
the number of wage earners had doubled since 1966 (increasing from 11,650 on that
date to 23.000 in 1981), absorbing two-thirds of the operational budget. The pen-
sioning of a thousand individuals who had completed 27 years of service or whose
incompetence was outstanding was to be made effective in January 1982.

Parallel with this. the CHNR made clear its desire to attack the evils of corrup-
tion and fraud. While a vast investigation of the customs administration personnel
was launched. some 30 persons, charged with misuse of funds—-including two bank
directors and their authorized agents. as well as a former minister of national
education. Nicolas Gotouas--were arrested in November. General Kolingba
announced "extremely harsh" penalties for those found guilty of "violations" in
the "management of public affairs."

Finally. in order to combat absenteeism and negligence. which had paralyzed the
operations of public departments, disciplinary measures were planned. And setting
the example by starting their workday at 7:30 in the morning, the military admin-
istrators urged the government employees to keep to the same schedule. something
which no one can recall having ever seen before in Bangui.

Slight Improvement

All of this contributed to reducing tension. to relieving the atmosphere of in-
security and fear which had previously prevailed. and led to some upswing in in-
dustrial and trade activities. For example. since September. two Central African
agencies representing French utility vehicle and light motor manufacturers saw
respective increases in their sales of 50 and 10 percent in comparison to the same
period in 1980. The only Central African manufacturer of shoes, whose sales had
dropped 17 percent in the course of the first 8 months of 1981, saw an increase

in turnover of 30 percent, which made the hiring of additional personnel neces-

sary.

However this "slight improvement" is still extremely precarious. and it is much
too soon to make any predictions. The task facing the new administrators is tre-
mend0us. in view of the situation of generalized bankruptcy and recession affect-
ing all sectors.

A landlocked country, the Central African Republic is more of an enclave than
ever. Except for a few hundred kilometers of asphalted roads, the road and track
network. which has had no maintenance for 16 years. is in a regrettable. if not
unusable. state. The result is that whole regions in the back country are cut off
from the capital. and this is one of the reasons explaining why the rural in-
habitants have reverted in some zones to a wholly subsistence economy.

The river network has seen a steady decline in recent years, and traffic in the
port of Bangui dropped to 86,000 tons in 1979. If there are external causes for
this development (the obstruction of the Congolese ports and the troubled situa-
tion in Chad, in particular). poor maintenance of the Bangui port and the handling
equipment also contributed greatly to it.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The main industrial crops, cotton and coffee, which along with tobacco supplied
more than a third of the country's export income in 1980, dropped by substantial
percentages. The cotton harvest, which had come to as much as 50,000 tons in 1970
and 1971, no longer exceeds 18,000 tons. The disinterest of the producers in a
crap which brings them practically nothing and for which they receive no en-
couragement, as well as the low level of world prices. are the basic factors in
this decline. The same is the ease with coffee. A crop of which 40 percent of the
harvest is stolen on the tree. Income from it had in the past, through the support
fund created to launch the recovery of this crop. served to "finance“ Bokassa's
"follies," in particular a considerable proportion of the celebrations on his
coronation. Coffee exports, which had reached 15,000 tons in 1978-1979, were not
expected to exceed 7,500 tons in 198l.

As to diamonds, which continue to supply the state budget with the greater part

of its foreign exchange income (8 billion CPA francs in 1980, i.e., more than a
third of the total for exports), the official production-it is estimated that
half the actual production is drained away by fraud-—has dropped by half. Produc-
tion fell from 600,000 carats in 1974 to 250,000 in 1980. The decline in prices
which occurred in April 1981 was hardly likely to improve the situation, which had
up to that point benefitted from an increase in prices.

The Financial Sinkhole

0n the social level, as one can imagine, the situation is disastrous. Health
structures are nonexistent or disrupted, with inevitably serious consequences in

a country in which infectious and contagious diseases are still endemic. The over-
all mortality rate is estimated at 250 per thousand. and the infant mortality rate
at 130 per thousand. There is approximately one physician for every 27,000 inhabi-
tants and one hospital bed for every 800 (and it must be realized, in addition,
that the distribution of health stations and personnel is, of course, uneven).

Approximately 90 percent of the population is illiterate, and the official school
enrollment rate is about 67 percent. Of a faculty of 176 at the University of
Bangui, with an enrollment of almost 2,200, 139 are foreigners. a reflection of

a policy which tends to hinder the training and development of national cadres.

The population explosion and above all the rural exodus pose formidable problems
(lodging, food) in the cities. While 80 percent of the population (totaling
2.334.000) draws its resources from agriculture, almost a quarter of the popula-
tion (676,000 persons) is living in the urban centers today, with the capital
alone accomodating 340,000.

The drop in exports, the decline in industrial production, and the squandering of
resources by the former "Emperor" Bokassa, for which it is certain no total can
ever be established (on the other hand, the credit established in accounts opened
in Switzerland by the former dictator to accomodate the profits from his misappro-
priations of public funds, and which is currently being tapped by the family of
the "prince regent," is estimated at 50 billion CFA francs), all of this led state
finances to the bottom of the pit. The public debt of the state reached 62 billion
CPA francs (i.e., almost 50 percent of the gross domestic product). The budget

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deficit. which reached a total of 8 billion CPA francs in 1930 (but which had at
that time been almost entirely covered by a subsidy of 7 billion provided by
France), was expected to reach 11 billion in 1981, while the contributions of the
IMF and France for the same fiscal year were only h billion and 3 billion CPA
francs. respectively. It is expected that the budget deficit may reach 16 billion
CPA francs in 1982.

Uhat can be done not only to prevent the economic apparatus and state services
from seizing up definitively, but also to establish the foundations for recon-
struction? The emergency plan for economic and social recovery drafted by the pre-
ceding regime (David Dacko). covering two years, was based on the estimate that

98 billion CFA francs would be needed for its implementation. And the General
Assembly of the United Nations expressly acknowledged the needs of the Central
African Republic in its 5 December 1980 resolution, which included an urgent
appeal for bilateral or multilateral aid.

The CHRN, which seems to take its inspiration from the program of its predeces-
sors. shows no lack for its part of ambitious undertakings, although its task is
to deal with the most urgent things first and to address itself to the priorities
sectors. lts concerns pertain to the improvement of the road and air transport
infrastructures. and the development of the rural and social sectors.

Where agriculture is concerned, General Kolingba's government plans to mobilize
the unemployed for the raising of food crops around the major cities and the de-
velopment of livestock breeding. The purpose will be to guarantee adequate food
supplies at moderate prices. In addition to the introduction of modern cultiva-
tion techniques, plans call for the extension of the areas devoted to export pro-
duction.

Four production extension zones for cotton are to be developed between now and
1985. The cost of the investments required is estimated at 16 billion CFA francs.

The Nomination of Goumba

Other proposals include the development of regional airports and undertaking the
construction or the repair of 1,800 kilometers of roadway between now and the end
of 1983. Eighteen billion CFA francs will be needed, and for the time being.
financing is only guaranteed for a quarter of this project.

In the trade and industrial sectors, plans call for encouraging the establishment
o! agropartoral "microindustries" throughout the country. Attention is also being
focused on extending prospecting for mineral wealth and the organization of re-
afforestution projects.

Pending a better understanding of the plans of the new leaders, financial experts
estimate that, apart from the sums allocated with definite goals in view, a
financial effort of 15 billion CFA francs per year over 5 consecutive years will
be necessary to put the administration and the economy back on the track.

It is understandable that, under these conditions, given the impasse in which the
country finds itself. one of the main concerns of the CHEN is to reassure its
"lriends," the suppliers or tunes and possible investors. rUl Lula .eaaa", -eu
Andre Kolingba stated in his 1 November speech that "No threat of nationalization
could be freely allowed in the Central African Republic." Also in this connec-
tion, the chief of state set forth, in his message of greeting, his determination
to put an end to the "unstable" and "vacillating" aspect of a society troubled by
"constant upsets," and he asserted his readiness to take responsibility for any
act of violence, sedition or action contrary to the "profound aspirations" of the
Central African people, which are “peace, stability, growth and work.“

Without a doubt some things have already changed in the country. The appointment
of Dr Abel Goumba, a professor of medicine and former World Health Organization
official and president of the Ubangi People's Patriotic Front-Labor Party
(FPO-PT)--who returned to his country for good, as he had said he would several
months ago, after 17 years in exile-~as rector of the University of Bangui is evi-
dence of this. Indeed. one can say that to some extent Abel Goumba had a right to
this post, because of his writings and his experience. The fact nonetheless re-
mains, however, that this was an event which would have been inconceivable under
the earlier regime.

The majority of the political parties have to date maintained a waiting posture,
when they have not, as some have done, indicated their a priori prejudice in

favor of the CMRN, while others do not exclude the possibility of possible collab-
oration, provided of course that they can learn more about the projects of the

new regime.

Rumors and Agitation

The Ubangi People's Patriotic Front, for its part. continues to demand the re-
lease of six of its members who were arrested by the Dacko government after the
IL July 1981 bomb attack perpetrated by the lddi Lala group, which has been
separated from the FPO-PT since September 19ao.

Behind the formal status quo created by the suspension of political activity,
which has just been reconfirmed by a circular issued by the minister of interior,
a certain level of agitation can be seen and many rumors are circulating. One
party, the Central African People's Liberation Movement (HLPC), headed by Ange
Patasse, a former minister and prime minister under Bokassa, several of the mem-
bers of which were reported to have been arrested early in January, is making
quite a fuss. After having demanded elections at the end of December--a sugges-
tion which everyone in the old opposition sector rejected as an ill considered,
if not demagogic proposal--and announcing coups d'etat which never took place,
Ange Patasse. who has been more often abroad than in Bangui since 1 September
I98l. recently announced that the Central African presidency should be his by
right. He attempts to legitimize his claims on the basis of the results of the
fixed elections in March of 1981, which he himself challenged, as did the other
candidates opposed to Dacko. but which gave him 38 percent of the vote. The least
one can say is that such an inconsistent and outrageous attitude hardly provides
any tavorable arguments to those who would like to see the dialogue promised by
Gen Andre Kolingba between the CSM [Supreme Military Council] and other sectors
of the nation launched as soon as possible, along with the establishment of the

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘onditions which will make it possible to rehabilitate the multiparty system in
the Central African Republic.

Poisonous Propaganda

Efforts to revive tribal tensions, as evidenced by an anonymous document announc-
ing plans for the assassination of political leaders, including Abel Goumba and
Henri Haidou, have also been seen, while, according to certain rumors, Bokassa is
planning, with the aid of unspecified forces, to try to regain power in Bangui.
However, in view of the way the former dictator oppressed his people. it is hard
to see how such a hypothesis can have credibility.

If it is obvious that all of these "rumblings" are the evidences of psychological
warfare and propaganda campaigns, it appears that, for the CH3", it is a time for
vigilance and austerity rather than dialogue.

Moreover, while precise commitments on the part of the new regime are yet to come
and questions remain as to the freedom of action of the CHRN in relation to its
predecessors, it is obvious that real change and recovery cannot be launched with-
out thc development of a national consensus concerning the vital goals.

As can be seen, the situation in the Central African Republic is still far from
stabilized.

COPYRIGRT: 1982 Afrique-Asic.

5157
C50: “719/568

13
me OFFICIAL US ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

CIVIL SBRVANTS' SALARIES REDUCED
Paris HARGES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 602

[Text] The (HRH (Military Committee for National Recovery), in power in Bangui
since September, has just adopted harsh measures in order to rectify the economic
situation and the AFP recently wondered about the firmness of the support it
could henceforth enjoy among the people.

The AP? noted that observers in Bangui particularly wondered about reactions
that would be engendered by recent reductions in civil servants‘ salaries,

which would range from 5 to 28 percent, based on the wage scale.

Some 24,000 persons are affected by the measure, adopted in order to reduce the
budgetary deficit of over 8 billion CPA francs, when the 1982 budget does not
exceed 30 billion in receipts.

The decision, which is very unpopular, is part of the conditions required by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) in order to replenish the Central African
treasury. Several delegations from the Fund have visited Bangui in the past
2 months and observers believe that in the fs'cs of the "good will" of the mili-
tary regime, provisions will be rapidly made in its behalf. France, the Central

African Republic's sain economic partner, could also participate in the recovery
effort undertaken by Central African leaders.

Moreover, the latter are stepping up their action in order to improve the Central

African image. For example, customs took in 1.8 billion CPA francs in duties in
December 1981. This figure constitutes a record in a sector habitually under-

mined by corruption.

The military constantly calls for a fight against the misappropriation of public
monies, fraud, smuggling, embezzlement and encourage the resumption of the major
types of agricultural production, especially cotton, the main budgetary resource.

It should be recalled that the freeing of prices, linked to the wage freeze,

already caused discontent among the people of Bangui in 1981, at the end of the
regime of President Dacko.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

11,461.
080: 6719/598

1h
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

IMPORTART moms—President Kolingba has appointed to high positions in
important state and comercial conpanies several personalities who have
exercised great influence on Central African pclitical life during the past 5
years. Thus, Joseph Potolot, who was appointed director general of the Central
African Social Security Office (0088). was in turn president of the Suprene
Court, minister of foreign affairs (1975). and then deputy prime minister in
charge of adninistrative question‘s until the fall of alperor Bokassa in
September, 1979. Can Andre Dieudonne Kaguale has been appointed director of the
National Information Office (ONI). This army officer was sinister of public
works and urban planning before he was appointed second deputy prime minister
in 1979. The new deputy director general of the French-Central African
Tobacco Company (PCAT), Gabriel Dote-Badekara, is a technocrat. After

serving as technical adviser to the Ministry of Agriculture for several years.
he subsequently held a nmber of responsible posts within the hinistry of Rural
Develop-eat. Dots-Badekara is a relative of Ange Patasse. Since Prof Abel
Combs, president of the Ubangi Patriotic Front-Labor Party, was appointed
rector of the University of Bangui a few weeks ago. Dote-Badekara ia the
second opposition figure on who. President Kolingba has conferred a senior
position in the edninistrative hierarchy. In Bangui observers consider the
soot recent decisions of President Kolingba as indicating a desire to open his
government in the direction of those holding different "outlooks." This
attitude perhaps will per-it the evolution of the political situation in the
Central African Republic, at a tins when the econonic situation remains a
matter of concern and when the 1982 budget has been fixed at 38.2 billion CPA
[African Financial Conunity] francs, with a provisional deficit of 8.2
billion CPA francs. [Text] [Paris ,HARCEBS TROPICAUX E‘I‘ MEDITERRANEENS in
French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 328] 5170

IRAQI COOPERATION-M 21 January in Baghdad, Iraq and the Central African
Republic signed a cooperation agreement providing for the establishment of a
nixed economic and co-aercial cooperation couission. according to the Iraqi
News Agency (INA). [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX B‘r MEDITERRANEENS in

CSO: (019/580

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
COUNCIL OF DEFENSE, SECURITY ESTABLISHED
Paris HARCHES TROPICADX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 33

[Text] On 26 December, it was reported in Ndjamena that the locality of Gum-ﬂadjer
in Eastern Chad, approximately 150 kms from Abeche, had been captured by hissein
Eabre's Northern Armed Forces [FAN]. Their capture of that locality, which is a
strategic key point opening the road to the Natha district, has changed the military
situation in the east of the country. That is the reason why the Zairian contingent,
consisting of 1,000 men instead of 700 as originally planned, is reported to have
been dispatched to Ati to reinforce the Nigerian contingent, instead of being deploy-

ed in Paya-Largeau as first intended. A Senegalese contingent nay also be sent to
Ati.

The advance of ﬂissein Habre's forces creates a serious problen for the mission en-
trusted to the DAB Pan-African force, and its commander-in-chief, Gen Geoffrey Bjiga
of Nigeria, has declared that should the country's stability be threatened, the mis-
sion would have to be "stopped at once." According to Hissein Habre, the Pan-African
force must do the groundwork to enable the Chadians to resolve their own problems
through negotiations and in a communique of the PIN handed on 27 Decelber to the APP
correspondent in Khartoua, he said that he was willing to start negotiations to find
a peaceful solution to the Chadian conflict. Goukouni Heddei and the GUNT [Transi-
tional National Union Government] are totally opposed to negotiations with Eissein
Habre.

The Ndjamena Government is worried by the fall of Oum-ﬂadjer, and the Council of Hin-
iaters met on 25 December to review the military situation. The Council of Ministers
also held a meeting the day before and decided to establish a "Council of Defense and
Security," the basic function of which will be to "soundly" manage the free military
aid given to Chad by several countries and to exercise control over all the armed
forces, integrating them into the National Army. As a result of this, some observers
believe that it could supervise all military operations and have more authority than
the Staff General of the Integrated National Army, which was created at the end of
May 1981 when the army factions were officially eliminated, although these still
haven't been brought under effective control. The Integrated National Army is under
the con-and of Lt Col Allafi N'Golobaye.

OOPYRIGRT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

8796
C80: 6719/453

l6
FOI‘OFFK]AI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GRAD

FRANCE SAID TO CONSIDER INTER-AFRICAN FORCES ROLE AHBIGUOUS
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 253, 1-14 Feb 32 p 1':
[Article by Antonia Blis: "The Challenge of the Northern Armed Forces"]

[Excerpts] The imbroglio in Chad is becoming a little more complicated with every
passing day. Speculation is rife. all or almost all of it tending, as if by chance
to regard the return of Hissein Habre and his troops to Ndjamena. And with the
prospecc of intensification of the civil war or the arrangement of a compromise

as insecure and dangerous as that which prevailed at the Lagos conference in
August of 1979.

Interference and Confusion

In the midst of all of these maneuvers, the field of action available to the
Transitional Rational Union Government (GUNT) headed by Coukouni Oueddei. is
shrinking steadily. And interference. in the form of a generous flow of sugges—
tions and advice from a group of nations claiming to act on behalf of the OAU.
never ceases to multiply, adding to the confusion. It would appear as if no lesson
had been learned from the dramatic events of 1960 and their outcome, and above
all. as if the "major swing" which occurred during the last OAU summit meeting in
Nairobi. where the new situation created in Chad by the defeat of Hissein Habre's
dissident forces was finally acknowledged and the full sovereignty of the CUNT
finally accepted, had never occurred.

Following the 5—day visit paid to Khartoum by a large delegation from Chad headed
by Coukouni Oueddei last 12 January. optimism gained the upper hand.‘ It
appeared, if one adhered to a literal interpretation, that the negotiations might
prove fruitful. In fatt. Sudan. which had until then supplied Hissein Habre's
Northern Armed Forces (SAN) not only with weapons and ammunition, but with
soldiers as well, and which allowed a part of its territory to serve as a sanc-
tuary for these forces. undertook to guarantee its ”total support of the govern-
ment and the people of Chad under the leadership of Coukouni Oueddei." On top of
that. it gave it explicit guarantee that it would not contribute "aid to any force
acting against the government in Chad. specifically the Northern Armed Forces."

The Sudan promised to use its good offices to assist the GUNT to implement the
general amnesty decreed last July for the FAN, with the exception of Hissein
Habre, who was sentenced to death in absentia, and several of his lieutenants.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in short, an idyll developed between Khartoum and Goukouni Oueddei's GUNT which
would make it possible for the coalition in power in Ndjamena to win back the ini-
tiative and to move to the offensive in order to win back the ground lost to the
forces of Hissein Habre. Since the withdrawal of the Libyan troops, in fact, the
FAN, breaking all their promises, have not ceased to advance in the east, the cen-
ter and now the northern part of the country, with the complicity, passive for the
most part, of the "inter-African force."

A Lie and a Deception

But how could one fail to see that the rapprochement between Ndjamena and Khartoum
looks very much like a deceptive trap? in fact, can the promises of Sudan to put
an end to the support it was giving their dissident forces of Hissein Habre
be taken literally? The troops of the former CUNT minister of defense, powerfully
equipped and said to be 4.000 to 5,000 men strong, have in fact already gained
control of numerous strategic sites. And last 31 December, President Numayri
again urged a "real national reconciliation" between Goukouni and Habre "under the
umbrella of the OAU." Why would he have changed his tact to such an extent in so
sht-rt a time?

in reality, the goals of all of those who are making as if to fly to the aid of
Goukouni's CUNT today under OAU sponsorship are becoming ever clearer. Additional
proof has just been supplied by the statements made by Nigerian Minister of Exter-
nal Affairs lshaya Audu, following his talk in Nairobi on 16 January with Daniel
arap Hoi, the king and chief of state and acting president of the OAU.

fhe Jaws of the Trap

According to Ishaya Audu. the first phase of the mission of the inter-African
peace force in Chad was completed "satisfactorily." One would think that he meant
by that that the task of that inter-African force was to promote the return of
Hissein Habre to the military terrain and the political scene in Chad pure and
simple. But that is not all. "Efforts must still be made, particularly where the
political problems in Chad are concerned," lshaya Audu added, going on to explain
that "The present government is a national transition union. and the OAU should
help to set up a government freely elected by the people of Chad themselves."

To speak the truth, it does.indeed seem that the nations who have set foot in Chad
under OAU sponsorship are seeking to dictate the settlement of that country's
affairs. And one might note that the resurgence of the arguments which were
current when the whole of the OAU, with very few exceptions, backed the France

of Ciscard d'Estaing in supporting the candidacy of Hissein Habre for the presi—
dency of Chad on the pretext of combatting Libyan "penetration.“

is the new French government caught in the jaws of the Chadian trap to the point
that it has no other policy than to follow the course of events as a group of
African nations want them to develop? Can it not or does it not want to go farther
in its support of the GUNT--which it encouraged, moreover, to demand the with-
drawal of Libyan forces--than political alignment with the OAU position? Hhich,

as summarized by the minister of cooperation and development last 15 January, in-
cludes among its principles "absolute support of the decisions of the OAU.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military nonintervention, support of every effort to achieve a political solution
and pursuit of civil cooperation." Hill Paris content itself with noting that the
"ambiguity" where the role of the inter-African force is concerned has not been

"completely dissipated?" In view of the development of the situation on the terri-

tory of Chad. the word "ambiguity" appears to be no more than an elegant
euphemism.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 AErique-Asie

5157
080: “719/568

19
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI“. ONLY

BRIEFS

WP FOOD AID--1he World Food Program (m) has agreed to provide Grad with
emergency aid valued at $7 million to seat the shortages in foodstuffs
following the civil war and the consequences. of the catastrophic drought
affecting the country; this indicated by the m in a col-unique published at
the end of January. The aid will be made up of 15,000 tons of grains which.
according to the m, will make it possible to feed 375,000 people for 100
days. According to the connunique, the grain shortage in Chad for the 1981-82
crop year is estimated at 163,000 tons, or about double the chronic shortage
recorded in the caurse of the preceding years. In View of this situation the
HF? considers that emergency aid must be uintained at a high level until the
harvest next November. We recall that the am already provided Chad with
food aid valued at $5.7 million last July and September. [Text] [Paris
MARCMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French Mo 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 328]
[OOPYRIGl-l‘l': Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 5170

YUGCSLAV, MARIAN COOPERATION GPBRS-Jbllowing a trip to Rmania and Yugo-
slavia by Minister of Health Garadous Monn-Djasngar, and a trip to Japan by
Minister of Public Works Pacho Balsam. the Chadian Council of Ministers has
issued a communique saying that these three countries had “indicated their
willingness to cooperate with (:had.‘I A shipment of drugs and clothing will be
arriving 'very shortly in Ndjanena' as emergency aid frat Yugoslavia, a country
which is reported to have expressed its desire to open an embassy in Chad.

'rhe communique also states that Belgrade and Bucharest had praised the envoy
of the GUNT [Transitional National Union Government] to intercede with
"countries which provide aid and assistance for the rebellion so that they

put a stop to it." Finally, official smrces in Ndjanena have said that a
Romanian mission is coming to Chad in the seccnd half of January. ['rext]
[Paris Hams TmPICAUX ET MBDITBRPABBE in French “0 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 33)
[COPYRIGIm ﬁne Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

EDP AID-~1'he European Development Fund (EDP) will devote 7,796,000 cons to
financing for the program of priority action in Chad in different fields (live-
stock raising, roads, social sector, and so on). [Text] [Paris MARGIES TROPI-
CAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 402] [COPYRIGi‘l‘z Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

680: 4719/598
20
F!)R10FF1C1AL USEZCMHLY

CONGO

PRIME MINISTER GIVES BROAD OUTLINES 0F S-YEAR PLAN
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 pp 3‘, 35

[Text] In our issue of 11 December 1981 (p 3316), we briefly mentioned that the
Congolese prime minister, Col Louis Sylvain-Goma, had presented the 1982-1986 5-Year
Plan for the Congo to the People's National Assembly. The plan, with proposed in-
vestments amounting to 1,105 billion CPA francs, was adopted on 24 December 1981 by
the assembly. In his closing speech, Col Denis Sassou—Nguesso, the head of state.
described as "a historic act" the adoption of this 5-year plan launched by "an un-
developed country with vast needs."

The prime minister, for his part, gave some specific details on the plan, the main
points of which we are reporting here.

"The 1982-1986 5-Year Plan is basically centered on two pivotal points: 1) initia-
ting the infrastructures needed to establish control over our lands, to bring a new
balance and development to our national territory; 2) getting the state sector back
on a sound footing. These two important strategic points mean in practice large
capital investment programs as well as programs to reorganize the production machin-
ury and get it rolling.

“The 5-year plan also includes social and cultural programs as well as programs aimed
at strengthening the state apparatus. (...) The total financial package for the
plan amounts to 1.105 billion CPA francs at their constant 1981 value, with 780 bil-
lion provided by the state and 325 billion by public or mixed enterprises, either

out of their own funds or through loans."

Sectoral and regional programs fall under four categories: capital investment and
infrastructural programs accounting for 68 percent of the planned outlays; programs
connected with the production machinery (36 percent); programs of social and cultural
investments (8 percent); investment programs relating to the state apparatus (8 per—
cent).

Infrastructures

The biggest allocations (531 billion CPA francs) will be for infrastructures. This
outlay pursues the following objectives: to build the most urgently needed road
links between distant points. putting an end to the isolation of some areas; to start
building major road links between the regions; to cover the cost of repair and main-
tenance for the entire road system; to study and reorganize the air transport infra-
structures; to modernize the CPCO (Congo-Ocean Railroad) with a view to boosting its

21
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carrying capacity; to increase the number of port and river infrastructures and mod-
ernize the ATC (Trans-Congolese Communications AGency); to adapt the port of Pointe-
Noire for a sea traffic which is expected to undergo rapid growth; to interconnect
the electric network; to bring electricity, geneiated by hydroelectric and thermal
power plants, to all urban and rural centers; to conduct studies and implement proj-
ects aimed at drastically increasing the installed capacity of hydroelectric power
plants; to extend the multi-channel radio links; to make postal and telephone ser—
vices generally available; to modernize radio and television; to improve urban liv-
ing conditions and create urban facilities; to build storage centers all over the
country for farm products, for basic commodities and for construction materials.

Implementation of this program during the years of the plan should solve most of the
regional problems. Hith 531 billion CPA francs being allocated to the infrastruc-
tures, they play a vital role in the strategy of the 5—year plan. The state will
directly contribute 633 billion while the enterprises will provide 98 billion either
out of their own funds or from loans.

These 531 billion CFA francs are distributed as follows (figures in billions): trans—
portation and civil aviation, 138.775; public works, 182.16; information and ONPT
[National Postal and Telecommunications Office] (posts and telecommunications), 36.23;
commerce, 20.33; tourism and environment, 11.9; energy and water supply, 117.1; ur-
ban infrastructures, 24.1.

Production Machinery

A total of 400 billion CPA francs, representing 36 percent of all the projects in-
cluded in the plan, will be allocated to the production machinery. The main purpose
of these investments in the production machinery is to get it back on the right
track; this recovery plan actually represents 21 percent of total investments and
67.5 percent of state investments.

In the sphere of agriculture and livestock, the long-term objectives are to meet the
country's food needs, increase exports, provide supplies for the ogre-industries,
while reducing_unemployment and improving the living standards of the farming popu-
lations. According to the plan, 73.5 billion CPA francs will be invested in agricul-
ture and livestock including 25 billion for the farmers. Also, close to 35 billion
CPA francs have been budgeted to make improvements in the state farms.

The large investments allocated to water supply and forestry-19b.8 billion crA
francs--will go to two specific types of projects: a paper pulp complex in Pointe-
Noire with an estimated cost of 118 billion CPA francs, and forestry estates in the
Sangha and Likouala regions.

Nearly 15 billion are allocated to mining and 103 billion to industry and fishing.

Social and Cultural Programs

"Improving the living conditions of the population," said the prime minister, "con-

tinues to be one of the constant concerns of the party and the state. Yet, one must
be aware of the fact that any improvement of the living conditions is basically deter-

mined by the results obtained in the economic development."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nearly 86 billion CPA francs have already been assigned to social and socio-cultural
programs. Host of the 86 billion will be distributed among the following sectors:
national education, 22.65 billion of which 9 billion will be for the university, 5
billion for building new schools, 1 billion for basic training, 7 billion for improv-
ing the education system; health and social affairs, 28 billion; subsidized housing,
15.9 billion; youth and sports, 4.2 billion; and 8.82 billion will be used for the
first group of 157 village centers chosen from all over the country."

Regional Programs

"A really vast investment effort, without precedent in the history of our country,
will take place at the regional level during the 5-year plan period," Colonel Syl-
vain-Goma said. "More than 62 percent of all the investments, or some 600 billion
CPA francs, will be assigned to projects directly connected with the regions as part
of an effort to eliminate all disparities throughout the national territory. Infra-
structures offering advantages on a regional and national level, the electrification
of towns located in the interior of the country, road and sanitation projects in
minor towns, capital investments involving transport, commerce and fuel distribution
in the regions and finally roads--all this involves outlays of nearly 270 billion
CPA francs. An additional 50 billion CPA francs will be used to improve the quality
of life in the regions in the form of health care facilities, drinking water supply,
housing, education. youth, sport and cultural projects. Finally, over 260 billion
CPA francs will be invested in profit-generating projects in the spheres of agricul-
ture, industry, fishing, mining, water and forest resources, and these projects will
be located somewhere other than in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.

He can say that the plan was drafted in accordance with one of the main concerns
voiced during the Third Special Party Congress: to bring the regions out of their
isolation and to encourage regional economic development; to create a fair balance
between the towns and the rural areas; to boost rural activities. But the willing—
ness to effect a decentralization means in practice a large-scale regionalization of
the tools of development even more than the allocation of heavy investments.

In addition to the ordinary operating budgets assigned to the local government, sev—
eral new financial resources will be available to the regions. Here is a list of
these resources: a Regional Action Fund of 3 billion CPA francs to promote the cre-
ation of crafts and industrial enterprises in the regions and, more generally. to
support all regional or local economic projects; another 3 billion CPA francs as-
signed to build public housing in the regions; 1 billion CPA francs to support local
agricultural and livestock projects; a Regional Development Fund of 3 billion CPA
francs will be established to give assistance to enterprises affected by operating
overcosts due to their unfavorable location. Finally, the administration of the
state's investment budget must be partly decentralized."

Effects of the Plan

The prime minister also said that "if these programs are implemented without delay,
our national economy will rapidly take off and show an average annual growth rate

of 10 percent during the plan period. As for jobs, some 55,000 new ones will be
created during the period covered by the plan. Finally, there will be an unquestion-
able improvement in the living conditions of the general population after the hous-
ing program is carried out, health care is made more accessible and projects involv-
ing educational facilities and the supply of water and electricity are implemented.

23
FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEiDNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Although the plan rightly raises great hopes, from a realistic viewpoint one must
also be aware that its execution could be hindered by impediments of a physical.
technical, administrative and organizational nature. These restraints are, in par-
ticular, the limited means of transportation, logistic and organizational problems
in the sphere of supplies, the lack of adequate skills in the work force, the weak-
ness of our national achievement capabilities.

There is a danger that our external balance will seriously deteriorate under the im-
pact of a fast economic growth largely based on imports of capital goods, of semi-
manufactures for our production sector and additional consumer goods as the family's
earnings increase. We must also be careful not to allow the public debt to increase
excessively under the double effect of worldwide higher interest rates and the more
widespread use of external financing.

For all these reasons, the government has deemed it absolutely necessary to back up
the programs of the plan with a package of accompanying measures the main purpose of
which is to constantly keep the plan on the right course. to control any imbalance
and to institute strict financial procedures.

The first group of measures, involving the guidance and control of the plan, sets out
to establish a planning method capable of dealing in a satisfactory manner with the
uncertainties of the future. A Permanent Plan Evaluation Commission will be created
and it will have the task of examining, modifying, and approving documents involving
the evaluation. control and revision of the plan.

The second set of measures deals with the decentralization drive. Some of the mess-
ures have already been mentioned, others were included in various sectoral programs.
However. it seems advisable to compile them in a single and consistent document to
make them easier to understand. to assess their scope, and to set up the means of
monitoring them. The administrative instruments required for the regional operations
will be reinforced mainly by setting up regional labor offices which are absolutely
necessary in order to have sound personnel management, by creating regional planning
offices, by introducing measures to encourage the decentralization of the banking
circuits and so on. The investment budget will be gradually managed at a regional
level and this will be substantiated with investments allocated several times a year
in amounts determined on a case-by-case basis. Civil servants assigned to the re-
gions will be given a bonus. Finally. the way in which these decentralization meas—
ures are implemented will be periodically monitored during the plan period.

The third group of measures, concerning the financial commitments undertaken by the
state. sets out to redefine the procedure applied to market transfers and loan sub-

scriptions.

The fourth set of measures involves some legislation changes which will be introduc-
od step by step over a certain period of time.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

8796
090: 4719/453

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

CONGO

BRIEFS

FRENCH SUGAR LOAN--A loan of CFA 3.6 billion (Fr 72 million) was granted to the
Congolese government at the end of January by the French Central Fund for Economic
Cooperation (€003) for renovation of the Congo Sugar Company (8000), installed at
Nkayi, it is announced by the CONGOLESE INFORMATION AGENCY (A01). The amount of
this loan will cover 35 percent of an investment program designed to enable $060 to
reach production of 70,000 tons of raw sugar per year in 1986. The loan agreement
was signed in Brazzaville on 27 January by the minister delegated to the presidency
in charge of cooperation, for the Congo, and by Pierre Nelease, director for the
Congo, for the CCCE. [Text] [Paris NARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBOITBRRANEBNS in French

No 1891. 5 Feb 82 p 330! [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11261

AGREEMENT REGARDING PETROLEUM COHPANY--An establishment agreement in the amount of
CFA 2.282 billion has been signed in Brazzaville between the Congo and the Bouygues
Off-Shore Congo company, whose headquarters is in Pointe-Noire, it is announced by
the CONSOLES! INFORMATION AGENCY (A01). [Text] [Paris NARCHES 'I‘ROPICAUX 8T HEDI~
reassureus in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 3311 [COPYRIGHT: Rene Noreux et c1e
Paris 1982] 11267

11267
C80: “719/585

25
FOR OFFNJAJ.IISEIWNLH
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

BRIEFS

RDLGB REQUESTS RECOGNITIm—The Denocratic “newly for the Liberation of
Equatorial Guinea (RDLGB) has asked to be legally recognized by the nilitary
junta now in power in Halabo, according to a col-unique issued to the press in
Dakar on 27 January. In the communique the president of the ma. Manuel
Ruben Mango, states that the. request takes place in the Era-evork of the
preparations for free and general elections. whose inplenentation has been
provided for by the military junta in the course of this year. In this context
the RDLGE wishes to contribute to the work of construction of democracy and

to play within that effort "an understanding role." [Text] [Paris meats
TROPICAUX er mums in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 328] [commrm
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.] 5170

080: 5719/5811

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MRIOPIA

BRIEFS

MARIAN RECEIVES CONCOLESE MINISTER-Adds Abaha, 6 Mar (REWER)--Ethiopian
leader Hengistu Haile Marian today received visiting Congolese Foreign
Minister Pierre Nae at his Asmara palace—dispelling claims by Eritrean
secessionists that he was wounded in Eritrea earlier this week. The Congolese
minister came to Ethiopia last week to attend the Organisation of African
Unity Ministerial Council in Addis Ababa. He stayed on for talks on
strengthening relations between the two countries, officials said. During
today's meeting in Asmara, Mr Nze presented a message from Congolese President
Denis Sassou-Nguesso. An official of the Ethiopian News Agency (ENA) today
described the secessionist claims as a sign of desperation. "They are trying
to mislead world opinion in a desperate attempt to hide their own ininent
demise," he said. A recentl Ethiopian television commentary said there were
no secessionist groups near Asnara. Those remaining in other areas were
being pursued by the Second Liberation Army through mountainous country

. near the Sudan border. [Text] [JN062106 London REUTERS in English 2055 GMT

6 Mar 82]

N0 com ON ERITREA“ STATEMENT—There was no official count on the EPLF
statement in Addis Ababa, where the authorities have kept silent on the
guerrillas claims to have scored major military successes in recent weeks.
western diplomatic sources in Addis Ababa said the Ethiopian Army has suffered
several thousand casualties since launching a tank-backed caspaign to smash
the Eritrean secessionist mvenent earlier this year. The sources said the
Ethiopian Government had sent up to 14,000 troops to northern Ethiopia under
what is officially called the "Red Star Development Campaign." The Ethiopain
media have said the aim of the campaign is to rehabilitate the area after

20 years of secessionist warfare. Last week, the official Ethiopian News
Agency reported that victory for the government was near. But diplonatic
sources in Addis Ababa and Nairobi recalled many similar statements in the
past and described the prediction as premature. [Text] [33051063 London
stun-Rs in English 1611 GMT 15 Mar 82]

ERITREAN GUERRILLAS REPORT LOSSES—Beirut, 15 Mar (REUTER)--Eritreen seces—
sionist guerrillas said today they have killed 530 Ethiopian soldiers and
wounded 700 in fighting over the last four days. The Eritrean Peoples
Liberation Front (EPLF). the largest of the guerrilla groups fighting the
Ethiopian Government for the independence of Eritrea, said in a conunique
issued in Beirut that the fighting was around the northern town of Nakfa
and on the north-east coast of the Red Sea province. Nakfa was the only
town left in guerrilla hands after government troops drove them out of
Asmara. the provincial capital [words indistinct] a new offensive to wipe
out the secessionist movenent and at the same time has undertaken to develop
the province economically. The communique did not report Eritrean losses.
"(Textl (31151640 London REUTERS in mglish 1031 GMT 5 Mar 82]

C80: WOO/912

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

WAGE NEGOTIATIONS, WORKERS DEMANDS
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 329
[Article: "wage Negotiations and Movements for Union Demands"!

ITextl Following the decision by the Gabonese Council of Ministers on 15 January
to raise the interoccupational guaranteed minimum wage in Gabon to CPA 35, 000 and
the supplementary allowance to CPA 15,000 (MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS of
22 January 1982, p 206), Prime Minister Leon Hebiame decided, at a cabinet meeting
on 23 January, that wage negotiations would take place throughout the entire terri-
tory starting on 25 January. These negotiations should relate to the general rise
in pay, but also to ”all the other problems" posed in the enterprises.

Negotiations did indeed take place at the end of January between the COSYCA (Gabon-
ese Trade Union Confederation), the single trade union, the CFO (Confederation of
Gabonese Employers) and the corresponding committees of the Ministry of Labor. The
demands. though, often went beyond this framework. Various movements, strikes,
were noted, especially in Port-Gentil, the economic capital of Gabon, and even in
Libreville. The agreements negotiated by the representatives of the personnel were
even challenged sometimes by the "rank and file," and the negotiations were especi-
ally delicate in the oil sector. the strikes began in ELF [Gasoline and Lubricants
Company of Francel-Gsbon and spread even to the subcontractors. whereas the situa-
tion seemed to be settled at the end of January, Port-Gentil's biggest enterprise.
in terms of personnel (more than 2,000 workers), the CFO (Gabonese Forestry Com-
pany). which does rotary-cutting and veneers, went out on strike on 1 February.

The workers' main demands were pay-related, the increase in the cost of living in
Gabon having made the situation of the lowest-paid workers difficult.

In some cases, the pay demands were for as much as a loo-percent increase. 0n the
average. increases of 30 percent were granted in all sectors.

According to the information available to us at press time, the increases in the
commercial sector were from 13 to 15 percent, depending on the category; and in
oil. 50 percent for the laborers and 30 percent for the technicians. Among certain
oil subcontractors, though, an 80-percent increase is reported to have been grant-
ed, which is 100 percent over mid-1981, because of a 20-percent increase 2 months
ago. In the mines, the pay of the supervisory personnel increased less than that
of the workers, and the increase is on the same order as in the oil sector.

28
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
INJI10FF1CJA1.I£SEI(HHLY

0n the other hand, the president of the republic decided at the end of January to
create. within the framework of the Ministry of National Education, e connieaion
assigned the task of improving the working conditions of the teachers in Gabon.

However, the civil service has not so far been concerned in the negotiations on pay
increases.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et cie Paris 1982.

11267
C80: 4719/585

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

BRIEFS

SOLAR ENERGY EXPERIMENTS-In order to improve working conditions for personnel
and the safety of users, the Beacon and Lighting Department, a division of the
Gabon Ports and Roadsceads Office (OPRAG), has conducted experiments on the

Ile des Perroquets, opposite the new port of Owendo and the Libreville port-
breakwater in the heart of the Gabonese estuary, with solar energy for beacons

in its channels. There is an average of 3 to 4 hours of sunlight a day in Libre-
ville and OPRAG estimates that the solar solution (photovoltaic conversion) was
more advantageous for its beacons than the old system that used gas. In addition,
an agreement involving an equipment program using solar energy for four Gabonese
villages was signed between the American and Gabonese governments on 4 February
in Libreville. The program costs a total of $1.6 nillion, about 680 million

CPA francs. Out of this total, the American portion is $500,000 (150 million

CPA francs) and the Gabonese Govern-eat will pay the renainder. The prograa will
be carried out in the field by specialists from the Lewis Research Center (Ohio)
near Cleveland, a unit under NASA. The villages chosen are Bolossovills (Holeu-
Nten), Bogandji—Ondia (Upper Ogooue), Nyali (Nyanga) and Donguila (Estuary).

The choice of these settle-eats in 1980 was confirmed in agreement with the
Gabonese ninister of mines and petroleum, second deputy prime minister, Etienne-
Guy Houvagha-Tchioba. Lighting by solar energy will make it possible to neet
essential needs (clinics, schools, social, street lights, distribution of water
by artesian wells and electric pulps). [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDI-
TERRANEENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 6031 [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie
Paris 1982] 11,464

8830 PROJECTS-3ack from a 2-week visit to the interior of Gabon, Andre-Paul

Apaadina, general manager of $830 (Gabon Power and Rater Company), said, in
an interview with the Libreville daily L'UNION on 28 January: "A great deal

reasins to be done in the interior. He lust have extensions in 17 places,
while 5 others, already supplied with electricity, must have water. In addition.

we have naned 20 areas where neither water not electricity is found. Consequently,
a vast program to equip these areas is being studied. However, electrification
and water supply projects are underway at Hayumba, Cocobeach and Omboue. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 403]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,664

30
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USIINVLY
FOR‘OFFKJAJ.US£¢DNLV

SEBC'S PRODUCTION INCREASEs--SEEG [Gabon Power and Water Company]: Growth in l981--

At a meeting in Libreville at the beginning of January, it was announced that for

the $856, the year just ended "was marked, as were the preceding years, by sharp
growth." This growth is characterized by an increase in production of water and of
electricity of 11.7 and 9.6 percent, respectively. The personnel of the 8336 also
increased considerably, reaching a total of 1,650 Gabonese employees and expatri-

ates. Turnover increased by 20.6 percent, going from CPA 16.74 billion in 1980 to

CFA 20.16 billion, before taxes, in 1981. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDI-
TERRANEENS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 330][COP!RIGHT: Rene Moreux at Ole Paris 1982]

11267
BRAZILIAN RAIL CARS RECEIVED--The Trans-GaboneseRailroadoffice (OCTRA) has just

received 61 rail cars from Brazil: ll low-sided flatcars and 30 cars with sliding
sides designed for transportof perishable cannodities. These cars were made in
Brazil by COBRASMA [expansion unknown]. These 41 new rail cars join the 449 cars
that OCTRA already has: 15 passenger cars, 362 freight cars and 15 service cars,
most of them from Japan, as well as from Algeria, Romania, France and South Korea.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82

p 330] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie Paris 1982] 11267

C50: “719/583

31
FOREIGN DEBT RISES, ECONOMIC MEASURES STILL AHAITED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 395

[Excerpts] Over a month after the coup d'etat that brought him to power, Captain
Rawlings had not yet been successful, by the beginning of February, in drawing

up economic and financial measures aimed at correcting the country's situation.
Nevertheless, certain isolated moves seem to have been made.

The decision made on 6 February concerning the deposit in banks and post offices
of all SO-cedi bills, in exchange for a receipt, pointed to an important monetary
reform. The SO-cedi note, the largest bill used in the country, should therefore
cease having any legal value effective 12 February. The measure was preceded by
the temporary closing, on 4 February, of all banks and, on the following day, of
most businesses. It should be noted that these measures were set forth before
the post of secretary of state (minister) for finance and economic planning was
filled. Also vacant was the post of natural resources, labor and health (see

the makeup of the government in HARCEES TROPICAUX, 29 January, p 262).

The monetary measure recalled the recommendation made by the IMF to the former
regime of President Limann that the currency be devalued by 500 percent.

It should be noted in general that the country is gradually taking the revolu-
tionary path chosen by the capitain, but this is not done without some reticence,
even within the army.

Therefore, many people wonder about the future of the new regime and at the same
time, note an obvious loss of freedoms and a deterioration in the situation. In
both Ghanaian and foreign business circles, people even wonder whether all eco-

nomic activity will soon be paralyzed.

Finally, a very harsh audit of the citizenry has been instituted in order to
ascertain their property and income. Denunciations of excessive income are not

only authorized, but recommended.
Foreign Debt

In its annual report for 1980-1981, the Bank of Ghana evaluated the country's
general foreign debt at some $1.5 billion, or twice the total amount of expected

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB¢MHLY
INJRGDFF1C1AI.US£Z(MVLY

exports in 1981. The rate of inflation is 11.0 percent. These data are even
more catastrophic .than those announced in our 8 January issue on the occasion of

the takeover by Captain Rawlings.

In addition, the Bank of Ghana also notes that at the end of June 1981, foreign
exchange amounted to 126 million cedis, or, at the official exchange rate at that
time, $65.8 Iillion. However, it was estimated that a tenth of that sum actually
served to supply the flourishing black market for capital.

In addition, in the light of this disastrous situation, the International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF) offered the previous civilian government of Dr Limann an aid
program for $1.4 billion stretched out over lo years, but on the condition that
the country get itself back on the path to economic recovery and that it devalu-

ate its currency. We know that the authorities at that time were opposed to
the recommendation, deeming it to be harmful to the standard of living of the

population, whose impatience could begin to become dangerous.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11 ,4610
080: 4719/ 603

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

GUINEA

RESUHPTION OF ABIDJAN-CONAKRY FLIGHTS-Air Guinee flights between Abidjan and
Conakry, which had been suspended for several years, just resumed on a weekly
basis. Organization of the flights has been entrusted to Air Ivoire, in keeping
with an agreement made on 8 February by the two companies. Resumption of the
air connection between the two capitals fits into the framework of "strengthening
cooperation existing between the two brother countries." It is believed in the
Ivorian capital that at a time when Africa hopes to promote the expansion of its
tourism, the opening of such a line between the Ivory Coast and Guinea will
result in a tourist boom between the two. [Text] [Paris HARCEES TROPICAUX ET

MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 390] [COPYRIGHTz Rene Horeux
et Cie Paris 1982] 11,464 '

FRENCH COOPERATIQ‘J AGREEMENT-~The JOURNAL OFFICIBL (5 February 1982) has pub-
lished Decree No 82-129 of 27 January 1982, concerning publication of the cul-

and Marcel Cros, Guinean minister of international cooperation. The report was
signed following the visit by a delegation from the Canadian International
Development Agency (ACDI) to Guinea. During its two-week stay, the ACDI mission
took up the programming, by sector and subaector, of specific activities in
order to draw up a cooperation program between the two countries. [Text]

[Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 390]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,664
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEH MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT--A ministry charged with construction and national
development has been established in Guinea. according to a communique from the
Cabinet made public on 21 January. This new ninistry replaces the Ministry of
Public Works, whose abolition was decided on by the Cabinet in view of the
inadequacy of the resources available to it in terms of the results achieved
by the former ministry with its existing structure. The personnel as well as
the material resources of the former Ministry of Public Works will be divided
among the "Commissariata General of the Revolution (CGR. a kind of super
prefecture in Guinea). which will then be responsible for the maintenance of
the road networks and the maintenance of bridges and tunnels located in their
respective territories. [Text] [Paris HARCﬂEs TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEERS in
French No 1890, 29 Jan p 259] [CDPYRIGRT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.]
5170

CONAKRY AIRPORT EXPARSION--The Aeroport de Paris Coapany has just signed a
contract with the Government of the Republic of Guinea for a feasibility

study covering the development and extenstion of Conakry airport. This
feasibility study, in which the Aeroport de Paris Company will play the major
role, will be carried out in association with SOPREAVIA [French Aviation
Studies Company]. The study will cover the construction of a new passenger
terminal. freight terminals and a maintenance hangar for the aircraft
belonging to Air Guinea; the reconstruction and improvement of aeronautical
support facilities; the installation of air navigation aids; the reconstruction
and develop-ant of various buildings and road networks; and finally the
organization and management of the airport serving the Guinean capital. [Text]
[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX 3T MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1890, 29 Jan 82 p 259]
5170 [copmam Rene Moreux ct Cie Paris 1982] 5170

C30: h719/580

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

GRANT '1‘0 PORTUGUESE MAGAZINE—The Guinea-Bissau Government granted many thou-
sands of dollars to a Portuguese magazine of the extreme right. TEMPO, for the
publication of a supplement devoted to the "benefits" and "advantages" of the
14 November military coup d'etat. This unfortunate initiative, which was
apparently due to the ministers of interior and information, created s consider-
able stir in Guinea public opinion and in international progressive circles.
It was aimed at giving credence to the myth that the 16 November events were
in the interest of the Guinea people. Horse, it appeared in a publication
which is the customary mouthpiece of the leader of the UNITA. Saviﬂai. Presi-
dent Nino Vieira is reputedly planning to request an in-depth investigation of
this affair. It is not excluded that it could end up by pointing out that it
was aimed at reinforcing ties between Portuguese fascist circles and certain
elements of the Guinea governmental team. [Text] [Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in
French No 260, 1-1:. Mar 82 p 31] Ioomxcar: 1982 Afrique-Asie]

CSO: h719/6&1

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
GOVERNMENT SECRBCY REPORTEDLY HAMPERS ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p #13

[Text] In his wishes for Mozambique on the eve of the New Year, Samora Machel,

chief of state, hoped that the initial success that will mark the actual launch-
ing of the decade-old fight against underdevelopment will be manifested and he
issued an appeal to the nation for the success of the operation.

The opening to the outside needed in order to achieve such a result and the search
for investments from Western countries encountered a najor obstacle, the FINANCIAL
TIMES recently emphasized: the excessive taste for secrecy on the part of the
government. Naturally, we know that Mozambique must face acute economic prob-
lems, particularly regarding its negative balance of payments, adversely affected
by the higher cost of energy and the need to import nassive amounts of food be-
cause of the stagnation of agriculture resulting from the departure of Portuguese
settlers after independence and from the drought and flooding.

However, "it is impossible to make a serious analysis of the economic situation
in Mozambique," the British daily says. The only reliable data are in the hands

of those close to the president of the republic and his ministers. Moreover,
anyone seeking statistics is referred to the annual report drafted for the

UN Security Council, a report most of whose figures the authors themselves say
are not reliable.

This fanatic secrecy makes potential foreign investors reticent. In Great Bri-
tain, for example, the Export Credit's Guarantee Departsent (8000), which sub-
stantially corresponds to the French COPACB [French Foreign Trade Company), may
refuse to cover the risks run by investors unless a certain number of data are

available, particularly regarding the foreign debt and service on the debt in
Mozambique. It is for this very reason that credits for an important aeronautics
project were blocked by the United States' Eximbank.

Despite Maputo's absence from international organizations such as the World
Bank and the International Monetary PUnd, or its nonmembership in the Lone Con-

vention. officials in the Nest have tried to evaluate Mozambique'e economic
difficulties. These attempts show that the overall balance of payments deficit
is reportedly on the order of $250 million, that foreign exchange reserves are
evidently exhausted and that service of the debt is some $500 to $800 million.

37
FUR1IHNCJAI.USE¢N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Assuming that these estimates are exact and considering Moznbique’s need to

ask for foreign assistance in order to fight its underdevelop-ent, the goverment
would undoubtedly find it advantageous to be less secretive in order to obtain
more.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982

11,461.
(:80: 4 719/603

38
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NMLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

DEMANDS IN MOSTAGE CASE-John Burlison, a young British citizen, has been held
hostage since 17 December of last year by the Mozambique National Resistance
Movement (MRN) which is opposed to the present government in Maputo. The MIN
has indicated that it will not release its hostage until the "world press"
published a communique denouncing "the Maputo Marxist regime." [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 3‘0] 8796

CASMEH NUT CROP-The cashew nut marketing campaign was scheduled to start at
the end of January in the Mozambique Provinces of Sofala and Manica. Opera-
tions were delayed by 1 month due to the shortage of means of transportation.
Machazem. Duri and Chibers are the main districts of these provinces where
cashew nuts are grown. The 5.000-ton production target for this region is not
likely to be met as a result of adverse climatic conditions and of insecurity.
[Text] [Paris MARCMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBSMS in French No 1891, 5 Teb

82 p 360] 8796

AERIAL SURVEY-The photographic survey of the Mozambique national territory
conducted in 1981 by the French Company of Stereoscopic Land Survey and by the
National Directorate for Geology and Survey, better known under the initials
of DINAGBCA. has already covered more than 12,800 square kilometers. The maps
drawn as part of this aerial survey program are on a scale of between ll7,500
and l/20,000 and represent several projects in progress in the country. [Text]
[Paris MARCMBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1891. 5 Feb p 3&0] 8796

COAL MINING AGREEMENTS--A bilateral agreement between Mozambique, Brazil and
the OPEC Fund for International Development involving a mining project. a con-
sortium of Brazilian companies will be entrusted with making an evaluation of
reserves of coal in the Mucanha Vuza region and then will provide equipment

and means of transportation for the mine. Studies will take 1‘ months to com-
plete at a cost of $5.4 million with $2.3 million provided by the OPEC fund.

By the time the project goes into operation, 6 or 7 years from now, total
investments made will amount to $700 million. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX
ET MBDITERRANEENS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 360] [COPYRIGMT: Rene Moreux
et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SERIOUS FOOD SHORTAGBs—The Mozambican Government is planning to nake an appeal
to the international couunity for emergency food aid, according to a dispatch

from the Portuguese agency ANOP dated Maputo, 2 February. According to the dis-
patch, which quotes diplomatic sources. the government in Maputo has reportedly
already made contact with the albassadora of the United States, Great Britain
and Sweden in the Mozambican capital. According to the same sources, the food
situation in the country is worse at the beginning of 1982 than it was in 1980,
at the tine of the great drought that nade international aid necessary. The
country reportedly covers only 5 percent of its neat and margarine needs and

10 percent of its needs for wheat and corn flour. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPI-
CAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 413] [COPYRIQ'rz Rene
Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] ll.l-6lo

cso: 4719/6025

1&0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

NIGER

SAUDI AID T0 DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS REVIEWED
Paris MARGES TROPICAUX ET MEDITBWS in French No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 393

[Text] On 1 February in Niamey, Nigerien Minister of Planning Brah Hamane
joined with whamad Al-Sujayr, vice president of the Saudi Development Fund, in
signing (as we briefly announced in NAMES TROPICAUX, 5 February, p 323) two

loan agreements for a total mount of 127 million Saudi rial, or the equivalent
of 11 billion CFA francs, to be used for three road projects.

The first project involves the Niamey-Filingue road (71 million rial, or 6.1
billion CFA francs); the second, the Pilingue-Tahoua road (2.6 billion CPA francs);
and the third, the HargouPCaya road (25.9 million Saudi rial, or 2.23 billion

CPA francs). The Niamey-Balleyara-Filingue and Pilingue-Tahoua projects represent
a total of some 430 kilometers of roads, while the Hargou-Falmey-Koulou-Gaya
project in the southern part of the Department of Dosao represents some 180 kilo-
meters.

Since 1976, total aid from the Saudi Development Fund has amounted to 12.52 bil-
lion CFA francs, with the Fund supplying 20.3 million rial in 1976 for construc-

tion of 150 homes (Faisal Compound), 19 silos for the Nigerien Foodstuffs Office
(OPVN) and 31 grain silos. Other contributions of Saudi Arabia to Niger's devel-

opment for 1976, 1978 and 1979 amount to 7,727,000,000 CFA francs.

Kandadji: Future Saudi Participation

In addition, Saudi Arabia is studying participation in the financing of the
Kandadji Dam, Muhammad Al-Sujayr, vice president of the Saudi Development Fund,
said on 2 February.

Following 0 meeting with Col Seyni Kountche, Al-Sujayr said that he had flown
over the site picked for construction of the dam and had "discussed financing
of the project with the chief of state."

The dam, which should be built some 170 kilometers above Niamey on the Niger,

would, according to authorities, make it possible to irrigate 110,000 hectares
of arable land, supply the region's water needs and install a lZS-megawatt
hydroelectric powerplant. For the first phase of work, the cost is an estimated

100 billion CPA francs.
COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

11,664
cso: 4719/598

FOIilﬂﬂflAl.USE(NVLY
H)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

BRIEFS

HALIAN FRONTIER TALKS-JIM Malian minister of interior and urban affairs,

Lt Col Sory Ibrahins Sylla. and the Nigerian secretary of state for the
interior, Ameu Pity Haiga, after 2 days of discussions in Niamey, reached an
agreement on 28 January by which the frontier authorities of the two countries
will meet regularly to resolve border questions. In a cos-unique the two
ministers also recon-ended the holding of a neeting between ministers of the
two countries charged with finance and couerce "to amine questions on the
transit of cattle and of merchandise." The suggestion for holding the nesting
on transit issues was made by the “alien side. The two ministers also
proposed the establishment of a "joint, nixed couission for a reconnaissance
of the border for later use." Mali and Niger have a coma border about 800
km long in the grasslands and Sahara regions. [Text] [Paris HARCEBS TROPICAUX
B'l' MEDITBRRAWS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 323] 5170

ROAD CONSTRUCI‘ION—The director general of the Jean Lefebvre Coapany from
Ivory Coast, Alain Dewe. was received on 27 January by Nigerian chief of state,
Col Seyni Komtche. Dewe indicated that the conversation concerned the
construction of the section of road from Zinder to Hirriah to Diffs and the
section of road from Tchadoua to Guidan to “”51 to Disradi which has been
assigned to his conpany. "He count on working in collaboration with certain
Nigerian conpanies, particularly the A11 Somana Reinforced Concrete Company.
The necessary equipment will be on hand in the near future, and the work will
begin between now and aid-February. The coat of the construction is estimated
at 3.5 billion CPA [African Financial COIIIIIllity] francs. Dewe went on to say,
"Elsewhere we had occasion to nention the developnent of the road network in
Niger and in the Nigerian border area. On this subject we expressed the wish
that we night see construction progress leading to the establishment of a
Nigerian road construction company able to respond to the needs of the
government in terns of road maintenance and construction of small road
projects." [Text] [Paris HARCNES TBDPICAUX BT FEDITERRANBBNS in French

No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 323] 5170

PEANUT PRODUCTION—In our issue No 1888 of 15 January (p 140) we published a
note on the situation in Niger in which we gave the figure of 1,567 tons as the
production of peanuts in the 1980-81 season. As indicated to us by Ali Sabo,
director general of SONARA (Nigerian Coupony for the Sale of Peanuts). "this
figure is rather that for the sale of shelled peanuts for the season in question.
The production figure for that year was 126,125 tons." [Text] [Paris HARCHBS
TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANMS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 323] 5170

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

SAUDI ROAD CONSTRUCTION WARS—4h» loan agreements amounting to 11 billion

Cl-‘A francs altogether were signed in Niamey on 1 February. These two loans,
provided by Saudi Arabia, are intended to finance two road projects: the
construction of the road from Niamey to Filingue to Tahoua (about 630 km) and
the road from Hargou to Falmey to Gays, in the southern part of Dosso
Department (sboat 180 km). [Text] [Paris HARCEBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS
in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 323] (comma: Rene Horeux st Cie Paris 1982.]
5170

FRENCH AID IN 1981-—The total mount of French civilian aid to Niger in 1981 was
23.101; billion CFA francs, according to an initial estimate drawn up by French
economic sources in Niamey. Out of this total, loans from the Central Fund for
Economic Cooperation (CCCE) amounted to 13.75 billion CPA francs. In addition,
according to an initial balance sheet from the French Aid and Cooperation mis-
sion, aid to investments (Aid and Cooperation Fund, FAC) amounted to 2.42 billion,
technical assistance totaled an estimated 5.2 billion and training scholarships
228 million, plus 60 million in expenses of the Ministry of National Education.
Finally, financial aid in the form of loan allowances from the 0063 amounted to
1.75 billion CPA francs. Added together, the aid places France in first place
among those giving civilian assistance to Niger, with 26 percent of the total in
1981. During the 5 previous years (1976-1980), France was Niger's main backer,
with 27 percent of the total civilian aid, leading the European Development Fund
(1b percent), the World Bank (12 percent) and the Federal Republic of Germany

(9 percent). [Text] [Paris HARCEES TROPICADX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French

No 1892, 12 Feb 82 p 393] [COFYRIGHR Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 11,666

(‘50: 4719/5398

1.3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

NIGERIAN'S ARTICLE WIMB APPEARS IN DDSCOH MICK?!“

Moscow FORBIGN TRADE in menu: lb 2, rob 92 pp 31-32

[Article by s. C. Ihaonuneltvu, Trade representative of the Federal Republic of

Nigeria in the USSR: 'Dawlopnant of Trade Between Nigeria and the USSR")

l'l'extl

Belore attainment of political
independence no direct com-
mercial transactions were con-
ducted between Nigeria and the
Sotict l'nion. Nigerian products
appeared in the Soviet. Union
only through the commercial
tratuactions of British ﬁrms. Our
commercial links therefore must
be said to be a relatively new
phenomenon. starting with Nige-
ria's political independence in
I960.

With the establishment of dip-
lomnlic relations, direct com-
mercial contacts began. which
reeeited added impetus when in
June l96l the Federal Minister
lur Finance. Chief Festus S. Olto-
tie-Ehoh. led a Nigerian delega-
tion to Moscow to conduct nego-
tiutions on direct trade between
Nigeria and the Soviet Union.

These negotiations initiated a
series of oilicial contacts between
Logos and Moscow which cul-
minated in the drawing up of a
trade agreement between our
countries. Another big event con-
cerning trade with the Soviet
Union was the visit of the former
Fetltral Minister for Commerce
and Industry, Aljaji Zane Bultar
Dipeharima. who, on behalf of

Mt

the Nigerian government. signed
in Moscow the lirst trade agree-
ment between Nigeria and the
USSR in July I963.

Experience gained while im-
plementing the ﬁrst trade agree-
ment gave rise to the conclusion
of others. each subsequently com-
ing into cllcct.

Nigeria's main export items to
the Soviet Union during the 1965-
1975 period included cocoa beans.
cocoa oil, arabic gum and
varieties of tropical wood. With
the exception of cocoa beans and
cocoa oil other items have
gradually faded from the Nigerian
export list to the USSR.

Featuring principally on the
latest Soviet export list to Nigeria
are pig iron. steel. rolled stock
factories' equipment, pipes. mo-

tor vehicles, agricultural ma-
chinery, frozen ﬁsh, building
materials.

Noteworthy during the decade
t965-l975 Nigeria enjoyed a
favourable balance of trade. ex-
cept in 1966. when it suffered a
small trade deﬁcit. Trade turn-
over reached its maximum in
I975 and amounted to 108.3 mil-
lion rubles. Since [977 the trade

MOMCIALUSEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040059-8

CSO:

COPYRIGHT:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

balance with the Soviet Union has
become negative. Thus, for in-
stance. in I980 out of total tum-
over between our countries which
amounted to 99.6 million rubles.
Soviet exports to Nigeria account-
ed for 80.2 million mbles, while
Nigerian export to the USSR
amounted only to 19.4 million
rubles. The growth of Soviet ex-
ports to Nigeria was due to the
increasing deliveries to Nigeria
of machinery and manufactur-
ing equipment for projects built
with Soviet assistance.

Certain factors exerted a re-
straining inlluence on the evolu-
tion of commercial links betwe-
en the two countries. One of
them - inadequate information
about potential possibilities of
our countries. Another inlltien-
tial [actor to he considered in
determittinu the "on ul trade be-
tween the two partners is their
dillerent social and economic
structures. In the USSR. foreign
trade is a state monopoly whereas
Nigeria practises a market econo-
mic system. Under the circum-
stances the interplay of estcrnal.
political and economic forces
which often cause complications
“lien planning foreign trade have
to be taken into account. Devel-
opment of trade between the two
states was lurther challenged by
their geographical remoteness. To
a urcat e\tent the trade is atl'ec-
ted by intensity. stability and by
the tiatlitiunal trade and econo-
IIIIl' u-lations. With the passage of
tune. West African countries. in-
eluding Nigeria. have come within
commercial teach of the Soviet

4700/923

'Vnoshnyaya torgovlya" 1982

its

Union.

The volume
transactions bet'
countries has COI
ed. rising from
insigniﬁcant sum
million rubles in
lion rubles in [9:
crease).

Careful examin
tern of trade b1
countries reveals
materials domin
exports to the U!
for Soviet linishe
ducts. At the sat
tentialities of the
kets have not yet
ized. Perhaps as
intergovernment:
tequired to alert
their economic
possibilities and

In an econt
which the two cu
I976 the USSR :
gigantic iron an
Nigeria. Work or
gan in June last
garded as the b
future industria
progress. There
the day when st
off the pt'oducti
plant, a new era
velopment will 1.

The l970$ hth
l980s are with u
can expect Niger
velop her natior
they will positiv
volume and stm
eign trade.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600040069-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

RELATIONS WITH CAMEROON REVIEWED
President's Visit
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 201

[Textl The recent visit to Nigeria by President Ahidjo of Cameroon turned out to
be very satisfactory for both countries.

In fact, as stated in a joint communique published at the end of this trip.
"President Ahidjo's visit enabled the two leaders to restore an atmosphere of
trust, peace and mutual understanding."

The communique also notes that a trade agreement was signed alongside with an
agreement on administrative cooperation in the sphere of customs. a cooperation
agreement on telecommmunications, an extradition treaty and a draft treaty dealing
with postal and financial services.

The communique also mentions that both heads of state have decided to reactivate
the joint ccmmlission and to study the possibilities of bilateral cooperation in
the sphere of hydroelectric power.

On an international level. President Ahidjo and President Shagari reaffirmed their

identity of views on major current problems in Africa and agreed to support the
OAU's efforts in Chad and elsewhere.

Agreement To Be Conducted
Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 201

[Text] President Ahidjo's visit to Nigeria was given extensive coverage in the
press of both countries. In its issue of 10-11 January. the daily CAMEROON TRIBUNE
recalls the bonds which have united these two countries since their independence
and the agreements concluded or due to be concluded.

These bonds led to the establishment of diplomatic relations as soon as independence
was proclaimed and to many official visits from both sides under the various
Nigerian regimes. They also led to exchanges of workers in large nunbers-with

many Cameroonians going to Nigeria and some 50,000 Nigerians coming to Camaroon—-to
a diversified trade and to several agreements. nanely:

h6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aurcomonts signed. ratified and still in force:
Friendship and cooperation treaty (6 February 1963 in Yaounde)

Draft treaty on the control of movements of people and goods (6 February 1963 in
Yaounde)

Agreement on airline operations by virtue of which Nigeria Airways has been
landing in Douala and Cam-Air in Lagos since November 1971

Cultural cooperation agreement (27 March 1972 in Lagos)
Draft treaty on police matters (27 March 1972 in Lagos)
Agreements negotiated but not signed:

Commercial agreement (1972)

Extradition treaty (1972)

Draft treaty dealing with fishing in territorial waters (1972)
Agreements due to be negotiated or renewed:

Draft treaty on the exchange of postal orders
Agreement dealing with telecommunications

Convention on setting up joint border checkpoints
Convention on postal settlements and tariffs

Additional protocol to the trade agreement on the location of palm groves at the
border between Nigeria and Cameroon

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
cso: «719/560

h?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

OFFSHORE OIL DlSCOVERIES--ln January, the Nigerian National Petroleum Corpor-
ation (NNPC) announced the discovery of a new offshore deposit, designated
Mloniso—l. in its No 97 Concession, located in the state of Rivieres. The
drilling to 38 meters below sea level began last 17 November, and the posi-
tive results achieved in December were confirmed subsequently. The initial
potential is for the exploitation of 3,000 barrels per day. Other wells will
be drilled during the third quarter of the year to establish the extent of
the deposit. The discovery announced in January is the ninth marketable de-
posit found offshore by the NNPC since its drilling activities began in
1976. [Text] [Paris moans TROPICAUX at mounameans in French No 1893,
19 Feb 82 p 563] [copmxcun Rene Horeaux et Cie Paris [1982]] 5157

680: “719/622

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEIEGAMBIA

ESTIMATED HARVESTS OF VARIOUS CROPS NOTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET NEDITBRRANEBNS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 23

[Text] During the 1981-1982 agricultural year, the two major cash crops of Senegal,

peanuts and cotton, are expected to produce 800,000 tons and 33,000 tons respectively
(comparied to 500,000 tons and 22,000 tons in 1980) as we reported in an earlier ar-

ticle (see HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS issue of 25 December 1981 p 3426).

As for other farm products, estimated figures supplied by Director General of Agri-

cultural Production Coly indicate that, this year, Senegal will produce over 700.000
tons of millet and sorghum. If so, this year's crop will be the third highest since
independence.

The two best years produced crops of about 800,000 tons. The lowest figures ever
registered were in the neighborhood of 300,000 tons. In the 1981-1982 farming sea-
son, farmers planted the highest acreage of millet in 20 years. More than 1 million
hectares of millet and sorghum were planted. Three-fifths of the millet crop will
be grown in the Sine-Saloum region.

With an average yield of 700 kilos per hectare, the 1981-1982 crop year is the sec-
ond best since independence. Only the 1978-1979 farming season was better with a
national average of around 800 kilos per hectare. In the last decades, the average
yield for millet crops has been slightly over 550 kilos per hectare and the lowest
300 kilos per hectare.

Another grain crop which had good results was the corn crop with a total production
of ovvr 50.000 tons and an average yield of 800 kilos per hectare. The 1981-1982
crop was 2,000 tons higher than last year. EVen better results could have been
achieved if fertilizers had been applied at the right time and in sufficient quanti-
tics.

This year, Senegal's rice paddy production--grown by various methods—-was just above
100,000 tons, not enough to meet half of the country's needs which stands at around
2’10 .000 tOnS .

Finally, the bean crop fell to 26,000 tons (compared to 35,000 tons for the previous
farming season) although more acreage was planted (59,000 hectares).

1&9
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NL‘.’

Aceording to the Dakar daily LB SOLBIL, the amount of rain which fell during the
1981—1982 winter season was "within the crops requirements. The first widespread
rains started on 25 June (except in the Louga region where they came a month later).
Despite brief periods without rain in the northern and central regions. the amount
of rain did not cause any Iajor setback.

"Contrary to what was feared at the beginning, the slight time difference in the rain-
fall between the northern zone and the rest of the country did not have adverse ef-
fects. because in some areas it stopped raining in September but there were rains in
October. The combined effect of these two factors was that plants with pods likely

to be exposed to a second germination had a change to dry up while the October rains
ensured the vegetative cycle of the late crops in the north.

"Finally, in contrast with what happened during the previous farming year. the sowing
did not stop when rains were forecast. By 31 July, 90 percent of all the sowing had
been completed."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
C80: 6719/453

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SERBGAHBIA

BRIEFS

RICE PRICE INCREASE-There has been a 30 percent increase in the price of a
kilogram of rice in Senegal, which has gone up from 80 to 105 CPA [African
Financial Community] francs, effective 31 January. In announcing this decision.
Falilou Kane. Senegalese minister of commerce, emphasized that this measure

was aimed in particular at lightening the financial burdens of Senegal. by
encouraging the citizens to consume Senegalese products, in order to bring an
end to the shortages of certain food items and to fight against fraudulent
export of rice (imported by Senegal) to neighboring countries. The Senegalese
minister stated that Senegal subsidized rice to the extent of 4 billion CPA
francs in 1981 and imported £50,000 tons of rice, as compared to 250,000 tons
imported in 1976. Minister Kane also indicated that Senegal is already
usbsidizing certain products (peanut oil, cotton, sugar. wheat) and most
recently peanuts, following the noticeable decline in the price of these
commodities on the world market. He noted in particular that the Senegalese
Government this year has spent 10.5 billion CPA francs to maintain the price

of peanuts from this year's crop of 750,000 tons. ﬂdnister Kane said that the
Senegalese Government, by deciding to raise the price of rice, chose instead

to subsidize peanuts with the intention of maintaining the purchasing power

of the farmers at their previously determined remunerative level. The increase
in the prices to the producers of agricultural products is one of the two
principal measures taken this year by the president of Senegal. The other
decision is the absorption of the debt owed by farmers to rural assistance
organizations (20 billion CPA francs). Finally, Falilou Kane indicated that
the millet harvest is good this year, amounting to 750,000 tons. He also
called on the Senegalese people to consume more millet, both in the countryside
as well as in the cities. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAREENS

in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 3171 [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982.]
5170

(:50: 4719/5130

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

TOGO

BRIEFS

DEBT RESCHEDULING-—The Togolese chief of state, Gen Gnassingbe Eyadema, re-
turned to Lome on 13 February following official visits to the PRC and Libya
(see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS, 12 February 1982, page 394). Two
agreements pertaining to the rescheduling of the Togolese debt to the PRC
were signed in Bonn on 11 February. They provide for the extension over 9
years of the payment period Ior the 34 million deutschemarks (88 million
French francs) in debts payable originally between 1 January 1981 and

31 December 1982. They are the result of medium and long-term credit granted
to home by Bonn and commercial credit granted by West German banks to Togo
with the financial guarantee of the government of the PRC. Both documents
were based on the rescheduling protocol (deferred repayment) signed a year
ago. on 20 February 1981, in Paris, between Togo and its main creditors (in
this connection see MARCHES "ROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBES, 27 February 1981.
page 488). Prior to the sign ng, President Eyadema met with Rainer Offergeld,
the PRC minister for economic cooperation. who gave Bonn's agreement in prin-
ciple to joint contribution, along with other countries, to the construction
of the dam which Togo wants to build with Benin on the Mono River on the
frontier. President Eyadema Ind Minister Offergeld stressed the importance of
economic cooperation between the PRC and Togo. The expansion of the Lome port
carried out with FRG aid, they said, made it possible to improve the pro-
cedures for supplying Togo as well as that country's exports. They also
stressed the effectiveness of "est German aid in the world development of
Togo. which has contributed to the improvement of its food situation. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1893, 19 Feb 82

p 562] [comnucun Rene Mon-aux et Cie Paris [1982]] 5157

C50: h719/622

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UGANDA

CLASHES REPORTBDLY LEAVE 90 DEAD NEAR KAHPALA
JNZ6l320 London REUrmsin English 1220 GMT 26 Feb 82
[Report by Bearnd Debusmann]

[Text] Nairobi, 26 Feb (REUTBR)-About 90 people have been killed during
army search operations following the mortaringof Kalpalas main barracks by
anti-government guerrillas on Tuesday, medical sources reported from the
Ugandan capital today. Contacted by telephone from Nairobi, the sources
said many of those killed were found in Namanve Forest which gained gruesome
notoriety as a dumping gromd for corpses during the murderous 8-year reign
of dictator Idi Amin.

"Uith very few exceptions, those found in the forest had bullet holes in the
back of the neck,“ one source reported. He declined to be named and would
not say how many of the dead -were civilians.

Other Kampala residents have also spoken of excesses by the army in their
search and one Ugandan professional working for a state-rm organisation
alleged to REUTERS that there had been killings, raping and looting.

On Tuesday, some 300 heavily-armed guerrillas slipped into Kampala, set up
mortar positions around Lubiri barracks near army headquarters, and lobbed
mortar shells into the sprawling cospound below. The government said 67
attackers and two soldiers died in the subsequent fighting.

Members of the diplomatic corps in Kampala were taken on a tour of the
barracks today and said there was little damage to the comlex, surrounded

by an 8—foot (LS-metre) wall. The diplomats were also taken to Rubaga
Cathedral, perched on a hill overlooking the barracks, and shown a mortar
position the attackers set up on the steps of the twin-towered building.

The Ugandan official accompanying the diplomats, Capt John Upor, a member
of Parliament, said the army had fired back with recoilleas rifles after the
mortar attack, beating back the guerrillas.

Third world diplomats in Kampala described the raid, the biggest since
organised anti-government operations began a year ago, as an acute political
embarrassment for the government of Dr Hilton Obote. His administration has

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHUAL USE ONLV

consistently dismissed anti-government forces as mere bandits and terrorists,
totally without popular support.

The Uganda Freedom Hovemnt (um), which claimed responsibility for the
attack, has said the fact that such a large group of men could operate freely
enough to shell the main barracks proved that it had local backing. The
guerrillas melted into the lush countryside after the raid and dispersed
towards the former capital of Entebee on the shore of Lake Victoria.

Although life in Kaspala swiftly returned to normal after the fighting, with
shops and government offices operating as usual, ’lhird World diplomats
described the attack as a major setback to efforts to rebuild a country
shattered by Amin's misrule and the bloody campaign to oust him.

The diplomats said the guerrilla operation was also likely to have an adverse
effect on efforts to make a disciplined, professional army out of what they
called "the gunmen in uniform" who helped overthrow Amin.

Much of the violence which has shaken Uganda since his departure has been
ascribed to the army and security forces.

Leaders of the opposition Democratic Party have said the army tends to over-
react to guerrilla operations, often resorting to indiscriminate reprisals.

C50: 1. 700/901

5h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIRST-HAND ACCOUNT 035031355 WI SITUATION
Paris PROJET in French Jan 82 pp I‘ll-115
[ Article by Jacqueline d'Harcourt: "Six Months in Uganda']

[Text 7 During the sun-er of 1980, a Hench television report revealed that
a terrible famine existed in KaramoJa, a province in northwest Uganda. Gifts
flowed in, enabling a fee non-government organizations to send in energency
aid teens. I went for 6 months with the A10? (International Action Against
Hunger) to distribute food and set up some little development projects.

These are my personal impressions on what expatriates, 'husunbu,‘ as the
Karamojongs call them, are apt to feel and achieve by living among a people
affected by famine.

the Kararnojongs are semi-nomadic herdsnen: the men go away in the dry sea-
son to pasture the herds, the women, children, and old men stay behind in
the village. This "primitive" population is unfamiliar with the wheel, has
no written language, lights fires with flints, and does not use cattle for
ploughing. The Karanojongs have always lived on the fringes of Ugandan life,
forgotten on their high plateau, despised by the other tribes. Their re-
sources are very limited: the herd supplies silk and blood to feed them,
pelts to clothe them; the men do a little hunting for big wild gene (zebra,
giraffe, antelope), the women use hoes to scratch at the earth around the
villages to grow, with luck, some sorghum

Karmja's economy depends on a fragile ecological balance among the land
(dry savannah), the livestock, and human beings. But for several years the
balance has been broken: the English made considerable inroads upon the
herds, and the populations has doubled since independence as a result of the
introduction of medicine. The herd can no longer be used as currency for
trade, it is no longer sufficient to feed the population, and is becoming
the subject of increasing struggles anong- Karanojongs. Trade has fallen off
since the political unrest has made travel dangerous. when Anin fell, the
military barracks were pillaged and all the arms stolen. Karsnojongs have
a lot of trouble leaving their territory. If they go into hospital in

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

another province, they run the risk of being killed in their beds or not
being treated.

After 2 consecutive years of drought (1978-1979), the situation became cata
strophic. With no links to the rest of the country, no harvests, no seeds
to sow, and the livestock decimted, the manojongs were domed to decline
and slow death unless outside aid one quickly. But in such a context of
deterioration of the living environment, there was no real solution to the
famine, and outside help was to create upheaval in the already unsettled
Karanojong society.

The Karanojongs' reaction '0 hunger is something inimaginable for our so-
ciety of plenty. h'hen a p« rson has seen his relatives die of hunger, and
when he has been hungry en-Iugh to scrabble in the soil to dig out roots, to
eat dirt by the handful, behaviors undergo profound and long-lasting modi-
fications and become very hard for Europeans to understand.

The Karanojongs assure the survival of the group above all else: they do
not touch the livestock, srle source of riches. The herd is the heritage
that brings power, and in that sense it is sacred. The Karalsajongs would
rather die than kill their cows, for without cows, they would soon oe
doomed: no milk to feed the non, bridge the gap between harvests, give a
little protection from the chanciness of the climate. Men are fed in prio-
rity, then the boys, their successors, and young women able to worh and
have children. The old men are the first to be abandoned, then the young
children. when they get beyond a certain level of malnutrition, the child-
ren are rejected by their families. In the 'feeding centers,“ it was not
unusual for mothers to steel their children's food to give it to their hus-
bands. Certain children, restored to health and sent back to their villages,
would cone back again in a aonth in an appalling state: they were already
dead so far as concerned their families, who were no longer feeding them.
while they are not the rule, such behaviors are frequent and fit in with
the economy of the group.

Starvation contributes to the creation of attitudes toward food that were
surprising to us at first; as soon as it is distributed, the corn is eaten
or turned into beer. Why make hear when the quantity distributed is only
Just enough to barely meet needs? The answer is quite a simple one: first
the beer will be sold, and with the noney he gets, the brewer can buy more
corn on the local black market than was given to him, and then, the Karano-
Jongs drink beer because they prefer an instant, intense pleasure to a long
series of privations. It is not crazy, it is one way of exorcising the fear
of dying, an understandable fora of 'carpe dial" Fgather the day"; live
while you can]. At the height of the fusine in 7979, an agronouist nanaged
to get sane seed and find sons surplus seed suitable for dry savannah, acne-
thing of a feat; he distributed it to the populace; a few days later, he
found out that a large part of the seed had inediately been node into beer.
That is obviously hard to take.

56
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Finally, the massive contribution of food from HF? (world Food PrOgrsr0
from May 1980 onward resulted in great deterioration in harsmojong Society.
The food became a right. And painful scenes were witnessed of angry women
and old men howling for "poacho" (cornmeal); in hereto, the main city of
naramoja, there were demonstrations of fury when trucxs full of corn drove
through the city without stopping. Not only did the KaramoJongs lose every
shred of dignity, at the same time tney became vagrants, stopped working,
waited for the distrioutions. These are the ill effects of aid; they are
inevitable and will persist so long as the expatriates are there and the
distributions continue. But there is no alternative; in 1979, the RP?
turned over the food stocks to the Ugandan government, and 90 percent have
been misappropriated.

As we worx, we have this question ever present in our minds: how can aid
be prevented from turning into support? we tried to find, or more precisely
groped toward,an answer, for there is no really satisfactory solution. He
has a few possible procedures: sell the corn, the tools, to more it clear
that they were not gifts nor rights, but an exchange. But fresh problems
emerged: sell, yes, but at what price? if it was too low, we ran the risk

or smuggling with neighboring areas; too high, and hardly anybody could
any any more.

'Food for were,“ the second method: exchange food for work. Repair roads,
dig water reservoirs, build schools. Each village taxes on a project that
it completes, we check and distribute afterwards. A difficult task: the
naramojongs cannot see any advantage in repairing trails, building schools.
They hope to get the food without work. Then you have to insist and threat-
en to get certain indispensable work restarted (such as digging the reserv-
oirs) after it nao been dropped when the famine came.

But handouts in whatever form provide temporary improvement, not solutions.
The famine is the result of such an accumulation of phenomena that sustain-

ea action must be taaen for the Karanojongs to be able to recover an accept-
able state of self-sufficiency.

With this is mind, we tried to diversify resources, using techniques suited
to the local situation, line weaving, cart—building, wicker-work, pottery.
These simple techniques use materials found locally or in nearby areas, and
permit manuiacture of useful items. we trained a few people who in turn

train others. The worxshops are organized into cooperatives intended to
work autonomously.

These projects are engaging, but it is also very hard to make them work.
One success for every 10 failures. They have to offer immediate advantages

so that the naramojongs can see the results of their work quickly; they
must not upset the social organization. The weaving shop is a good example:

we used rudimentary looms and manufactured lengths of cotton cloth. Cloth
is extremely hard to find in Karamoja, and there we are finding a way to

get a fine piece of material in 3 days! The cotton mill is open only to
the men, so that weaving will become a noble, prestigious activity, and will

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not be dropped at the first difficulty. In spite of all that, the expatri-
ates have to be there all tne time to make sure that operations go well,
whereas for the outcome of these efforts to be successful, they should be
taken over by the Karamojongs. What is to be done to get these warriors
to develop without losing their identity? Is it right to start these
workshops? Hhat would be the most suitable projects?

we measure the chasm between the Karamojongs and ourselves; it is the cause
of the problems, but enriches us at the same time.

In Uganda, we Europeans undergo the threefold experience of power, differ-
ence, and another way of life. 'Landing' in Karamoja with 'full anthority'I
(control of the food), we feel as if we have the power of life and death
over a population that would do anything to have something to eat.

But one should make no mistaxe about this, and missionaries who have lived
here for a long time are well aware of it: whatever our power may be, we
are not the chiefs. Acknowledged, respected, feared perhaps, above all we
are intruders to be taken advantage of to the maximum. In the best of cases
we are looked upon as guests. In meetings with the villagers, the chiefs
keep to themselves, not wanting to be compromised in transactions with the

, 'poscho merchants." we think we are in control of the situation, but in

fact many reactions and many decisions escape us. He realise much later
what really happened.

The situation makes many demands on us. You have to keep your temper, have
a sense of humor, know exactly what you want, and what you can gain, and oe
sure of yourself. There can be no trickery during palavers; the Karamo-
Jongs soon perceive what sort of person they are dealing with, and they are
pitiless. You have to learn what your power'is and how far it goes, and

that takes wisdom enough to admit it and strength enough never to get disc
couraged.

Yet life is far simpler for Europeans 'over there' than it is here. Having
nothing to fall back on, we have only ourselves to depend on, and we very
quickly learn to behave with economy: waste nothing, assess, plan ahead.
Trips to Kenya are few and far between (every 3 weeks) and long ( a two-day
round-trip); one cannot be careless. The vehicles must be maintained, and
it is sometimes hard to be meticulous when one is very tired. The Karamo-
Jongs teach us to make use of anything: our discards supply their extras.
Our meager garbage cans are besieged: capsules are used as ornaments,

food cans become cooking pots, potato peelings are devoured.

All day long, we are watched, observed, there is no privacy, nothing is a
secret. You can never have a moment's peace, someone is always coming to
complain. You have to he attentive to everything. He also learn the rules
of courtesy all over again, too: respect the customs, bow, smile, and ale
ways be signified.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When practical problems take on so such importance and make up the frame-
work of everyday life, when you have to be careful to stay alive, the dif-
ference between what is essential and what is superfluous becomes very
clear. Lite seems simpler. Is that uhat gives the expatriates in»: have

lived over there a long time the untroubled gaze of people in harlony with
themselves?

COPYRIGHT: by SERAS, 15 rue R.-Marcheron, 92170 Vanves. 1982

i21L9
CSO: h719/SS9

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?IC[AL USE ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

BRIEFS

NEW LABOR REGULATIONS--The prohibition on the right to strike in effect

since last 1 November (see MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 6 November
81 page 2822) in Upper Volta was lifted on 16 February by order of Col Saye
Zerbo, president of the Military Committee for Recovery for National

Progress (CHRPN) and chief of state. In addition, the presidential order set
forth the procedures for settling collective labor disputes. If the pro-
visions of this regulation are approved by the trade unions in Upper Volta,
the CHRPN will have taken an important step along its long and difficult

path toward providing the country with the social contract announced when
Col Saye Zerbo assumed power in November 1980. in addition, the regulation,
which stresses that the right to strike "can only be exercised in connection
with the defense of legitimate collective interests,“ lists the state depart-
ments and bodies which are not authorized to participate in strikes. This
applies to the judges. secretaries general and directors general of public
and parapublic departments, the army, the police, penal institutions and cus-
toms authorities. among others. Pinally, the regulation specifies that any
trade union organization which calls an illegal strike or continues such
despite a court order can be dissolved. [Excerpt] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX
ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1893, 19 Feb 82, p 561] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Moreaux et Cie Paris [1982]] 5157

C80: #719/622

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

DIAMOND CU'l'l'IMG INDUSTRY ENVISAGED
Paris MARCHES 'I'ROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAMEEMS in French Mo 1890. 29 Jan 82 p 269

[Text] Zaire which is the world's largest diamond producer--a fact often
forgotten--plans to set up a cutting industry for these precious stones. The
project is said to have received technical backing from three independent
companies which took over the marketing of Zairian diamonds last year, after
Zaire cancelled the contract giving exclusive marketing rights to the Central
Selling Organization of the De Beers group. These companies (the London-based
lndustrial Diamond Company and the Antwerp-based Caddi and Glasol) are
reported to be cooperating in the project with the Zairian state company
SOZAM [Zairisn Company for the Marketing of Ores] which has a monopoly over
the marketing of mineral ores in Zaire. The proposed cutting plant will
require investments of about $2 million and will provide, or so the
government hopes. jobs for 700 Zairians.

According to the FINANCIAL TIMES, this intonation was made public in Kinshasa
at the end of the latest diamond sales involving 461.900 karate (the Novenber
1981 production of mostly industrial diamonds mined by MIRA [Bakwanga Mining
Company] and of jewelry diamonds from Tshikapa). The proceeds from this sale
amounted to some $8.5 million. of which $5 million was in hard currencies.
with jewelry diamonds fetching an average price of $179.6 per karat. Lower
grade industrial diamonds (bort) were also sold at $2.2 per karat, a price
considered to be satisfactory by SOZAOM since that type of diamonds is sold
at markedly lower prices in Antwerp.

The financial daily of the city mentions that Zaire's diamond industry faces
two major problems: the illegal mining and marketing of diamonds in quantities
practically equal to the official production, and the declining quality of the
stones extracted from the mine operated by MIBA (Bakwanga Mining Company).
Furthermore, the country's total (official) production is falling partly as a
result of illegal sales: Zaire's production, which reached a record high of
13.4 million karats in 1976, was only 5.7 million karate in 1981 and is
expected to amount to 6 million karate in 1982.

Alluvial deposits are being worked out and it is becoming urgent to start a
program of extraction from underground mines. The MIBA people estimate that
exploited deposits of kimberlite contain reserves of some 150 million karats.
But funds must be found to finance this project. According to SOZACM

61
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

estimates, $40 nillion of foreign loans will be required which. in practice.

will have to cone from the World Bank group. In fact, representatives of the
International Finance Corporation (SFI). a Uorld Bank subsidiary, were due

in Kinshasa at the end of January.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Ole Paris 1982.

8796
C50: l0719/56?!

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

BRIEFS

INCA II PROGRESS--The second phase of the Inga hydroelectric complex, Inga II.
intended to supply electricity for the Shaba mining region which is located
1.820 kms away, will go into operation in July 1982. According to Zaire Presae
Agency, [AZAP]. which quotes official statements issued by the Ministry of
Industry, tests to carry high voltage currents to the Sheba region will start
in January and last 6 months. The Inga II power plant has a generating
capacity of 1,272 megawatts and will boost to 2,326 megawatts the installed
capacity of Zaire's hydroelectric power plants. The high voltage power line
linking the Shaba mining region to the power plant is the longest in the

world. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS in French 80 1890,
29 Jan 82 p 269] 8796

STATE ENTERPRISES REVERSION-The question of putting some Zairian public
enterprises back into private ownership remains on the agenda. The Executive
Council devoted special attention to this question last Deco-bar and a
statement issued by the state commissioner for government investment holdings
on proposed conditions for the transfer or purchase of these enterprises has
provided some details. The conditions which individual or corporate entities
must fulfill to be accepted into an enterprise created to replace a dissolved
public enterprise are: (1) They must uphold and continue the original social
purpose of the enterprise being turned over to private ownership; (2) They
must have the required managrment experience and ability in the sector
concerned or in a sector of activities related to those carried out by the
enterprise being transferred to private ownership; (3) They must offer solid
financial guarantees; (6) They must be in order with the internal revenue
office and with social agencies. These conditions apply to all individuals
or corporate entities under Zairian law which wish to become owners of an
enterprise being turned over to private ownership through purchase. The
council has asked state commissioners to send to the Department of Government
Investment Holdings as soon as they can list enterprises from their
respective sectors which are elegible for transfer to private ownership.

[Text] [Paris "moms noncwx m usumsmuarus in French No 1890, 29 Jan 82
p 269] 8796

NEW WATER SUPPLY PROGRAMS--As part of the l981~90 water and drainage
international decade. the REGIDBSO [Water and Power Distribution Administration]
has prepared preliminary plan for the supply of drinking water. intended to
bring water to 164 locations throughout the country where that service is

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-T ONLY

still unavailable. The cost of implementing this program has been estimated
at over $232 million. In addition to creating more jobs, the program also
aims at making drinking water available all over the country and ensuring

that this service reaches at least 70 percent of the population by 1985 and

85 percent by 1990. The number of locations set by the program is divided as
follows: 6 in Lower Zaire. 19 in Equateur, 17 in Shaba, 15 in Eastern Kasai.
11 in Western Kasai, 21 in Kivu. 24 in Bandundu, 31 in Upper Zaire. The city
of Kinshasa is not included in the safe water supply program but appears in

an expansion program involving drinking water purification and distribution
installations spread over the same decade. These two programs, and another
one to train technical and administrative management personnel. represent
RBGIDESO's 10-year program covering the 1981-90 period. Although this is only a
preliminary plan, it gives a good idea of what efforts the Zairian agency
intends to make during the current decade. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1890, 29 Jan 82 p 269] 8796

FRENCH MILITARY AID-According to Gen Francois Gilard. head of the military
cooperation section in the French Ministry of Cooperation and Development,
France is willing to increase its financial aid to Zaire in the framework of
its military assistance. General Gilard, who arrived in Zaire on 12 January
for an inspection visit of Zairian military units where French overseas
volunteers are working, was received by the Zairian head of state, Gen Mobutu
Sese Seko, on 16 January. After this audience. General Gilard expressed
satisfaction with the spirit of cooperation which exists between the Zairian
officers and the French overseas volunteers. According to official sources.
there are 128 officers and "60's serving as French military overseas
volunteers in the Zairian Armed Forces. Their main tasks are to train
paratroopers, to supervise an air unit equipped with Mirage planes. a tank
brigade and the Zairian Armed Forces Training School of Mbanza-Ngungo in the
Lower Zaire Region. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in
French No 1889, 22 Jan 82 p 207] 8796

ITALIAN AID FOR REFUGEES--The Italian Government has pledged to help Ugandan
refugees in Zaire by placing 10 million lire (approximately $80,000) at the
disposal of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
[UNHCR]. According to a communique issued by the Zairian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation, this sum is intended to cover the
deficit of the UNHCR's aid program for Ugandan refugees in Zaire. Close to
160.000 Ugandan refugees are currently residing in Zaire. a country hosting
600.000 refugees with the largest group being some 265,000 Angolans. [Text]
[Paris MARCMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBEMS in French No 1891, 5 Feb 82 p 331]
[COPYRIGHTz Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.] 8796

cso: 4719/56: END

6h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY