PU“ UI'I'N IAI. "5". UNI.‘

JPRS L/10350
24 February 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 763

FOREIGNBROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way repres‘nt the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT
rcuo No. 763

CONTENTS

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ANGOLA

BURUNDI

Some SADCC Members Fail To Honor Finance Pledges
(Roger Murray; NEW AFRICAN, Jan 82) .

Toward Indian Ocean Con-non Market
(Jonathan M'Earuia; AERIQUE-ASIE; 18-31 Jan 82) ..........u

Coffee Shortfall Noted in Both Private, State Sectors
(MARCHIS TROPICAUX ET MIIIITERRAN-IS, 11 Dec 81)

Briefs
Finance Agreanents With France

CAPE VERDE

CHAD

Pereira Expresses Hope on Relations With Bissau
(Aristides Pereira Interview; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 18-31 Jan 82) ..

Church, Private Interests Seen Affected by Land Reform
(Colm Fey; NE)! AFRICAN, Jan 82).

Libyan: Said To Be Unfavorable to Chadian Reconciliation
(Pammmxrun.21Ju18a H..H.u.”.u.u.u.u.n.u.u

OAU Force Said To Be Playing Game of Imperialist Interests
(Antonia B113; AFRIQUE—ASIE, 18-31 Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Habre Advance Disturbs Mittcrrand
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

Effects of Petroleum Output on Political, Economic Situation
(Siradiou Diallo; JE'UNE AJ-‘PIQL , 2 Dec 81)

GUINM-BISSAU

Cape Verde Dialogue Needed To Improve Country' 3 Image
(Editorial; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 18 Jan 82)

Briefs
Responsibility for Racist Renarks
Opposition to Nasuicave Settlement

IVORY COAST

Echoes of Impatience With Econonv, Politics Heard
(Siradiou Diallo; JEL‘NE AERIQUE, 9 Dec 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Steady Improvement of Secrecy Reported
(William A. Stoever. Dennis J. Conlon; Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Various Aspects of Petroleum Problem Examined
(MARCEES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEHS, 18 Dec 81) . . . . . . . . . . .

LESOTHO

Details on Assassination Squad Given
(Jasper lbrtiner;'1‘8£ STAR, 22 Jan 82).

MALAWI

Briefs
Foreign Exchange Reserves

MALI

Food Production. Other Economic Problems Discussed
(Jacques Latreuoliere; MARCEI-S TROPICAUX er MEDITERRM’EENS,
18 Dec 81).

Briefs
Algerian Aid for Oil
Soviet Cooperation on Gold

VOZAMSIQUE

South Mrica Seen Supporting HRH Destabilization Campaign
(David Ward,. tin Plaut. m AFRICAN, Jan 82)

3ore13n Trade Regulations. Organization Reviewed
(MARCRZS TROPICAUX z'r mums. 11 Dec 81)

.. b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600030059-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

Briefs
Increase in Inflation
Ships Under Nigerian Flag
Japanese Loan for Irrigation

RWANDA
Briefs
1982 Budget
Tea Factories From Belgium

SENEGAL

Briers
ﬂamored National Union

SOUTH AFRICA

Death of Prominent Black Civil Rights Leader Examined
(PIE?! AFRICAN, Jan 82)

ANC's Seventieth Amiversary Marked
(Abdou Berrada; NEW AFRICAN, Jan 82) . . . . . . . . . . .

UPPER VOLTA

Economic anhasis Said Misdirectcd
(Guy Arnold; NB“ AFRICAN, Jan 82).

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030059-9
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

“HER-AFRICAN A}

8015 SADCC W5 FAIL 10 HONOR PIMKE PLBDGBS

London NEH APRICAN in English Jan 82 pp 29-30

[Article by Roger Murray: ”SADCC Plans are Htti Cash Snarl is Blamed“)

[Text] THE MNE Milli“. 0‘ ﬂ" Southern etatee" made in l atatement ieeued by the

African Development Coordination Con-
ference (SADCC) met in Blantyre late
leat year to review progreae in funding
vital tranaport end oommunicatione pro-
jecte. Theae play a crucial role in the
SADCC'e overall objective of reducing
economic dependence on South Africa.
Dewite pledcaa of about SSW-million
made at the Mepmo conference in 1980.
only ”BO-million has an far been actu-
ally raieed to meet the aetimated coat of
$1.920-million required to implement 99

regionally-humud and country pro
jecta.

Since the hietoric eummit meeting
which tool: place in Lunka in April 1980
at which the SADCC wee eatabliehed. the
nine participating countriee ‘ Angola.
Botawana, Leaotho. Malawi. Moeambi-

SADCC Council of M iniatere at Blantyre

The atatement blamed South Africa for
the deatruction ofbridgee near Beira and
of navigationel aids in Beira port. The
etaternant and the timing of the latter
attack appeared to be “deliberately
related" to the meeting. Theee attacks.
the atatement aaeerlad. could only be
eeen ae a “direct Minnee to the growing
succu- of "Clonal treneport rehebiiite-
tion“.

TheSADCC utenenteet e recedent.
Thie wee the ﬁn! line that Malawi hae
been aeeociated with ouch a atrons con-
demnation of South Africa'e policiea
towerde the region. Previouely. Kalaevi
had maintained cloaa trade and general
economic tiee with South Africa. and had

que. Tm“, Swuillnd. Zambia and :MISADEC l ‘0
Zimbabwe - have niece may worm- Indeed. Pruident Banda unarm-
in implementing concerted action to eec- .m in m a, open an m. At

ure reyional «to-operation within their
etretegy of economic liberation.

The traneport and oommunieetione
eector baa been men the higheet prior-

ity eince a fundamental re-orientetion of

the hiatoric trafﬁc tonne which tie
moet of the SADC atatea to routea
through South Akita. ie eeen ae the moot
crucial area to the overall aim of reducing
eatetin; economic dependency.

”blamed

Thie concern {wee reﬂected in the
atrona condemnation of South Africa for

alleged? our-Nina "a policy of deetebil-
iuuon meted acemet SADCC member

1

every otherSADCC meetingtheprocead-
tnce have been formally opened by the
Prealdent of the hoot country.

The aiatement wee unueuel in that the
SADOC hae not previously made public
minute on overtly political ieauea. Ae
the minietere themeelvee aaid in the
atatement. they were primarily con-
cerned with "development co-
ordination”. Yet it wee felt impoeaible"to
pan over in eilence South Africa'a
aureaeive aaione.“

W

'l'bemainitemontheagendaevaato
revie'procieeainﬁnancinctheprojecta

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
drawn bytheMaputo-baaed Southern
Africanug‘raneport and Communications
Conniuion. Though the coat of the pro-
jecte preeented to intenational and
bilateral ﬁnancing agent-tee at the
Maputoconfereneehaebeenecaleddm
from the original etinnte of about
Sum-million to titanium actual
aid d'nbureeznente eo far available are
euﬂieienttemeetonlythecoeiofeatnall
number of the pm'ecu.

Only about Slso-niillion hee been
firmly committed. loam a total of
81,740-niillion atill to be ﬁnanced in
order to complete the programme.

Of the total of 97 projeete originally
preeenied at the Maputo conference.
me have been cotnp.lated and ﬁnance
haebeenaecuredforafe'oftheother
Mean. A ernall number of additional
projecte have been added to the original
liat. leaving99projectaatillneedingtotal
orpartfinancing.

Moetoftheprojecteforwhichmﬂicient
funding hae already been nied. were
not in a real aenee new projecte. and
formed part of “a; bilateral aid
commitmente.

For eaamle, the Maeeru international

airport in Leeotho, accorded low overall
priority by SADCC. already has 846-
million committed out of total coata of
mmﬂlionldoatofthennanahaebecn
raieedfrotnArabdonoragenciee. andthe
aniountprovidedrepreeentaaquarterof
thetotalfunde actually committedtothe
SADCC programme by mainly Weetern
andArabdonore.

In content. the atnbitioue rehabilita-
tion project of Moaanibioue’a porte. and
thefour-couniryrailway eyeteniconneci-

ngthani to other SADOC atatea. haa
reoaivedalnioetnofundlng

According to the document prepared
for die Blantyre meeting by the Tune-
port and Communication Gemini-ion.
thetotalprojectcoetienoweetimatedat

COPYRIGrt'ri 1981 IC Magazines Limited

CSOI 4700/705
FOI¢MﬂﬂKJAl.USE(HVLY

INTERPAFRICA“ AFFAIRS

TOWARD INDIAN OCEAN COMMON MARKET
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 257, 18-31 Jan 82 pp 58-59
[Article by Jonathan M'Haruia: "A Common Market for the Indian Ocean"]

[Text] Hhile the regime of Sir Seewoosagur angoolam has deliberately tied the
island of Mauritius to the racist regime in Pretoria through a loan agreement
whose provisions are particularly repugnant (see AFRIQUE-ASIE, No 254, 7-20 Decem-
ber 1981), the Mauritian Militant Movement (MMMD, although still part of the oppo-
sition, is already taking concrete steps to promote commercial cooperation and

the regional economy, which the party has always recosmended and which the situa-
tion in the Indian Ocean cannot fail to help, even if certain political obstacles
remain.

Everything began, in fact, when the Mauritian Marketing Office, noting a record
production of potatoes - about 16,000 tons, when Mauritian consumption is about
11,000 tons a year -- planned to export the surplus, mainly to the Seychelles.
Aware of the poor relations between Mahe and Port-Louis, owing to Ramgoolsm's
friendship with James Msncham,1 and especially their common views - the Mauritian
regime has never digested the coming to power of the socialists in Mahe and regu-
larly insults, both publicly and in private, the government of Albert Rene, which
further poisons the few ties that exist - the officials of the Marketing Office
contacted Paul Berenger at the beginning of November so that he might enter into
negotiations with him - his relations with President Rene are very cordial -
concerning the sale of surplus potatoes.

The mm, which has always supported further economic and commercial ties between
Indian Ocean countries and which believes that this is the solution to their
development and economic independence from Western metropolises and especially
Pretoria, send a delegation to Mahe on 9 November, a delegation made up of Paul
Berenger and Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo, party economic adviser, to undertake dis-
cussions along these lines.

The Berenger mission, which stayed on the island from 9 to 15 November, had no
difficulty in obtaining the consent of the Seychelles authorities for the export

 

1 The former Seychelles president, put in office by the English upon independence

in 1976 and involved in the recent abortive coup d'etat against the regime of
Albert Rene.

3
FOIIHHHCJALlEHEONlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to that country of 1,000 tons of potatoes and 600 tons of onions, beginning in
1982. It also noted the existence of vast prospects for commercial trade between
the two countries, hindered by a basic obstacle: the lack of any regular ocean
shipping line between the Seychelles and Mauritian ports.

Aware of the need to strengthen bonds between the coastal nations, President
Albert Rene spontaneously decided to provide a link between Mahe and Port-Louis
by the government-owned "5 Juin" boat, which would supply the distant Seychelles
islands. Furthermore, in order to encourage the development of regional trade,
he decided to give priority to Mauritian products that could be exported to the
Seychelles, especially since these products would replace those still imported
from South Africa by private merchants.

With the problem of the shipping line resolved and in keeping with the policy

still preached by the MHM regarding regional cooperation, certain party leaders -
in particular, Paul Berenger, Kader Bhayat and Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo -— founded

a company as soon as they returned from the Seychelles: INTRACORP (Intra Regional
Trading Corporation), in accordance with the provisions of current law on companies
and in the absence of a better legal structure. It will act as the local repre-
sentative of the company owning the "S Juin," the vessel which, beginning in
January, will provide the Mahe-Port Louis connection once every two months in the
beginning and once a month later. INTRACORP will also specialize in regional
import-export.

The company, whose establishment renders South-South cooperation a concrete fact,
is basically for the purpose of promoting commercial trade and setting up certain
industrial projects bring the countries in the southwest Indian Ocean together,
mainly the Seychelles, Madagascar, Mauritius, the Camera Islands and Reunion.

It will effectively engage in commercial activities that will eventually enable
countries in the region to get away from an excessive and dangerous dependency

on Western countries for products that they can supply, to tighten their bonds,
bring down certain prices on their respective markets, free themselves from the
growing influence of South Africa, especially in the case of Mauritius, and
improve their economic and commercial situation.

Regarding exports to the Seychelles. in addition to potatoes and onions, products
that could be exported immediately include edible oils, margarine. soap, frozen
chicken and livestock feed. Regarding Mauritian imports of Seychelles products,
salted fish and coconut, to mention but these two, have already been chosen.

As for the establishment of industrial enterprises, technical aid may be given to
the Seychelles, particularly for the setting up of a color television network on
the island at the beginning of 1983.

Trade between Indian Ocean countries is so paltry that it is a field in which
everything remains to be done, opposition circles in Mauritius state, and INTRACORP
will not be confined to the Seychelles, but will also extend to Madagascar, Zim-

babwe, Reunion and the Camera Islands.

The establishment of this company by MMM leaders met with diversified comments
and reception, both within the Mauritian left and government circles. To the

5

FOR 0i1ﬂC1ALI£5£¢NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

criticisms of members, party leaders, greatly concerned by the project, answer
that the prime objective is basically political, insofar as the MMM has always
preached maximum economic and regional cooperation.

It is also stated that the company's purpose is not profit. It is to enable

HMM leaders to better master the details of the import-export business, chartering,
and so on. This explains the presence at the head of the company of Paul Berenger,
future minister of economy, finance and labor if there is an election victory,

and of Kader Bhayat, who would then be minister of commerce in an MMM-PSM
[Malagasy Socialist Party] government.

Lack of Arguments

Furthermore, in this new context, the company just founded by the MHM leaders
would be absorbed by the state Commerce Corporation, which will be set up as pro-
vided by the government's joint program. and would become a specialized department
in regional cooperation.

It must be noted that the National Commerce Corporation just launched by the Ram-

goolam regime is not in keeping with the provisions governing a state corporations
and that its powers are limited to the importation of rice and flour. which the

HMM deems to be absolutely inadequate.

Lacking arguments and knowing full well that the startup of the cooperation project
will bring about a drop in prices for certain basic commodities now imported, the
men in the regime accuse the MMM of hatching "sinister schemes," such as the
financing of its election campaign by the Seychelles or even the importation of
weapons! Whatever the case, it is planned that even before the coming general
elections, the concrete results that might be registered in regional trade will
themselves contradict these accusations.

With, on the one hand, the talks that began in April 1981 between the Chambers of
Commerce and Industry of Reunion and Mauritius and, on the other hand, the exces-
sively timid gestures to Madagascar and the Comoro Islands - because of the

lack of political determination on the part of the Mauritian regime - the proposed
regional cooperation launched by the main opposition party in Mauritius seems to
indicate that the process of building an Indian Ocean Common Market is on the

way. However, political and economic observers in Port-Louis do not hesitate to

point out that the political obstacle to this process resides in the very existence
of the regime of Sir Seewoossgur Bamgoolam, who prefers to be the yes man of

Pretoria rather than to serve the interests of the peoples in the region.

COPYRIGHT: 1962 Afrique—Asie

ll,h66
cso: 0719/521

5
F0ll€lﬂﬂ€1Al.USEiNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

COFFEE SHORTFALL NOTED IN BOT“ PRIVATE, STATE SECTORS
Paris HARCEES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEESS in French No 1882 11 Dec 81 p 3324

[Text] Angola's coffee production in 1981 amounts to no more than one-tenth of the
tonnage produced the year before the country's independence. In 1974. in fact.
according to the Statistical Yearbook of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization

(FAD), production was 225,000 tone. In 1980. the best year since independence.
production was only 36.576 tone. This year. according to a recent issue of JORNAL

DE ANGOLA, it fell to only 21,501 tons.

The "coffee plan" developed by the Luanda authorities for the 1981 season not only
64 percent of its target; it had called for a ceuillette [translation unkown] of
marketed coffee. Both the state and the private sector failed to neetthelrtargets.

It had in fact been envisioned that the state sector would produce 20,677 tons of
marketable coffee. but it obtained only 12,020 tons. including 3,928 tone from the
province of South Cuanza. 3.667 tone from Uige. 3,118 tone from North Cuanza, and
1.307 tons from the combined provinces of Bengo, Cabinda. and Halanje. As for the
private sector (including the cooperatives), the plan called for it to produce
12.689 tone. but it produced only 9.b8l.

A report from the technical department on Encafe's coffee production emphasizes,

in this connection. that the partial failure of the plans for the sixth national
coffee season--which began 1 June and has been over since September-was the result
of lack of motivation on the part of the personnel responsible for the ceuillette
[expansion unknown] becausc of poor material and social conditions. The Luanda
daily did not fail to observe in passing that this deplorable situation recurs year
after year.

"It is time," adds JORNAL DE ANGOLA, "to do everything possible to avoid a

repetition of the same problem next year. He cannot get along forever on improv-
isation--st least. if we are serious about our production plans. Once again. the

coffee harvest suffered from the inadequacy of transport. in addition to unfavorable
weather conditions."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
CSO: 5719/358

6
FOIIDFFNJA1.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BURUNDI

BRIEFS

FINANCE AGREEMENTS BITE PRANCE--The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Lt
Col Edouard Nzambiamana. signed three conventions for financing involving aid
from the French PAC (Fund for Aid and Cooperation) to Burundi on 11 December at
Bujumbura. These agreements bear on the following subjects: (1) 2.5 million
French francs for detailed prospecting using geophysical and geochemical means in
the northern zone of Kirundo and in the southern zone of Gitega-Ruyigi. France
has contributed to the financing of a detailed study of mineral deposits in

the northeast of Burundi. (2) 3.5 million French francs for commercial refores-
tation. This sun will make it possible to continue a reforestation program
covering 7000 hectares which was begun in 1979. (3) 3 million French francs to
protect the Kibira forest. This sum should make it possible to reforest 180
hectares and open up 50 kilometers of additional trails. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS
TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1886, 1 Jan 82 p 39] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 9855

C50: 47l9/46b

I! .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPE VERDE

PEREIRA EXPRESSES HOPE ON RELATIONS HITH BISSAU

PMON901 Paris AFRIQUB—ASIE in French 18-31 Jan 82 pp 6-9

[Interview with Cape Verde President Aristides Pereira by Simon Halley: "We

Are Prepared To Establish Interstate Relations With Bissau on New Bases"--date
and place not given]

[Excerpts] Cape Verde President Aristides Pereira was calm. but bitterness.

disappointment and a kind of pain could be detected in his words. The coup in
Bissau 14 November 1980 shock and shocked him deeply.

Indeed the reason why Aristides Percira is still deeply affected by the military
coup is that he is extremely worried about its repercussions on the very future

of a nation. an ideal and a dream to which he has been so closely bound for
several decades . . . .

Is there not a danger that the crisis between the two capitals will grow worse?
Is a confrontation possible or inevitable? What interpretation should be given
to statements apparently made by the chairman of Guinea-Bissau‘s revolution
council, saying that he would seize Cape Verdian merchant ships by force? The

Cape Verdian head of state prefers not to overdramatize those statements, as
some sections of the Portuguese press have done:

"You see," he replied with a faint smile, "we have read such statements in the
Portuguese press. We find them surprising and hope that they are merely a
misinterpretation of various statements. We think it is inconceivable for a
head of state to talk in that way...!

'The main point is that if the Bissau leaders showed sangfroid and realism they
would realize that our decision [to dissolve joint Guinea-Bissau-Cape Verde
Shipping Company] is not hostile. They should tackle this problem, which
affects a vital aspect of our economy and trade, with the necessary lucidity.
When the majority of partners no longer wants a company, how can anybody
legally oppose it? what about international law?"

However, Aristides Pereira refuses to spurn the future. Neither the bitterness
nor the frustration he feels prevents him from hoping. And when we asked him
whether the release of Luiz Cabral [former president of Guinea-Bissau's

Council of State and deputy secretary of the PAIGC] is not an encouraging sign
dawning on the horizon of relations between the two states. his answer revealed
that glimmer of hope which he does not want to abandon:

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [WEI ONLY

"Of course," he said, "Luiz Cabral's release is a good thing. It is a positive
factor for Guinea-Bissau. It reveals some commonsense on the part of the
Guinean leaders, and even a sense of responsibility, while demonstrating the
correctness of the position we had defended from the start. of course, when
President Luiz Cabral was arrested, along with a nuuber of his comrades, we
were still members of the same party and my responsibility as PAIGC secretary
general made it my duty to express my opinion and condemn the coup d'etat

and the arrest of the leaders."

[Question] what about the other political prisoners?

Aristides Pereira: Although we are no longer bound to the same party and hence
do not want to interfere in Bissau's internal affairs, we can nonetheless say
that, since the country's main leader has been released, we see no reason for
leaving the others in prison.... It is up to the Bissau leaders to shoulder
their responsibilities.

We asked a final question on the crisis between the two countries. what about
the slander campaign or racist feeling being developed in Guinea-Bissau whose
main target is so-called "Cape Verdian colonialism"--a quarrel based on pre-
judices inherited from savage colonialism?

'Ve regret the fact," the Cape Verdlan head of state replied, “that the Bissau
leaders have not learned from the colonial post. Remember the history of the
national liberation war and how racism and triballam were used for centuries
by the colonial system and particularly by the penultimate governor,

Antonio Spinola. That also applies to the occupation and domination of
Guinea-Bissau by colonialism. I say that the Bissau leaders should return to
the lessons of the past, of our common history. The language used before,
during and after their congress in Bissau was the language of racism. It
would be a terrible thing to unleash that process. It would be terrible and
dangerous because, once started, it is likely to beccme uncontrollable and get
out of the leaders' hands. Unfortunately that is already being seen in Bissau.
And that worries us a great deal because there are Cape Verdian citizens living
in Guinea and we sometimes feel concern for their safety.

"Moreover, it must be remembered that racism can be whipped up by special
socioeconomic conditions. Unless it is stopped, and quickly, we are likely to
see a campaign whose results, we are sure, will do great damage to Guinea—Bissau
itself."

Aristides Pereira thought for a moment:

"I do not want to close this subject on a pessimistic note. Allow me to tell
you that, although the events of 14 November were, I am sure, felt by both our
peoples as a very severe blow, it must be admitted that we should be realistic.
The coup destroyed the plan for unity to which we aspired so much. He must,
thereiore, act accordingly. The achievements in the efforts to unite the two

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 081)

Cape Verdian and Guinea-Bissau peoples were not in vain and should not be
wasted. It is vital that the Bissau officials be realistic and aware of

that fact too. They must realize that, although everything was destroyed
by the 14 November events, we must start again by other means. However.

if we are to start again we must first normalize relations between the

two states. The achievements by our two peoples form a capital which is
still real and which can be set in motion at any time provided a responsible
spirit is adopted. That is what I wanted to say. and it reflects the deep
convictions of our people and their leaders..."

The interview continued and dealt with many other subjects: Cape Verde's
role in normalizing relations between Dakar and Luanda, the situation in

southern Africa and in Chad, relations with France. the domestic situation...
He will continue its publication in our issue.

COPYRIGBT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

CSO: 4719/544

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UPI-IL IAI. liar. UNIJ

CAPE

CHURCH, PRIVATE mmsrs SEEN AFFECTED BY LAND REFORM

London ti!" AFRICAN in English No 172. Jan 82 pp 18-19
(Article by Cole Fey]
with the problem but the document is

[tvcerpte] 1932 my wan. to u make or break

year i'or Cape Verde'a agriculture. if the
peat yeara of thee: remarkable people
and their equally remarkable political
leadere are anything to go by. then.
despite the anemone difﬁculties. Crrpc
)Ierde may atill haveachance oiaurvival.

Firet and 'forernoet among the accial
and economic problem in the land quee-
tion. In a country ouch aa thil. there in no
room for aentimentaiity over land uae. To
survive. the country mun grow a much
ae ia humanly poaeible to cut down on
imported food euppliae and allow preti~
ouaioreigncurrencytobeuaedeiae-
where.

The climate ie to dry that for several
yeera in aucceeeion recently. all the
ialanda' food crepe - including the eta~
plea. maize and beene - failed. Even the
mod fertile land waa unable to bear
crepe. At the aame time much of the beat
land waa not worked by the local people
becauae the ownera were ebeent from the
ieiande.

The problem ia compounded due to the
complex land relationa which exiat in the
com-try. Cape Verde ie one of the lbw

lorda own vaat atretchae of farming
land which are either worked by con-
tract labour or. elrnply ltept aa an invuat-
rnent lt ia alao unuaual in that one of :he
biggeet landlorde ia the Catholic Church
which reportedly em 60 per cent oi all
the available land. Other large holdings
belong to Portugueee companiea and
individual inveetore.

The government haa now introduced a
long-awaited land reiorm paper to deal

11

ouch a long and complex piece of legiala-
tion that it haa cauaed a great deal of
confuaion. Laet October. one man waa
killed and another injured when jittery
eoldiere ﬁred into a crowd demonstrating
agaimt the propoeed reform or againat
what they took it to mean. Abroad.
emigre Cape Var-diam have aleo been
protecting in the belief that their land
will be taken away from them.
Everyone ngreea that the large land-
ownera and the Church must be per.
euaded to hand the property but to the
people. Thia appliee eapecially to thoee

aince independence. The problem ariaea
when the law hae to ire into account all
the Cape Verdiane who etill own land in
the itlande but whoae permanent place or
reaidenca may now be far from the coun-
try. Theae poo le. atlll aee their aojourn
ae temporary. hey hilly intend to return
to their homea one day and ac do not want
to find that they auddenly have no homea
togotoand nolandtopaeeontotheir
eone. Such emigrea are alao a very impor-
tant aource of revenue for the country in
that they atili eend remittances in foreign
exchange to the familiea they left behind.

On the other hand. the government
cannot allow the continuing inequitable
ayatem of land tenure to endure simply on
the baaie oi‘ aentirnentality and. beeidee.
We not the email emigre peaaanta that
the rebrm ie aimed at.

FOR Ol-1-1CIAL USE ONLY
0332: 5a 9. v2.6. 723 «302.5 2.
a 3:00 9388 cm vac—ma Ema—.3520:
man—5:3 35o c358:- EE 33.
$98.83??? 9. 2:..— .33. >9...
:5 582.6 5083... 9. 3:3 2:.
.33. :23 v8: 88 8 we :63 583:
BE cam-335.3 2:— 9. wove—pan:
:3 783 8.5.2. 0...: pro 33...: 3:
on? to...» .2" 588 .32.. 9:33:21.
r. 3838 1. s:- nonﬁa 5a 8 :5
33553 93:23 1.... 0553.983.
:6 coca—p22. on 13..- n 9. 92.2 I
2.33 2:. F: 29381:. .5 5 562..
:3 3.3058320: ca 5333 we. :5
>n12§3~ ”2.3.3. 9o 33. 5n :3
8:35... 13.32: I :8 38...: new...
1:- 732. >138.- 1.3.3. .38
883...; 5 V3? :32. if. 8:.
928:: :5 .2: m: 5. v28 35:—
3. 9o 85. w: 0553.982. 2:— :53
now 3.38.... «2. «.5 333.83.. Ina-.3 .-
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONLY

CHAD

LIBYANS SAID TO BE UNFAVORABLE TO CHADIAN RECONCILIATION
Brussels POORQUOI PAS? in French 21 Jan 82 pp 42-43

[Article by P.K.]

[Text] This past autumn, as Goukouni asked him to do, Qadhdhafi withdrew his troops.
He did so with spectacular and suspicious abruptness. creating a vacuum in the south
and center that has been more or less filled by blue-helmcted Africans from the OAU.
(In the north, it seems that the Libyans were in less of a hurry to leave: uranium
and petroleum exist there far beyond the Aouzou strip that they have held for a long
time.)

Coming out of its Sudanese "sanctuaries.“ Hissein Habre's PAN (Northern Armed Forces)
took the city of Albeche along with sizable equipment stores that had strangely been
left behind by the Libyans. That left the FAN better equipped than the wavering
troops of Heddeye Goukouni's GUN? (Transitional National Union Government)--which is
itself divided.

weariness is currently working in favor of Hissein Habre. whose troops are camped
around the city of Ati, halfway to the capital city of Ndjamena, where life has re-
sumed as best it can in the patched-up ruins. He does not want to attack Ati, which
is held by the CAD Force's Zairians and Senegalese. Either he will go around the
city by establishing trails strong enough to support his fine armor, or he will wait
for the "Arab telephone" to have its effect.

The 300,000 inhabitants of Ndjamena are already expecting--some with fear and others
with hope--to see him return as triumphant conqueror or as partner in a "patriotic"
reconciliation whose future, in Chadian style. would be another story.

Meanwhile, although apparently doomed to get along with each other, the two partners
refer to each other in violently categorical and vivid terms. As far as Goukouni

is concerned. the leader of the PAN is "a traitor--an enemy of the people--with whom
one does not negotiate." ror his part, Hissein Habre amiably told L'EXPRESS that
Goukouni. "cornered like a mad dog. ought to disappear at the end of a rope."

While awaiting that agreeable prospect, the GUNT's president, hampered by dissensions
in his own team and the stagnation of an economy that has scarcely recovered from

the latest shocks, is censoring the press, which he had so far left quite free, and
knocking 50 percent off the salaries of the civil servants, who are already furious

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at having received only 6 months‘ pay last year. with the coffers empty, he cannot
satisfy his own people--who are thus tempted to hope for better from the challenger.

Meanwhile. France, which had helped Goukouni with military equipment so he could get
rid of the Libyans, is discreetly stepping up its diplomatic activity in the region.
In Lagos, President Hitterrand's African adviser, Guy Penne. has discussed the
chances of a Chadian compromise with Nigerian President shemu Shagani, who has al-
ready acted as “wise man“ in that affair.

More mysterious is the apparent about-face by Sudanese President Numayri. After
backing Hissein Habre for months in the name of their common hostility toward
Qadhdhafi. he has now reestablished diplomatic relations and air links with Ndjamena
and returned the Chadian Embassy in Khartoum-~which had been occupied for months by
Habre's people-—to Goukouni's diplomats. He is giving assurances that he will pro-
hibit the movement through Sudan of arms being sent to Habre and that he will pro-
vide Chad with food aid. Is this a sign that 0.5. diplomacy, which has a special
line to Khartoum as well as to Cairo, is playing Goukouni off against Habre? Or are
there ruses making the game even more subtle than that? Everything is possible, es-
pecially Sudanese mediation.

The big enigma remains, of course, the discretion of the Libyans. It is hard to
imagine than favoring a Chadian reconciliation that would inevitably work against
them. It is easier to imagine them waiting until the situation disintegrates enough
to make them indispensable again. Unless Qadhdhafi really wants to go on an orgy of
virtue with a view to becoming a great man in the OAU and winning the chairmanship
of that organization for the Libyans.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 POURQUOI PAS?

11798
CSO: 4719/523

1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

CHAD

0A0 FORCE SAID TO BE PLAYING GAME OF IHPERIALIST INTERESTS
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 257. 18-31 Jan 82 pp 12-13
[Article by Antonia blis: "Another Upbeaval"]

[Text] By suddenly demanding, on 29 October. the total withdrawal of Libyan troops
stationed in Chad, whose help was decisive for ending a 9-month war and routing the
dissident forces of Hissein Habre, the GUNT [Transitional National Union Government]
obviously took a gamble--only too apparent today--which threatens to plunge the
country back into a crisis of unprecedented scope and complexity.

And people are still wondering why the GUNT decided to make such a decision. Did

it overestimate the new French Government's intentions and capabilities for providing
assistance? Did it reasonably believe the word of Hissein Habre. even though it

is known-his whole course of action confirms this-~that, guided by a single ambition,
to seize power in Ndjamena. he has successively betrayed all his commitments, all

his friends and allies? Finally, did it have too many illusions concerning the real
intentions of the GAO. in which the supporters of Goukouni Oueddei's government could
be counted on the fingers of one hand 6 months ago, an OAU which proclaimed its support
for the GUNT at its latest summit meeting in June in Nairobi under new political
circumstances marked by the fall of the Giscsrdian government in France and which
pledged to establish an inter-African force capable of replacing Libyan troops and
assuring the defense and security of Chad?

Strategic Position

We could also wonder on the basis of what information and analysis of the Chadian
situation did France issue a formal appeal to the DAB for the latter to implement
its plan and to more or less initiate the process that has been developing since
29 October.

For the time being, there is no getting around the fact that all the elements of

a new bloody conflict and a new plot against the revolutionary achievements of the
Chadian people are falling into place in Chad. and that in the vacuum created by
the departure of Libyan troops. the allied forces of imperialisa are surging toward
goals which are more than questionable.

News reports from Chad now speak only of runors of war and the almost regular advance
of Hiasein ﬂabre's forces. Thus the seizure of Gum-Hadjer by the FAN [Northern Armed

15

FOR Ol-‘FIUAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIHAI. llSl-Z ONLY

Forces] was announced on 23 December. a "strategic position" closing off access
to the province of Baths. a vast central region of the Ouaddai, all of whose locali-
ties had previously been occupied by Klssein Habre's men.

In early January, it was reported that advancing PAN troops were within a dozen
kilometers of Ati. the capital of Bathn Province. located about 1.00 km east of
Ndjamenanwhere about 2.000 troops of the inter-African force are concentrated--
while others were moving toward Kongo. in Salamat. The goal of Hissein ﬂabre's
forces. comprised of men from Konsseri. in Cameroon. via Sudan. powerfully equipped
and supported by Cairo and Khartoum is clear: to strengthen their positions and
to advance toward ndjamena so that if they cannot take the city and hold it totally.
at least they can establish themselves as a force to be reckoned with.

Are we going to find ourselves back in the same situation as in March 1900, on the
verge of Ndjamena's second war? That is a reasonable fear. For in the face of the
enemy's thrust. the cm has only an embryo of an established national army. whose
members are equipped with dissimilar weapons and which actually still has to be
organized. There are also factions whose combat readiness and motivation are far
from identical.

As for the inter-African force. the least that can be said is that. at least until
now, it apparently does not disturb the PAR. Ita deployment is considered complete.
according to the Nigerian comander. Hole Ohunayo. who stated on Io January that about
5,000 men. 2.000 of them Nigerians. were currently in place in their respective zones
of operation.

The main question remains: What good is this force? In accordance with the resolu-
tion adopted by the OM] suit of 26-27 June at Nairobi. its composition was to be
first approved by the GUNT and its mission was to assure the defense and security

of the country until government forces were established.

This point was fully included in the agreement "on the Status of the Pan-African
Peacekeeping Force in Chad," which was signed on 28 November l981—-on the eve of

the announcement of the demand for Libyan withdrawa1--between President Gouknuni
Oueddei. on one hand. and on the other. the acting OAU chairman. Daniel Arap Moi.
the Kenyan chief of state. and the OM] general secretary. Eden Kodjo. This text
undoubtedly needed more detailed specifications. as demonstrated by its conflicting
interpretations today. but how can the defense and security of a country be assured
if not by fighting those who. with assistance from abroad. as in the FAN's case.

are striving to rekindle the flame of war and to impede the stabilization process?

'No observations are essential. On one hand, the composition of the inter-African
peacekeeping force was not submitted for GUNT's prior approval. (m the other hand.
and above all, today there is a desire in high 0M1 circles. whose views are of
course supported by those who have sent troops. including Zaire in particular, to
assign this force only the mission of legitimate defense ... without specifying
against whom.

This interpretation of the nature and role of the inter—African force poorly conceals
obvious motivations. President Goukouni was also justified in declaring. several

weeks ago. that "if the 0A!) persists in its interpretation. the outright withdrawal
of its force will be demanded."

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not only is the inter-African force of no use in the present situation. but it has
also managed to cloud the Chadian issue. And above all, the fact cannot be ignored
that its presence plays into the hands of imperialist interests and goals. Thus

the Zairian contingent, for example. supplied with arms by the United States. looks

like a pawn for Washington‘s plans to penetrate Africa, in which chad is a pivotal
point.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11915
CSO: 4719/51]

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

BRIEFS

HABRE ADVANCE DISTURBS ﬁlm-The advance of Hissein Habre's troops toward
Ndjamena seriously disturbs President Francois Hitterrand, who justifiably fears

that his assurances and promises to President Goukouni may not be respected: This
was the main reason for the visit of his adviser on African and Malagasy affairs.

Guy Penna. to Lagos. the site of the conference of countries which have supplied
troops for the inter-African force. In view of the GUNT [Transitional National

Union Government] president's proposal to denand the withdrawal of the inter-African
force if it should continue to remain idle before the continuing advance of Hissein
Habre‘s troops, the French chief of state said that he hoped the OAU force would

not become the "protectors" of a man sentenced to death by Ndjamena, especially since
it is no secret to anyone that it was Paris which pushed for sending the inter-African
force to Chad. An African diplomat in Ndjamena resarked: "French diplomacy unfortu—
nately seems to totally disregard the movements of 0.5. secret services. which have
staked everything on Rissein Babre with the aid of Mobutu. Bongo and Nuayri." [Text]
[Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in Punch No 257. 18-31 Jan 82 p 17] [oomma'rz 1982 Afrique-

Asie] 11915

080: “719/511

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

EFFECTS OF PETROLEUM OUTPUT ON POLITICAL. ECONOMIC SITUATION
Paris JBUNB AFRIQUB in French No 1091. 2 Dec 81 pp 44-66. 57
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Oil's ﬂour Has Come")

[Excerpt] In search of contracts, many businessmen are
arriving in Brazzaville where. for the first time since
independence. much construction is in evidence.

The airline companies Air Afrique and UTA have had to increase their flights

to the Congolese capital. Now there is at least one flight a day between Paris
and Brazzaville. Foreign companies that previously completely ignored the
Congo's sky are now crawling on all fours in order to get in the door. Around
the pool at the Hotel Heridien. French still dominates, but a lot of English.
Italian. German. etc. is also heard. The Lebanese. formerly almost nonexistent,
are rushing en masse.

The authorities. visibly surprised but also concerned. are trying to stem the
tide of these new conquistedores. and are increasing emergency measures. Thus,
every foreigner now debsrking at Brazzaville is summoned by the state security
service. which asks him what he is doing in the Congo and how long he intends
to stay.

The change is equally visible in the efforts begm in the area of urbanism.
Although nothing, or very little. had been done for many years, now there is

a real building boom. Following the kickoff given during the festivities marking
Brazzaville's centennial (October 1980). a series of projects is under way.

"It's the first time I have seen so many cranes in the sky over the capital."

a foreign businessman who has been in the Congo for 15 years told me. All the
large firms. trade firms as well as insurance companies and banks. are trying

to present the most imposing front possible. The French chain of PLH hotels

is building a SOD-bed complex. and the oil company Elf-Congo is about to construct
a 26-story building; the entire commercial center of Brazzaville is undergoing

a complete transformation.

The government has not been left behind; it even intends to be the real motor
of what is happening. In an outlying area of the capital. situated halfway
between the airport and the city center. Chinese and Soviet technicians work

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

side by side. all the while superb1y ignoring each other--an example of peaceful
coexistence which should inspire all the African countries. As they have al-
ready done in other Africa capitals, the former are building an imposing people's
palace. The latter are constructing a no less imposing edifice destined to

house the party's high school.

The Cubans are building social housing. Farther away, along the riverbank, a
French company is erecting the official residence of President Denis Sassou
Nguesso. Host ministries and administrations are following the fashion of the
day. You are being received in a minister's office? A scale model of the
building designed to house the ministry in question attracts your attention
first of all.

There has been a frenzy of construction, and its repercussions are beginning
to be felt in the working class section of Poto—Poto; there has been an impres-
sive wave of businessmen looking for contracts; and there has been a brisk
upsurge in activity affecting Brazzaville and. of course, Pointe-Noire. port
and economic capital of the oomtry. All of this has a single, identical
source: the influx of black gold.

Oil's hour has now come to the Congo. Today it is sure of having in its pocket
its admission card into the black gold exporters' club. Back in 1975. Brazza—
ville's rulers had been told that production, which ran about 2.5 million tons,
would double the next year. and that in the near future their country would
become a veritable Bldorado! The euphoria was so great that civil servants.
whose salaries had been frozen for years and who often went 2 or 3 months with-
out being paid, were immediately given raises.

It was, unfortunately, a short-lived promise! Instead of doubling. oil produc-
tion declined during the next 3 years. falling to 1.8 million tons in 1977.

But since 1978 the trend has definitely been reversed. Following production

of 4.5 million tons in l981. it is thought that with only presently known
deposits. the Congo will approach an annual production of 10 million tons by
the end of the decade. Or perhaps even more, because predictions are constantly
being revised upward.

A wind of optimism is once again blowing over the country. From now on. students'
stipends and businessmen'a travel expense accounts will be substantially in-
creased. and a significant salary increase has been announced for the beginning
of 1982. The government. however, is not limiting itself to blow-by-blow
actions. It is completing the draft of a 5-year plan, 1982-1986, which should
be adopted by the National Assembly in December. at the same time as a new
Investment Code. The state alone. not including the private sector, intends

to invest at least 800 billion francs CPA (16 billion French francs) during

that time span. Pierre Houssa. a young technocrat of few gestures but with

a lively spirit, and the head of this ministry, confided to us that the overall
outlines of the plan are based on the reconquest and development of the national
land and on the development of infrastructures. especially in the areas of
transportation, telecommunications. and energy.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Congolese rulers, concerned about avoiding the mistakes generally made by
petroleum-producing countries, have not hesitated to send comissions to certain
of these countries in order to study their experiences. They learned a lesson
from these observations: the need to develop a large production sector aside
from oil. The only way to effectively combat a rural exodus and to keep the
farmers in their native areas, the minister of planning told us, is to put
modern conveniences, ranging from rural roads to telephone booths, and including
dispensaries and ambulances, at their disposal.

This is what, in official language, is termed a "village-center," an institution
designed to serve as the basis for agricultural development. The authorities
seem determined to invest the bulk of the oil-produced money in these institu-
tions. They are determined to slow, if not to halt. population growth around
the Brazzaville-Points Noire axis, which already accounts for almost half of

the Congolese population. This will be a battle of giants, since it is extremely
difficult to eliminate this universal phenomenon.

The same is true for corruption, against which the authorities claim they want
to wage an all-out war. In order to do this, they have asked the government in
Paris to help them uncover fraud, overbillings. and other dishonest procedures
engaged in by French businessmen in collusion with Congolese officials. In
another attempt to reduce the risk of error and theft, the Brazzaville govern-
ment has asked CDFACE (French Insurance Company for External Trade) to guarantee
only those projects that have obtained the endorsement of the Congolese Ministry
of Planning.

Regardless, the easy money of oil is beginning to haunt the populace. Everyone
wants his share. Fast, as much as possible, and by any means. Evidence of
this was given by a young doctor who was loudly protesting in front of us at
the Linacongo (National Airline of the Congo) agency in Brazzaville. He had
been taken off a flight to Pointe-Ncire without explanation, although he had

a ticket marked 0K. He saw his place given to a Lebanese businessman who had
just greased the palm of the coupany's agents. a much too frequent practice
in administrative and service bureaus. A diplomat who knows the country well
told us that as long as you offer a substantial “matsbiche,” all doors are
miraculously open for you.

The Congolese Labor Party (PCT, Harxiut-Leninist inspired and the only party)
keeps watcn. Its most militant officials and members are indefatigably active,
in hopes of keeping the effects of bourgeois contamination to a minimum. The
slogans spread across the large posters at intersections of the capital's major
arteries relay official pronouncementu as best they can. The struggle to pre-
serve revolutionary purity is omnipresent and sometimes takes unexpected turns,
such as this slogan inscribed in front of Brazzaville's law courts: "Down
with the bureaucratic bourgeoisie!" Or this one, prominently displayed in
front of the central post office: "Dam with envelopes!" A sentence which
evidently condemns not envelopes that are for mail, but those containing cor-
ruption money. But considering where it was placed, [the slogan] couldn't help
but make you smile.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN UH‘IULN. USE ONLY

The arrival of black gold has not just given rise to new needs and, along with
that, the necessity of earning money at any price. It has also provoked a
certain disaffection with political agitation and inflanuatory speeches.
Theoreticians, doctrinarians, and other guardians of the faith seem to be. if
not losing ground, at least on the defensive. A diplomat who lives near a fac-
tory said. "Before, I would be awakened in the morning by the speeches that a
political representative would give from time to time to the workers assembled
in the courtyard. But for some time now, I haven't heard speeches. applause.
or slogans repeated in unison."

It's true. It's as if the Congolese are suddenly more aware of profits than

of politics. "We remain more faithful than ever to our Marxist-Leninist ideo-
logy." Comrade Lekoundzou Ithi Ossetoumba. menber of the Political Bureau of the
Pcr and finance minister, affirmed in a convinced tone which did not invite a
reply. "However, we think it is time to worry about worker output. That is

why meetings will take place from now after working hours." This concern with
efficiency is supported by President Denis Sasaou Nguesso's slogan asking party
members to be content no longer to be "Red." but to be "both Red and expert,

in order to obtain positive results."

As such, oil does not have only bad effects. 8y instilling a taste for work

in the Congolese. it is at the same tine offering a Marxist-Leninist regime

an indispensable basis for combating underdevelopnent. 0n condition, of course,
that it knows how to avoid the pitfalls, excesses. and deviations to which
every young revolution is exposed.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9720
C50: 4719/3329

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINP“ BISSAU

CAPE VERDE DIALOGUE NEEDED TO IMPROVE COUNTRY'S IMAGE
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 257, 18 Jan 82 pp 8-9
[Editorial by Simon Malley: "For a Summit Meeting")

[Text] Could the Guinea-Bissau authorities' freeing of President Luiz Cabral lead

to gradual normalization of relations between Bissau and Praia? 0n the basis of
information gleaned from the most reliable sources in Bissau, Praia and Dakar, it
seems that present conditions should favor a process of laying foundations for a
dialogue that all democratic and progressive African and international powers sin-
cerely desire. APRIQUE-ASIE unhesitatingly joins in the expression of this desire,
and our position has been unambiguous ever since the military takeover of 14 November
1980.

Suffice it to mention certain facts:

(1) The overthrow of President Luiz Cabral has willy-nilly isolated Guinea-Bissau
to a very great extent from the progressive states of Africa and the Third World
generally. Portuguese-language countries-~former Portuguese colonies--and progres-
sive or revolutionary regimes have condemned, rebuked, disavowed or ignored in emba-
rassed silence the military takeover in Guinea-Bissau. Except for President Joao
Bernardo Vieira ("Nino"), all the brains and ringleader: had suspicious ties with
reactionary and neocolonialist forces in Portugal and other imperialist powers.

Guinea-Bissau's prestige has been seriously tarnished, as has been shown by some

state visits made by the president of the Council of the Revolution to France and

the Soviet Union. Is it not significant, for example, that President Nino was not
received by President Brezhnev in Moscow and that his discussions were limited to
meetings with Boris Ponomaryov and a vice-president of the Council, Vassiliy Kuznetsov?
Or that his trip to Paris went almost unnoticed, while the Cape Verdian president,
Aristides Percira, was welcomed with such interest that he was received twice in

4 days by President Mitterrand?

(2) Guinea-Bissau patriots are very much aware that threats to the country's terri-
torial integrity, independence and soveriegnty have sharply increased since the events
of 14 November. These threats are both political and economic, and the historical
prestige of the PAIGC had resisted them for a long time thanks especially to the
active solidarity between the Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verdian peoples, who are united
by the same desire for progress and by common objectives.

23
FOR 0FF1C1AL.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z ONLY

(3) At the last Bissau congress, the hopes and maneuverings of the most reactionary
elements, the ones most closely tied to neocolonialist interests, were blocked. These
elements did not succeed in dominating the congress nor in moving into the upper eche—
lons of the party. Rather, several of them were subjected to sharp criticism by grass-
roots party members for their abuses, corruption and social and political behavior.
Thus, the minister of Foreign Affairs, Victor Maria Saude, was violently denounced

by many party cadres. The situation is especially revealing of the political atmos-
phere in the country because the party's intellectual elite remains basically hostile
to the coup d'etat.

(4) A threat hangs over President Vieira, and it comes from those who were the true
architects of the coup. The president of the Council of the Revolution has refused

to give in to their pressure; he has resisted the demands of counterrevolutionaries
from FLING [Front for the Struggle for Guinea-Bissau Independence] and UPANG [expan-
sion unknown] who have fought the PAlGC for a long time and who have set impossible
conditions for their return to the country; he has been hostile to appointing his
Foreign Affairs minister to the post of deputy general secretary of the party and

to appointing the present governor of the National Bank to the position of prime
minister. All this and much else marks him as a man to be brought down for those

who dream of turning Guinea-Bissau into a p.radise for Western capitalists--especially
the Portuguese. Everybody in Guinea-Bissau knows that getting rid of Nine would leave
the doors of Bissau wide open to the Spinolist petty bourgeoisiewiththeir rip-off
mentality. if that happened, what would become of the truly revolutionary and patri-
otic elements in the armed forces, for whom Nino remains a prestigious figure?

(5) The danger of racism spreading in Guinea-Bissau as a result of statements by
some Bissau leaders is seriously worrying progressive Africans. Aren't those people
becoming emulators of the most vicious colonialists of the Portuguese era when they
seek to widen the gap between the Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verdian peoples by setting
mixed bloods and blacks against each other? Did not President Kountche of Niger
recently warn the chief of the Guinea-Bissau diplomatic corps against the danger of
such statements, which African peoples should unhesitatingly reject? Nhat has become
of the memorable lessons of the martyr Amilcar Cabral, whom the Bissau leaders claim
to be following?

(o) The leaders in Praia have said many times that they favor a dialogue with Bissau
at the highest level, as have Presidents Samara! Hachel, of Mozambique, and Abdou
hiouf, of Senegal; these statements make it possible to be very hopeful for the future.
especially since deep concern about Bissau has been expressed in the postponement of
the annual meetings of the leaders of the Portuguese-language countries (Angola,
Mozanmique, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde, and Sao Tome and Principe).

is it not playing into the hands of the real enemies of the Guinea-Bissau and Cape
Verdian peoples and of all Africa to keep the quarrel going between the two countries,
to continue trading accusations and recriminations and to use newspapers and corrupt
journalists to stoke the fire of racial and racist prejudice in order to thwart any
hope or possibility of normalizing relations between the two countries?

Victory cannot be claimed by maintaining the fiction of the PAIGC label in Bissau.
The only victory that is possible or attainable is the one that Guinea-Bissau and
Cape Verdian patriots can win over their domestic and foreign enemies. To win it,

21.
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY
FOR OFFIC‘ML USE ONLY

only one way is possible: dialogue. nialugue hased on the sincere good will of hoth
parties to overcome all the problems caused by the events of l4 November I980.
nialogue at the highest level, between the two heads of state, as an image of that
which had begun and was developing between the two peoples. If the initiatives of
Presidents Samara Michel and Abdou Diouf are not acceptable to the Bissau leaders for
one reason or another, why not suggest others? The main thing is that Presidents
Aristides Pereira and Bernardo Vieira be able to meet in private conversation in
order to build new and fruitful relations between the two countries. Despite what
may have happened in the last 14 months, the bitterness of some. the disillusionment
of others, this conversation is being impatiently looked forward to by all Cape

Verdian and Guinea-Bissau patriots worthy of the name and, beyond them, all the
democratic powers of the continent.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

8782
(:50: 4719/51!)

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘HUAL USE ONLY

GUlNﬁA-BISSAU

BRIEFS

RESPOhSIBILITY FOR RACIST REMARKS--Some diplomats posted in Bissau report that the
Guinea-Sissau minister ofthe Interior, Manuel Saturnino da Costa, has taken a Sene-
galese journalist as a partner in opening a cabaret in Bissau. The journalist
already owns a cabaret in the Senegalese capital, which, he says, is intended to
"finance" his newspaper. He recently played a part in an incident inflaming race
prejudice in Guinea-Bissau by pitting mixed bleeds and blacks against each other
on the explicit instructions of the Guinea-Bissau minister of the Interior. [Text]
[Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 257, 18 Jan 82 p 17] 8782

OPPOSITION TO NAGUICAVE SETTLEMENT--What is it? A very ordinary matter: a joint
shipping company was formed on 3 Septeaber 1977 as part of a Guinea-Bissau-Cape Verde
unity project managed by the PAIGC. The project was undertaken at the insistence of
Cape Verde and with its financial support. However, following the events of 14 Sep-
tember I980, economic and trade relations between the two countries were frozen, and
Guinea-Bissau obviously wished to impede the operations and management of the company.
Cape Verdian stockholders (the government and private parties), who held 52 percent
of the stock, decided to call a general meeting in a special session that approved
the dissolution of NAGUICAVE [Guinea-Bissau-Cape Verde Navigation Company] with the
support of all stockholders, including those of both Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde.
Differences arose over the way in which the company was to be liquidated. Guinea-
Bissau insisted that the boats be put up for sale on the international market, but
the Cape Verdian stockholders felt that this was not in the general interest, espe-
cially because their country would he left without a national security fleet, which
had been purchased almost completely with Cape Verdian effort and capital. Under
these conditions, a majority (52 percent) of the stockholders passed a motion to
transfer the company's assets and liabilities to the Cape Verdian government, which
would then reimburse the other stockholders for their proportionate shares of the
liquid assets. Since all guarantees have been provided for, it is of course under-
stood that Guinea-Bissau will not be put at a disadvantage, as it will be paid on

the basis of frozen assets as calculated by a commission of three experts appointed,
respectively, by Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau and a company or international organiza-
tion agreed upon by the two governments. The majority decision of the general meeting
has been attacked by Bissau, which has appealed to the San Vincente court. [Text]
[Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 257, 18 Jan 82 p 7) 8782

650: 4719/519

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

ECHOES 0P IMPATIENCE "IT“ ECONOMY, POLITICS HEARD
Paris JBUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1092.9 Dec 81 pp 36-38
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "The Restless Ones Speak Out")

[Text] In addition to the economic and social crisis, there is
the fear of a constitutional vacuum.

The cerermonies marking the 21st anniversary of Ivorian independence (7 December)
put the accent on austerity this year. No new infrastructureprojectswcreannounccd
and there was no round of partying in the provincial capital. as was the custom in
the past. The official viewing stands which workers had begun setting up in early
October all along Abidjan's Boulevard Valery Giscard d'Estaing were dismantled.

The ministers who had thought they were supposed to have this work done saw them-
selves hauled over the cools and described as "insensitive" by an angry head of
state.

What is happening, as President Houphouet-Boigny acknowledged before the National
Council of the PDCI (Democratic'Party of the Ivory Coast. which he heads) when it
met on 16. 19 and 25 ﬁsvcaber 1n Abidjzn, i: that the country is 3 the midst of a
crisis of "exceptional gravity." The crisis is caused first of all by the impact
of a global recession on an economy that is broadly open to the outside. But also.
and more important, it was caused by the catastrophic fall in the world market price
of cacao, which has led to a decline of something close to Fr CPA 600 billion (Fr 8
billion) in export earnings. The combination of these two developments has brought
about an unprecedented state of stagnation. Many businesses are slowing down or
are in perilous straits. while others have simply shut down. This stagnation has
had especially severe effects on the building trade and public works, two sectors
which ever since independence had been a driving force in the extraordinary boom
the country experienced.

Among "expatriates" (the Ivory Coast has more of them than any other country south
of the Sahara) it is not unusual to meet technicians ready to pack up. They may go
to Cameroon. or Gabon. or to Congo to wait for better days. Or perhaps they will
resign themselves and go back home. "There is nothing more for us to do here,"
confided on construction engineer who. during the fat years. had decided to settle
down "for good“ in the Ivory Coast. Today, he is getting ready to “dispose" of all
his assets and real estate and set sail for other parts. "Since there can be no
question of my returning to live in France." he further confided. "I will go some-
where else in Africa. but I cannot stay in the Ivory Coast. where everything is
falling apart."

27

FOR‘OFFNHAL.USE1)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some businessmen are not so pessimistic. While acknowledging current problems.

most prefer to curtail their lifestyle and rethink their investment plans rather
than clear out. "There is no question we are going through some hard times."
averted a French industrialist who has seen in the Ivory Coast for some 20 years,
"but there is no reason to despair." He goes on to explain that with its impressive
road network. its energy infrastructure, its excellent communications and hotel
facilities. not to mention the spirit of initiative in the rank and file. the Ivory
Coast is certainly not in mortal danger. "Prospects are not grim." he said in
conclusion. "The country will recover sooner than people think."

That optimism seems to be shared by the big international financial institutions.
such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The former announced
on 25 November that it was providing the Ivory Coast loans totaling $166 million.
Most of that money will be used to improve economic management, stimulate public
investment. and support agricultural prices. It will also facilitate the imports-
tion of certain raw mr'erisls indispensable to industry, some equipment goods, and
spare parts. This latest commitment brings to $906 million the amount of loans the
World Bank has provided the Ivory Coast to help it cope with the crisis it is

facing.

In addition to those loans, the IMF last February promised to put $500 million at
the disposal of the Abidjan government. That is impressive proof that the donors
still have faith in the country. Some donors are even prepared to approve new
loans, members of the Ivorian ruling class suggest. But the authorities themselves
are turning down those offers. believing that it would not be wise for the country
to incur further indebtedness. They believe the country should not go beyond the
current debt ceiling if it wants to continue to enjoy the confidence of the inter—
national financial community. True, the experts say the Ivory Coast's petroleum
prospects are excellent. People say that by 1983 it will produce enough to cover
all of its domestic needs, and that by the end of the decade production will
approach 8 million tons. or the equivalent of what Gabon is producing today.

But the black gold miracle has not yet become a reality, and meanwhile the economic
crisis is having distressing effects on society. Privately owned industries have
reduced their production and in the and thrown a number of workers out on the
street. where they join the ranks of those who lost their jobs last year when the
state-owned companies were eliminated. Then there are the young people fresh out of
university who took poor advice in the beginning and now cannot find work that cor-
responds to their training. That veritable army of industrial reservists conjures
up frightening prospects for the authorities. According to one particularly bleak
analysis'of the situation given to the PDCI National Council, the secretary general
of the UGTCI (General Union of Ivory Coast Workers). Mr Joseph Koffi. estimates the
number of jobseekersatclose to 80.000!

AL the same time, the housewife's budget is being eaten away by galloping inflation
of retail prices. In 1 year the price of some staples doubled at the Treichville
market. while the cost of premium gasoline is now up around Fr CPA 275 (Fr 5.50)
per liter! Under these conditions. the government could not ignore the demands
articulated before the National Council by various socio-vocational groups,
especially since wage levels have remained the same for a years. Various measures,
therefore. have just been announced: starting 1 January 1982, civil service

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

salaries will be increased 10 percent. A solidarity fund, to be created out of a
systemwide l-percent deduction from employee salaries. is to be set up in 2 years
for the benefit of the most disadvantaged categories.

Ignored for a number of years, doctors will see some improvement in their situation.
As for the young people who cannot finish school, they will be guided toward agri-
culture. The state is going to dev0te substantial resources to them, both for
training and for modernization of the reception, production and communication
infrastructure. Hill these measures be enough to appease the indignation generated
by the sudden deterioriation in the standard of living? Will they be enough to

dispel the grumbling of the white-collar unemployed? Nothing could be less certain,
because the rank and file and the intellectuals as well have another reason--a

political one—-for being impatient, not to say exasperated: the constitutional
vacuum presently facing the Ivory Coast.

By the terms of the reform adopted 25 November 1980. president of the National
Assembly will no longer Succeed to the presidency in the event the position is
vacant. Instead the successor will be the vice president. But no vice president
has been named yet, and the delay is feeding all sorts of rumors. "Resign. and
stand for election with your vice president-designate," shouted opposition deputy
Camille Adam during a speech by 76-yearwold President Houphouet-Boigny. "I will
name my vice president when the time comes." retorted "the Old Man." not without
adding that it is a question on which he continues to reflect. day in and day out.
But for the moment. priority must be given to the economic battle. he concluded.
because "the vice president will not be the one to get the country out of the
crisis.“ Which is true.

For all that. Mr Camille Adam's interpellation should not be taken lightly.
Certnlnly. this deputy. a brilliantpleaderand head of the Ivorian section of
Amnesty International, is no stranger to controversy. Along with labor organizer
Ngo Blnise. deputy from Bouafle, he had already made a mark for himself in the
debate during the first budget session to which the National Assembly was invited.

The two men had not hesitated to critic;zc--in what was seen as an impertinent way--
certain projects sponsored by the head of state. including one in his home village

of Vnmoussoukro.

For once. the statements of the Cassandra of Ivorian politics went beyond isolated
concerns. He was in fact the spokesman for all the restless persons who are worried
about this constitutional vacuum in which the Ivory Coast is caught. At this point.
that includes almost the entire political class. the cadres. youths. and the politi-
cized workers. All of them. whether they admit it or not. are waiting for the head
of state to do something that will chaso away the dark clouds which might otherwise
needlessly begin to amass.

In addition. a number of people. including some of the President's close advisers.
sometimes feel that a not insignificant piece of the machinery of state is not in
place, especially since the dismissal oi Hr Philippe Yace. former secretary general
of the PDCI. Since then, President HouIMouet—Boigny has not had a right hand to
assist him directly in the staggering task of administration and decision-making at
the party and state level. There is no one who would even be able to take charge
of immediate business if the head of state were to become temporarily disabled.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0 V“ v. o o~ one. \-~!t. \n ‘hl

Given the succession question. the economic crisis. and the social problems, one
might. say that the Ivory Coast is truly at the crossroads. 'l'hc entire sociupul mm:
framework of the country is threatened. It is true that Felix Houphouet-Boigny.
having been in the political arena for nearly 1.0 years, has weathered a number of
crises before. And once again he may well land on his feet. despite the problems
now facing him. All the same, in Africa it is easier to get into politics than to
leave it.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

9516
C80: 4719/35?

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STEM)! mm 0? Boom REPORTED

tendon NEW AFRICAN in mglish Jan 82 p 51

[Article 111 Dr William A. stoevex end Donnie J. Conlonz
Influence People and win the Economy Wat'l

l'rexcl

THE lVORY COAST to one of tropical
Africa's new economic eucceee etoriee
Although the country leclta oil or eub-
mnuel mineral depooiu. ite GNP hao
grown at an average annual rate of 7 per
cent einco independence in 1960. The
country now hu the higheet income per
cepita in Weot Africe. eetimated to even
age “.260 in 1979.

The benefite of growth have epread to
the lower income groupe to e greater
extent than in moot other African coun-
tries. in 1970 it wee eetimoted that the
poorest 80 per cent of the population

received 43 per cent of the nation'e
income. whereoe in other compareble
countries the come eegment received
32-36 per cent

Viahlobaeo

In the authore' analyeie. two of the
important fectora contributing to the
growth have boon the government'e deci-
eion to concentrate ito reeourcoe on
improving the country'e natural export-
tmainly tropical agricultural products)
end ite Iiberel. hee-moritet economic
policiee.

The former docioion hae avoided the
eetebliahmont of inefﬁcient. email-scale
Import-eubetituting induetriee‘ while the
iatter policy hae promoted induetrialiu-
tion through the eetabllehment of a few
labour-incentive export-orientated fee
toriea.

The country'a policieo are olmoot e
textbook example of the waye foreign
inveetment con help promote the growth

31

IVORY CON

“Ivory Coast:

of e viable and competitive industrial
base. Following are come of the weyt in
which the country haa mode iteelfettroc.

tive to foreign inveetment end reaped
eubetantial benefits in the process.

The approach of Preeident Felix
Houphouet-Boigny't government. eince
the country'e independence in 1960. to
foreign investment hae not been marked
by the erratic nun. in ideology or appli-
cation that have charecterieod come
other African countriee.

The lnveetment Code of 1969 hao been
virtually unchanged up to the preeent.
end its longevity hee created e eteble and
reaeouring environment for foreign
invootoro.

Mlahou

The Ivory Coeet‘e continued cloee ties
to its former coloniel ruler France have
helped to malte the country both politi-
cally and economically attrective. Pott-
independence inveetmont hoe continued
to ﬂow in from France. while during the
decade from 1970 to 1980 non-French
foreign compeniee hove increaeed their
inveetment at an even foster rote. The
lone Convention of 1975 allows duty.
free entry into the entire £.E.C. for all
Ivorian expats

Like many other West African member
countrioe of the French Communaute.
the Ivory Cout um the CFA franc.
whoee convertibility is guaranteed by the
French treowry. This makes the cur.
rency relatively stable end giver invee
toreeonie aaeuronce thotthey will beeble

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MED
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030059-9

FOIOFFICIAL USE ONLY

to repatriatc reasonable returne on
money they put Into the country.

Many foreign compeniee have found
that the combination ofa etable economy.
acceee to the large EEC market. and
cheap labour enable them to make aub-
etantial profite on certain kinds of pro-
ducte. Generally the export producte
have been tropical agricultural com-
moditiee and labour-intenaive low-
technology manufacturea

The country’s emphaeie on improving
ita agricultural baec bee reeulted in rie»
lng purchaeing power at all levele of the
population. The In turn hae created a
viable market for eome locally-produced
conaulner goods.

Wed

The Ivory Coaet hat allowed compan-
tively free entry of capital. adequate
dividend repatriation. a relatively unrr
etricted regulatory environment. and
comparatively few economic dietortione
for political purpoeee. Coneequently.
foreign ae well u domeetic entrepeneure

. have been free to make profit-
maximieing decieione unfettered by
heavy-handed tontrole and bureaucratic
red tape.

Moat foreign compamee into the
mid-1970's were allowed to hold 100 per
cent owneiehip In their ivorian eub~
eidiariee if tbuy wiebed. in 1916 the
government announced the objective of
"lvorianiution" of capital. but it hae
moved alowly in requirim companiee to
take in local partnere. and it hae paid
adequate computation for the few full or
partial diveetituree it bee forced. ln prac-
tice it hae allowed coneiderable leeway
for negotiation of local ownerehip

uiremente.

government he- impoeed eeeen-
tially no reatrirtione on the level of tech.
nology employed by incoming inveet~
menu. Coneequentiy the meJority of fore-
Ign inveetment bee been in agricultural
proceeaing. teatilee and clothi . phar-
maceuticale and eimple houehol iteme.
Theee manufarturee have created jobe.
earned foreign exchange. aupplied
domeetic needa. and helped to expand the
country'e induetrial beee.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 IC Magazine Limited

CSO: 4700/705

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00050R000500030059-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

VARIOUS ASPECTS OF PETROLEUM PROBLEM EXAMINBD
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1884. 18 Dec 81 pp 3366-68

[Text] The coastal areas on the southern rim of the Gulf of Guinea could prove to
be one of the world's seven biggest Saudi-type oilfields still remaining to be
exploited. according to the recent study published by the A61? company. The

Ivory Coast, the geographic center and economic magnet of this part of West Africa.
could take advantage of the opportunity. if this is the case. to take a decisive
step toward expansion. And the petroleum manna could resolve the cash-flow crisis
the country is presently experiencing. as well as partially offset the shortfall
(several hundred billion CPA francs) in foreign exchange earnings due to the poor
price of coffee and cacao on international markets. But caution and discretion
seem to be the golden rule of the members of the oil committee.* all Ivorians
except for the chairman. who are kept informed by the oil operators.

President Felix Houphouet-Boigny likes to say--as he did at Yamoussoukro on

13 September at the final signing ceremony for an oil agreement--that in this
regard the Ivory Coast is like a panther. the most ferocious beast of the jungle--
who "does not roar out his victory cry until he has finished off his prey." The
victory proclamations he refers to are nothing other than the claims one hears
frequently in Abidjan that a new "Ivorian [economic] miracle" is at hand.

Despite the injunctions to be patient. oil is one of the leading preoccupations

of financial and industrial circles in Abidjan. Production from the Belier field
began in August 1980. and eight other concessions have been given to oil companies
whose exploratory work is at various stages of advancement. Hhatever the dis-
coveries may be. the production levels hoped for. and the profits the Ivory Coast
hopes to reap from the oil exploretion--even if less than 1 "black gold rush"--
the arrival of the oil operulora and their expense accounts is already starting

to rovlvv economic activity. which has been somewhat sluggish of late.

T‘fﬁé committee is composed of the secretary general in the Office of the President.
the minister of mines. the finance minister. the head of Petroci [Ivorian Petroleum
Company]. and the head of the Autonomous Sinking Fund. among others.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I’K'IAI. USP. ONLY

  

:0 E ll’llllllllf

 

       

Df GUINII

o sol-n- 9

_________J

GOill'

 
 

The map of oil concessions in the ivory Coast (above) shows that offshore explora-
tion is now going on all along the coast from Grand-Lahou to the Ghanaian border.
The companies involved are American (Phillips. Exxon. Sedco. Union Texas).

Italian (AGIP). Anglo-Dutch (Shell) and French (OPP-Total). In addition. the
state-owned oil company. Petroci. holds an interest in all the consortia that have
been created, but does not systematically help pay the exploration costs.

The most recent exploration agreement. signed at Yamoussoukro on 13 Septeuber 1981.
covers 730 square kilometers in Section D-l west of Abidjan. The operator is the
A01? company (31.9 percent of the consortium). which in fact is involved in every
prospecting license given out in the Ivory Coast except for the Belier. and is

also the operator on the Grand—Lahou concession. (Present concessions in the Ivory
Coast cover 22,600 square kilometers. 17.400 of which are offshore).

The French company CPP-Total, according to Mr Jacques Dupouy-Camet. operations
director for the group. has only recently shown an interest in oil exploration in
the ivory Coast. From now on. however. Total will be involved in all stages of
the production line: exploration. rcliolng and distribution.

Total. which holds lO.l percent of the shares of SIR (lvorinn Refining Company).

has distribution rights to [7.5 percent of the oil marketed in the ivory Coast.

Total has four prospecting permits: Crand-Lahou A—l (17.5 percent of the consortium),
Abidjan 0-1 (21.25 percent) and Assinie E-l/N-l (72.5 percent). The Frency company

is the operator on the latter twin concession (E—l offshore. 780 square kilometers.
and H-I on onshore. 5,240 square kilometers). During the first half of 1981. Total
carried out 3,000 km of seismic sections and was considering starting up some new

exploratory drilling late in November l98l. Its total investment in exploration
should come to aroend Pr 200 million in the initial stage.

in reality. only two concessions--Belier and Espoir--have really gone beyond the
first stages of exploration.

3’!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Belier: Prospects for Limited Expansion

The pumping of oil from the Belier field beginning in August 1980 marked the
Ivory Coast's entry into the ranks of oil-producing countries. The prospecting
permit on that concession. located off Grand-Bassam 40 km east of Abidjan. was
issued in November 1970. Esso Exploration is acting as the operator and leader
of a consortium composed of Esso. Shell. and Petroci. The consortium took the
name Ivorian Oil Operations Company (SIOP);the shareholders are 8350 (63.75 per-
cent), Shell (21.25 percent). and Petroci (15 percent).

The exploratory work and drilling begun in 1970 did not bear fruit until April
1979. when the results obtained justified moving into production. Between 1970
and 1979. seven geophysical studies were made and 8.500 km of seismic sections
taken. In addition. 20 exploratory wells totaling 54.800 meters were bored under
water varying between 40 and 100 meters in depth. These wells were plumbed from

2.200 to 3.400 meters below the sea bottom.

The oil is carried up to a platform 37 m wide by 61 m long with a total weight of
5.000 tons. which sits on eight 60-m piles. The platform. which was built through
a joint venture between BTPM and U15 at a total cost of $15.5 million. is linked
to the land-based installations by a 28-km pipeline that cost 3.4 billion CFA
francs.

within a few months after beginning production in August 1980. Belier reached a
production level of 9,000 barrels per day. or a rate of 450.000 tons per year. In
all. SIR gets about 1.600 cubic meters of oil with a density equal to 0.t45.
However. total deliveries in fiscal year 1980-1981 were only 330,000 tons. because
there were several unexpected production problems.

Prospects for expansion appear limited. In 1981. production should be 380.000

tons. and it is not likely that the maximum annual production capacity of the
installations (15.000 barrels per day. or 750,000 tons per year) will be approached
in 1982. While the experts may anticipate growth to an annual production level of
400.000 tons by 1982. Exxon officials like John H. Youd. vice president of the
company's Ivorian branch office. are hoping that a program of reinjecting natural
gas into producing wells (estimated to cost $35 million) will result in even greater
production increases, at least in later years.

Esso continued its exploratory drilling in 1981 (three wells in the first 6 months.
totaling 25.749 drilled feet). but the results of flow tests were disappointing. it
appears. The deposit seems to be characterized by a large number of small high-
density pockets which cannot sustain a high rate of continuous extraction. This
explains some of the dry holes.

Overall investment in theBelierfield seems to have totaled 55 billion CPA francs
as of the end of l980. including 22 billion for operations. If the price per
barrel paid by SIR to 810? is indeed $28. then the annual turnover of 25 billion
CFA francs will doubtless make that investment profitable. In October 1981. tests
carried out by Schlumberger confirmed the presence of natural gas in sufficient
quantities to consider exploiting it at some future time.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSl-I ONLV

Espoir: A Two-Stage Development Strategy

The Espoir field. whose reserves appeared from the very first soundings to be much
larger than those of Belier. has whetted imaginations in Abidjan and elsewhere for
the last 18 months.

The deposit appears to sit astride two concessions. Concession C-l, situated off
Jacqueville. 50 km west of Abidjan. is worked by a consortium including Phillips
Petroleum (57.5 percent), ACIP (22.5 percent), Sedcc (10 percent). and Petroci (10
percent). This area. covering approximately 1.093 square kilometers. was the
subject of a renegotiation of production interests in Narch 1980 to enable Petroci
to increase its share to 60 percent.

Concession AB. south of 0-1. is much larger (12.1hl square kilometers). and a
production—sharing contract providing for variable participation has governed
operations since 1975.

The American company Phillips Petroleum drilled some 15 exploratory wells between
January 1980 and September 1981. The account of petroleum activities in the ivory
Coast published by the trade magazine PETRO CONSULTANT shows that in the first half
of 1981. five wells totaling 54,135 feet were drilled. Out of these five wells.
three appear to have found some oil. The first (Ale) is located 56 km southeast
of Abidjan in Section AB. where the water is 400 m deep. The second (ABZx) is 6 km
east—southeast of the first (water depth. 485 m). and the third (Clx) is about 5 km
northwest of well Alx (water depth. 400 m). Since then. another exploratory well
completed in late June 1981 has reportedly tested out at a yield of 17.400 barrels
per day. Hhile one must not rely excessively on these data. which provide only
indications, it should be noted that Phillips Petroleum's operational plans call
for the drilling of 30 exploratory wells, each costing $12 million. between now

and the end of 1983. That is not "small potatoes." noted Howard Cormier. Phillips's
chief of drilling operations. in an interview with BUSINESS WEEK in July 1981.

The overall strategy for developing the Repair field can be outlined as follows:

The first exploratory wells proved the existence of sufficiently large pockets of
oil below water of medium depth to justify moving more quickly to the production
phase. These. in turn. should produce the cash flows to finance continued explora-
tion off the coast. The reserves discovered in the deepwater areas are reportedly
of higher quality than the others. but precisely because of the depths involved.
more sophisticated techniques are required both to conduct exploratory testing and
to go into production. Thus they will not be exploited until sometime around
l984—l985.

In the Initial period. therefore. the "Dan Duke“ platform. an auto-elevatrice
[translation unknown] installation with a maximum production capacity of 80.000
barrels per day (h million tons per year) will be brought from Japan. where it was
built. to the ivory Coast. where it will go into operation by the end of 1982.
Anchored on a baseline at a depth of 100 m. the "Dan Duke" platform will be connected
to four previously drilled wellheads by 22 km of pipeline. This pipeline will be put
in position in the second quarter of 1982 by the Apache. That ship. loaned to
Phillips hy the Santa Fe company and expected to arrive in Abidjan in February 1982.
has the equipment to "unreal" the line on board. The oil extracted will be tempo-
rarily stored by a tanker moored to the platform and periodically transferred to
other tankers.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Initial production. by June 1982. should be around 25,000 barrels per day. and by
the end of the year it should reach 50,000 barrels per day. if the second phase of
the first stage is completed in the meantime. Production during the second half
of 1982 should reach between 700.000 and 1.2 million tons. It remains to be seen
whether it will reach between 2.5 and 3.5 million tons by 1984. The existing con-
tracts allow the "Dan Duke" to conduct operations for 3 years. up to July 1985.

During that time, exploration on the high seas will continue. and the technology
required to exploit deposits below bodies of deep water is under study right now.
CG Doris, a French company. is currently designing a new fixed-platform system
based on the principle of a floating concrete "gravitating tower" separated into
sealed compartments. with a joint allowing both horizontal and vertical movement.
coupled with a Cardan joint to prevent torque.

The gravitating tower project is getting 50 percent of its financing from an EEC
subvention and 50 percent from Phillips. Chevron. CFP. and EFC. To date. no off—
shore oil operations have ever been done in water deeper than 300 meters. This
tower could therefore be used not only at Bspoir (360 m) but in the Santa Barbara
Channel in the United States and in the Casablanca field in Spain (where Chevron
is the operator).

Production possibilities could be considerable: current predictions are 300.000
barrels per day by around 1985-1986. But that estimate reflects only the personal
intuition of observers on the scene. The heavy investment planned--900 billion
CPA francs between now and the end of the decade--does, however. lend support to
these optimistic assessments.

However that may be. and even if future political and financial developments are
set aside. before the potential at Espoir can be realistically assessed there
remains the necessity of surmounting the technical problem (water depth) and deter-
mining whether this field may in fact contain much more natural gas than oil.

Production and Consumption: Uncertain Projections

it is tempting to try to draw up an estimate of oil production and consumption in
the Ivory Coast in order to come up with a figure for overall export earnings.
According to the data that have been gathered, crude oil production could rise to
the following levels: 400,000 tons in 1981; 1.1 to 1.6 million tons in 1982; 2.5
to 3.5 million tons in 1983; and 3 to a million tons in 1984.

while these projections are only approximate. it is even more difficult to deter-
mine how much crude oil the nation itnelf will consume. In effect. the ivory
Coast. which has a refinery with a theoretical capacity of 2 million tons. tradi-
tionally serves the oil needs of the neighboring countries of Mali and Upper Volta.
and in addition it provides fuel oil and diesel oil to foreign ships passing
through Abidjan as well as jet fuel to airplanes touching down in Ivory Coast.

in 1980-1981. SIR reportedly refined 1.45 million tons of crude. of which 330.000
tons came from the Uelicr field and the rest from various other sources (Venezuela.
Nigeria. Saudi Arabia: estimated cost 100 billion [CPA francsl). In addition.
354.000 tons of finished products (butane. premium auto gasoline: 138,000 tons;

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regular gasoline, kerosene: 90.000 tons; diesel oil: 110.000 tons) were imported.
Exports (international. Upper Volta. Mali) during the same period approached
600.000 tons of refined products.

Domestic consumption (all finished products together) during the 1980-1981 fiscal
year amounted to 1.03 million tons. or 13 percent below the previous year's level.
The consumption decline for 2 years in a row is explained not only by mediocre
economic conditions but also. and more importantly. by EECI's (Electrical Energy
of the Ivory Coast) gradual substitution of hydro for thermal energy. Since early
1981, hydroelectric powerplants have been providing almost all of the country's
electricity. and since July 1981 the thermal powerplant at Vridi. which had con-
sumed 118,000 tons of diesel-380 fuel in 1979-1980 and 62.000 tons in 1980-1981,
has almoat ceased its activity. The Ivory Coast's hydroelectric potential will
soon be further increased by the Soubre dam. on which work is expected to start by
the end of 1982 (see the bidder prequalification notice in HIM of 11 December 1981.
p 3305).

One of the other important parameters. from the point of View of the Ivorian oil
ledger. relates to SIR's production capacity. At Vridi. near the port of Abidjan.
SIR has a refinery with a theoretical capacity of 2 million tons which in fact at
present handles no more than 1.6 million tons. Petroci—-the state-owned company
which is the biggest shareholder (30 percent) in SIR--has asked for and obtained
a commitment to increase its maximum capacity to a million tons. This expansion.
whose cost (180 billion CPA francs) is now considerably higher than the original
estimates (100 billion) has generated violent controversy in Abidjan. and is now
more than a year behind schedule. Hydroskimming is now set to begin in April
1982. and hydrocracking—-which should facilitate increased production of diesel
oil or jet fuel-—is scheduled to begin in August or September 1982. This latter.
which requires ultrafine tuning that will be time-consuming to complete. will in
all probability not be operational before 1983.

If it stays to its schedule. SIR over the 1981-1982 fiscal year should refine 2.4
million tons of crude oil. including b00.000 tons extracted from Belier. it could
then. without more than minimal recourse to import of finished products. cover both
lvorian consumption (1.01 million tons of oil products) and also that of Mali.
Upper Volta. and its international market (630.000 tons). Then, with the expected
[economic] recovery in late 1982. consumption may well increase by 10 to 15 per-
cent per year.

in order to total up the oil balance-sheets. one wOuld need to know the percent of
crude oil from Espoir that will be refined by SIR. assuming that it is of suf-
ficiently high quality. In reality. however. by the terms of the existing produc-
tion-sharing contracts. Petroci has only a 10-percent interests. and there is
apparently nothing to prevent the other members of the consortium from exporting
the rest of the production. unless Petroci exercises its right to increase its
interest to 60 percent. This is the big unknown with regard to short-term
prospects for all operations. Many international banking institutions. especially
in France. are ready to finance Petroci's participation. but they are requiring
detailed information on the size of the Eapoir reserves. Now the American operators
appear to be reluctant to turn over the information demanded. The American banks
that helped resolve the Ivory Coast's cash-flow problems this year (Chase Manhattan

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI". ONLY

and several others put together a $275 million Euroloan) are Supporting the
American operators. The magazine BUSINESS WEEK. in the article cited earlier.
emphasized in this regard Washington's very keen interest in African oil.

The French companies have not been able to maintain their initial advantage: the
exploratory work conducted by Elf several years ago. a few kilometers from the
Espoir field discovered by Phillips. has not yielded anything. and Total--which
devotes most of its attention in the Gulf of Guinea to Cameroon--cannot compete
with the resources the Americans have committed.

The latter are thus in the strongest negotiating position. since it is unlikely
that AGlP--like ENI during the 1960's--will play the role of spoilsport. By
November 1981, the Ivory Coast had still not exercised its option on the Espoir
field. even though the production schedule becomes firmer day by day. Given
these uncertainties. there is as yet no basis on which to assess the financial
profit that the country will get out of the oil operations.

However. given the trends shown in the projections sketched out above. the ivory
Coast could probably become a net exporter of petroleum by I983. One must hope
that this will remain only a theoretical possibility. and that the oil earnings
will in fact be used to upgrade agriculture and make it the driving force behind
the country's expansion. as President Houphouet—Boigny would like. If the
discovery of large deposits of natural gas is confirmed. the lvory Coast will also
have to move quickly to adopt a specific policy on exploitation. in order to clear
up the current uncertainties on the petroleum scene.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris [981

9516
C80: 4719/376

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LESMH

DETAILS ON ASSASSINATION SQUAD GIVEN

Johannesburg THE STAR in English 21 Jan 82 p 12, 22 Jan 82 p 11

[2 Part Article by Jasper Mortimer: "This Secret Band of Killers Poses a Threat

to Lesotho"]

[21 Jan 82 p 12]

tiontat and former
eerretary to Ktn;

'Du'a htt equad ta
pmmed to be re}

had e reputauon (or
publlehtn; new: of

[Text] MASERI' — An round shot to «em The mum; or an» Koroto has killed
assassxn alton I day but. tube and the at- or threatened my
s uad that atleg- e 0510] Nohale and WW 00 "081W! porters of the Buo-

e lv killed 51x We! Keane. two lute had tnternauon- toland Congress
Ba§olho as! "at venom! Meade. of at repercussions. Party. Some. each
remains at lllr u’ “m“ 'h" mm "mm" ” VtceChanceltor
er; u re emu: with done! mmnuesioned Sembl- M m"
3" huh. I Johannesburg ad- zutr’gyrted “the!
Named after a Se- 0 Klehaet Ramon “cm 3° “"5“““ ' ‘
eotbo monster. tolo, an opposltnon ”Mb" murder "’ 3‘" m“ the h”
Koeolto. the awed supporter who was the "9°" h" M garage met! m the
u blamed for the abducted in early been released yet -- t mt: — ’You are
Ruling at: September and “‘6 he '3‘ ‘ ”‘°““ an LLA collabora-
. her at the Brtttstt tor" (a reterence to
. Odtlon Sehen a "W" W h” c - acr «no
prominent ed «'1: a. never 5"“ M“. o m n o “-‘ “It“ a
Preaa Unton. He Liberation my)

- it aeems that
Koeolto reserve: the

Moahoahoe ll. 90'1““ 0 '0 1’ mun f! h d I:

who area taken from numeroua death 3:: gum) ‘pm IS‘ "-3.136 e Hr:
lua car on June I: threats ‘W "l “a a” ”WWW Government“ (Kore-
.nd l.{ef found Vllk‘h '8" "m h'um “BIN" Ln't WOfdﬁ) 01' 00‘.

but?! heyond my :woeokd‘) and sent p...“ Senior LEC
2‘12: grandson of 0- \'-re chancellor COT,“ e A“ “glee $t§rm=nczﬁx

. e n ,

Inaotho Cbnertan Antony saw a! “6":ng cu"; ngnu ls acme
Councﬂ Phlll‘mlﬂ a}. LIDOMl U‘MNI- pnme "MW! k990i“ The." 5"
Ben Hasllo In a “l! 0' WWW ”5 Leahua Jonathan a m" n” “mm
anoottne attack on ”V” N N‘ atett. message about the latent termed " “ '
m Meatlo home on WNW the "I” abductions nt new. ”m" ‘°"" m

September t tn car. he and Nestle. Mae. ,(Chm are
mm tar Hallo 0 you.» um" llo ﬂed to South W“ “PM“ ‘“
namly saved members of the Le Atria. mited the ;,f'°"'° "PM“
noun. Son... Evut‘eliu‘ United Stem and Lee‘L 1M; “gamer
. Ed..f Mamba. chquh (LEO). Ind W]! la“ "WHQC ‘0 “on“? czm‘l'“ ‘3
the anti-government second largest 5! Midi"! ‘0 M B‘np I, “f '2“
oduor at the largest Chm“ "I besnthu. ”n" ‘° N“ “V ' to5 {ﬁve tut?

rtn-utertnn nevu- ”CNN"! Iotuba 9°“ " "'9 AACC ch :1 L’ r :1!
m." m mm. and Mullo and two buy-twins an em. 33'; ' 'émuﬁ
vlm wee abducted other: "M “a not "b" d are Its 132nm";
from Q... m. .3 went to be named. 3y no means are 1:11,] “on the
September 1 and all the persons y .

’10

FOR “FFK‘IAL USE ONLY
LEC).

The Government
denies these allega-
tions vehemently.
Foreign Minister
Iioolri Molapo said

in a recent inter-
VIQI:

'Masiio and lotu-
ba constituted no
threat to the Leso-
tho Government.
Motuba tons a critic
who used the pen.

"it we were the
type 0! government
who bills critics. tie
would kill other
persons such as
Godfrey h’oiiaang
and other BCP exe-
ruin-es in Maseru as
they ronattute a
threat in that they
aspire to be the
gm‘ernment.‘

While there i! no

evidence linking the
Government to the
murders. several
people — includin
Iirs lotuba an

[22 Jan 82 p 11]

[Text]

MASERU— "Our
headboy had just
said goodbye." re-
calls Mrs Maiabi
Motuba of the
last moments she
spent With her

husband. "but
then he came
back to say two
men were out-
aide."

it was Septnnher
1 She. her husband.
and their three
young children were
sitting in the kit.
rhen' of their hmise
in Morita. a small
town so into smith
of Maseru.

Sir untuh. vaa
nmlreadtng the
last arlirie (or that
Inrtnighi'a edition

FOR OI-‘FN'IAI. l‘Slﬁ 0h!)

Mattie - believe
the killers are mem-
bers of the oiiicial
Police Mobile Unit
“’10).

The ewdenee ai-
leged is:
O A r m e d it IU
men came to hiatu-
ba's oliiees twice:
the first time they
threatened his I..'e
and said they did
not like his paper;
the set-0nd time
they stayed outside
because oi a nearby
(lord.

0 As biasilo ran
iroin his houae
during the tooling.
he saw a "military
vehicle" shining its
headlights on his
home. The vehicle
was partied outside
a Dohoeman‘s home.

0 Sources close to
the ﬂotuba iamily
say a policeman at

Mania. the local ril-

oi Leselinyana ia
Lesotho (Light of
Leaotho). Fw the
put eight years the
paper had been his
lite.

its circulation
stood at 80000.
more than double
its rival. the limo
Catholic weekly
Moeietsi on Baaotho
(HM) and tar ab-
ove the government
weekly Mochochono
now. This was in
no small we: a tri-

bute to his editor-
ship.

Although the
Morita-based Leso-
t h o Evangelical
Church published
LeseIins-ana. Motuha
confined church at-
iaiis to only a cause
ter of the paper and
general news to the
real He was knots-n

iil

lace. told Mrs biotu-
ba that one oi the
men who abducted
her husband was a
member oi the PIN
and that his name
had been ten to
police hea uartere
in liaseru.

One ean only
apeculate as to
Koeoko'a identity. It
may consist oi
zealous PMUonen
that have taken it
upon themselves to
retaliate for LLA at-
tacks. it may be the
Cabinet does not
know what certain
extremists in the
PMU and BNP are
doing.

DeSpite ‘all the
murders and threats.
Koooko is still at
large. No arrena
have been made.

Yet Koeoko haa

.lett clues. For in»

stance death threats
are typed rather

tor having the cour-
age to quote from
the pamphlets oi
the outlawed Lest)
tho Liberation
Army as well as
from the ruling Bas-
otiin .Vational Party.

“At that moment
two men walked
into the kitchen.

“It. are-your visu-
ton." the one said.
They were blankets.
but underneath Mu
lotuba aasr they
had short firearms.

“Will vou please
-:ome outside. We
want to talk to
you."theman said.

”No." said Mr Mt»
tuba. pen In hand.

'Vill y o u please
come in.”
"He took them

into the Mange and
Mrs Mamba twill to

her bedroom.
Moments ‘aier he!
hushsnd :nm her

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than "written" in
letters c u i from
newspapers. a n d

thev are posted in
liaseni

ii the CH) took a
sample oi typing
irons every type-
writer in the capital
(probably only a
ieir hundred). they
might well trace the
machine used.
(Typewriters have
individual charac-
lt‘tiSiit‘n nlﬂ‘h as the
war on the keys).

Many Basolito rt»
gard Koeoko its an
ally of the Govern-
ment. owing to the
views expressed in
its threats and to its
choice of victims.
Until the Govern-
ment turns its de-
nials into arrests. it
trill continue to be
ausperied oi at least
acouiescing iii K0»
iio‘s murders. -

tri Neva Co. 190'

the men were police
and wanted to take
him to Maseru.

“lie told me he
would ash the men
to take him to Aton-
)a police station to
confirm they were
police.

“We went to the
kitchen where tvro
trirnds had arm-ed.
Let-lieu Koeshe and
Osiel Mohale —
chose dauehier was
staying with us. The
friends volunteered
to acrompany Edirar
and they all went
outside.

"i asked them
where they were
going 'lli’l my husw
hand.

”They didn‘t want
to tell use. When
Edgar said they
must tell me. Ole!
”id they were i»
lice irom Maseru
and were taking
ht In t h e r e end
e-ould hnn: h t to
heck.

“I was afraid to

ask for their ID
cards.”

The tour men lett
tn .\lr Koeshe‘I car.
with Mrs htctube
very worried. She
telephoned Morije
police station but
did not get through.

“I thinlr the tele«
phone the out of
order purposefully."

The next morning
she went to Morita
pol:ce station but
they knew nothing
about the r n. She
telephoned Mr
KMslie’s oltice llt
Maseru. but he had
not IPfl"’d She
km“:- th- :4 V"!!!

was sale Mr \‘oes'te

would hate t:le~
nhcned.

-. The next day
Jews can“; 50 km

down the road at a
place called Stloe.
there were three
bodies covered lll
blood.

She heard her
husband end his
trtenda were found
lying not tar from
the road and in so
much blood it

seemed the ltitttm
had been done
there.

Who wee behind
It?

‘I don’t know,"
ehe repltcd. "but I

think it we: the Po.
lire Mobile UttlL
These pet-pie hate
hero lollowtn‘ my
huthand lane 19"
and I November
titan two PIN etee
reme b hte ml.
and eeid the! van-
ted the eon. d
the eereeee we
Wrote ertchee 0"

FOR ()FFK'IAI. l'Hl" ONLY

Leaettnyenei
poo-ham!
Her intend O
fused. "t‘hq wen
tied hl- eelt tune

m

they 'weuﬂ “do
their worh.’
't'h. tap tele-

vheeed hue on
November I and
told hiee thy would
come I I an en
Detenther d and
"N I”. O '60
their work."

An LIB dot..-
tloo it“ b aee
Prune Inlet. L.
hue aheet the
threetg ter the
church had also
received written
warning b lotuhe.
The Price Ute-eter
passed the delete-
tton on to fret-sport
lintrter Pm.
Peete.

On In min.
of December 4 the
LEC delegates etet
Xinlster Peete whe

8.06 It. ”I". I"
t h a t Edgar w a e
protected.

litter the deten-
tion left they heard
from Morita thet
the PM!) then had
amt-ed and perked
outside Idear‘e et.
(ice.

The delegate.
went heck to the
\ttntster who out
some PMU efficere
in “out. pert mt
meht a Patt' soldier
stayed near lots-‘0
home Church
mutt-es were eve-Oll-
cel oi "ll! pretee-
lion

According in tin
.‘loltiha. the only
reeson why the tern
PMU men did not
interfere with Edger
was because a mo
bile hank van had
set up rhop ectt In

be

his olﬂce end the
me o! the crowd
deterred theta.

Today Mn statu-
ba {eon the future
on her income u on
eccountant at ”on.
la Glrle' It I e h
School. She exoects
a little petmon from
the church. hut
overall she saw "l
don‘t see how it is
going to he better.

"I hope the Lord
will help me to get

my children ede-
cated."

e e e
“It we. 11 pin

the t was woken
up at barking cloetl
and a loud banttnl
on the door." Belt
htenlo writes in hit
rhttrrh newrpepen
Losehnyana Ia Le-
eotho.

The date was Sep-
tember d. 198) Al-
though M.- Martin
did not ltnovr it. it
was the last nieht
he would stay at his
home In Qoaltn:
outside llaeeru.

“I opened the
curtain a little end
saw two enned sol.
diers. Alter asking
them what they
wanted. I told them
I was Mastlo.

“They eetd: 'Get
out. man. we have
come to lull vou.
we‘ve been ordered
to'

"I told them I
wou:d not do so
end told them to
kill me right in my
house At this point
my wife llt a lamp
and immediately
there we: merciless
thoottn;

“After I escaped l
law "to military
vehicles shining
their headlights on
nay house. One of
them was outside
the house 0! e Mem-
ber of Parliament.
.‘dr Schantti. who Is
my nei‘hhnur. llns

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

son is . policemen
who lives at his
tather's home.

“I am writing this
so the people 0! the
nation should know
who attacked me.
contrery to the
broadceste of Radio
Iesotho which have
:rled to play down
the attack.

“For e tone time
It! name end other
people's eeteee here

been published h
pamphlets threaten-
hts our ilvee.

“Alter our return
from Europe In
June when l toend
thet Odlioe sehert
(tanner necrotery to
King Ioahoesh
11) had been hill
1 was told u a
member at the tru-
hnl) Benito Naile-
eel Party Mt l
ehould leeve the
country because I
would be murdered
end Leselinyan. le
Lesotho editor Ed-
gar Motuhe would
tollow me.

"My wort let the
baeothe Chrielian
Counel end Lew
t h e Bveneeltcat
Chord! made cer.
tell people in the
Govern-id. very
hitter.

"When the Prime
limiter led e Deco
tho deleutloe to
leputo (molly).
ene delepte. when
he eaw whet the
World cot-och 0!
Churches wee doing
there. seld to other
delegates: 'Il Mastlo
were not I memher
of the Lesotho
Christian Council
our country would
he setting a lot of
eid. A wey should

'he tmmd of getting

rad at this :uy.’

'l heerd title from
other members at
the delegation.

'ldotehe he: (led
hot the truth that
he dted tor romaine
FOR "FPK'IM. IS}: ONLY

alive and will haunt
out who mom
bill tm."

tit

Three days “in
in attempted usu-
wmlon of mum.
the mm M! sound
allegedlv abducted
Edgar ﬂown from
his home and ktlied
hula.

Wells-mm II Le-
sotho Is now edi'od
by a noun of senior
memhors o! t he
LEC. It eonnnues to
have the lamps! ('if-
euluion In Lesotho

Ir Masllo Mod
this rep-1r! from
Iomevhore abroad.
30 no expend to
uh up a post no:
Clo All Afru-n
(«no-nae. at on»
than u Nun-M.

n. m. a. I“.

h3
ma ormm. USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAM" I

BRIEFS

FOREIGN EXCMAMGE RESERVES--Malawi's foreign exchange reserves reached their highest
level at the end of October: 75 million Malawi kwachas. Reserves are expected to
decline to between 40 and 50 million kwachas by the end of the fiscal year (March
1982). The temporary improvement is primarily due to the good yield on tobacco
(high prices) and sugar (a larger crop) this year. as well as to the credit line
extended by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) under a Standby Arrangement. and
a Structural Adjustment Loan from the world Bank. The IMF credit line to Malawi
stands at $67 million. By the end of October. Malawi had received $33 million.
The goal of the Malawi Reserve Bank is to have foreign exchange reserves on hand
to cover 3 months of imports (this year. Malawi's monthly imports were between 20
and 30 million kwachaa). [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUM ET MEDITERRANEENS in
French No 1883 11 Dec 81 p 3317] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 9516

080: “719/356

hh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

FOOD PRODUCTION. OTHER ECONOHIC PROBLEMS DISCUSSED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1884. 18 Dec 81 pp 3343-3366
[Article by Jacques Latremoliere: "Food Goals. Economic Reorganization"]

[Text] The vicissitudes Mali has experienced have for 20 years favored excessive media
coverage of them. The level of the gross domestic product per capita. one of the lowest
in the world. has contributed to this. without however reflecting the real importance of
the traditional self-subsistence sector or the real quality of life in Mali. Given such
a context. everything becomes a subject to be dramatized. For example. we read recently
that foreign aid, including that from France. provided 80 percent of the budget income.
while a glance at the subsidies granted to facilitate budget implementation shows the
absurdity of this percentage figure.

Food Products--The Heart of the Problem*

Quite rightly. it has been claimed that natural calamities have befallen Mali, but it
has been too readily assumed that they are inevitable. and that as a result of them.
international aid in food was required. Worst of all. doubtless out of peasant caution.
the people of Mali themselves have grown accustomed to receiving such aid and to sug-
gesting it. hoping thus to conjure away bad luck. “hat was not reported. for example,
was that the first shipments of grain (40.000 tons) sent to the Tuareg grouping camps
in the north during the major drought periods of 1973 came from the provinces of Bou-
gouni and Sikasso. and that inadequacy was much less to blame for the shortage than
the poor conditions for handling the aid shipments. In 1979 and 1980. based on a few
isolated observations. major French newspapers carried reports of a cotton harvest
limited to 30.000 tons of cottonseed. while in fact the volume exceeded 150.000 tons.
Closer to us. government estimates in 198] confirmed by bodies participating in con—
tributing aid to the Sahel revealed a probable grain shortage of 300.000 tons because
of the limited rainfall in the planting season. Hell-oiled mechanisms were put into
operation on this basis in Paris and Brussels to correct the situation in time. Now
if Mali has not yet achieved self-sufficiency in food. it nonetheless has a corn har-
vest this year which is sufficiently abundant to reduce the market price in relation
to the official price by two thirds. and sufficient in any case to offset the local
shortages which have occurred in the Geo region.

 

*COncerning "food and income crops." see the article in the 11 December 1981 MARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS.

"5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On the other hand. however, we frequently read in supposedly serious reports that

Mali, when it was called the Sudan, was the “millet granary for the A0? [French West
Africa] federation." This is to presume somewhat hastily that the supply difficulties
there today are the responsibility of the authorities alone. This is only true to the
extent that the reserve granaries controlled by the administration represented an effec-
tive safeguard against shortage, within the general framework of a subsistence economy.
and with much less developed urban populations. But it is false if it is meant thereby
that Mali supplied the food needs of other territories. in an era when the marketing of
grains was impossible except within a very limited radius, in terms of the tonnage.
markets. harvesting. storage and transport means available.

The image-oriented media need to incarnate the poverty in a country, just as Colonel
Qadhdhafi personifies the Satanic will to destroy stability for it today. Underlying
these reputationstherenre always some facts, but it is necessary to interpret the
form in which they are set forth. Lying across sub-Saharan West Africa. between the
10th and the 13th parallels. from Senegal through Mali. Hossi, the Nigerian emirates.
the cotton regions of Chad and Baguirmi. to Ouaddai. there is a zone which until the
beginning of this century contained one of the major political organizations and which
remains the home of the heaviest population concentrations. Their impoverishment to
the benefit of the coastal regions is occurring on both the economic and human levels.
Following capital in gold and jewels. it is now the men who are departing: from Mali
to Senegal and France. from Upper Volta to the Ivory Coast, from Ouaddai to the Sudanese
Djesireh. causing the decline in food production to become a little worse with every
passing year. The only regions escaping the rule are those where the development of an
income crop. such as cotton in South Mali and Logone and Hayo-Kebbi in Chad provide a
means of trade against imports which it would be illusory to seek to eliminate. or even
simply to reduce. As to the supplying of food to regions with income crops by those
who have none. this is a difficult program to carry out. because declining food produc-
tion in the latter follows the same rising curve in the former as industrial fare pro-
duction. The need is never felt there to import even a grain of millet.

The Sahel regions are not doomed to a poverty in contradiction with their history.
There are indeed weather or agronomic problems leading to the impoverishment cf the
soil and likely to accelerate the desperate extension of traditional crops in certain
cases. The tragedy lies in the failure to find. in their farm arsenals. something on
which to gamble which might play the trade role played elsewhere by cotton or rice. Or
more exactly. the inability to market successfully. in the modern sense of the tern.

the crops which were once the source of their prosperity and which are, in the majority
of cases. grains. It is not a question of a definitive situation. The demand for
grains in the urban centers. where the population has doubled or triped in Africa since
1950. offer them broad markets. The technical difficulties of harvesting. storing and
shipping the products can henceforth be easily resolved. and in this realm. moreover.
given a free economy. the solutions develop of their own accord as soon as sufficient
production exists. The most serious obstacle is the low unit value of grains, in com-
parison to the relatively large number of hours of labor they represent, and the limited
enthusiasm for this crop on the part of the peasant. as a result. who thus tends to
limit his cultivation to the satisfaction of his family's needs. Only an improvement of
yields. as a function of more modern tools and the use of fertilizers, can alter the
factors in this problem.

h6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mali-Sud 1 and 2

The two operations in progress in Mali—Sud 1 and that to be launched in 1982 in Mali-
Sud 2 are important in a way not limited to the frontiers of Mali. because they were
structured on the basis of these factors.*

The solution adopted to develop the initial financial resources was the introduction of
cotton. well-suited to this role. Its unit price (130 Mali francs per kilo) is higher
than that of millet. corn or sorghum (2 80 Mali francs per kilogram). It is also a
food product the cultivation of which fits in perfectly. in a continuous cycle. with
the rotation of grain crops benefiting from the delayed effect of chemical fertilizers.
It lends itself readily to the use of draft animals. producing an improvement in yields
and a reduction in labor time per hectare. the use of manure and of fallow pastureland.
and the development of nonnomadic livestock raising.

Financed jointly by the World Bank (IDA [International Development Associationl), the
Aid and Cooperation Fund (FAC), the Central Fund. the DADEA [Arab Bank for African Eco-
nomic Development]. the African Development Fund (ADP) and the government of Mali.
Mali-South 1 is a project covering the 1975-1982 period. The estimated cost is 21.9
billion Mali francs. or £5 million dollars. including a loan of 15 million from the IDA.

The results achieved during the 1980-1981 season. the sixth since the operation began.
were mediocre where cotton was concerned. in terms of production as well as area under
cultivation and achievement of the goals. which were almost reached during the preced-
ing season, and also yields and even the number of operations included. Since the

rain came very late. some peasants limited or abandoned their cotton crop rotation.
Foreseeing a difficult year for food supply. as did the authorities themselves, they
"pushed" corn crops. thinking that they could sell the surplus of self-consumption
crops at a remunerative price on the urban market. This hope proved partially in error.
because of the abundance of supply. but it bears witness to the administrative responsi-
bility of the producers. and the fact that cotton. which served as the propulsive mechan-
ism at the beginning of this project. in no way enjoys any privilege when grain income
reaches or exceeds the level of what it can produce.

For the same reasons. ambary. after a period of difficulty in 1976 and 1977 because of
the low purchase price available to the producer. and which reached a peak in 1979-1980
with 2.100 tons produced in expert-assisted cultivation. dropped again to 1.6bo tons in
1980-1981.

Compensation was obtained above all. as we have noted. from corn. since millet and
sorghum suffered from the short duration of the rainy season in 1980 and the plant
materials themselves which were used were relatively unproductive. Uith a goal of
21.h00 tons. the corn harvest totaled 5b.000 tons in 1979-1980. The total for 1980-
1981 is not yet known. but it is estimated at 70,000 tons. Even this represents only
the production staffed by the Mali Textile Company (CMDT). representing only a portion
of the crop growers. In fact. corn. once a simple garden crop. has enjoyed an undeni-
able popularity because of the average open field yields obtained (2.600 kg per hec-
tare in 1980-1981). which could be increased to 4 or 5 tons on the basis of mass

 

*They have also been utilized in the AVV [Development of the Volta Valleys] in Upper
Volta.

1*?

FOR nwsrmu "QB (“11"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

selection of local plants and seed stock. and further increases would be possible
thanks to the new varieties now being tested. This popularity. it is true. may re-
flect the mediocre sale price this year in 1982. On a national level. the increase in
the tonnage marketed for corn. millet and sorghum. taken together. can be estimated at
30,000 tons.

To these figures must be added those for rice. cultivated, within the framework of a
program previously financed by the ED? [European Development Fund) and now taken over
by the CMDT. on partially developed low-lying land. The (expert-assisted) production
came to 8,000 tons. with average yields of 1.300 kg per hectare.

In addition to industrial equipment (three cotton-ginning mills were built), the accom-
panying social measures are of great importance. Village associations. further training
of smiths in the manufacture and repair of farm tools. the training of young farmers and
the beginnings of mechanization (50 tractors currently in service) are gradually con-
tributing to the development of a new type of family farming using draft animals. im-
proved seed. chemical and organic fertilizers. with a "nest egg" made up of four or five
head of cattle. and an area of seven or eight hectares planted to cotton. sorghum and
corn.

On this basis. the Kali-Sud 2 project has brought about moderate development for cotton
(180,000 tons of cottonseed in the fifth year), a reduction in ambery cultivation. which
no longer seems profitable without Subsidies. an increase in millet and sorghum produc—
tion from 103.000 to 165,000 tons. with an increase in yields from 500 to 1.100 kg per
hectare, and an increase in corn from 70,000 to 150,000 tons, with an average yield of

3 tons per hectare. Linked with the continued development of the lowland areas (1.600
to 4.000 hectares). the production of paddy rice should reach 22,000 tons. with yields
of 1.800 kg per hectare.

Parallel campaigns have also been pursued with regard to other crops. such as sesame
and "niche", and nonnomadic livestock raising. Staffing and research will be strength-
ened. social measures will be pursued and extended. with a campaign to drill 400 wells
financed by Swiss aid in the Bougouni region. the development of a reforestation area
around Sikasso. the gradual extension of mechanization to the 250-tractor level. an ex-
tension of the ginning capacity to [90,000 tons. Supplementary operations, finally,
are planned to combat onchocerciasis. while the possibility of processing the Bourem
phosphates for farm use will he studied.

Irrigated Areas

The basic goal of these two programs c<ntinues to be to make Mali self-sufficient in
food. In 1980. grain still accounted lor 3.01 percent of the import total. The effort
made in Mali-Sud. like the infrastructure projects making it possible to create new ir-
rigated areas, should make it possible to absorb this remainder speedily and to plan
the marketing of a constantly increasing surplus in such neighboring countries as Sene-
gal. Guinea and Liberia. which do not have enough. This would thus. a posteriori, jus-
tify the flattering but overstated reputation of the former territory of Sudan, also
contributing to a better’foreign trade balance.

With this goal in mind. is the development of irrigated areas the best solution? In
the zones with sufficient average rainfall (Mali-Sud. Centre-Guest. Sens-Dogon), the
improvements in yields which such areas would make it possible to obtain under certain

he
l-‘OR «mvcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions should be compared with the high cost of carrying out and maintaining
this development. the training of farmers in a special technique, and the difficulties
caused by the population shifts this generally entails. The history of the Niger
Office is but the tail of the interplay of these factors. and still today the amorti-
zation of its now longstanding water distribution structure is not sufficient to
avoid regular recourse to foreign aid. The PAC contributed 9.6 million French francs
in 1981 to what is termed its "renovation." The Central Fund has allocated two
loans in the course of the past 2 years totaling 13.2 million French francs for

the building of the Coste canal (19 km). This will open up 40.000 hectares for

rice cultivation, and will make possible a substantial saving in energy by replacing
pumping facilities with the gravity principle. If it is true that rice cultivation
cannot be contemplated in Africa without cultivation improvements. the cost of this
canal (4.8 billion Mali francs) will nonetheless burden the cost price of paddy

rice for a long time yet to come.

It would seem to be less urgent in Mali to develop new areas. even if irrigated.
than to mobilize farmers to achieve greater compensation per hectare cultivated

on the land already available without investments other than those the cost of which
is tolerable thanks to the income from cotton (or any other possible crop. if such
is to be found. with comparable advantages).

From this point of view. it can be said that the advantages of the Selingue Dam.

which was put into use at the beginning of 1981 with 66 billion Mali francs in financing
from foreign aid (France. FRO, Canada. Italy and the Arab nations) have to do mainly
with energy. The ll-megawatt power of the turbine currently installed has already
doubled the electric current which can be supplied to Bamako. One of its secondary
effects will improvement of navigation conditions on the Niger between Koulikoro

and Markala. But the profitability of the 55,000 hectares of land the development

of which it theoretically makes possible is more problematical. The 9.000 individuals
who had to be displaced for the reservoir would not be sufficient to exploit that
area. either. presuming they were to agree to the experiment. and supplementary
manpower would have to be sought elsewhere. Moreover. the fact that the site has

not been cleared. because of the danger of upsetting the oxygen balance in the water.
also serves as a hindrance to the development of fishing. which might have alleviated
the difficulties in this undertaking.

Even assuming a hydraulic infrastructure serving an industrially equipped sugar
complex. as would be the case with the Bankoumans project in tin Selingue zone.

on which the Technip. with PAC and Central Fund financing. is making a feasibility
study. the profitability of developing 3.000 hectares is doubtful.

This approach should doubtless be corrected when it comes to regions in which low
average rainfall makes irrigation technology necessary. The Labezanga Dam. to the
southeast of Gao. would thus be juStified. but it would be reasonable to coordinate
its development with that of Kandadji. in Niger. 100 km downstream. which would
make it possible to irrigate 100,000 hectares and would provide a supply of 800
gigawstts per hour. The same factors obtain for Dire, where the solar plant should
make possible the irrigation of 3,000 hectares. In 1981 the PAC provided a subsidy
of 3.4 million French francs for this project. To speak the truth. the cost of
these installations should result in their orientation toward crops more remunerative
than basic foodstuffs (cotton. early vegetables. fruits), since the organization

of domestic marketing of grains is such as to offset the disadvantages there of
regional crops destined for export.

1:9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
II!“ VI I OMIIIDI on]. uni--

Economic Balances

Eliminating grain imports and replacing them gradually with exports is obviously

a current focus for the economy of Mali. However, actions designed to improve the
traditional balances--farm diversification and mining research and exploitation--
should not be neglected as a result. The 19 percent of the import total for which
the oil bill accounts can only lead to hopes for favorable results in the ELF
[Gasoline and Lubricants Company of France] activities in the Geo sector, Hacina
and Araouna. and those of 3880 and EL? in the Taoudeni basin. even if only with

a view to oil production limited to local needs. There are no positive indication
as yet to justify any prediction. The search for uranium undertaken by the Japanese
Power-Nuclear and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation (PNC) firm in the Gao sector
is reported to be more encouraging.

The mineral resources listed are numerous. but their scattering in the volume of
known reserves makes exploitation unlikely. In Kalana. gold extraction. pursued

with technical assistance from the Soviets. yields 1.8 tons per year. to which are
added 470 kg of silver. This effort will be continued for 3 years. However, the
equipment loan of 3 million rubles (240 million French francs) granted by the Russians.
repayable in 10 years. deferred for 2. and at 4 percent interest. is not the bargain
of the century. Because of the volume and geographic location of the bauxite in
Kemeba. to the southwest of Bamako. it is not especially attractive to the large
international companies. The deposits of iron and magnetite in Dating and Bafoulabe
are still being studied by the Russians and by the Geological and Mineral Prospecting
Office (sum). with FAC financing.

we have excluded from this study the public and semipublic industrial sector. con-
ceived on the basis of the irrational approach which prevailed in many African countries
after independence was won in the 1960‘s. The failings in technical and commercial
administration subsequently caused the initial inadequacy of the profitability co-
efficients to deteriorate. Last week we reported the total of the state company

debts (p 3279). but an analysis of the demographic, psychological and social conse-
quences of this experiment remains to be undertaken.

It is acknowledged that 20 of these 26 bodies should be eliminated. it is unlikely.
however. that the government will take the risk. This aberration would create dis-
content in the higher ranks of governnknt employees. whose political influence the
government had hoped to use with regard to the wage earners in industry and trade
and lower—ranking government employees. the final arbiters. along with the students
and the military. in crises affecting the regime in Bamako. as in many other Third
Horld capitals.

Hhat is most likely is that once the wage debts have been covered thanks to the

French loan. and the popular reaction thereby been offset in part. the authorities
will try to encourage private capital contributions to these companies. where the
trade offices are concerned. their role remains limited. to the benefit of the private
sector. The Malian Agricultural Products Office (OPAH). which marketed only 6 percent
of the millet production and 30 percent of the rice in 1981. but accounts for 50
percent of the Mali Development Bank credit state companies. will be limited to

the function of supplying public departments. The Cement Company of Mali (SOCIHA).
whose annual production has dropped from 50,000 to 15,000 tons, will be reinforced

by uerman and Saudi loans. The SOCAH (canned foods). in which major errors caused

the loss of 75 percent of its production of tomato paste, is only surviving thanks

to two loans. totaling 5.6 million French francs. granted by the Central Fund. Only

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the contribution of the FRO. in the amount of 1 billion Mali francs. can save the
Bourem phosphate exploitation undertaken by the SONAREM [National Company for Pros-
pecting and Exploitation of Malian Mining Resources]. Parallel to this. a trend
toward the private sector is strengthening. The Industrial Shea Company of Mali
(SIKA-MALI) has just been established. with a capital of 1 billion Mali francs.

52 percent of it contributed by German and Belgian firms and the balance by Mali
merchants. An affiliate of the Central Fund. the PROPARCO. has underwritten 10
percent of the capital of Great Mali Mills. along with the SOMDIAA and a Lebanese
enterprise, to establish a food complex in Koulikoro. for which moreover the Central
Fund has granted a loan of 15 million French francs.

A11 in all. it could be said that the financial contributions expected by the govern-
ment of Mali in connection with its entry into the UMOA [Western African Monetary
Union]* cannot be justified by a desire for reform alone. What is required is a
reorganization of the economy. first of all in the primary sector and then in the
industrial sector. by cautious but determined chipping away. on both the capital

and management levels. at the supposedly irreversible structures established by

Mr Modibo Keita. often ridiculed but nonetheless solid and skillful. Gen Mousse
Traore, if he can achieve this goal. will finally have replaced the self-pity which
has paralyzed Mali for too long with confidence.

Agricultural Results for the Mali-Sud 1 Operation 1975-1982

Goal 1979—80 Achievement 1980-81 Achievement

Cotton
Area (in hectares) 136.000 118.612 102.362
Production (in tons) 163.600 161.966 102.000
Yield (kg per hectare) 1.062 1.197 1.000
Expert-assisted operations 91, 800 75.661 68.765
Ambary
Area (in hectares) 66.000 3.601 3.686
Production (in tons) 3.000 2.081 1.660
Yield (kg per hectare) 700 658 671
Expert-assisted operations 7.600 12.252 10.963
Millet-Sorghum
Area (in hectares) 300.000 118.860 116.338
Yield (kg per hectare) 800 i900
Corn
Area (in hectares) 16.600 26.271 --
Production (in tons) 21,600 53.396 (70.000)
Yield (kg per hectare) 1.500 2.200 (2.600)
Expert—assisted operations 26.300 23.310 23.321
Rice (developed lowlands)
Area (in lmctares) 6.600 1.358 1.551
Production (in tons) 8.800 3.280 --
Yield (kg per hectare) 2.200 2.600 -
Expert-assisted operations 6.800 1.066 1.111

TEoncerning the matter.of Mali's joining the UMOA. see the article in the 11 December
1981 HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS. P 3779.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Agricultural Results for the Mali-Sud 1 Operation 1975-1982 (continued)
Goal 1979-80 Achievement 1980-81 Achievement

Rice (undeveloped lowlands)

Area (in hectares) 7.200 4.198 3,387
Production (in tons) 6.500 -- --
Yield (kg per hectare) 900 - —-
Expert-assisted operations 2,500 2.100 2.461

Estimates for Mali-Sud 2 Operation 1983—1988

Year 0 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5

Cotton

Area (in hectares) 118.000 120.400 122.800 125.200 127.600 130.000

Production (in tons) 142.000 148.000 156.000 164.000 172.000 180.000

Yield (kg per hectare) 1.200 1.230 1.270 1.310 1.348 1.385

Expert-assisted operations 75.000 75.000 76.000 76.600 77.300 78.000
Ambary

Area (in hectares) 1.500 1,500 1.000 700 500 200

Production (in tons) 1 .000 1 .000 666 466 333 130

Yield (kg per hectare) 666 666 666 666 666 666

Expert-aesisted operations 6.000 6,000 -- -- - 1.000
Millet-Sorghum

Surface (in hectares 115.000 122.000 129.000 136.000 143.000 150.000

Production (in tons) 103.500 112.240 122.550 136.000 150.150 165.000

Yield (kg per hectare) 900 920 950 1.000 1.050 1.100
Corn

Surface (in hectares 29.000 33.200 37.250 41.700 46,000 50,000

Production (in tons) 70.000 83.000 98.712 116.760 133.400 150.000

Yield (kg per hectare) 2,300 2.500 2.650 2.800 2.900 3.000
Rice (developed lowlands)

Surface (in hectares 1.600 -- -- —- —- 4.000

Production (in tons) 4,000 -- -- -- —- 14.000

Yield (kg per hectare) 2.500 2.700 2.900 3.100 3,300 3.500
Rice (undeveloped lowlands) '

Surface (in hectares 4.200 4.800 5.600 6.400 7.200 8.000

Production (in tons) 3.780 4.560 5.300 6,400 7.200 8.000

Yield (kg per hectare) 900 950 950 1.000 1,000 1.000
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500030059-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Financial Commitment of Aid and Cooperat
to Kali in 1981
(in millions of French francs)

Rural Sector

Fruitena Project 1.6
Reorganization of peanut production 5
Hopti II rice operation 1.8
Renovation of the Niger Office 6
Kayes-Nara livestock breeding (water)
zone department 2
Dire agricultural area (wheat share) 3.4
Peanuts for confectionary purposes
~ (second section) 1.5
' Renovation of the Niger Office (No 2) 3.6
Industries and Mines
Diamond syndicate 2
Gold syndicate 1.8
Infrastructures
Telecommunications Department 0.6
- Diaba bridge on National Route 6 0.9
Dredging of the Timbuktu canal 0.8
Social Sector
Public health 3.1
Cultural Sector
Equipping of the national film-
making industry 0.3
Grand Total 34.4

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horcux et Cic Paris 198].

5157
C80: lo 7l9/382

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500030069-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

Mali territory. The seriousness of this problem recently led the Mali government
to set up a state-owned firm-~Petrostock--in order to carry out a policy of
building up security reserves and distributing petroleum products. The trip

of the Mali delegation to Algeriera enabled it to present Hali's need for technical

SOVIET COOPERATION 0N GOLD-A delegation led by Robert Tieble N'Daw, Hali's
minister of industrial development and tourism, went to the Soviet Union from
9-12 December 1981. The Soviet-Mali talks led to the signing of a new inter-
governmental agreement on future economic cooperation between the two countries.
The signing of this agreement was the beginning of a new stage in the development
of Soviet-Mali economic cooperation. said Mr N'Daw. In accordance with this
agreement, Soviet and Mali organizations will cooperate in the exploitation of a
gold mine in Kslens. The exploitation of the gold ore deposits in this region
should provide an important source of funds needed for national development and
for the improvement of the country's financial position. In order to provide

the Kalsna firm with a permanent supply of electricity. an electricity transmission
line 120 kilometers long will he built between Selingue and Knlans with the
assistance of the USSR. The implementation of these projects has a special place
in Hali's new five-year economic development plan. {Text} [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1886. 1 Jan 82 p 25] [COPYRIGHTz Rene
Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 9855

C80: 4719/464

5h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOUTH AFRICA SEE}! SUPPORTING NEH DES‘IABILIZATION CAMPAIGN
London NEH AHICAN in English No 172, Jan 82 p 2!.

[Article by David Word ond Martin Plant]

conﬁrms. norhr buoys loodiutotho
Wonportofﬂsh'owsrshlovnup.
‘ tho tonponry doom! of tho
port’s main harbour. Mwooko oorlior
mod and nil hridcss ooor Boiro wore
W.mokiuthocrociolum
linktozmhdwo'ohwdcotUntoli.

Th-oovonto.inthoviswoftho
SADCCnhMoro'odiroctm-ckon
them-noonol‘rocionslmnopm
rohohllltotion. ond oppoorstobo dolihor-
oiolyrohtodtothisuootinf.

Tho honblna woro not cor-riot! out
dlrsctly by tho Smith Akicln Dofucs
Pores hnthy tho Mumblquo Rooiuonco
Movsrosnt (nu). Tho Mozambican
outhaitlss m thot tho “RM io

Don‘thlonsu

Just as Jouoo Sovimbi'o South
Milan-W Units is atom. to

lto on ”loan. If thoy connot hondlo

tho m thoy should notblomo no“
EVldonco io mount . howovsr. thot
tho m was sad "mud

ofthoon
mm
quontitiooolomunitioomoodbytho
HEM. mud in both English and
Afrihons.

Thsm

lotodrooouppli-lotho
troop hovo oloo found

maximum-aims“
WWdeilaorintholou
1970a ltwoo [iron strsinhuboos. noor
Untamhythssnithlﬂms "gins.
meuofororodiouotion

Ghioh dinotoil ﬂsmly onti-l-‘rolimo
month Mort Moumbiquo wors
oloo oot up. At tho time. tho MRM woo
ooomllod ontiroly by tho Rhodooion ooo-
urity forcoo who. themselves. wors cru-
dolly roliont on South Ali-icon militory
oooiotoncs.

Following Zimbobwo's indopondsnco
the ontiro opsrotion. including the rodio
notion, woo movod intoSouth Africa and
is m hood ot Gszmkulo in tho North-
on Wool close to tho Moumbiquo
hordsr. Tho momma ofhoth Monm-
biquo ond Zimhsbwc clolm to hovo pro»
cioo dotoils of tho hose. Prime Ministor
Rohsrt Manh- hoo occusod South Afrioo
of ironing upwards of 5.000 former fol-
guano ofBiohop Momma olonssido the

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82o00850R000500030059-1

COPYRIGHT:

FOR ()FFIUM. USE ONLY

'l‘ocounterect the problem of the MM.
the Zimbebwe end Moumbique govern-
ments have agreed e joint militery
etretegy end both Prime Minieter
Maybe end Preeident Semore Mechel
encoded e specie] summit meeting et
Umtelleerlierthleyeerinordertodeviee
en enti-MRM etretegy. The problem.
however. eeeme to he eeceleting.

Pleyleg hem

Since Jenuery it ie eetilneted thet
morethen 500people hevebeen killedin
the conﬂict. including 200 “RM guerril-
leeendBOMoeembiceneoldlere lnper.
ticuler. the tecticeoflhe MRM eupley-
in; hevoe with the helium edminietre-
tlon’e villege beeed etretegy. The corn-
munel ville‘ee in remote rurel ereee of
centrel Monmln‘que ere fevourite guer-
rille tenete end Zlmhebwe ie feclng e
minorrefuceecrieie ee peeeente flee from
the MRM ectoee the border.

The totel number of 410'“ Mom
in Zimheh‘ve le now over 3.N0 end
increeeingetereteol‘ﬁperdeyfhmie
e reel denser or the fighting alluding

movement eeroee the border. One Zeno-
PFMP repreeentingthe hudereree bee
celled («urgent eid. There in etlll e wer

protecuon of the government". he eeye.
The ecele of the We guerrille oper.
etione ie echievina exectly the kind of
politicel end economic deuehllhtion
thet Pretorie deeiree. The recent bridge
denim ie e good exemple. Although the
bombing took plece in Mozambique. the
greeteet impeet will he felt in Zimhehwe.
At preeent. 80 per cent of Zlntbebwe'e
trede goee through South Afrlcen pom
but the pom of Beire end Mewto 00‘»
the cheepcet end ehorteet mum to the

m 50weenteheepee

Beire for exemple ie ”tinted to be
approximetely 50 per cent cheeper then

CSO: 4 700/692

movemente en even meter eecrlﬂce.
Therefore. it ie not eurwieing thet the

1981 IC Hegezinee Ltd

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA

~ROPOZ~00850R000500030059~9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

FOREIGN TRADE REGULAIIONS, ORGANIZATION REVIEWED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1883. 11 Dec 81 p 3324

[Text] In our edition No 1682 of February 1978. p 325. we published "reliable
information on the possibilities of sales" to Mozambique, extracted from the bulle-
tin of the Belgian Froegn Trade Office.

The same source is taking a fresh look at the question, in a different form. both
more concise and more complete, for it is studying not only the possibility of sales
to Mozambique, but also possibilities of buying in that country. where foreign trade
is a state monopoly under the control of "trade centrals."

Exports from Mozambique to foreign countries are handled mainly by the following
centrals: Carbomoc (coal); Citrinos de Mocambique (citrus fruits); Mademo (tropical
wood); Magma (minerals); Mabor de Mocamlnque (tires and tubes); Riopele Texteis
(fabric); Companhia Vidreire de Mocambique (hollow and sheet glass).

with regard to imports to Mozambique from other countries. the following system is
in force: Bach ministry receives an allocation of hard currency for the acquisition
of imported products. while the industries that make use of the latter are respons-
ible for scheduling deliveries of supplles. Only after the ministry concerned has
approved that plan does the purchasing center call for bids. The call for bids.
while notifying the traditional suppliers in each industry. is normally addressed

to all potential suppliers without distinction. Other things being equal. prefer-

ence is given to socialist countries.

Two other conditions are especially important in Mozambique: delivery time
requirements. because of the urgency of getting certain activities in operation; and

delays in payment because of structural foreign exchange deficit.

Despite the essential role played by the centrsla. the foreign supplier is at an
advantage if he contracts directly with the user. In such a case, it is recommended
that he have the purchasing center verify on the scene the quality of the product

imported and its proper utilization.

Here is a list of the principal import centers in Mozambique. It should be under-
stood that some of them are also involved in the export of Mozambican products to

other countries:

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Enacomu: imports of food and textile products, export of tea. copra. cajou
[translation unknown]. salt, and other agricultural products; Intermecano: imports
of vehicles. agricultural equipment. and spare parts; Interquimica: imports of
seeds, fertilizer. chemical products. pesticides, insecticides; Interfranca: tax-
free imports; Intermetal/Equitec: imports of industrial equipment and current

consumption material; Intermetal/Bdime: imports of raw materials. connecting
materials, iron, steel, and nonferrous and other metals; Pescom Internacional:
exports of crustaceans. imports of deep—frozen fish, canned fish, and fishmeal;
Equipesca: importing and distribution of water pumps and irrigation equipment;
Dimac: importing and distribution of construction equipment; Eneme: importing and
distribution of office equipment. typewriters. computers, calculators. etc.; Hedimoc:
imports and exports of pharmaceutical products.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

9516
C80: 4719/2358

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

INCREASE IN lNFLATION--According to Nigeria's Federal Office of Statistics (F08).
the rate of inflation in Nigeria was 22.7 percent in the first quarter of this
year. compared with only 8 percent the first quarter of the previous year, while
the rate for 1980 as a whole was only 9.9 percent. If it is difficult to get
exact figures on Nigeria's rate of inflation. with the rate varying according to
the source (NTH of 22 May 1981. p 142l), one thing nevertheless seems clear:

the rate has been particularly high this year. The Central Bank and the F08 both
recognize this. According to the Central Bank. the consumer price index in Lagos
rose 23.9 percent in a 5-month period. while the price of food products alone rose
33.5 percent in the same period. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1883, 11 Dec 81 p 3309] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux

et Cie Paris 1981] 9516

SHIPS UNDER NIGERIAN FLAC--Hore information has come to light about Nigeria's
intention to open a London office for the registration of ships sailing under its
flag (MTH of 13 November. p 2883). A British shipowner. Hr Nicholas Churcher.

has in fact reached agreement with the African state for the latter to open such an
office in the British capital on 1 January. Only about 100 ships were registered
under the Nigerian flag at the beginning of 1980. but Mr Nicholas Churcher believes
that figure could reach 3.000, or even more than the number under the Panamanian or
the Liberian flag. The scheme would bring Nigeria only 1 million pounds in regis-
tration fees per year and would creatu no jobs in the country. for the shipowners
would not be required to hire Nigerian crews. Last May an attorney named Richard
Dresner was considering opening a center in London where shipowners could register
their ships under the flag of convenience of their choice. but this scheme was
abandoned because of opposition from the seamen's union and from a number of
deputies in the House of Commons. [Text] [Paris NARCNES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1883. 11 Dec 81 p 3309] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux

et Cie Paris 1981] 9516

JAPANESE [DAN FOR IRRIGATION-~Japan recently awarded Nigeria a loan worth 16.9
million yen (49 million nairas) for construction of the latter's Lower Anambra
Irrigation Project. The loan agreement was signed in Tokyo by Mr Victor Hasi.
Nigeria's finance minister. and Mr T. Nosomi. president of the Japanese Overseas
Economic Cooperation Fund. The project. which is part of Nigeria's Green Revolu-
tion. should be finished in the next 5 years and lead to annual production of
50.000 tons of rice on an area of 5.000 irrigated hectares. [Text] [Paris
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1883. 11 Dec 81 p 3309]
[COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 9516

CSO: 6719/356
59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RHANDA

BRIEFS

1982 BUDGET--The operational budget of the Republic of Rwanda for fiscal year
1982 has been set and balanced at 16.2 Rwanda francs (1.62 million dollars);
likewise a development budget of 3.5 billion (35 million dollars). Although
receipts have increased by 12 percent. the austerity policy adopted because of
limited financial resources will continue. due in particular to the price of
coffee in the world markets. Many financing projects are contained in the 1982
budget. in particular the establishment of a national development council
(legislative assembly), a program for soil conservation and reforestation. school
reform. and the construction of administrative buildings. Rwanda must also face
the problems of repayment of ‘ts foreign debt and subsidies to government-'wned
firms. The ministry has planned steps to increase income: an increase in Highway
tolls. a national lottery, and greater vigilance at customs offices. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS No 1886, in French 1 Jan 82 p 39]
[copynlcnr: Rene Horeaux et Cie Paris 1982] 9855 '

TEA FACTORIES PROM BELGIUM--The Belgian firm Soberi has just signed two new
contracts in Rwanda. They are for the delivery of two "ready-to-use" tea
factories, one in Pfunds and the other in Gisovu, with a production capacity of
900 tons per year and 1800 tons per year respectively. The total investment
involved is 350 million Belgian francs and will be financed by BAD (African
Development Bank). These two contracts are added to two tea factories which have
already been assembled by Soberi in the same country for the same client. [Text]
lParia MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1886. 1 Jan 82 p 39]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1982] 9855

C50: 47l9/464

(\0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "I-‘HCIM. USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

RUMORED NATIONAL UNION-~There are persistent rumors circulating in Dakar about a
measure which President Abdou niouf could take in regard to the 1983 parliamentary
elections: The chief of state would request the fornation of a national union,
which would group together other Senegalese political organizations around the
Socialist Party. [Text] [Paris APRIQUE-ASI! in French No 257. 18-31 Jan 82 p 17]

[COPYRIGH'N 1982 Afrique-Aeie] 11915

CSO: 4719/511

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SW1

DEATH OF PROMINENT BLACK CIVIL RIGHTS LEADER zmmso
widen NEW AFRICAN in English Jun 82 p 43
[Fran the Liberation men: "The Day They Did e 'Biko' on ernge"]

next) When 3m. Blko died violently while in South Ail-icon police

cuetodyin1977.hewesvlnuaiiyumbySAWhliee.Nw.ﬁve

years later. another

pruninent
violeniiyandWhiteSouthAiriceie

bieckcivilridrtsﬂghterhnsdied

tryingtoiuehwthematterﬂew

Africenhereneysirlbtnetoyetenotherbmvebieckectivitisiwho
wesmderedmlelncuetody

GRIFFITH MXENGB'S wife
Nonynmeeel could not believe whet ehe
eew when ehe went to identify her hue-
band'e body at e government mortuary in
Durbanﬂieheedhedbeenbaehedin.
Hie cor-e had been cut off. Hie etomech
ripped open. Hie whole body wee a mepof
wounde mode by a ehe'p inetrument.

When newe of hie gruoeome deeth ilret
become known early on the My morn-
ing. black leader-tend the block commun-
ily at large were numbed with ehock end
diebelief. Mxenge wee no ordinary men.

Yet to the white community hie death
wee paeaed off no juet enother "black
death”. The comment of the newe editor
of a daily newqeper in Durben typified
white ignorance. When told of hie death
by a reporter. the news editor aelied:
"Who ia Grlﬂith Mxenge?“

The truth la thet ernge'e death in of
similar eignlﬂcance to thetofSteve Bike.
Both were men who had coneidereble
inﬂuence in bleclr politice

Mxenge. 46. was the father of three
young children end one of the country'-
moat prominent black lawyere. He knew
the eufl‘ering. the eepiratione and the
goaie of the dieenfranchieed Bleche.

The cruelwodd

He carried out hie legal work with hie
wife Nonyameeel. aleo en attorney. from
officee in the block erea of Durban. A
former member of the banned African
Nationel Congreee. Mxenge gradueted u
a lawyer hem the Univereity of Natal in
l975 after being releeeed from Robben
ielend a few yeere eerlier.

He eerved three yeere on the notorioue
prieon ielend aﬂer being found guilty of
alleged ANC ectivitiee. 0n hie releeee in
the early ID10a he wee prohibited from
continuing with hie law etudlee becauee
of a banning order.

But when he started hie prectice he
became one of the moot eought alter
politicel civil righte iawyere in South
Africa. He travelled widely to repreeent
political ectiviete throughout the coun-
"3"-

He was initiated into the cruel world of
political trials when he wee the inatruct-
ing attorney for the widow of Joeeph
Mdluli. the ANC member whodied while
in detention on March )9. 1978.
Although he wee the Mdluli family
lewyer. Griffith Mxenge wae deteined in

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OOPYRIQH‘:

CSO:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mulch ofthet year and held without trial
for 103 deya.

Thereeher he wee the inetructina
attorney in many political triale in the
varioue oentree of South Africa. ape
cially Durban, Pietermaﬂtxhurg. Cape
Town. Seat London and Johenneeburg.

Re waaeleotheattorneyforthefemily
of Mapetla Mohepi. the eeeretary-
ceneral of the banned South ”flan
Studente' Organisation (SASO),
while in police eluted: in Port Elizabeth
on July t5, 1916.

exile.

More recently. Mxenge wee actively
involved in the nntloSAIC
the Nate! lndian Concreae Anti-Republic
Committee which wee eetebliehed to pro-
teat againet the 26th ennivereery ofthe
white republic. He was alao a founder»
member of the new black new-paper
Ukueo eterted by the bennedjournellet
Marimuthu Suhratnoney. and of the
Releaae Mandela Committee.

1981 IC Magazines Limited

4700/705

Defence Force raid on ANC
houaee in Matola in Moumbique. Grif-
ﬁth Mange attempted to get their bodies
to South Africa. When thie failed he made
all the errenpmente for the femiliee of
the deed men to travel to Maputo for the
funeral that wee addreaeed by ANC pree-
ident Oliver Temho '
t Samara Mechel

be eo brutally eeeeev'
They can kill thouaande of
xencee but they will etill not kill the
black people'e queet for liberation."

The vice-president of the Natel lndien
Congreee. MJ. Neidoo. said that Mxenge
would not want the black people to mourn
his death but rather continue with the

been in vein. The
etruule for which Griﬂlth Mxence eon-
trihuted eo much will be eventually won
by the dernoeratioloving people of this
country.“ Naidoo eeid.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIUAL USE ONLY

ANC'S SEVENTIBTH ANNIVERSARY MARKED

scum AFRICA

mndon NEW AFRICAN in English Jan 82 pp 28-29

[Special Report. by Abdou Berrndat

(Text!

THE QUESTION of how the African
National Congraee hae eurvived 1o yeara
of ruthleee and methodical repreeeion ie
one that will occupy fitture students of
‘SouthAfricanhletoryformanyalongyear.

Perhape thoee future students will
never learn the true aecret; only thoee
who have lived through come. at least. of
the extraordinary evente of thoae 70
year-e can have any real appreciation of
what they have meant and of the abiding
spirit of freedom that has driven men
pan the point of death in purauit of their
innerrnoet beliefe.

Onloohen

Maybe the white maetera of todey
ehould be among the moat earneet eeclt-
ere after that elueive truth. if they were
to come anywhere cloae to it in their
reeearchee. they might discover that in
70 yaara they have not been able to
deetroy the ANC; inetead through politi-
cal repreeeion. direct amult and all the
aubveraive cunning the apartheid state
haa brought to bear. the movement hae
grown and flourished to a national mirt-
tanoa that heare compariaon with any of
the great freedom movementa of history.
The white maatere might even come to
reeliee that it ie their policiea that are
doomed, not thoee of the ANC.

To underetand the preeent. let ua look
at the peat Once armed African mi»-
tanoe u the European aettlere wee
cruehed in the iaet half of the 19th
century. and after the Britieh defeated
the Boer-a. the eaae with which the
Whiter were able to patch up their rival-

Git

"'ihe H111 to Be Free:

rice and eat up a colonial etate to their
common advantage confounded the
'nativea"(aathey indeed were). 11m Afri-
cana were reduced to the etetue of mere
onlookera of hiatory unfolding in their
own land.

Deep aoul-eeerching on thairpart led to
that hietor'ic ’ in Bloemfontein
when, on January 8. 1912. eighteen
montha aﬁar the netting up of the Union.
the South African Nativea' National
Congreaa wee born.

The generation of Sol Plaaﬁe and
John Dube. elected ﬁrst Secretary Gen-
eral and President respectively of what

wee noon to become eirnply the African
National Congme. had in fact under-
stood that laclt of unity on the part of the
Africane had been the prime reeeon for
their defeat.

It ia thia leaeon. so bitterly learned.
which aucceaaivo leaders of the ANC
have had to repeat time and time again in
reeponae to varioua challenger-a from the
left or the right.

In their first deliberations. the conven-
ers of the Bloemfontein meeting agreed
that the were between Xhoou and the
Sothoe. the Zulua and the Tonga had to
be buried for over.

"me Congress In Unique Be-
cause Its Consioueness Tran-
scend: Class Berriers'

Thia anti-ethnic and anti-tribal stance
hencharacterieed the oldest orcaniaation
car since - no mean achievement in a
land where the rulera have attempted to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANC' 9 Survival Secret“)
I-d hf.“ uln-uﬂk G. C-Er-Eﬂ. Gal-CH €50

E. >333. 3&5. 23 09—25%.
= (3 E 93 can... a... $39 59858 R.

9: 593303 9... «35a 5:...- 2...
.356 98:3... 38.5.: 338.. :5
E38225 .53.!— 3. 28 2837.3
.23 a... .932. 588; as 8:: on
.285.

.3:- =8. set $79.35 .8031.
1-. 8332.3 95.5 :58 312 we:
«3... . .5: 8 v35: .2. 8 3.38.
:37. 16:. p- . 2x. :8 :— ocsn macs?
5:39

> 9:... 9:50 we v38... E :8 83:
$358 a. 9. >20 nan {Ear .8258
m: :- Fia‘. .. 5: a. 83.2—
E. 8:22.. 9.2.3 o..- aSSB-E 1E3
.- 8 8.0in .3 5. Bow-— Pain 5.. 3
32.35 .53; (so: 3. 8 no So a:

Irllh ’53-» Ihhlr
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600030069-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lectual. urban and "petty bourgeois"
nature of moat ANC leedera.

Thia explanation. which in fact tgnoree
or pretends to ignore the more complex
nature of the movement. fella preciaely
beoauae it cannot account for ita mili-
enoe and growth.

How. altar ita banning in 1961. wee the
ANC able to aurvive underground? How.
today. deeplte what may appear as
unaurmountable logistical problem,
groupe ofUrnlthonto We Sizwe guerrillea
can launch epecteculer operationa and
regroup inaide the country. can perhepa
neverbeexpleined fully.

But eurely aome of the international
recognition accorded to the ANC (and
many ofita internal moceeeee) are due to
the men and women who direct it.

Theae cadrea who alter the 1976 upria-
inga have had to cope with taxing new
problema like the inﬂux of "Meet.
many of them children. aeern precleely to
have made their guiding rule the
attachment to the baaic principlee which
had allowed theirorgenieetion to aurvive
and to become the inepiretion of all the
other nationalist movementa in Africa.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Ic Magazines Limited

CSO: 4700/705

ll.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600030069-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOHIC WIS SAID MISDIRECTED
London NEH AFRICAN in English No 172, Jan 82 p 19

[Article by Guy Arnold: "Zerbo Gore the Wrong Balance"]

”9“] Upper Volta. staggering under mane unemployment and inﬂation
andoneoithepooreetnetioneintheworld. ieconoentratinoon
dubiouepreetlgeproleciewhilethemeiorltyoithepeople have
empty bellies. GuyArmld reports

IN A CLASSIC one of putting the cart
before the hone. Colonel Zerbo'a regime
aaema bent on eapenaive preatige pro-
)eete while the country is crying out for
agricultural reform and greater emp-
loyment.

Upper Volta. landlocked in the Sahel
belt. it one of the pooreet nationa in the
world with the GNP of late than 8200 per
head. The drought of the 1970a tool:
heavy toll of the country‘s meagre
reaourcee. The rising coat of importe
puahed inﬂation to ateggering prepor~
tiona and contributed to the downfall of
the Lemiaana regime in 1980. Today.
although the government haa announced
a policy of concentrating on the rural
rector. it ia pureulng malor development
projecta which tend to belie the ateted
am.

For example. the government la
ing ahead with work on the Sahe rail.
way axlenaion to the north - awkrna —
although an far it haa only obtained
financee for lOOhma. The railway haa
been criticiaed ea economically unviahle
hut ia defended by the regime becauae of
tie aocial ea well ea ita economic value.

Mot-kins

Great empheaia upon rural develop.
ment. therefore. maltea aanae but the

conatreinta - whatever policies the gov-
ernment adopte - are formidable. Apart
from unemployment and inflation there
ia almoat no aurplua capital generated at
home. Poor infrastrucutre and lack of
altilla meant that the country it depen-
dent upon continuing foreign aid.

Thia in part explains the recent over-
aeea viaite by members of the govern-
ment. Theae viaite. however. have aleo
been part of a aeerch for recognition or
‘Iegitimacy‘ for the regime. In the first
venture out of the country ainoe the coup
which brought him to power. Colonel
Zerbo viaited aaveral Weat African coun-
triea laat autumn while Foreign Miniater
Felix ‘f‘iantaraboum went to London.
New Yorlt and the UN.

While in Ghana. leet September. Col-
linlta between the two countriee. A lake is
to be made navigable and werehoueea
and depota are to be built at Tome to
handle Voltan goode 0n the cane trip.
Zarbo viaited Ivory Goeat. Togo. Benin
and Hall.

In London. making a determined bid to
shoe that Upper Volta ie not tied only to
France. Tientareboum, outlined
hie country's economic needs agriculture
and mining both require foreign inveet-
merit and hopefully acme would be forth-

coming from Britain. He aleo nought
incraeaed British trade.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
These overseas visits were also
designed to enhance the image of the
regime. One line being advanced is that
for the time being at least. Upper Volta
simply cannot siford ineﬂ'icient democ~
racy. Whether the regime will be able to
demonstrate that military rule. however
well intentioned. is more efficient
remians to be seen. The government is
trying hard to show that it is open in its
attitudes and that the mayority of the
people ere united behind itsdevelopinent
programme.

The trouble with this image is the
developing and potentially explosive row
with the trade unions. At the beginning
of November. Zerbo banned strikes until
further notice. Warnings were issued to
the trade unions and especially to
Zoumana Traore. the secretary- neral
of the Con/Damion Syndicate Vo
who had become an outspoken critic“ of
the regime. He was told to curb his
criticisms.

Tensions had in any case been growing
between the regime and the unions Col-
onel Zerbo. however. denies that restric-
tions upon the unions involve their sup-
pression but clearly there is a deep and
apparently growing rift between the two
sides.

By the end of November. Traore had
disappeared and was being sought by the
police. He resigned from the commission
which was investigating the Laminna
regime as e protest against the govern-
ment's ban on strikes.

ColonelZerbostillinsiet hisdecreewill
remain in force until a social contract
governing the right to strike II
A troubled economic background makes
this government-union confrontation
potentially all the more dangerous to the
stability of the country.