APPROVHD 0-0" HthAuh: 2007!!)2100: CIA “DP-2 OOICOHOOO‘IWOOOOCO o
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040060-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE (XILY

JPRS L/8424
27 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 632

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400604)
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets '
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items.are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGl'l' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING (KNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED RER£IN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

POUO No. 632

Commas

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Arrival in Mozambique of GDB Htlitsry Advisers Reported
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS. 9 Mar 79)........

Briefs
Hall-Ghana. Ivory Coast Agreesents

ANGOLA

Briefs
Volvo Buses

BENIN

Briefs
General Bopulstion Census

BOTSWANA

Briefs
Dlsnond Produétlon

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

People Utah To Put an End to Bokssss Regine
(Josn Ngnsnsn Tl “guts; AFRIQUB-ASIE. l9 Mar-l Apr 79).
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040060-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

S CONTENTS (Continued)
' GUINEA-DISSAU
Briefs
- French Agricultural Assistance

Delegation to Brazil
- Agricultural Improvements

IVORY COAST
Briefs
SIVOHAR Ships
Franco-Ivorian Maneuvers
Oil Platform
Refinery Expansion
MADAGASCAR

Briefs
Resumption of Petroleum Research
Fuels: Sone Problems
MALI
_ Briefs
- Verdict May Be Annnlled
Japan Agricultural Delegation

RHODESIA

Violators of Sanctions Reported
(Mohamed Haiga; JBUNB AFRIQUB. 11 Apr 79).........

SOUTH AFRICA

Briefs
Relations with Brazil

TOGO

Briefs
BOAD Snell Business Loan

' UPPER VOLTA

Briefs
Pams Dam Projects

-b-
you omcm. us: our

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100040060-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ARRIVAL IN MOZAMBIQUE 0? con MILITARY ADVISORS REPORTED
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEERS in French 9 Mar 79 p 648

[Text] Some 500 GDR military advisors have reportedly arrived in Mozambique
during the weeks preceding the 22 and 26 February visit to this country by
Erich honeckar, chairman of the State Council of the GDR. This was announced
on 25 February by the Sunday weekly MELT AM SONNTAG of the Springer group.

The newspaper refers to information issued by Western intelligence services.
It adds that "many more hundreds" of East Germans are reportedly stationed
in Zambia. According to the “BLT AM SONNTAG. "this could be the prelude

to a large offensive mounted by the black nationalist movements against
Rhodesia."

Again according to the weekly, the East German military advisers in Mozambique
have reportedly been assigned the task of training Robert Mugabe's troops.

the leader of the ZANU [Zimbabwe African National Union]. as will as

Joshua Nkomo's troops, the leader of the ZAPU [Zimbabwe African People's
Union], especially in the use of the SAM 7 Soviet missiles, one of which
recently downed s Rhodesian transport plane.

Diplomatic circles and observers in Berlin believe that this type of coopera-
tion with the nationalist elements implanted in the "front-line states"
bordering Rhodesia as well as South Africa which are already enjoying
material assistance from the GDR, seems more plausible than the training

of ZAP" pilots in East Germany.

This information, issued in Lusaka at the time of Ronecker's visit. has not
been confirmed in East Berlin. where diplomatic circles expressed a certain
skepticism.

0n the other hand. these same circles and other observers have stressed that
the treaty of friendship and cooperation signed on 2d February in Maputo by

Honecker and Mozambican President Samora Machel includes a military clause.

"The two signatories. which will coordinate their position in case of a

1
FOR OFFICIAL U83 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vlnlunl lnvldcnt thrvntunlnu pence. have durlded to ronulnte their unupurntlon
In the mllltury fluld through bllulurul arrange-outs ln order to cunnolldnte
their defensive capacity." the document any». It is estimated in Berlin

that such agreements could be useful for putting the stamp of official
approval on the presence of instructors and advisers.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux ot Clo Paris 1979

CSO: 4600

2
(OR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAI R8

BRI BPS

MALI-GINA, IVORY COAST MEWS-4m Council of Ministers of ma,
assemblcd‘ on 18 January in Kuluba under the chairmanship of head of state
Gen Mousse Traore, has ratified draft agreements on Judiciary cooperation
as well as three agreements regarding postal and telecommunication services,
the moveth of people and goods and cooperation in matters pertaining to
tourism between the Republic of mm and the Republic of Ghana. The Council
has also ratified two draft treaties signed on 13 January 1979 by Mali and
the Ivory Coast, the first dealing with benefits granted to agencies and
services, as well as to civil servants and agents operating in either coun-
try, and the second relating to the cooperation between the Ivory Coast and
Mali in matters dealing with transportation and maritime transit. [Text]
[Paris WHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEEHS in French 9 Feb 79 p 317]

CS): Moo

3
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNI-Y

ANGOLA

BRIEFS
VOLVO BUSES-~1hc Suedish automobile factory VOLVO will sell 600 buses and
heavy trucks to the Angolan Hinistry of Transportation. The contract.
which was just signed in Stockholn, is for a total of 106 million kronor;

it is the second large contract obtained by this Swedish firm from Angola.
[Text] [Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 953 ll Apr 79 p 79]

680: 4600

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BENIN

BRIEFS

GENERAL POPULATION CENSUS-~8enin has started a general census of its popu-
lation and their places of residence. This operation. being carried out
during March, is part of the UN decennial census program. The operation

in progress is part of the 1970-00 section of the United Nations and its
total cost is estimated at 035 million CPA francs. Benin is providing
59.2 percent of the total cost, whereas the UN Fund for Population Act (vi-
ties (PNUAP) is supplying 40.8 percent. This census operation will be car-
ried out in several stages. Thus the training of census compilers re-
cruited from along the 753 students of teaching colleges. plus 332 secondary
school teachers in the ratio of 4 teachers per district. took place in the
6 provincial capitals free 26 February to 5 March. During the stage ex-
tending frola 7 to 17 March, the 1,085 cospilers mentioned above will in
turn train the 4,000 recording officials and the 800 team leaders. in the
ratio of 1 team leader per 5 recording officials. The census itself will
then be taken within 10 days after conviction of training: during these

10 days, each recording official nust take a census of 1,000 to 2,000 per-
sons in an urban area and 800 persons in a rural area. Consideration will
actually be given to the distribution of places of residence and to popu-
lation density in order to define census zones. teach zone will be outlined
on a map and each recording official will have a map of his area to deter-
mine his territory. [Text] [Paris messes TROPICAU)! B'l‘ MEDITERRANEBNS in
French 16 Her 79 p 643] 11915

C50: 4400

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

BOTSMNA

BRI EFS

ulmoun PRODUCTION--A fourth development plan (1976-1981) is being implemented
in Botswana. For the fiscal year 1978 revenues amounted to 121 million pulse
(1 pun-approximately 5 French francs), corresponding to an increase of a roar-
inately ho percent, while expenses amounted to 13l.5 million (+22 percent ;

its estimated deficit of 10.5 million constitutes only 50 percent or that or
the preceding bu et. In 1977 foreign trade showed a deficit equivalent to
38.9 million 171's -l.'( million). At the end of 1877 exchange reserves rose

to a countervalue‘ of 8h.3 million ms (920.11 million over the end or 1976).
With the Iwaneng and Orapa deposits controlled by De Beers (the state being

a partner in capitalization), Botswana owns two of the most important diamond
mines in the world. The Orapa mine, in operation in the northern part or the
Kalahari desert, supplied 10.5 million karate in 1978, twice the production of
1977 (15 percent in gems and 85 percent in industrial diwonds). the exploita-
tion of the Iweneng deposit required equipment valued at 128.7 million pounds
sterling. the subsoil is rich in minerals. Prospecting continues for diamonds,
copper and uraniun-bearing minerals. oél‘ext] [Paris NAMES TROPICAUX ET
NEDITSRRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 3 l

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llh‘l-Z ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

PEOPLE WISH TO PUT AN END i0 BOKASSA REGIME
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE In French l9 Mar-l Apr 79 pp 55-56
[Article by Jean Ngnaman Tl Ngula: "The Last Days of 8erengo"l

[Text] Having taken refuge In his Versailles, far from an
impoverished and turbulent capital,nokassa ls hurriedly
pillaging coffers of a bankrupt nation. ”After me, the
deluge . . . " The storm clouds are already gathering . . .

After the bloody events which occurred In Bangui on 20 and 2l January,
everything suggests that the last days of the dictator crowned aokassa I
are numbered. The repression started by Zalrlan-Central African forces has
actually only Intenslfled the resentment and anger of a population weary

of enduring the whims and greed of the former French Army corporal who. by
the sole will of the Elysee Palace, has reigned for l3 years as absolute
master over 0 country plllaged and drained of Its resources.

But all sorts of tactics have been used to bring about an apparent "normali-
zation" of the sltuaticn.

As is his custom, the megalomaniac of Berengo has tried to ascribe the re-
sponsibility-for the events to scapegoats chosen from among members of his
government and civil servants, accused of having taken "antlsocial mea-
sures." Thus the hunting companion of Giscard d'Estaing has had the mInis-
ters of national education-~Kazagui--and higher educatIon--Zokoe--arrested,

as well as several other officials (including the headmaster of the Bangui
high school).

Relatives of elementary and secondary students singled out as instigators
of the demonstrations have not been spared, of course, and today are still
the object of countless incidents of harr-ssmant. Finally, it Is known
that it is as a result of additional financial ald granted by Paris-~at the
time of the visit to France by the head of the Central African Government,
Mr Henri Naidou--that civil servants and students were able to collect
their wages and scholarships, which went unpaid for months.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus no effort has been spared, in Paris as well as in Bangui and in
Kinshasa (whose mercenaries have flown to the aid of Hobutu's friend) to
try to save the face of a government which appears to be more and more
hopelessly doomed. The reports of the French ambassador to Bangui are
also alarming and are arousing the greatest concern in the Elysee Palace.
In fact, it has been noted that locally printed clandestine pamphlets have
been in circulation almost everywhere for weeks and it is confirmed that
”Emperor" Bokassa is running real risks.

Under these conditions, it is clear that the angry explosion of elementary
and secondary students embittered by strict standards which require them
to wear a uniform, as well as the supporting demonstrations of thousands
of local civil servants, workers, farmers and unemployed persons, repre-
sented only a serious warning signal. For i3 years of capricious, dicta-
torial management of government affairs by a man whose only goal is to use
and to serve his french masters. on the backs of the people, have created
an explosive situation in which anything can happen.

Bitterness is even keener since the army's overthrow of Mr David Dacko on

i January l966 had been received with a certain degree of relief, justified
by the intrigue and corruption which characterized the former administra-
tion. The young officers who had Just seized power had also pledged to
struggle against these evils. To end injustice, to get the economy moving
again, to create jobs and to promote harmonious development of the country:
these were actually the declared goals of the military committee which was
set UP.

A Bloody Purge

However. the tune began to change after listening to the first speech by
the new chief of state, Colonel Bokassa, chosen for his duties because of
his seniority and his superior rank in the army. After praising his cousin
Dacko, described as "very intelligent and very responsible, but unfortu-
nately surrounded by bad ministers and advisers," Papa Bok's first objec-
tive was to get rid of his putsch companions and the few rare intellectuals
able to oppose him.

Thus of all the officers who took part in the Saint Sylvestre putsch, only
three are still alive: Generals Dieudonne Hagabe, Bangui and Koligba. It
should also be noted that, always haunted by the fear of losing his omnip-
otent power, Bokassa was careful to get these last two individuals out of
the way, respectively appointed ambassadors to Paris and Canada. Appar-
ently Generals Bangui and Koiigba have no illusions about the unpredictable
reactions of the master of Berengo, since they have not set foot in Bangui
for years. As though they were afraid of being arrested and suffering the
same fate as their former comrades in arms, such as General Handaba, Colonel
Auguste Bongo, Captain Alexandre Banda, Colonels Abakar and Hande and Gen-
eral Lingoundou of the national police force, all of whom were imprisoned,
tortured and finally shot. The exile of Dr Abel Gouriba, known and

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR iiFi‘lClM. "Si. "NI-Y

respected in certain Central African circles for his consistent notional-
ism, also occurred in the context of thls bloody and systematic purge.

with his hands free. Bokassa did not even feign the appearance of outlining
"Cnnmnlc. financial or social policy, as Is well known. Thus the country's
situation grew worse. to the point of piu- ‘iill'I all sectors into total
paralysis. In l978. for example, the balance of trade showed a deficit of
more than 2 billion CPA francs. Foreign Indebtedness, constantly increas-
ing, anuunts to 70 billion CFA francs today. Diamond production, until now
a principle source of foreign exchange. has taken a nose-dive for several
years. Estimated at 500.000 carats at the time of independence. it mounts
to barely 300,000 carats today.

The precarious stability of public finances is such that the country has
been unable for years to make investments with its own funds. from i970 to
I977. the budget deficit rose from i to 6 billion CPA francs. And Paris is

contributing more than 85 percent to the budget of a country whose leaders
are famous for the practice of diverting public fundsl

In December l9". more than i0 billion CFA francs were squandered on the
masquerade of Bokassa's coronation. an emperor who shamelessly drains gov-
ernment coffers to satisfy his whims. This is how he buys palaces, villas,
restaurants, hotels and cafes in Europe and takes lavish vacations accord-
ing to his moods. Several treasury officials are rotting in the Jails of
the emperor of Bangui for having dared to protest against this westefulness.
Intrigue and embezzlement are such that bangui holds the record for the
number of Haflosi, disreputable businessmen and international bandits con-
verging on the country to make a fortune.

The Gowen Affair

Following the famous story of bokassa's tebanese stepfather, who myste-
riously disappeared with a suitcase full of diamonds. today we report the
even more serious affair of Samuel (Bowen, a former lsraeli general relieved
of his contend for misconduct during the Kippur war and who. having turned
into an international crook, actually appears to be serving as a cover for
South African companies for questionable operations. The diamond conces-
sion of 30,000 square kilometers, which boitassa granted to his personal
friend Samei iiowen, has in fact fallen to the racists of Pretoria.

In the image of the emperor, who still sees to it that no one surpasses him
in this respect. all those gravitating around the government are trying to
accumiate as much property as possible. Each minister owns several villas.
taxis, bars. etc. The former minister of finance, Augustin lioyamba, has
just built a new superb villa near the university campus, whereas former
prime ministers Donitien and Patasse dip into the funds of the iietlonal
Development Bank (bull) to carry out business operations. This is how
Patasse was able to establish SICAGRI, the Agricultural Produce tompany.

9
FOR drrtcmt use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Revolt Stirring

Ever since. the gap has continued to widen between the flunkies of the gov-
ernment and the vast majority of the population which, in these circum-
stances. must cope with galloping inflation and bombardment with all sorts
of taxes and duties. The earnings of ministers were recently doubled, of-
ficially increased from 250.000 to 500.000 CFA francs. An advisory priest
to the court receives i million CPA francs and Mr Albert Koube. court ad-
viser in charge of the treasury. receives an income of 2.5 million

CFA francs. in a country in which per capita income is barely 200 french
francs per year and in which a worker has trouble earning l0,000 CfA francs
per month, this Is a particularly intolerable scandal. And these are only
a few examples. which are far from revealing the gross injustice and tragic
situation of the Central African people.

Under these conditions. it is understandable that the preferred country of
President Giscard d'Estaing's safaris is ripe with revolt. But the ques-
tion being asked today is how the necessary decisive response can be deliv-
ered in the absence of any organized and informed political life.

Of course, the reactions of individuals such as hr Hakombo Barbote, a for-
mer Central African ambassador in exile today, who has asked that an inves-
tlgatory comission under the auspices of the United Nations be sent to
Bangui, or the reactions of organizations such as the National Union of
Central African students, which is stepping up its meetings and occupations
of embassies abroad. are undeniable proof of the awareness of Central Afri-
cans and their will to put an end to Bokassa's rule. however, there is
still no organized united front capable of dealing with any possibility*
and preventing an alternative neocolonial solution. which Paris is consid-
ering acre and more.

Mn this regard, it is regrettable that the Central African Student hove-
ment--the only currently existing organization capable of addressing the
international cmlty--is being weakened by obscure ideological con-
fiicts most often related to Haolsm.

COPYRICH‘I’: |979 Afrlque-Asie

"NS
C50: “100

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

SWEDISH HACIIINERYncuinon has Just ordered machinery for the manufacture of
utchou from the Swedish company ARBIICO of Knlmnr (in the ooutlnrn port of
Sweden) for a total of 8 million ktomer ($1.86 million). The machinery
will be installed in the Djolibu match factory now being remodeled. [Text]
[Paris MARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 9 Mar 79 p 629]

030: 6600

11
M ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUIlﬂ-IA-BISSAU

BR! RPS

FRENCH AGRICUUI'URAL ASSISTANCE-June has granted aid to Guinea-Bissau in
the amount of 1,800,000 francs, as per an agreement signed between Guinea-
Biccau State Commissioner for Rural Development (Minister) thrio Cabral and
French charge d'ai‘iaires in Bissau Jean de Dianous. The French aid will be
use: to finance the second stage of a project designed to increase peanut
production, especially in the Cunere agricultural-industrial complex near
Bissau, to purchase agricultural equipment and seeds as well as to strengthen
fanning methods using animal traction. [Text] [Paris Willis TROPICAUX or
HEDITERRANEEIS in French 9 Feb 79 p 317]

betas/mos '10 BRAZIL-4n official delegation from Guinea-Bissau left recently
for Brasilia to study a possible increase in the cooperation in various areas
offered by Brazil. This delegation, whose arrival in Brasilia was treated
with great circumspection, was headed by leonel Vieira, director general of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Guinea-Bissau. who met with Brazilian
Minister of Foreign Armirs Antonio Meredo da SilVeira. [Text] [Paris
mums TmPICAUX ST DEDITERRMBENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 317]

ACRICUL‘I'IIML MROVDIMS-During his visit to Guinea-Bissau from

20 to 25 February Gen Rmalho Banes. president of the Republic of Portugal
expressed his interest in various agricultural development projects.
Specifically. he visited a project in the regions of Bafsts and Bapu in the
eastern part of the country for the cultivation of cotton. which will
eventually do away with the iaportation of textiles now in use. Financed

by the EEC with the assistance of the French Textile fibers Development
Company (CM). this project. which will beceae a mixed comaercial company.
has already increased the cotton acreage from 15‘ hectares in 1976-1977

'to 3.500 hectares in 1979 with a 1.600 kilo yield per hectare. 98 percent
of which is highest-grade cotton. Through this same project. 3,500 hectares
of rice and 2.000 hectares of sorghum and corn will be put under cultivation
this year. Still another project in the eastern and northern regions is
aimed at replacing completely until 1981 the peanut crops by new varieties
which are acre resistent to drought (a major problem for Guinea-lisssu)
thanks to their shorter cultivation cycle. their long roots and reduced
foliage. These new varieties come from Senegal where they have been in use
for many years. The [MC [Aid and Cooperation Fund] has granted a credit

(or this project. [Excerpt] [Paris ““110lele 81' treatments

in French 9 liar 79 p 629]

080: “00 12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Uh'li ONLY

IVORY COAST

BRIEFS

SIVOMAR SNIPS-with the approval of the Ivorian Government. the Ivorian
Shipping Company SIVOHAR has decided to order (our ships of 13,000 to
15,000 tpl. [expansion unknown]. The cowany has already received a cer-
tain nuwer of bids Iron Japanese and European shipyards. sum had pre-
viously ordered eight 16.000-tpl. ships. whey were delivered in 1978 and
have been put into service. of the eight ships. five were built in Japan
and three in Spain. SIVOHAR. on the other hand. has not concealed the
fact that it is considering ordering its ships from France, it the torus

stipulated would penit it to do so. [‘l'ext] [Paris mucus TDPICAUX 8T
NEDIWWEBNS in French 9 Mar 79 p 630] 11915

FRANCO-WOMAN WMISuMar Admiral Philippe Crourat. in col-sand of at-
tack submarines of the National French Navy. has just visited Abidjan.
where he inspected the attack subserine Espadon. Along with other French
vessels--the logistic support ship Mona, the corvette hconit and the cut-
ter Oregounthe Bepadon participated in Franco-Ivorian maneuvers of! the
Ivorian coast. Mhiral Crourat was received by several Ivorian officials.
in particular Captain Lanine Padika. the sinister of the navy and the
French ambassador to the Ivory Coast. Hr Michel Dupuch. [Text] [Paris
NAMES TMPICMJX B‘i‘ HSDI'A‘BMNS in french 9 He: 79 p 631] 11915

on. sumac-who French cowany Stacking-Gm [expansion unknown] for or!-
shore Petroleum Operations (ms). in partnership with Business and Indus-
trial Union (UIB). has just obtained a contract for a total vlue of

15.5 tailiion ($8 sillion for 01: and $7.5 million for mu) for the con-
struction. transport and installation, in the Belier lield off the coast
of Abidjan. of a drilling/production platters (eight pilings) and three
large production nodules for 3380. The project also includes the laying
of a 10-foot pipeline 20.1 kiloeaters long and its emuent at a depth or
5 esters for a total length of approximately $00 esters. The operations

will extend over a 1-year period. [Text] [Paris mm rmrcwx a?
EDITBRMNEENS in French 9 Mar 79 p 630] 11915

1 3
I 3 FOR OFPIC [I‘L’DSE ONLY

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

asrmam summon-urn. Ivorian Refining Coepany has just placed an order
with Ileurtey Industries on 8 "arch to expand the Abidjan-Vridl refinery.
first stage (hydroskia-ing). This turnkey contract includes the studies
and construction of the follwing units: atsospheric distillation:

2 uillion tons/year: hydrotreatsent of gasoline: 1,500 tons/day (CPR [Co-
operative Peel Research] process): low-pressure catalytic reforming:

1.200 tone/day (1?? [French Petroleum Institute] process]; hydrodosulfuri-
zation of gas oils: 800 tons/day (CPR process): washing of gases with
amines: sulfur production: 40 tons/day (ﬂeurtay process): then-eelectric
power plant: 3 boilers with capacity of 100 tons/hour each at 67 bars;

2 turbine-alternator units or 24 m [eegawatt] each; 100,000 cubic eaters
storage capacity; general installations. The approximate aleunt of the
order is 100 uillion French francs or 35 billion CPA francs. The scheduled
comlstion period is 23 months. [Text] [Paris WES Tmrxcaux B'i'
MEDITBRMNBBNS in French 16 Her 79 p 691] 11915

C80: 4400

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WPICIM. USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

assumxou OP Pmmuzun mum-According to MADAGASCAR-M11", a mission
of onperte free tho ﬂorid Bank is currently in Madagaecer to diecuee petro-
leun reaearch in nedagascar and to study the poaeibilitiea o! a reauaption.
and the lean- to (inance it. with ualagaey officials of the Military Office
for Strategic lnduetrios (000118). Halagaay hopea of one day iinding
“black gold“ on land or at on have been unfulfilled an of the present
tile. Only a few signs of gaa and heavy oila were diecevored in the aouth-
crn part of the country and on the western coaat of the island. Pro. 1967
to 1973, petroleul research in Madagascar waa particularly intenae. Ten
foreign colpaniea. coat of which were in partnerahip anong theuelvee and
with Halagaey capital, took advantage of about 20 pornite for land and off-
shore research during that period, extending over a total area of

239,000 square kilometers otteMre. French. Anericane. Italians and la-
raelia spent 16.5 billion Malagasy francs ($74 nillion) in 6 yearn on lo
drillinga. without obtaining convincing results. Only the bituinoue
sandstones of Beeolanga, in the central-weatern part of the country and
which have long been known. could currently be developed provided that a
profitable extraction technique is found, however. The University of
Madagascar is participating in thia reaearch. (Text) [Paris Hams
TMPICAUX 31' tantrum-ens in French 16 Mar 79 p 707) 11915

was: sous “Dams-71» Suprene Revolutionary council studied the problen
of fuels in ita aeeting of 5 March. eince stock ahertagea have been noted
in certain location. due to routing difficultiea. but aloe and particularly
because of fire damage to part of the inatallatione of the “nave refin-
ery. which hae reduced production Iron 800,000 to 600,000 cubic netere per
year. In addition. 13 tank care loaded with fuel exploded very recently
on the Tananarivo/eaatern coast line. The govern-ent hae aeaurcd consulate
that if this aituation ahould lead to a new shortage, it will only be for
a short while, as all necessary measures have been taken to prevent a
panic. [1‘13th [Paris "ARIES WICAUX 31' HBDI‘BWS in French 16 Mar
79 p 707] 11915

C503 4‘00

15
FOR OFFlClId. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 0832 (WIN

' mm

BRIEFS

VERDICT MAY 38 MULLED-JIM verdict rendered by the Criminal Court of
Kali (regarding netsbly for-er Minister Kissina Douksra. who was condsnned
to death) at the time of the "corruption trial" may be in the process 0!
being ennulled. The native invoked: the Court's trsnsier trot: bonito to
Timbuktu should hsve been decided through e ruling end not a decree. Actu-
ally. the real native sets to be gross inadequacies st the tins of the
preliminary inquest end the court proceedings. [Text] [Paris Jim
APRIQUE in French Ito 953 11 Apr 79 p 301

JAPAN AGRICULTURAL talisman-4 six-member Japenese mission visited mi

from 210 Januery to 7 Februtry to lay the toundntions tor a mum cooper»
tion between this country and Jepen in the field of agriculture. 'lhe dele-
getion has visited, “on; others, the Office at the Niger and the hire sree

in the Timbukty region. [Text] [Paris W TROPICAUK Er mxmnms
in French 9 Feb 79 p 317]

cso: “:00

16
PO! OFFICU‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RHODBSIA

VIOMTORS 0F SANCTIONS REPORTED

Paris JEUHE AFRIQU'B in French 11 Apr 79 pp 80-81
[Article by Mohamed Maize: "The Friends of Ian aith"]

[Text] Sons powerful Western societies are enabling the
Salisbury resins to hold out after lb years of econoaic
embargo.

On 20 April. nearly 3 million Rhodesiens. white and black. will be called to
vote in two very distinct ballotinge. 'lhe blacks will nane their 72 repre-
sentatives to the first ”aultirecial" Consituent Asseably in Modesia's his-
tory. The whites will elect 28. these elections are to ratify the "internal
settlement agree-ant“ signed on 3 March 1918 between Prime Minister Ian saith
and the three aoderete black leaders Abel Husorewe. Ndebeninsi Bithole end
Jeremiah Chireu. Olite obviously. the Patriotic Front (that is. the gusrilla
forces led by Robert Mugabe end Joshua lkoao) are not taking part in this
balloting. which is considered null end void by the United nations and by the
OAU. But in the west, powerml political and economic lobbies are trying to
come to the aid of the Salisbury reeiae end give credibility to Ian hith's _
plan.

A victory for the Conservatives in the British elections on 3 W would be
the last chance for the "internal eettleaent." Subport for the Rhodesia
cause will be one of the principal election campaign themes of tire Margaret
Thatcher's party. Mr John Davies, her spokes-en on foreign affairs. indi-
cated recently that he would "1m the oceanic sanctions {iecided on by the
United Nations in January 1966) against Rhodesia." and that he "would not
stand by idly if the whites were in danger." Ian hith did not miss the op-
portunity to attach the Labor Party. which has Just lost poweruin particular.
the Secretary of State for Foreign l Cos-mealth Affairs. Dr David Owen.

who is guilty of wanting to associate the Rhodesian Patriotic Front in any
ahering or power south of the Zubeai River. area. who is intransigent about
the aeintenance of economic sanctions until a satisfactory solution is worked
out. and is supported in this by the United States. is blamed by Nth for
all the evils fro- which lihodesia suffers.

17
FOR OHICIM. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After receiving Mr Smith in the United States in October 1978. some American
senators of the Rhodesia lobby (led by Robert Dole. Jacob Javita. Sam liaya-
kawa. etc.). accompanied by English embers of Parliament, will go to observe
the Rhodesian elections. thus giving them a certain credibility. In reality.
these politicians are only the vanguard of poweer economic interests.

According to a list drawn up by the United Nations. S93 Hestern companies are
trading illegally with the Salisbury regime. In most cases. the comercial
transactions are carried out through the intermediary of South Africa. One
British firm holds a place apart in this trade: the London and Rhodesian

Land and Mining Corporation. better known by its abbreviation WRHO. LONRRO.
the first multinational company in Africa. represents in Rhodesia 12 British
firms and 7 other Western companies.

Other British fims come close behind IDNRliO. British Steel Constructions
Ltd. which has three representatives in Salisbury. works in association with
six western monopolies: four American. one Canadian and one French. British
Leyland Motor Company, associated with 11 European and American firms, has 6
subcontractors in Rhodesia.

The banks are not idle. Barclays Bank (bondon) manages the operations of
several of its sister banks of the United States. France. Canada. Belgium,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands. National and Brindlays Bank (London). which
is present in all the larger Rhodesian cities. represents French, Canadian

and West German firms. Standard and Chartered Banking Group (London) controls
the Rhodesian financial market through the intermediary of five branch offices.

America manifests its Presence through the South African firms—in particular.
the Anglo American Corporation of Mr Harry Oppenheimer. whose Rhodesian sub-
sidiary. AMRlio. controls about 1:0 companies working in all economic sectors.
and principally in mining production. Most of the American firms operating
in South Africa are also active in Rhodesia.

'ihe aid of the Hestern countries is especially conspicuous in the military
sphere. Today. the Rhodesian Air Force. which has more than 100 airplanes,
is equipped with western planes which. for the most part. have been built
under license in South Africa. Spare parts and light weapons come principal-
ly from South Africa. Israel, and IIATO stocks.

without this multiform aid. would Ian Smith's Modesia have survived 1'. years
of economic cabal-go and 7 years of war of liberation?

cormmm: Jeune Afriqus'GRUPJIA 1979

1126'!
C80: U100

18
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NLY

SOUTH AFRICA

BRIEFS

RELATIONS mm BRAZIL-JIM Brazilian Covarnnant haa alvaya'avoidad promoting
trade botvaan Brazil and South Africa. tha Brazilian Foraign Affaira Hiniatry
spokoaaan atatad on 26 March. Ila vaa trying to rabut an articla publiahad
the aunt: day in ona of tha country's Iain dailiaa. JORNAL DO BMSIL had
pointed out that. daapita aha UN raconandotiona. trada with South Africa.
part lcularly Brazilian iaporta fro: that country. continuad to incraaaa.
This haraa Brazil‘s diploaatic afforta in Africa. particularly with tho
for-or Portuguaaa coloniaa. Tha official conant addad that than haa again
baan talk in Brazil of a South Atlantic ailitary pact with Argantina and
South Africa. [Taxtl (Paria J30“! APRIQUB in Branch 11 Apr 79 p 79]

C50: 4600

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

80A!) mm. BUSINESS IDAI-u-A 1oe.n agreement vu signed on 216 January in lone
by the president of the Heat Atricen Develonuent Bonk (BOAD), Pierre-envel-
Denibn and the mgoleee minister for rinence and economy, Teri Benieun ect-
inz on representative ibr the Netionel Center for the Pmnotion of hell and
Median-Sized Enterprises (cum). This loen, in the mount of 260 million
frencn CPA, is intended to oover the partial financing for en expeneion of
the industrial one in lone end for the creation of an industrial are: in
Lem-lure in the northern put of the country. [Text] [Peril WEB
TROPICAUX ET WW8 in Punch 9 to}: 79 p 322]

C80: 1.1300

20
FOR OFFICIAL {188 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

BRIEFS

PM D»! Pmc‘r--A report submitted on 28 February to the Volten Council
of Hinisters focuses on the projected dam on the Kowienga River at Penn.
The project, whose study is assigned to the Canadian design cospany 81c
(Surveyor beniger Chen-rat) coqarises a rock-till den l,¢50 eaters long and
35 meters high. 1.5 billion cubic meters of stored water and a 7-H [Begu-
wntt) turbine. The water level will extend over a length of 45 kilonetars
and a width of 18 kiloaeters at its widest section. Productivity of.

32 sillion m (kilowatt hoursl corresponds to Ouagadougou's oonsuwtion in
1977 or \VSO percent of the country's total consumtion at the ties. Power
will be transmitted by a 115-”! lkilovolt] line o'er a distance of 268 ki-
lometers. passing through Garango (also to be used for transaitting the
electricity produced at negro) in order to supply the capital. Use of water
downstream from the da- will take it possible to irrigate 7,300 hectares

by gravity, and thus without any consumtion of energy as at Bagre. to sup-
ply the pups. 'i'he dan's cost of construction, including n 25-kilceleter
access road tron Pane, project study and engineering, traneniesion and
risks, currently anounts to 10.1 billion CPA francs. The project's sched-
ule sets the beginning of land operations i-sdiately after the winter 0!
1980. i.e.. between Septewer and the and or October 1980. we may recall
that on 14 February, the council of Hinistere declared the Pane dell project
a priority (ct. mantras TRIPICAUX B‘r mornmums of 23 rebruary p 153).
[Text] [Paris W TWIN)! 31' museums in French 9 Her 79

p 631] 11915

650: 4400

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL'I