FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IPRS-L/10712

t August1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

(FOUO No;784)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Englishelanguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

POUO No. 784

CONTENTS
ANGOLA
Briefs
UNITA Operation Announced
Hocamedes Port Importance Stressed
CAMEROON

Economic Situation at 10th Anniversary Noted
(om “Cg"mui m AFRIQUE, 19 "q 82) 000000...

CHAD

Habre Seen as Gaining Over Goukouni, Kamougue
(m Among, 19 w 82) 0......OOODOIIOOOOODIOIOO.

GUINEA BISSAU

Briers
3c Regional Develop-ant Financing

HMAHBIQUE

Briefs
Cahora Bassa Electricity Production

nether-lands Beira Port Loan

NIGER

Effects of Decline of Uranium Prices, French Aid Noted
(Jacques Latremoliere; MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
mImS’ 11‘ m 82) 00......OOOOUOOOOOOOOCO...
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

39mm.

Country's Neutrality in Falklands hr Seen as 'Cmdmm'
(311161011 019.110; mm: W003, 19 Hay 82) ............

ZIMBABWE

Success of Mugabe's Mean Trip Reported
(MCOiO Sandal); m AFRIQUB, 9 Jun 82) 0000000000000

”MUSEONLY
BRIEI’S

UNITA OPERATIONS ANNOUNCED-4n a conunique published by its delegation in
Paris on 1 July. UNITA listed the operations it conducted during the first
half of June, announcing that it killed 173 Angolan soldier. as well as

14 Cuban nilitary; its operations also resulted in 550 wounded and the capture
of 35 foreign citizens (half of whon are Portuguese nationals). URITA more-
over noted that it captured bl nenbers of the governnent arned forces and that
it destroyed 9 helicopters. UNITA losses amounted to 12 dead. 63 wounded and
5 whose fate is unknown. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERMNBENS
in French 16 Jul 82 p 2061] [COPYRIGlsz Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.]

WES PORT IMPORTANCE STRESSED—The port of Hocanedesnthe nain outlet to
the Atlantic Ocean for Angola's southern provinces—is inportant both
strategically and economically. Its role is now threatened both by the

aerial supra-acy of South Africa, which has increased its reconnaissance
flights in the region lately. and (but nore distantly. as this latter threat
is nainly of concern to the hinterland) by the stepping up of the activities
of the Units opposition wt in areas where it is active. Regarding the
strategic inportance of the port, the authorities in Luanda deny South
Africa's clai- that Hocanedes is used for the unloading of nilitary materiel
for SHAPO. But the port is the main approach for the provision of supplies

to the southern Angolese arly, since the overland routes linking the ports of
Lobito and Benguela (600 km to the north) with towns in the interior (ﬂuila
:nd Lubango) and unsafe and difficult, the situation being insecure. Regard-
ins, the economic isportance of the port, it is now practically the only outlet
to the sea for Angola's southern provinces. Its ore port, which was estab-
lished for iron ore leaving Cassinge, is the terminus of the railroad which
services the province of Cuando-Cubango via that of ﬁuila. Hocanedes is also

continent. An Angolese and an Angola-Spanish fishing fleet use it; Soviet
trawler-s operate farther north. nut Moscow is still Angola's principal
partner in this sector. [Text] [Paris HARC’EIES TROPICAUX ET animals
in French No 1907, 28 May 82 p 1613] [OOYYRIGH'I'z Rene Harem: et Cie Paris
1982.] 9855

680: I. 719/1058

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

me 8110A?!” A! 10th ANNIVERSARY sum
Paria m ARIN! in French In 1115, 19 May 82 pp 63, 65-66, 69
[Article by Gerard hegresnu: "Capital Met")

[text] On the 20th of hay, Caneroon oelabratee brilliantly the 10th anniver-
sary of the ramification of the two for-nor bglieh-epeahing (Southern) and
Prench-epeahing provincee. It wee. in effect. in 1972 that the for-er federal
Republic been-e the United Republic of Cansroon.

use decade thua defined has been an eoononioally good one. A few key figures
show progreas in practiaally all sectors:

1. The gross national product (61!!) increased nearly fivefold. riaing fro-
326.3 billion CPA franca in 1971-1972 to L625 billion in l980-l98l.

2. the state budgeta and those of the dmlopnsnt plane have taken vertihhle
leapa forward. the otate budget? It was Sb.‘ billion CIA franca in 1972:
today it is 310 billion. Develop-ant plane? No hundred eighty cm francs
were allocated to then in 1972-1976, and nearly ten tinea nore will be e1-
located to the Pifth (1982-1987).

3. Sinilarly, and this ia an indication of good nenagnent-fron 1972 to 1982,
the portion of invent-ants not directly productive fell fron 75 to ‘5 percent.

These statistics aren't always easy for tho average Cameroonian to interpret:
on the other hand. the evolution in the eectore of production is directly felt
in his daily life. Agriculture, for emla. It concerna nore than three-
quarters of Caneroonisne: nore than six million people living in rural areaa
are faraero. Their succeesea are often cited as on examle for all of Africa.
Cameroonian agriculture being the real lifeblood of the country and the prin-
cipal source of currency.

Sone exaﬁlea: cacao, first agricultural production of 105.000 tone in 1975-
1976. 122,000 tons in 1979-1980; coffee which went fron 58.000 tone in 1977 and
83,000 tons in 1979-1980; pineapples, wood. pal- oil, eugar. and cotton advance
everywhere. not to motion food crops. Cansroon is on its way to alinentary
self-sufficiency, when it ian't exporting to the neighboring oomtriea to the
out and south. the govern-ant ian't eatiafied with giving noral support to

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIHAL USE ONLY

far-era, it holpa than with concrete naaonroo: an increaoo in tho norhot
pnrchaao price of prodncto, a opecial incentive inotitnted in Iobrnary 1971 to
favor now growero of cacao and coffee. 1n the one way, tho nodornioation of
cultivated aroaa, tho policy of extending food-producing croplndo and the do-
volopnnt of cooperativeo hava pernittod the growth of a "paaaant claaa"
conociooatoao. the working backbone of the contry'o acon-ic downloploot.

worth noting aloo. on the otrnctoral loyal, io the tronafornation of WI!
(National Rural Davelop-nt toad, created in 1973), a banking eotabliol-ont
capable of accoptins dopooito oo no to better fulfill ita rolo of ”banhr of
tho poaoanto," and tho oqaply of fertiliser. whooe inortation coat 2.12 bil-
lion CPA franca in 1977-1978 and 3.92 billion frooco in 1979-1980. do a wholo.
thia policy. aided to be onro by fairly favorable cli-tic ‘cooditiono. io
bearing fruit. and tho coutry'e loadoro are droning of bocooias, within tho
not too diotant future. "the granary of Control Africa.” loo-hue, Canaroon
io oafefronfaninoandioonnoeoinsadocraoooiniteinortationoffood
producto: 1.38 billion wheat floor inorto in 1980-1981 ao oppoood to 2.34
billion in 197$1919.

Caeroonion industry in alao uporioncioc a fairly apectacnlar daweloplont.

aided, it'a true, by natural richoo not nany African coutrioa pooaooa (do-

pooito of bauxite. iron. hydrocarbidoo, a wory donoe and aaoily controllable
watar ayatn—tho oocond boat ayat- in Iranchropoakins blach Africa. after

that of Zaire) and by a roll-organic“ honking not...

Pnrouins tho inventory and exploitation of ita natural roaonrcoo, tho comtry
io procoedina rapidly with ita iodcotrialiaation. necking "no holda barred"

tho dcvolopuont of ita natural reooorcoo: iron dopoaita have boon diocovorod
in tho region of Hhalan, whilo that of Halolloo. clooe to Krihi. proaiaoo 120
nillion roaorye tone. according to ooti-atoo. The ”I”: projecto an in-
vootnont of 60 billion cu franca for ita exploitation. In tho area of natural
can, aleo, all hopeo aro porniaeible: with reoorvoo anti-ted at 200 billion
cubic netero tho Civil Society for tho hploitation of eaooroonion (m
plane to oatablioh a liqnofoction factory in tho lribi region.

Vo luat alao draw attention to tho sworn-oath roaliotic oil policy. 11.»
production of Caloroonian black gold. which in etill in an infant otato since
it only hogan in 1978 with 800,000 tone of unrefined oil. reached 8.3 million
tone in 1981. no oaloo '01-: 300 billion CIA franco of which 118.62 (that
is. noro than 57.62 porcont of the 1981-1982 bodset) want to tho 'l'roaoury fond.
It'a a conoidoroblc on. not tho loadoro have had tho wiodoa of hoping a
cool head in tho face of tho tantationo oil woalth uanally prmheo and
haven't throw tho-oolvoo into ovorly edition projocto booed oololy on oil.
ao no not to run tho rioh. ao hao happened oloewhoro, of an 1.1th in davolop-
not projectiono and an acceleration of the rural mdno. which would doprivo
agriculture of laborero. 0n the contrary, according to tho hiniotor of tho
lconoly ond the Plan. hello Ionba Hoisarit tho authoritiee conoider tho ravnnoo
procoodin; fraa oil "a oobaidy for tho realisation of davolopoont objectivea."
ror, "oil rooonrcao are ucortain; depoeito era aahanatod with tine: tho priceo
of thia product are onhject to nnprodictablo fluctuation."

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The econoeic picture of the country on this eve of the 10th anniversary of the
creation of the United Republic of Caneroon does not of course consist en-
tirely of positive aspects. There are shadow in certain sectors. ”developing"
Cameroon is beginning to be confronted by the problns of industrialised
countries:

-s consmer retail price index that is cliiing;
--rental rates that increase are rapidly than salaries;

-difficulty in finding ewloynsnt in certain sectors, notable for young people
and professionals (the corollary. also, of a high rate of school attendance:
100 percent at the prinry level);

-the "Ca-eroonisation" of certain key sectors of the eeonony which the leaders
would like to see nove lore quickly, all the while neintaining the overall
balance and the necessity for foreign invest-ants.

Besides this. the fifth Plan proposes as one of its priority objectives the
pronotion of national all and nediuI-sieed businesses and the willingness
to build an econoey me ow tonrds the doeestic narket.

swerything 'encoursges us to think that these objectives can he attained.

For Caeroon has another asset: it‘s the African country with the least debts
(around 25 billion on francs in 1981. that is. hardly 8 percent of the budget).
This is all the lore neritorious in that these results have been obtained in

an unfavorable international context, characterized by the tee oil shocks of
1973-197‘ and 1979-1980. a general econonic crisis. a eajor alum in world
prices of the staples exported and the considerable increase in value of the
nerchandise and equipnent inported. It's also one of the African countries
that has best succeeded in "managing" its budget: thanks to a disciplined
policy of economic liberalisn, open and directed at the sale tine.

State budgets are balanced with their own receipts (with the exception of the
two deficits of 1973-1976 and 1974-1975). The authorities denonstrste the
sane rigor with respect to debt utilization: long-tern loans, less costly,
finance investeents vhich are not directly productive while short-tern loans,
closer together and tied to nore onerous conditions. are allocated to projecte
which are note inediately profitable.

This mnner of adeinistering public finances is responsible for the fact that
Cameroon enjoys a precious capital trust vith the foreign investors from when
it contracts for the loans it needs. "businesenan's paradise” as mus
AFRIQUE 200an wrote several nonths ago. foreign investors jostle each other
in Cameroon: in 1980 Anericans, French, English, Spanish, Dutch purchased al-
together 296.981 nillion CIA francs in Caneroon, which represented an increase
of 19.3 percent coepared to the preceding year. A nice score for 10 years of
nanageeent!

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982.

9825
050: 4 719/1067

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
WRESEENASGAINDIGWW, WOW!
Paris JEUNB AFRIQU! in French No 1115, 19 hey 82 p 26
[Article: ”Goukouni Losing. Kamougne Not "inning”

[Text] The ministerial reshuffling announced by Yresident Goukouni Oueddei
has become...a constitutional revision. Except that Chad doesn't have a con-
stitution. By signing on 8 May a ”Mjnena declaration" setting up, on a
parallel basis to the CONT (Transitional National Union Goverment), a State
Council, "a body for the conception of ideas, for reflection, or consultation
and orientation," Goukouni and his vice president, Col Wadal Abdelkader
Kanougue, have given the lie to what they have been professing during the last
few weeks: Goukouni wished to reshuffle the government. he decided (or was'hc
forced?) to double cross it; he planned to get rid of Kanougue, crediting the
latter as being the strongest today of all the other Chadian eneny brothers;
Kamougue threatened to withdraw into the south--to plan a secessionsw-he is
establishing himself and reinforcing his position in the capital and as the
leader of Chad.

For at least by appearances, the State Council, presided over by Col
l:anougue--and made up of all the other faction leaders of who: Cookouni hin-
self is one-has been called upon to exercise the real power. Most likely its
duty is to "help and assist the head of state and the governnent in conducting
domestic affairs, organizing the arny, and running the administration," but it
will be called upon especially to seek out "the ways and means to achieve
peace, maintain and consolidate it, and preserve national unity and territorial
integrity." The basic message must be retained through the words: financial
management will be the province of the government; peace and diplomacy, in
short politics with a capital "1’," will devolve upon the State Council. Or in
other terms: Kamougue, who presides over the Council, has taken the upper
hand over Goukouni who runs the government.

However, these appearances do not portray the realities. The state's two
"strong man" are perhaps among the most isolated in Chad today. One of them.
Goukouni, has wanted to nake changes in his government at a time when his re-
fusal to accept any negotiations vith Bissein ﬂabre has been contested by all
his partners, including Kanougue himself and Acyl Ahnat, who is reputedly pro-
Libyan but who is prepared to deal.

MWLWONLY
PO! 07510“. USE ONLY

As for W, protestations have been node against his within the Peresnent
Oo-ittee of the South, which he presides over now only eyaholically. Further-
more, the two~headed govern-eat established in Mja-ena does not resolve the
heart of the problem the Chadian crieie involves leee the current "governors"
than the "peace of the etmg" which niasein lehre is the only one in a posi-
tion today to offer. Purely and duly because it is he who holds the reins
of military power. Rebel though he is, he is the one occupying the territory.
The heade of neighboring states are pushing Gonkouni to negotiate. Be is still

refusing to do so. He ie' the only one. And he no longer he the wherewithal
to support his obetinscy.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GIUPJIA 1982.

9927
C80: 5719/1009

momaumouur
FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(MVLV

(1 ecu - about $1). Guinea Bissau: rural development of the Bafata Oahu zone
(6.8 million ecu subsidy). The new project, which will be cofinsnced by the
PAC [Aid and Development Fund] includes: [construction work in rural areas/z
access and service roads. tech-scion of lowlands; [harness in farming;
supplies of lulu-purpose cultivator-s, seeders and carts; [village equipmentl:
huskers, peanut threshers, corn shelling rachines, scales, nills, village ware-
houses; [peanut silos]: construction of new silos, reconstruction and usin-

nntional bidding for the supply contracts; other expenditures will be under
state supervision. [Excerpts] {Paris HAROHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in
French No 1907, 28 May 82, p 1381] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreaux et Cie Paris
1982.] 9855

cso: 4719/1058

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Baesa dam will be able to reach central and northern Mozambique by the middle
of 1985, when the work and projects now being carried out under the heading
"Center-north line" are complete. When this line becomes operational it will
enable Mozambique to directly consume almost 20 percent of the electricity
produced by the dam. The annual growth rate is expected to be 10 percent.
Next December the first phase of the construction of the Center-North line
will be completed. Current will then reach Hocuba, in Zambezia, making it
possible to implement a nunber of industrial. agricultural and mining develop-
ment projects. Among the centers elated for development are Caia (heavy in-
dustry), Luabo, and Marromeu (sugar industry). Electrical energy will also be
brought to the urban centers of Nempula, Quelimane and Pemba; these areas now
rely on old diesel oil power plants. The second phase of the project-which
has already begun-will bring electricity to Rampula. Pemba is the objective
of the third phase, which also provides for a number of secondary lines lead-
ing from the main one that will provide electricity to less important indus-
trial and urban centers. The whole project will cost $230 million; it is to
be financed by credit lines opened by French and Italian banks. The work will
be done by a consortium of enterprises of these two countries. Bids have been
requested internationally for the construction of six secondary stations on
the line. At present Mozambique uses a very small part of the total energy pro-
duced by the Cehora Bases dam, and part of that is transformed in South Africa
before being sent back to Mozambique. Zimbabwe is interested in buying elec-
trical energy from Cahora Bases; the second power plant would have to be in-
stalled for this. Most of the energy produced by Cahora Baesa is now sold to

South Africa, although acts of sabotage against the high voltage power lines
interfere with these sales. {Text} [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS

in French No 1907, 28 Hay 82 p 1513] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris
1982.] 9855

NETHERLANDS BBIRA PORT LOAN--The Netherlands granted Mozambique a 31 million
florin loan (approximately 12 million dollars) on 7 July to improve the port of
Beira. The loan is reimbursable in 25 years at a rate of interest of 0.75 per-
cent and carries a 10-year grace period. The funds will be used for the purchase
of materials and services in the Netherlands. {Excerpt} (Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX
ET MEDITERRANEﬁNS in French 16 Jul 82 p 20bl] [COPYRIGﬂTz Rene Horeux et Cie .

Paris 1982.]

C50: 6719/1207
PO! 05110“. USE ONLY

NIGER

EFFECTS OF DECLINE 0F URANIUM PRICES, FRENCH AID NOTED

Paris HARCHES TWPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 80 1905, 16 May 82 pp 1251-
1256

[Article by Jacques Latrenoliere: "Niamey. a New Rate of Developeent"]

[Excerpts] There is no doubt that Francois Hitterrand has chosen Niger for his
first presidential trip to tropical Africa because Col Seyni Kountche was one
of the first African heads of state to asks contact with his after 11 Hay

1981. It is also because this "midway republic"-which is not only a neigh-
bor of war-torn Chad and of that seething ness of ethnic groups and cultures
that constitutes Nigeria but also part and parcel of the Sahara region agi-
rated by Qhadhdhafi's propaganda—plays a particularly important role in French

policy.

Nigerians and French have a lot to discuss in the political and econolic
spheres. But for these talks to be conducted on a sound basis, both sides

will have to dwell in depth on their past relations. French people are not
aware of the identity problem experienced by Niger. It is questionable whether
the Nigerien people themselves have a correct appreciation of this problu.

In France, Niger is often viewed as one of those artificial states whose

borders were drawn according to the white. arbitrary decision or interests of the
former colonizer. This is perhaps true in the case of its Saharan borders, al-
though the officers and geographers who drew those borders took into account the
points to which the populations were gravitating. In any event, ts southern
borders were set for specific reasons and it is hard to understand why some
Nigeriens deplore the split of ethnic groups for which the colonirers are
blamed.

These are not simple differences of opinion saong scholars. Sons provinces-
because they were distant or had princes who were good at asneuvering-aanaged
to avoid being conquered or falling within the sphere of influence of the Shehu
of Kouka and of the emirates rules by the Foulbe aristrocracy, thanks to a
sense of identity which Niger was able to turn to good account to consolidate
its national unity endangered by the length of its vital central region.

It is also inaccurate as well as risky to consider the Kaossen rebellion of

1917 as one of the heroic cements of the Nigerian resistance to colonialisa.
Inspired and araed by the Senuesiya--whoae foraer aabitions Colonel Qhadhdhafi

roamussmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tends to espouse today after ousting the last khalif from the Libyan throne-
in the Nigerien arena that rebellion nerely represented, the resistance of the
neer groups. both pre-Touareg and Touaregl, to the inevitable disnantling of
their symbiotic association with the black inhabitants of the Sahel.

The Tanbari of the Kel Greas, for instance, insisted on describing the annual
taxes paid to the French administrator as a "war tribute" and this attitude
did not change when the French left. In 1981, Qhedhdhafi used it as an ex-
cuse to accuse Niger of "persecuting the Touaregs" and it was a decisive
factor in the betrayal couitted by ﬁche-ed Ag Ainsdou, Colonel Tountche's
forner principal chief secretary, who defected to Tripoli with 11 other dis-
affected cowanions. This incident shows that the Touareg society is un-
stable rather than that it wants to form a separate state. It is a socio-
econonic problem rather than a political problen but is just as ilportant for
the governaent in Nianey, considering the location of the uraniua deposits,
its eajor source of revenue.

Hisunderstandings To Blininste. Objectives To Understand

Hith Francois Kitterrand arriving in Niaaey in a few days' time, these histor-
ical facts need to be recalled so that the effectiveness of his visit is not
marred by basic aisunderstandings. It would be to the advantage of Niger to
revise sons of its national theses. not so nuch because they have anti-Trench
overtones but because they actually run counter to Niger's goals of cohesion,
strongly shared by France which is bent on preventing the creation of new
methods of destabilization in the region.

The sane change of attitude is required on the part of the French side where
people have taken a long ties to accept the overthrow of Diori ani, who was
considered to be one of the pillars of the independent French-speaking Africa,
and to discontinue their biased remarks against the authors of the overthrow.
Jean-Pierre Cot’s few words on 18 September 1981 when. addressing the European
and African Press Association. he nentioned that lilitary regimes in Africa
represent an "acknowledgment of failure" caught people's attention in Niger
because it cane shortly after Colonel Rountche's visit to Paris. The problen
with that phrase is not so such its literal leaning as the interpretation at-
tached to it: namely, that in the view of the French sinister a military re-
gime can be justified when a situation becoaes catastrophic but that there can
be no recovery at all unless there is a return to civilian rule. According to
this interpretation, the minister was not stating a fact but expressing a poli-
tical principle which caused irritation.

As a political principle, the idea is questionable. If 8 out of the 15 French-
speaking countries of tropical Africa are now under ailitary regimes or under
regines headed by ailitary leaders, it is partly because, in those countries,
the army is the nornal career for high school graduates iron the poor classes,
unlike the sons of civil servants and nerchants who prefer to go into other
careers. Also, in a period of crisis, it is natural for the arny to be consid-
ered as a repository of leaning and its honesty seens to be guaranteed by the
fact that the military stay away free: top econonic positions. In Africa, con-
trary to what happens in other continents. most military governments have

10
IOIOFHCIALIJSEONLY
escaped the charge of being the tools used by the establishment--consisting of
landowners, industrialists and businessmen--to curb the aspirations of the
nasses.

In Niger, through his personality and by keeping a tight rein on his associ-
ates, Col Seyni Kountche has succeeded in maintaining the spirit of discipline
and integrity which led to the overthrow of Diori hanani's regime. he did not
try, as was done in Benin and in the Congo, to advance his own interests by
setting the Marxist ideology in action through the expedient of a party whose
leadership posts are occupied by more or less the same men who forn the general
staff. "hat he has tried to do is to channel the youth toward specific tasks
of public purpose, anong others, land develop-ent, building schools, health
centers and snall dams, planting trees, by incorporating that youth into the
Sanarya which now has 9,000 village cells and includes close to 60 percent of
persons under 30. In the sphere of rural econoly, he opted for the cooper-
ative system. The genuine and voluntary participation of all social classes
in this project which, since February of this year, has been given the label
of "development society," offers in Niger the peculiarity of not clailing to
be inspired by a revolutionary ideal but by the tradition of its basic politi-
cal and administrative structures which have always covered the entire country,
even during the colonial years, in Niger as well as in hoslea Chad and in
northern Nigeria.

Today, Niger is one of the few French—speaking African countries where tribal
chiefs have direct access to the central government in their official capacity
and are entitled to participate in the task of parastatal develop-ant. The al-
liance between the regime and the tribal chiefs increases the points of contact
with the masses and greatly decreases the measures which need to be taken. It
is to be hoped that Francois Hitterrand will recognize this policy as being
socialism in action even if it is not called by that name. This will help the
two govern-eats reach the fairly large number of decisions which they need to
adopt jointly.

After settling these preliminary problems, both heads of state lust clarify a
problen the solution of which is of paramount importance for the economy of
Niger and for that country's relations with France: it is the question of the
uranium. To understand the conditions which under the talks will take place,
one must renenber that in 1981 Colonel Kountche made a public statement strongly
denouncing international speculation which, according to bin, has prevented the
Nigerien state from pursuing its development goals by bringing down the price
of that netsl on the international sarket. In 1981, uranium revenues-in

terms of direct and indirect taxes, dividends and others-~anounted to Just

11.7 billion CPA francs compared to 26.8 billion in 1980, so that instead of
providing enough assets to cover 90 percent of the inveatnent budget, those
revenues only contributed 6 percent.

Uranium, Niger and France
France, represented by the COGEHA (a subsidiary of the French Atomic Energy Com-

mission dealing with the fuel cycle) and by other French conpanies such as the
CPHU (French Uraniua Ores Coapany), HINATOEB [expansion unknown] and Pechiney-

11
FOI‘OFHKJAI.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hokta, holds a 514 percent interest in 30mm [Air Region Mining Company].2

On an average year, Trance buys 30 percent of the uranim it requires fron
Niger and Prench purchases represent slightly less than 50 percent of the total
production which. in 1981, amounted to 10,200 tons of uraniu metal representing
5.700 tons of exported yellowcake. France then was likely to feel that the
criticism made by the Nigerian head of state was directed at it.

The latter's disappointnent is the more acute because his coming to power had
coincided with the petroleum crisis which followed the You Kippur War. As a
result, production of uraniu netal juwed from 1,306 tons in 1975 to 6,200 tons
in 1981 while the price of a kilo of uranium rose from 8,750 CPA francs to
24.500 CPA francs. This resulted in the investment capabilities of the comtry
being greatly increased. The investment budget could be 10 tines higher. This
investment drive was accowanied by important requests for foreign funding
which meant that between 175 and 1980 the external debt of the state quadrupled
(approximately 190 billion CPA francs). During that same period, the GDP in-
creased in value by 8.6 percent. The size of the projects increased accordingly
and the development plan for the 19/9-1983 period envisaged a 9.5 percent an-
nual growth rate. This far-reaching plan reflected the optimism of a nation
which thought that it was finally going to overcome its poverty of many
centuries, a poverty felt to be particularly unfair for a country which had
joined the narket economy.

The price slump is not enough to justify the recession which followed. Uranium
is still not quoted officially in the London netal Exchange. The quotations
put out by the M00 [expansion mknown]. a private organization, only give an
indication of the spot prices based on sales of small amounts of uranium and
these prices have dropped free $65 a pound in 1978 to a current $25 or $26, or
15,500 CPA francs per kilo. At the initiative of the COGEHA. the group of
German, Italian, Japanese and Spanish shareholders with stock in SOHAIR and
comm have agreed in 1982 to pay a surcharge on Nigerien uranium raising its
price to 26,000 CPA francs per kilo. but this move will not prevent the 1982
revenue which the state derives from these two companies falling below 10 bil-
lion CPA francs.

The real problem lies in the decreased demand for uranium in the world market.
The major producing countries, such as the United States and Canada. are also
the Iain users of uranium. They produce enough to satisfy their own require-
ments and have huge reserves without even counting the reserves of the uraniu-
in Namibia and Australia. The rate of growth of consuaption in the world can-
not be measured by the example of France because the Preach nuclear program
constitutes a genuine epiphenomenon as a result of the fairly moderate attitude
of its environmentalists and of the fact that the EDP [French Electric Comany],
which is a state cospany, can take out long-term loans without desperately try-
ing to seek profits. While it is true that the cost of one oil or coal-
generated kilowatt is respectively three and two tines higher than the cost of
one nuclear kilowatt. in the case of the nuclear kilowatt most of that cost
represents the initial investment. This is why in Anglo-Saxon countries. where
the generation of electricity is in the hands of private companies. the fact
that it takes a long time to build a nuclear power station (around 12 years)

12
FOR OFFICIAL MONEY
FOR1OFFKJAI,US€CNNLY

acts as a deterrent given the uncertainty of changes in the price of equipment.
The overall situation is already negative in the United States, where there
have been far more cancellations than new orders.

Prance itself could be led to take advantage of some characteristics of the
uranium market. Indeed, its own estimated reserves (150,00J tons with about
2,600 tons mined annually) will only last 50 years providing that its power
plants continue to operate as they are doing now by importing 60 percent of
the uranium requirements, or 23 years if they only use French uranium. But
the rate at which uranium will be purchased could be influenced by the advan-
advantages offered by the storage of concentrated uranium from the viewpoint
of cost (a 3-year supply of uranium to feed a power station costs the same as
a 3-aonth supply of fuel oil) and of the storage area required (a 2-year sup-
ply or uranium for all the French nuclear power plants can be stored in a
hangar). Consumption will also decline as the use of the breeder reactor be-
cones more generalized and this has nothing to do with the fear of exhausting
reserves of fuel but with wanting to use the potential energy of uranium more
efficiently.

Looking ahead 30 years. and barring a political upheaval which would result in
Europe being cut off from the oil fields of the Middle East, this situation is
not likely to improve since Great Britain has its offshore oil in the North
Sea, the PRC has large reserves of lignite as a backup fuel and Japan, which
could be a good buyer or uranium, is suffering from an acute attack of "en-
vironmental fever." After that period, the prospects for uranium could be
good again if, as will probably be the case, no other source of energy is found
which can replace uranium from a commercial standpoint.

Summing up, one cannot suspect the companies, either French or foreign, which
are involved in the mining and concentrating of uranium in Niger of being in
that business for speculative purposes and, as far as that country is concern-
ed, these companies continue to be irreplaceable clients. Half of the produc-
tion of concentrate of sodium uranste or concentrate of magnesium uranate, not
sold to Prence, is regularly exported to the other four countries, partners of
SOHAIR and COHINAK, in proportion to the capital contributed. The ONAREH (Na-
tional Office of Mineral Resources of Niger) sold 2,000 tons of concentrated
ore to Libya with a surcharge even higher than the one paid by the Western
countries. The use to which that ore will be put remains unclear.

Along with extracting the ore the operating companies and their shareholders
are careful to make this a profitable operation and to bring to the Saharan
population the technical benefits which result from these operations. The

first unit (1y megawatt) of a coal-burning thermal power plant in Aneu-

Araren, which burns locally mined coal, began operations in 1981. This power
plant is run by SONICHAR [Anou-Arsren Coal Company of Niger], a company in which
the Nigerien state holds 60 percent interest, the Islamic Development Bank. 23.6
percent, and SOHAIR and COHINAK together, 16 percent. A second unit with the
same generating capacity will be added to the first to provide electricity to
the mines and the concentration plants, and to neighboring towns, especially to
Agades. The agricultural experiment of AHIDAR (Arlit Hydro-agricultural De-
velopment) run by the CBA [Atomic Energy Commission] under the sponsorship of

13
FIIICHWGCIAI.INNI(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nigerien Hinistry of Rural Developnent, an experiment which involves pulping
water fron deep layers and using mineral fertilizers to improve the soil. has
made it possible to plant orchards and fields right in the niddle of the desert,
initiating the local population in the use of irrigation. The project is al-
ready supplying the personnel of the mines, in Agedea and even in Niamey with
fruits and vegetables during part of the year.

The 650 has of road between Tahoua and Arlit-which was completed in December
1980 and is absolutely essential to supply the nining district (25 kilos of
material and niecellaneoua products lust be brought in to obtain 1 kilo of
uranium concentrate)-was financed by CONCERTA [expansion unknown] with the
nining partners contributing 75 percent as their share. These partners have
also helped to set up the Hining School of the Air legion which graduates 60
forenen a year. Some of then go to work in the mines while the others have no
trouble finding jobs in Nigerian industry.

The fact remains that the expansion of mining operations will be slowed down by
the economic situation and that it will be subject, above all, to an increase in
demand. The N'rassa N'Teghalgue Mining Company (surr) constituted by ONABIH,
COGEHA and Kuwait Foreign Trading Contracting and Investment, pursues that goal.
A consortiun formed by ONAREH, COGIHA and the 0.5. conpsny CDNOCO has carried
out exploration work in the region of Inouraram, 90 hma south of Arlit. These
operations have revealed the existence of a deposit of 100,000 tons of low-
content uranium. Pluor (USA) and Crops (France) have conducted a feasibility
study on that deposit. Prospecting for coal continues and, in this sphere, in-
portant signs and deviations have been noted.

Necessary Adaptation

The decline in earnings, created by the drop of uranium prices in the market,
has meant an econonic slowdown and a significant heightening of social tensions.
Another effect was that the Treasury reserves have alnost disappeared, dropping
from 20 billion to 10 billion CPA francs in 2 years and these reserves were, in
fact, the security for the government debt in the private sector (public works)
and in the senipublic sector. This development is accompanied by a higher
foreign trade deficit, by the postponement or delay in the implementation of
major projects (a sugar refinery in Tillabery, a cenent plant, a den in
Kandsdji) and, finally, by a drop in the nunber of orders with consequent fi-
nancial difficulties for the enterprises.

At the sane time, the country is turning more and more to foreign aid to finance
its progrsns. In 1981. the amount of foreign aid received was 86 billion CPA
francs, of which 25 billion were provided by France and, in 1982, the latter is
expected to give at least 5 billion more; the anount of Arab aid requested for
the current fiscal year is almost 20 billion CPA francs.

Niger realizes the importance of this aid even if only half of it is free of
charge and even if it means a future increase of its debt servicing charges
which have already junped from 2.4 billion CPA francs in 1976 to 16.6 billion

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1982. But Niger must also realize that there is a certain gap between the
abundance of proposals and aid given and the reality of the economic situ-
ation.

For the time being, nothing is likely to replace uranium in the country's pack-
age of resources. Peanuts and cotton have practically disappeared from the
statistics. Exports of meat and of cattle on the hoof remain at their usual
low level. Prospects are good for the textile industry where SONITEXTIL [ex-
pansion unknown], formerly NITEX [expansion unknown], has been strengthened by
its partnership with Schaeffer, Riegel Textile Corporation, CFAO [French Com-
pany of West Africa] and CR? [expansion unknown]. But its production will only
go to the domestic market. ELF [Gasoline and Lubricants Company of France]
continues to carry out explorations in the area around the oil fields of Agadem,
between Ternit and Bilma, but nothing has indica ed, so far, that the project
could be profitable. Projects to mine phosphate and iron are in Say are still
in the initial stages.

Uranium has produced an export economy the profits of which should have made it
possible to exploit more mineral resources, to implement large projects and to
develop potential resources on an industrial scale. In the same measure that
uranium revenues decline, the economic objectives must be redirected, lacking
support from exports toward agriculture to substitute for imported goods, but
despite the fact that it is very important and in conformity with the social
organization established in the country by the new regime, this cannot have

the same attraction for international capital. It is to be hoped that the gap
mentioned in the previous paragraph will close gradually.

This situation requires more than just postponing the implenentation of un-
profitable projects and revising the estimated expenditures of the 1979-1983
5-year plan. It also calls for using the maximum amount of available financial
resources, that is to say foreign resources, to replace unnecessary imports,
mostly by making the country self-sufficient in food production. Col Seyni
Kountche, who keeps a close yearly account on the crops, thinks that in 1932
the country will probably have to buy 120,000 tons of grain which will increase
the deficit of the balance of payments by 20 billion CPA francs.

Because it is consistent, French and European aid will play an important role
during this period, which is not so much one of "harrowing changes" as of
adaptation to circumstances; it has already done so by channeling most of its
available funds into hydroagricultural development projects in the Niger River
Valley. The recently started projects of Namarde-Goungou, Karma and Karaigorou
will increase the irrigated area by 1,200 hectares, and the ED? [European De-
velopment Fund] will have thus financed 25 percent of Niger's water projects
for agricultural purposes.

French aid stands at a high level. In terms of value, it amounts to 30 percent
of all aid given by foreign governments. This aid was the driving force behind
the study and implementation of big projects such as Kadandji, the railroad
between Parakou and Niamey. the teleconnmnications network, the university,

and industrial and mining development. But in the sphere of rural development,
the assistance has been limited (23 percent of the credits granted by the Aid

15
roe omau. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Cooperation Fund and 10.4 percent of loans extended by the Central Fund
for Economic Development during the last 5 years) and a change of policy is

required. There mat also he a change of direction in the technical aid aya-
ten which has hardly evolved.

Uranium is not "finished" as some people are happy to announce. For a certain
period of time, and it is hard to say how long, uranium will have to occupy a
less prominent position in the programs. Investments must be selectively re-
vised. This is not a heart attack but, as a mechanic would say, a slowdown in
the timer regulating the speed of development. After clearing away the am-
biguities cluttering the conference table, President Hitterrand and President
Kountche will be able to effectively devote their talks to the tenor of the
changes required as far as French aid is concerned.

FOOTNOTES

1. Currently. they number 800,000 and are divided in several "confederations":
Sandal-Amatitan in the Koutous, Rel-Air and Kel-Gresa. There are also some
Ulliminden near Mali and some Jambanza ("red foreigners" in Hausa) who ar-
rived in that region before the Touaregs. By extension. the Berbera are
called Azbinawa (nen from Air) in Niger.

2. In 1979, the capital stock of scam (Air Region Mining Calpany) was
6,348.9 million CPA francs distributed as follows: Nigerien state (011M
[National Office of Hineral Resourcesl). 33 percent; comm, 27 percent;
French companies, 27 percent; Urangeaellachaft. 6.5 percent; Agip Nucleare,
6.5 percent. The comm (Akouta Mining Cowany) had a capital stock of
3,550 million CPA francs with cum holding 31 percent of the stock;
COGEHA, 25 percent; 0031) [mansion unknown] (Japan). 25 percent and “USA
[expansion unknown] (Spain). 10 percent.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux st Cie Paris 1982

8796
(:30: 4 719/981

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

dOUNTRY'S NEUTRALITY IN FALKLANDS HAR SEEN AS 'CURIOUS'
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE in French No 1115, 19 May 82 p 26

[Article by our special envoy in Baker, Siradiou Diallo: "Senegambia Requires
Ital

[Text] Dakar and the Cape Verde peninsula have always been considered a
strategic position of prime importance in the eyes of military experts. It is
known that during the last year (1939-1965), De Gaulle tried in vain to con-
quer it. And the Petsin regime did all it could to retain it. During the
negotiations which led to Senegal's independence (1960), the French government
insisted upon keeping a naval air base in Dakar. The strategic interest of the
Cape Verde peninsula has just been discovered by the British government on the
occasion of the Helvinas war. *

For two weeks, Royal Air Force planes coming from their bases in Great Britain
have been putting on a veritable airborne ballet in the skies above the baker-
Xoff airport. Hercules 6-130 type aircraft heavily laden with war materiel
land or take off there in very quick succession. Tine only to fill the tank,
refurbish the water supply. and quickly check the engines. On the landing
strip, it is not unusual to find a civilian Aerolineas Argentinas plane

parked next to the RAF planes. The apparent Senegalese neutrality is such
that the British and Argentine crews could iraternize, if they wished to do so.
when they have time to rest and relax sonewhat, they coexist and get along on
very good terms at the Hotel Teranga, at the Diarama or at the Ngor hotel.

Hhile waiting to do battle under less kindly skies, British and Argentines
stroll around like amiable tourists, cameras and movie cameras slung over their
shoulders, through the streets of Dakar.

In is a curious neutrality which allows the planes of one former colonial power,
Great Britain in this case, to use the airport of a non-aligned country to go
bomb the territory of another non-aligned country! or course, with the birth
of Senegsnbie, Senegal's heart beats somewhat to the rhythn of the Common-
wealth. It is not in the name of the solidarity of the menbers of this group
that another African country. Sierra Leone, is authorizing British warships on
their way to the Hslvinss to put in at Freetown? ﬂight we say that North-
South relations are solid in ways in which South-South ties are not? The atti-
tude of the Dakar and Freetown governments in any case reveals the weakness of

17
IOI1DFFKJAI.USIIINLV
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

of Third World ormiutione. Portmtely. ever and drove the official
positions. the people's heart. do not aver. in thin me those of the African
people- beet to the rhytb e! the rive Argentine! (”Ions Live Argentimi").
And no it will be a lens as there rennin- one parcel of colonial territory to
be liberated.

COPYRIGHT: Jenna Afrique 6mm 1982.

9927
cso: 5719/1009

18
”WWMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2M

SUCCESS 0? WE'S EUROPEAN TRIP 3mm
Paris mm AFRIQUB in French 9 Jun 82 pp 28-29

(Article, by our Harare special correspondent Francois Soudan: "In the Land
of continuing Hiracle"]

[Text] Robert Mugabe case to introduce his country to
Europe. with sons strong trunps in his hand.

Robert Mugabe is a cala president. Unlike sons of his African counterparts,
glued to their presidential palace out of an obsessive fear that a coup d'etat
is just waiting for his departure to break out, the Zinbabwean prine sinister
on 3 June was to.coaplete a trip far fron Harare. what better argment,

after all, could there be than such a long absence—seven European countries
visited in close to three weeks*--to denonstrate to the West that there was
no substance to the dire predictions of civil war that have been stirred up
continually since the ouster of Joshua Mono in February 1981? "Zinbabwe is
a stable country," Robert Mugabe said repeatedly in both private talks and
press conferences. "Help out. Invest. History will vindicate you." Did he
persuade his listeners, this 57-year-old fornsr guerrilla leader who 26 months
ago because prime minister of what used to be white-farner Rhodesia?

Daubtless it is too soon to say. But after several days spent between harare
and Bulawayo, frOn townships to ministerial offices, one can at least say with

certainty that there is a case to be nade.

The first success. and a renrkable one it isnuugabe called it a "veritable
miracle" in London-was the fomtion of an integrated national srny. The odds
were certainly against any attempt to turn ex-freedon fighters accustoud to
loose discipline into a highly structured force by integrating then with the
white offiers who fornerly served under Ian Smith and had fought against then
for 7 years. Especially since relations between the guerrillas of ZIP“
[Zinbabwe People‘s Liberation Array] (mono) and ZANLA [Zistabwe African
National Liberation Arny] (Hugebe) have not been warn since pre-indspendence
days. It is a fact unique in the annals of colonialism that it is the sane
white general--Sandy McLean-who was couander in chief of the colonial arny,

 

* Great Britain, Heat Ger-any, Italy. Rolland. Belgiun, France and Greece.

19
mammal“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who today commands his former adversaries, the latter having moved up from
the status of "terrorists" to that of regular soldiers. Assisted by Rex
Nhongo (the former commander of ZANLA) and Hafela Hasuku (ZIPRA). HacLean

is at the head of 60,000 men who have been trained and organized by 70
British advisers and 300 "recycled" white officers. This army, the
reorganization of which was completed several months ago, has in the main
succeeded in withstanding the tensions which divided Robert Mugabe and Joshua
Nkomo in 1981: only 500 ZIPRA guerrillas (out of 20,000) deserted when

"Big Josh“ was thrown out. There remains one question. however: what is
ultimately to be the real mission of the 5th brigade, trained in the eastern
mountains by north Korean instructors and composed exclusively of former
”Mugabe-ite" combatants from ZANLA1 Some observers in Rarara believe that
this elite unit, extremely low-profile at the moment. might well constitute
Rorert Hugabe's pretorian guard...

The spectacular military reconciliation is in fact nothing but the reflection
of another. more fundamental one: that between Whites and Blacks. ”You are
Africans like us." Mugabe had told them. "He want you to stay." Hostile,
then skeptical (60,000 of them left the country in two years). many were
finally convinced. and the emigration rate has been in decline for several
months. These 170,000 "white Zimbabweans" (compared to 210,000 at the time
of independence) are no longer interested in politics. and only two things
matter to them: the education of their children, and maintaining their
standard of living.

At their private pools and bridge clubs they talk at great length about their
apocalyptic fears that the social changes made by the new regime will translate
into a decline in their income. And it is true that free primary education,
the spectacular expansion of the health infrastructure, the general increase

in wages and the creation of 100.000 jobshaveconsiderably increased their

tax burden. But it is also trua--and many admit it-that they would never

find such quality of life in Europe, Australia or even South Africa:

"Zimbabwe is super!" proclaim the tee-shirts worn by their fair-haired
children.

But for the great rural masses-~90 percent of the 7.5 million inhabitants-
the change from Rhodesia to Zimbabwe is not always in evidence. Only lb,000
peasant families crowded into the Tribal Trust Lands (native reserve areas
on poor land) have been re-estsblished on white farms abandoned by their
proprietors. Officially it is claimed that in the next 3 years some l6b,000
families will be established in this way. But in order to do that it is
necessary to compensate the European farmers--credibility compels it--and
thus considerable sums of money must be mobilized. This is undoubtedly the
most difficult problem today confronting Robert Mugabe and his finance
minister. Bernard Chidzero. Especially since the Zimbabwean economy, once
the euphoric boom of the months inediately following independence had
subsided. has settled into an unstable equilibrium. Growth in Gross National
Product [GNP], which had reached the remarkable level of 12 percent in 1980
and 10 percent in 1981, will probably not exceed 5 percent this year. The
rumors of a massive devaluation of the Zimbabwean dollar (between 12 and 20
percent) are becoming increasingly believable in Harare, and several gold,

20
FOI‘OFFIJAI.USE¢IILY
FOR'OFFHJAI.IEHE(NNLV

nickel and asbestos mines belonging to Anglo-American and Turner Newall, have
had to either close their operations or cut back. worldwide recession, drop
of currency, the disastrous corn harvest of 1981 (down 45 percent because of
drought) and the shortage of skilled labor are probably responsible for the
disappointing level of Hestern investment. in spite of the modest success

a year ago of the International Conference for the Reconstruction and
Development of Zimbabwe (ZIHCORD). This concerned Robert Mugabe and allegedly
convinced him to go to Europe to plead the young republic's cause, despite
his abhorrence of "the perpetual mendacity of some Third World leaders.“

He came to obtain the loans needed to finance the very ambitious 1983-1986
development plan. which calls for expenditures equal to Fr 36 billion. or CPA
Pr 1.700 billion. 38 percent of which are supposed to come from 0800
[Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development] countries.

Is there real substance behind his high-sounding words, and does he have the
nationwide base needed? Apparently. yes. His prestige has not been tarnished
in two years of independence, and his party, ZANU, [Ziababwe African National
Union]. has a solid majority (57 of 100 seats) in the parliament. Especially
since the spectacular winning over of five of the 10 white deputies in Ian
Smith's Republican Front (which has now become politically insignificant).
There remains Joshua Nkomo's ZAPU [Zimbabwe African People's Union]. which is
still quite popular in Hatabeleland and which has not without reason been
accused of fomenting armed disorders. But between the hardliners of his
party grouped around former political commissar Dumise Debengwa (known as

the "black Russian") and the conciliators (particularly the four ZAPU
ministers who remained in the government after the ouster of their leader),
"Big Josh" is left with nothing more than an increasingly marginalised role
as mediator.

In any case, he is no longer the undeniable leader of the opposition, the
alternative he had hoped to become. And it will not be for him to exploit

the real differences within ZANU dividing a radical central committee born

in the guerrilla phase and a very pragmatic governing team. These differences,
incidentally. are responsible for the prime minister's sometimes inconsistent
rhetoric: violent. very "Comrade Bob" when he speaks in Shona to members

of his party; moderate. almost soothing when he speaks in English to white
farmers. Split personalitv? No. the tactical skill of a loner for whom
solitude, up to this point, has been a pretty good teacher.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GBDPJIA 1982

9516
C50: $719,1085 END

21
IORIOFIIJAI.UBIGMNLY