FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10678
22 July 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 783

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOT!

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
nevspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, uith the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or follouing the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information use
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation uas summarized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication-in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBNINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

P000 NO. 783

Coureurs

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Briefs -
Opposition Members in France

CHAD

Reasons for Victory of Hiaaein Habre Noted
(Siradiou Diallo; JBUNB AFRIQUB. 16 Jun 82) ......

Briefs
Goukouni'a Actions Against GUNT Members

CONGO

Briefs
COC Temporary Executive Commitee Disbanded
Strengthened 'talian Cooperation
PCT Central Committee Meeting
Special Assembly Seosion
French Aid. Romanian Delegation

DJIBOUTI

Afar Ethnicity Linked to Creation of PPD
(AFRICA. Feb 82) soaaoaooaasaaassaassoaooeaooaooeo

ETHIOPIA

Tripartite Alliance Seeks to Curb 'U.S. Imperialism'
(mchp Feb 82) sososea.soaaoooosesaaseaeasaasass

GABON

Nation's Economic Situation in 1981 Analyzed
(MARCHES TROPICAUX 8T HBDITERRANBENS. 16 May 82) .
Document Describes Mining Activities in 1981
(MARCMES TROPICAUX ET MBDITERBANBINS. 11 Jun 82) ........

Briefs
Insecurity in Libreville
Asoco's Gsbon Activities

GAMBIA

Briefs
National Assesbly Session

GUINEA
Briefs
Joint Danish Shipping Operations
Spenish Relations
KENYA

Anslysis of Luhys. Nsudi Lsnd'Brswl
(AFRICA. p.b 82) sssessessesoosesessessssessossesssessss

LIBERIA
Briefs
IDA Credit
Mining Project
NIGER
Briefs

Desertificstion Advsncing
Belgian Cooperstion

NIGERIA

Probless in stor Situstion Reviewed -
(Edi. Iron; m1“. Apr 82) OOIOOOOOOQIOOOO'IOOOe..000.

SENEGAL

Planned Cuthsck in French Cooperstion Mission Reported
(MARCHES TIOPICAUX ET MEDITERRAMIBMS, 16 Msy 82) .......

Briefs
Stopover for British Militsry Aircreft

ZAIRB

Politicsl. Economic Beckground Reviewed
(AFRICA. Apr 82) A...0.0.0.....0.‘I.OO‘QOQOOOOI‘.IOOO'OO

. b -
IOIIOIIICIAI.IEII(HMLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

OPPOSITION moans IN mum preeence in France of two members of the
opposition sought by the Central African police hee angered the authoritiee in
Bangui. One of the coauthors of the pro-Pataaee coup d'etat attempt on 3 March,
General Boziae, is reported to have been living in a southern suburb of Paris
for 3 nonthe. As to Lt Col Kano-ago. former lender of the me [Central Afri-
can People'e Liberation Movement] headed by Ange Pateeea. he arrived in the
French capital at the beginning of my after being expelled iron the Congo.
French Hinieterial Delegate to the Minietry of thernal Relations for Coopera-
tion Jean-Pierre Cot will doubtleae, during his firnt trip to Bangui. which is
scheduled for 9 July, neke an effort to alleviate the concerne of hie inter-
locutore on the aubject of the activitiee of theae two men. [Textlll’aria

JEUNE AFRIQUB in French No 1119. 16 Jun 82 p 381(00m168'l‘: Jeune Afrique
GRUPJIA 1982.] 5151

050: (0719/1119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REASONS FOR VICTORY OF “188813 “333 MED
Perle JBUNB AFRIQUB in French No 1119. 16 Jun 82 pp 26-27
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Chadunnd of a bong March"]

[Text] Never two without the third. After having occupied I'djanene twice

(in 1978 and 1979) on a trial baaia. niaeein Bebre hee juet pulled off a vari-
table naater coup with hie third entry into the city. The leader of the ﬂor-
thern Arned Porcee (PAN) took over the capital of Chad at dawn on 7 June.
without encountering any real reaietance there. Accoqanied by the laat group
of faithful followers. President Goukouni Oueddei had croaaed the Cheri River
a ehort tine previously. seeking refuge in Cameroon. juat ae Bieeain labre had
done in 1980. when he waa forced to leave udjanena when it wee occupied by the
forcea of the Treneitional National Union Govern-ant (CWT). which were eup-
ported by Libyan air power and armored unite.

The chief of the PAN cboee to live in neroua. 275 he to the aouth of Kouaeeri.
But aince he planned to continue the war. the Caneroonian authoritiee notified
him that he would have to leave the country. There ia good reaeon to praeuu
that Goukouni Oueddei will aoon be the recipient of the same injunction:
either to bury the war hatchet for good and reaein in Canaroon. or to go elae-
where. Perhapa to Algeria. whoae anbaaeador in Yaounde in reported to have
been eounded out already in this connection by repreeentetivee of the van-
quiahed chief of state. Faced with the eene alternative. Biaaein aabre. for
his part. choae Sudan an the heat nation-a choice which paid off.

Establiehed on the frontier between Sudan and Chad. in the little village of
Djenena. it did not take the chief of the PAR very long to reorganize hie
troope. which included aoae 2.000 nan at that tine. Sone were eurvivora fron
Ndjeaena. while othere had cone fron other parte of Chad which the GUNT forcea
had eubaequently occupied. The town denoninator for all theee nan wea the
high level of their norale. And that waa deepite the cruehing defeat auffered
aoae daya earlier in Ndjaaena. All the foreign conentatore were atruck by
the confidence of ﬂieeein liabre'a eupportere. Confidence first of all in then-
aelvea. but alao in their leader. for when they were all ready to fight and
even nake the supreme eacrifice. United Nationa experta. repreaentativea of
hunanitarian organizatione. doctore end journaliate. without distinction. were
keenly iqreeaed by the deteraination of theee guerrilla fightera. the frugal--
ity of their livea and the iron diacipline which prevailed in their ranhe.
Quarturcd for the most part within their own country. their main leaders
included. the FAN benefited from firm support from abroad. beginning with
neighboring Sudan. As a rear base. this country provided hissein Habre with
valuable logistic aid. despite the open hostility of the people who. in the
frontier region. are profoundly Mahdist and more or less sympathetic to
Qsdhdhafi. Setting aside the other obstacles. including those having to do
with language. President Nimeiri gave massive and unfailing support to the
PAR. The retreat of the Libyan troops from Chad at the end of 1981. followed
shortly afterward by the visit paid by Goukouni Oueddei to Khartoum. changed
nothing of this. The protestsby'the chief of state in Sudan concerning non-
intervention were nothing but a wartime ruse. He continued to aid the nation-
alist chief of the north well and truly.

Foodstuffs, weapons, ammunition and fuel bound for the zones controlled by the
PAN continued to pass through Sudan. Prom Egypt there came not only weapons
and ammunition taken from the arsenals established in earlier times by the
Soviets. but military advisers responsible for training recruits as well.
Communications were organized with the aid of Egyptian technicians and the
transmissions themselves were relayed by communications centers in Cairo. As
to the nerve center of the war. the money needed to buy foodstuffs. to pay the
soldiers and to finance the many missions abroad. it was mainly Saudi Arabia
which took charge.

Riyadh also provided Hissein Habre with considerable diplomatic support. not
only through it dense network of relations in the Arab world and in Africa.

but in the West as well. The fact that certain leaders turned such a deaf ear
to the repeated appeals for aid from the president of the CUNT cannot be ex-
plained otherwise. Finally. behind this curtain of inextricably involved com-
plicity and more or less indirect support was the United States. Determined to
oppose Quadhdhafi everywhere and by every means. the Americans had to support
the leader of the FAN. Hadn't Hissein Babre provided indications enough of his
hostility toward the turbulent Libyan leader?

Since the outcome of the Claustre affair. that French ethnologist he was forced
to release under a double injunction from Goukouni and Qadhdhafi. he professed

a fierce hatred of the latter. Since the enemy of its enemy was necessarily
its friend. the United States had hardly any problem in aiding Hissein Habre.

Strengthened by such solid diplomatic support and served by a well-organized
and perfectly disciplined army. the chief of the PAR was bound to triumph.

Particularly when he was opposed only by an eclectic coalition representing
ill-restrained ambitions. The factions making up the GUNT had neither cohesion
nor a plan nor a true leader. "The only real force in this country is Hissein
Habre and him alone,“ we were told with a touch of bitterness in December of
198| by Ahmat Acyl. the GUNT minister of foreign affairs and leader of the
Revolutionary Democratic Council. “If the inter-African force for maintaining
peace remains neutral and does not help us. he will make short work of us."
Now the DAB contingent made of Nigerian. Senegalese and Zairean troops (3.000
men in all) has remained with weapons at the order.

MW AFF'FV‘V '11.... A‘WV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After harassing the Libyan troops stationed in the eastern part of Chad. the
FAN followed in pursuit as soon as they began their retreat in November 1981.

Immediately taking Abeche. and then Biltine and Faye-Largeau, hissein Babre's
men made a lengthy stay in Oum Adjer. And after waging a harsh battle against
the government troops, they then took all the time they needed to reestablish
their ranks and their liaison and supply lines before launching a pincer opera-
tion against Ndjamena. After the fall of Ati. the stronghold of Ahnat Aoyl's
Revolutionary Democratic Council. as well as Hongo and houssoro. nothing fur-
ther stood in the way of their entry into Ndjsmena.

The only key position remaining along the route.to the capital was Hassaguet.
80 km to the north of the capital. Now after 5 hours of violent battle be-
tween the FAN and Goukouni's People's Armed Forces. Hassaguet, in turn. fell
on the evening of 5 June. THO days later. the PAR. commanded by Idriss Deby.
the deputy chief of the general staff, took Ndjamens.

This victory was the culmination of a long march undertaken 10 years ago by
Hissein Babre. his stubbornness proved strategically successful. even if.
tactically speaking. it sometimes played him dirty tricks. This was the case
in 1980, when having refused to negotiate a cease-fire with Goukouni

he provided the president of the GUNT with a golden pretext for appealing to
the Libyans to drive him out of Ndjsmena. At the present time, it is Goukouni
Goukouni's turn to meditate on his stubbornness. For in the end it was his
categorical refusal to agree to any negotiations with his brother enemy (as
urged by the can) which led to his defeat. The fact remains that the resort
to arms has finally determined the outcome of the long civil war in Chad. and
has brought forth a leader--Hiasein Hebre. whose victory is now total and un-
challenged.

Provided the redoubtable faction leader is able to prove himself a skillful
statesman. And can promote a policy of reconciliation. unity and national
understanding involving all the forces and all the individuals useful to peace.
And that he erases the errors of French diplomacy. which were after all only
the result of a misunderstanding. In order to bind up the wounds of Chad and
relaunch the train of its development. which has been standing. disabled. in
the station in Ndjamena for 15 years.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1982.

5157
050: 6719/1119

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

GOUKOUNI'S ACTIONS AGAINST GUN'I' mm~Porner president Goukouni Ousddei
sought to clear the epsce around his in the nonthe which preceded his fell

(7 June) by eliminating e11 the lukewern elements in the GUN? [Transitional
National Union Government] suspected of venting to desl with nissein Bebre.
The first terget wee Col Ks-ougue. for whose street for "treason" Gouhouni hes
signed an order so of the end of Jenuery. with the agree-ent of certein offi-
ciels of the southern forces end It number of officers in the Chsdisn Arsed
Forces (FAT) hostile to the colonel. whose nilitery strength lies shove all
with Felix Helloun's for-er gendems. The Zaireen chief of state. Hohutu
Sese Sekn. was temporarily successful in suspending the inplessntstion of that
order. Goukouni then blend Ahnst Acyl in this connection. This time. he was
to come up sgeinst the Libyan veto. [TextllPeris Jam AFRIQUB in French

No 1119. 16 Jun 82 p 38][C0?!RIGBT: Jeuns Arrique GRUPJIA 1981.] $157

080: 0719/1119

PGR OWTCIM. USP. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

COC TWORARY EXECUTIVE CWT!!! DISBANDEDnThe executive Co-ittee
of the Brazzaville Chanber of Co-erce has disbanded on 22 Hay after a

general neeting held under the chair-anahip of the Congolese Itiniater of
Genome. mange Ngaporo. According to the einister, the chaeber'a situation
is ”diaaatrous" and narked by a ”disgraceful apathy." Be also declared that
"things have not been clear" during the two inepectiona which took place
recently, in particular as regards eanagenant. The tamorary executive
couittee elected on government initiative is headed by Apthoo Note.

omcon [Rational Marketing Office] general nsnager. The first vice president
is Marcel Castanou, SIM [expansion unknown] , the second, Heurice Opany
(press staff), the third, Brosper Gandzien. The treasurer is Andre Batanga,
BNBC [National Developmt Bank of the Congo]. Certain persons, without
being were of the Congolese government, have observed at tiles sons short-
coaings in the operation of the Brazzaville Chain! of Co-srce. but the
deciaion to aet up a tenorary executive conittee. at the very meant when
the Chader of Col-area was engaged as the headquarters of the federation of
co-aercial coapanies in Central Africa. and especially the charges nade
against the nanageeent. have aroused anxiety mg the canpaniea vhich operate
operate in the Congo. [Text] [Paris “GEES 1'30?ch IT mum-manuals in

Irench No 1909, ll Jun 82 p 1517, 1518] (comm: Rene noreux at Cie
Paris 1982] 8490

5mm ITALIAN COORBA‘IIOilm-President Saeaou Bgueeao received Roberto
Palleachi. Italian secretary of state for develop-ant cooperation on 2 June
in Brazzaville. At the concluaiOn of this aeaaion, the Italian secretary of
state and theninister delegate to the president of the (huge. in charge of
cooperatiOn. especially in the fields of public works. fishing. mining.
energy and finance. [Text] [Paris "ARMS TROPICMIX ET “DIM in
French No 1909, 11 Jun 82 p 1518] [COPYRIGB'Iz Rene Koren et Cie Paris 1982]

8690

PCT CW COHI'I'I'BB "sermon-rho Central comittee of the Congolese Labor

Party (PCT). the country's single party, held a regular Ieeting at the beginning
of May, in Brazzaville, to study the situation in Africa (Naaibia, Western Sahara.
Chad). Among other things, the Central emittee called on the can to Deco-e
united again on the matter of adeitting the SW (Saharan Denocratic Arab
Republic) in its ranks. [Text] [Paris MARCHES WIQUX a'r razor-Emma in
French No 1905, 14 Hay 82 p 1286] [COPYRIGBTI Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982]

8796

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPmiAL ASSEMBLY SESSION--1he People's National Assembly of the Congo has been
convened on special session to study supporting measures for the 1982-1986 Five-
Year Plan. l'i‘sxt] lParis mm TROPICAUX B'i‘ mlmms in French No

1905, 14 May 82 p 1286] lCOP‘lRIGIl'l‘: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

FRENCH MD, mamas DELEGATIOﬂuM financing agreements involving a total of
200 million CPA francs (4 million French francs) were recently signed in
Brazzaville between Congo and France. The two agreements deal with the agri-
cultural sector and more specifically, with agronomicai research and small—
scale motorization. Also, a Rmanian delegation headed by Karin Capisizu,
secretary of state for agriculture and food industry. has just paid an
official visit to the Congo. Among other things, the delegation had talks
with Henri Djonbo, minister of water and forestry, and was received by Aime
Emanuel Yoka, minister delegate to the president's office in charge of
cooperation. The delegation also toured several agribusiness plants in the
outskirts of Brazzaville. ['rextl [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX er IBDITBRRANEENS in
French No 1905, 14 May 82 p 1286] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982]
8796

C80: 4719/983

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAR ETHNICITY LINKED TO CREATION 0? PP!)

London AFRICA 1n Bngliah Feb 82 pp 33-34

[Text]

N October. Djibouti ofﬁcially
became a oneparry state. under
President Hanan Uouted's ruling
Rasaemblernent Populaire pour
Progres (RPP). it hardly seemed a
negesary moye 3- the eountry had no
or erreoogmze mesa a. n
fact.thePreeident'?decisbnnt¥iwse¥ a
one-
the aoonal Amory. was sparked
ottbyagetf’t'orttogecl le-of
any 0 e an a con
grooms earlier.“ P
This was the Pattie P Iaire de

Djibouti (PPD). prompty dubbed

'anti-nationalistic and subversive by
theGovernmentwhenitwentpublic in
mid-A . Within a month. the
entire -man emewtive committee of

the p new party had been
mum halfot them were
released in the new year). and donor
more of their supporters were brieﬂy

detained. And with the National

Auemb 'e ban on any other

parties. ePl‘ lostanyhopeofbeing

refgntered. and any chance therefore

0 putttn up candidates for the

assembly e ectronswhicharedue tobe

held in a couple of months.

The Government‘s criticisms of the
PPD were extenaive. President
Gouled. who was out of the ooun
whenthePPD'sleaderewereat-reat .
said on his return. that theyhad been
t in; to encourage ethmsm. .and
et me superionty.andtheyhaddmw
bored phlets. in itael! illegal. and
even. ealle .triedtoembeuie
state funds. nether much was

lnlactitiseertainlytruethatthe
autionolwwmwmg
repreaent. '
- .dy WWW”. 0" “if
moon'ttwomatnethntc‘ goon.
' ‘ f Somali-

himaell. .
Similarly of the lending
members of the proposed new party
was the secretary general. Mm
Ahmed ldris. a tormer MP to the

Mohammed leea Dit Sheiko and
Mohammed Siad Arahe and other
MP3. Ahmed Dini had ' (our

"600 as Prune

ears fmmhis
We? ' uterine "'6'

Afar activity - .
In fact the have been move
sineei ndeneein I977. Underthe

French. I Afar: were the ruling
group and the lssas who made up an
estimated 40 per cent of the country's
population. were the critics. The Afars
comprise some 35 per cent of the
population. and the remaining 15 per
cent are Arabs from North or South
Yemen. and Somalis from Somalia.
who.notsurprisinglytendtoalign with
the RPP.

In claiming that the RP? and the
Government is unjust ethnically and
that it is partial. the Afars point. for
exam letotheamnestyannounced for
ﬁveo D ibouti‘sllpoliticalprisoners
tn July. ts left six still held — all
Afars (all convrcted of bomb attacks).

Dini has also argued that Afars are
denied jobs. that French rants
are normally sent to non-Afar areas
while Afar areas are generally neglec-
ted. that the Government has faled in
its development promises and it has
also failed to carry out such matters as
removin the fences and eheclt points
around jibouti town. Ironically. it
was Dini himself who was responsible
for keeping these operation
immediate y after independence.
The appearance of the PD. despite
the Govemment‘s immediate dismis-
sal of it as a tiny group and purely
ethnic. shook the administration
badly. A number of the RPP‘s own

Afar MPs swiftly changed parties.
losing rent free Government houses in
the process. The whole episode made
it clear that President Gouled's theory
of consensus politics is even more
fra ile than had appeared on the
su ace.

Equnily. worrying for the Govem-
men‘. were th links that the PPD might
have been forgnbwith neighbouring
Ethiopia.The P evenclairnedtobe
socialist. and Dini. on a recent visit to
Addis Ababa. got a very warm
reception. Since independence.
PrestdentGouledhasbeenwatehfulof
both his neighbours and equally
distrustful of both. The President is
concerned that neither should have
too much to do with Djibouti.

The Government has reason to be
wary. In December. for example there
was the fatal shooting of a doctor
Osman in the centre of the capital.
There has been no proof of who was
responsible. but Osman wasa member

of the Majerteen'rIa‘n 'o'fSoﬁaTia. and
he has been living in exile for some
years. While apparently uninvolved in
the opposition politics of the Somali
National . Movement. or similar
organizations. two of his brothers
inside Somalia were arrested by
President Siad Barre's regime and
held for some months recently. 11sere
was some reason therefore to believe
Osman's death could have been
political. Whether or not he was af
vrettrn.asoppositionsourcesallege.o
Somali hit squads. cannot be
conﬁrmed; and no evidence has been
produced that the Somali regime is
even prepared to deal with its enemies
If] this way. Nevertheless. the Djibouti
Government ceztainly believes that
the roots of Osman's murder lie in
are“:

q . eepisode .mderlinesthe
vulnerabtylty of the state. and it
demonstrates exactly why theGovern-
ment is so keen that the substantial
French presence in Djibouti remains
unchan . At the moment there are
some LAX!) Frenchmen in D'ibouti.
aswellasaround‘ﬁllltroopsénclud-
ing a demi-brigsde of the orei
Le’ ). a squadron of Mirages s.
a a substantial naval taslt force. in
the territo of3m.m0people. France
of course providesaidofsome20
million dollars a year as well as pays
around 200 million a year for its
troops. co-o rants and other
personnel. rance's interest is
strategic. as D'ibouti commands the
narrow Babel andeb ' tonthe
Red Sea where so much oil still passes.

And. the US. similarly appreciates
the strate ' importance ofthe rtof
Djibouti; ortheﬁrsttinteinl .US
warships paid more visits to Djibouti
than French ones did. That is in fact a
connection that President Gouled
remains cautious about. He strongly
condemned the USIEgypt. Sudan.
Somalia and Oman milit
maneuveres last year. Bri tStar -.
Indeed he even postpone the annual
F ranco-D jibouti military manouveres
to avoid any su ' of tble
involvement in Bright Star. ieh was
also bitterly criticised by two of his
neighbours. Ethiopia and South
Yemen.
Many in D ibouti do resent the
French. and c ’ with reason that
their attitudes are colonial. They say
that almost alll of the 200 million
dollatsayear spentonthet and
advisers oesstraightbaclrto lance.
that the rench es are too high.
that the French re y run everythin
andsoon.Thereismorethanagrain
truth in all this. But still France is
needed by everybody. Ethiopia and
Somalia can‘t trust each other.

As the episode of the PPD empha-
sises. Mars and lssas remain more
than rtially unreconciled. and the
Frenc do still hold the ring to some
degree. So even the bitterest critics of
French policy in Africa mute their
criticism of D 'tbouti.

President ouled has been surpri-
singly successful in lgetting aid from
Arab states—wmi ion dollarsfrom
Saudi Arabia since I977. as much
Eomised by Iraq. as well assums from

uwait. the Emirates and Libya. But
it's not enough. With virtually no
resources (though there is now a real
possibility that there is de level
water to be found with all t t this
would mean for agriculture) and
thousands of refugees still in the
countrymho ﬂedfromthe tingin
Ethiopia four years ago. jibouti
needs all the help it can get. I
mum?! ALLIANCE SEEKS 1'0 CURB 'U. S. ROBIN-1814'

London AFRICA in English Feb 82 pp loll-’05

[text] IN response to joint mili‘ man- Ethiopia's Foreign Minister. Col.
oeuvreS. code-named Brl l 5!" Felelte Gedle-Giorgisdnanotetous
82. involving Egypt. Sudan. alts. Secretary of State. Alexander Haig.

andOman.0tsanued and ﬁnmdbv Felelte warned that Ethiopia will be
the United States of America! the forced to re-examine the mixes of
forci nministers of Eth 'a.Ltbya. its entire policy wear the US
and uth Yemen reoengisheld an should the manoeuvres involve ac-
emerge meeting in A Ababa tions detrimental to Ethiopia‘s
at whicht ey analyzed. and ultimate national interests. Nodetails on what
Iy criticized. operation Bn tStar. this monument could entail were

Many diplomats In A Is Abibt. given but the fact that it was still a
both Ethiopia‘s allies and others. say question of ‘should' the operation
little else could have been done. The prove detrimental. led some obeer~
harshest. andmostextreme.methods vers to believe that But ‘ was still
of retaliation would have been the leavingitsdoortothe US 'ghtl‘ajar.
clause of. or further demand of per- Felelte regards operation t
sonsel cut-backs‘at.' the Ahmencan smasa'war rehearsal‘.andbelieves‘
em assy; an ranian-sty _ anti- - - .
American demonstration outside the nimgn?me:r;eac:)RDdl;(el:agd 23:33,

ant“ 5:32;: aymjd c3"! acronym.the QIF.or Ouicltlnterven-

for joint manoeuvres with the ggnlfgmecme-"Ogcllegdtemstale‘t‘i'tmlw:

i“ '°’P°"”‘ Ethiopia’s deeper integration into the
None of these acts of vengeance m :i l |

was suggested. let alone carried out. “a camp. But. to deeper

Observers in Addis Ababa say prob- “ can 3° is a common "9“.“

. considers its
alive 539:": 52$“: :33”; “a": national and international interests as

hands. Et iopia also remains ab e to 9°" ““6 parcelofthoseofthe socialist

protest. along with its allies. that it h camp. . it even “W9 profound fusion

. Vllh Libya. Washtnfton's t hale
an

never gone so far as to t - .

war operations with the sine? 538:1}! m‘x'gfmmg'm mg:
‘oint manoeuvres. outs' o in; _

llarfetched. would not go down very emergen 3:: together. N“ ”I,

. . . because 0 E 's will. but Libya s
“c" "'5'“ E‘hma' belief that the Bight Star manoeuvres

were above all aimed at its lamahir-
Warning iyah. “therefore. this time around.

re ardles 0! domestic oil revenue

Instead of anything drastic. some " ments at home. promised “by”

pretty vehement words flowed from
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080052-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' ' ' .an will continue. openly termed - ‘mnocm' that M
2m; 5:23;? d 'sucutmbedto us imperialism. ‘ . It a
the lusion characterizes Libyan “W telhnstheﬁ m
— Ethiopian relations. a widenin , ‘ _ lhll spoke the three
memmﬁmsm‘ [ allies right to stand ‘steadlast against
- the provocations.
any novel item emerged. from ‘ Ofﬁcial US—Ethiopian relations
emeréency session in Addts Ababa. it are in a state on constant decline. The
was tniopia's unleashed and unres- tende is [or both countries to
trained diatribe against Sudan. along entre into politically opposite cor-
with ”Ethic ' 's regular opponents. nets. with a welcomin glove only
Since Ga daft‘s denunci. tron of occasionally extended or economic
Sudanese President Nintein at Addis aid reetnents. The gap between the
Ababa‘s Revolution Square last Aug- two. ar from narrowing. is widening
ust. Feleke has managed to walk a to a seemingly unbridgeable gulf.
narrow diplomatic line. with a degree Durin the same week of operation
alequilibrium.concerningSudan. All Bright tar in E . the central
efforts were geared t salvaging the committee of the mision to
hard-won rut sinking mpgroach Organize the Party of the Working
g tStar as en- ’

ment. 0 ration Bri People of Ethiopia (CONE) held its

-.led all t neighbourly pretence. Third Regular Plenary Session.
Although many other issues deman-
lnmaevannaon dulduandmmindunn 0w whn.

when. where and how 0 organizing
Felelte spoke of retardation of the the party. a «inclusive statement ot
achievements oi cooperation in the priorities was that Ethiopia should
region. and particularly with Sudan. stren then its defence capability in
because of “American intervention.‘ the ace of the 'serious tmpenalist
It is probably no coincidence that a threat' that Ethiopia and its allies
reported upsurge in the Eritrean war obviously perceive.-
practically accompanied this de-
terioration in Sudanese - Ethiopian
relations. Although the Sudan has
cligeped the win of the Eritrea
Li ration Front LP) by disarming
and confining many of its members.
the Eritrea People‘s Liberation Front
(EPLF) is apparently enjoying re-
newed Sudanese collaboration. It is
now wondered if Sudanese-Ethiopian
relations have reached a point of no
return.
Sudan‘s cooperation in containing

Eritrean secession is still a ‘ my in
Ethiopia‘s foreign policy. owever. it
now appears that. in a quid pro quo
situation. the carrot is being replaced
by the stick. In the foreign policy
opinion of Ethiopia. althougu Gadda-
ii is not entirely trusted by all as an
ally. he is considered irreversibly
anti-'mperialist. Nimeiri on the other
hand. especially after Bright Star. is

0091111611: 1902 Meta Jaurnala Ltd. 1851‘ W75

cso: moo/us:

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007l02I09: ClA-RDPS2-00850R000500000052-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATION'S BWMC SITUATION IN 1981 ANALYZBD

Paris malts TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEBNS in French is 1905, 16 May 82 pp
128b-1285

mcerptﬂ In 1981, Gabon, like the rest of the developing countries, suf-

fered the repercussions of de economic crisis experienced by the industrial-
iced countries. All its main export commodities (timber, manganese, uranium
and even petroleum) were affected. But while the price of tiaber and uranium
remained stagnant and even dropped in times, the recovery of the American cur-

rency had a favorable effect on the prices of manganese ore and petroleum in
term of their value in CPA francs.

It is therefore likely that total earnings from Gabonese exports increased
again in 1981. Yet, a rather exceptional increase in the country's ieports
caused a certain slippage in the usual surplus of its balance of payments.

In any case, judging by the growth of .its external net assets, the balance of
payments of Gabon was in good shape in 1981. The same can be said regarding
the position of the Gabonese treasury in relation to the banking system.

On the other hand, the final months of the year were marked by an inflationary
pressure which created some social problems and which, in January 1982, led
the government to grant a wave increase for the first time in 2 years.

The year of 1982 looks less promising than the previous one. No big improve-
ment is expected regarding the situation of timber, manganese and uranium.
The upheavals experienced by the oil markets could also deprive the govern-
ment in Libreville of part of its expected revenues and force. it to cut some
of the expenditures included in the 1982 budget.

Agricul tural Production

Cocoa-—In 1980-1981, just over 2,800 tons of cocoa were marketed, this amoums
to 1,000 tons less than in 1979-1980 and 1,500 tons less then in 1978-1979.
This significant drop was partly due to the fact that less cocoa was smuggled
into the country. Other contributing factors were the old age of the cocoa
plantations, the damage caused by brown rot, the shortage of manpower and the
failure to increase the prices paid to farmers.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Yet it should be noted that at the beginning of the 1981-1982 crop year, farm
prices were renegotiated for the second consecutive time. It is true that
these prices are still slightly higher than the prices paid in other African
countries. particularly in Cameroon and in the Ivory Coast, at least as far
as top-quality cocoa is concerned (320 GFA francs per kilo).

In any case, the 1981-1982 crop year seems to have started well since. at the
end of its 3rd month,the harvest was more advanced than in the previous year.

Coffee--1n contrast to what happened with the cocoa. more coffee was marketed
in 1980-1981 than ".1979-1980 (around 1,700 tons compared to 1,300 tons). But
it seems that the gains registered were the result of more coffee being
smuggled from neighboring countries rather than an increase in the country's
production.

As in the case of cocoa. the price paid for coffee remained unchanged for the
second time around during dm 1981-1982 farming year. But it must be pointed
out that this price, which stands at 180 CPA francs for 1 kilo of coffee
berries. is decidedly higher than the prices paid in other French-speaking
African countries. In any case, prospects.remain uncertain in the current
farming year.

Other Crops-Very little information is available regarding agricutural pro-
ducts other than cocoa and coffee. However, it is known that in 1981 Gabon‘s
sugar production was down coupared to 1980 (14,000 tons instead of 17,200
tons) although it produced more than was needed to meet the country's needs.

Forestry Production

Until the end of the first half of 1981, Gabon had been relatively untouched
by the prolonged crisis which affected the market of tropical woods and even
the timber market in general. For instance. the National Timber Company of
Gabon (SNBG) managed to export almost the sane amount of okoune wood as in
1980 and its foreign sales of origo wood were even slightly up.

For the entire year of 1981, results were distinctly less satisfactory. The
SNBG bought 17 percent less okoume wood and 29 percent less origo wood than
in the previous year. This company's exports decreased to a much lesser
extent (5 percent for okoune wood and 16 percent for origo wood). 0n the
other hand. local sales of okoune wood plunged drastically (39 percent) while
sales of origo-which had severely shrunk in 1980-recovered and almost went
back to their 1979 level.

It should be pointed out that despite the economic crisis, France continued
to be a good client for Gabon. In 1981, French imports of okoume and other
Gabonese woods were slightly up.

mining and Industrial Production

As in the case of forestry production, the mining sector of Gabon suffered
the effects of the crisis in the industrialized countries.

1h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hanganese ore exports seem to have been most seriously affected: in 1981, the
shipments made through the port of Pointe-Noire dropped by 28 percent:
1.543.000 tons in 1981 cowared to 2,137,000 tons in 1980.

The COHUP Eranceville Uranium Mining Companﬂ was apparently worse hit than
the comma Egooue Mining Companﬂ since it seem that the amount of uranium
mined in Gabon remained practically unchanged (1,033 tons in 1980. 1,025 tons
in 1981) and that exports decreased just very s1ight1y—999 tons in 1980,
9106 tons in 1981.

- But the volume of crude oil pumped continued to decline: according to special-
ized publications. only 7.65 million tons were pumped, compared to 8.9
million tons in 1980, which amounts to a lit-percent decline. All things con-
sidered, the best results appear to have been achieved in the production of
natural gas where shipments (83.8 million cubic meters) went up by 17 percent
compared to 1980 (71.9 million tons) and by 38 percent compared to 1979.

Gabon does not publish an industrial production index. Also, there are no
figures for the consumption of high-voltage electricity in 1981, which had
amounted to 309.5 million kilowatts per hour in 1980. a 10-pereent increase.
Under these circmstances, it is difficult to have an overall picture of the
recent activity in the industrial enterprises of Gabon.

But we know that the refineries continued to operate at less than full capa-
city and that, in 1981, the two refineries put together processed slightly
less crude oil than in 1980: 1.2 million tons compared to 1.28 million tons.

The timber industry was obviously affected by the repercussions of the crisis.
For instance, French imports of wood savings from Gabon dropped by more than
half in 1981 (2,200 cubic meters cornered to 5,100 cubic meters in 1980).
Things were slightly better with veneer wood and plywood, mainly as a result
of a marked increase of sales in the foreign market.

Prices and "ages

We know that after the first petroleum: "boom," Gabon experienced a disturbing
inflation. After that. prices settled down and for quite a while Gabon was
one of the Black African countries with a slower rate of inflation. But
towards the end of 1981 there was a recurrence of inflationary pressures.

it is true that despite a noticeable increase in the chapter of "building and
public works" (21.2 percent), the wholesale price index rose by just 9.8 per-
cent between November 1980 and November 1981. But retail prices rose more
sharply, going up by 13.7 percent for high-income households and. more sig-
nificantly, by 15.8 percent for low-income households between Decedwer 1980
and December 1981.

Consumers were badly affected by these increases because wages had not been
raised since the beginning of 1980. As a result, bhere were strikes, par-
ticuiarly in Port-Gentil, and the government was forced to increase the
monthly interoccupational guaranteed minimum salary from 30,000 to 35,000
CPA francs and the "minimal monthly income" from 100,000 to 50,000 CPA francs.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Foreign Trade

Export Prices--'l'he SNBG has not changed its buying and selling price lists
since 15 April 1980, a fact which has created problems for the titer enter-
prises and for the SNBG isself since production costs have gone up.

in this respect, the cannon fared better because the dollar price of mangan-
ese ore was slightly up when the contracts for the 1980 shipments were con-
cluded. Taking into account the recovery of the American currency, the
increase in terms of CFA francs was obviously much higher: according to
statistics issued by UNCI‘AD, this increase we, in excess of 30 percent for
the entire year of 1981.

During a certain period, Gabon, like most of the other oil-producing com-
tries, had to lower its crude oil prices ‘in dollars. But here again, the
recovery of the American currency had a favorable effect in ter- of the con-
version into CPA francs: in 1981, the average (211’ [50st, insurance,

freight] price of Gabonese petroleum inorted by France was 972.3 French
francs a ton while in 1981 that price jumped to 1,670.31 French francs which
represents an increase of 51 percent.

All things considered, uranium was the :omiity most severely hit since,
apparently, its average selling price went down by 10 percent.

Volume Exported—He reported earlier the changes which took place in the
amounts of manganese shipped from Pointe-Noirs. Not counting the shipments
of petroleum, 1.1 million tons of goods were shipped to foreign destinations
from Libreville-and Port-Gentil during the first 9 swaths of 1981 compared
to 1.5 million tons for the same period in 1980. This was a considerable
drop and tinbsr and petroleum products account for most of it.

During these first 9 months of the year, shipments of crude oil frme Fort-
Gentil are reported to have decreased by 2 million tone or 33 percent. But
such s drastic decline needs to be confirmed.

Total Value of Exportsncabonese statistics concerning foreign trade in 1981
are still unavailable. Under these circumstances one has to turn to French
statistics and to those compiled, although less frequently, by the 0300.

French imports from Gabon amounted to 2,279.6 million French francs in 1981
compared to 2,723.3 million in 1980. This 16 percent drop was mainly due
to a decrease, in quantity as well as in value, of crude oil shipments.
French purchases of Gabonese products other than petroleum also dropped by
slightly more than 5 percent.

The statistics of the OECD reveal decidedly better results. In fact, during
the first 11 months of the. year, the dollar value of Gabonese exports to
countries which are members of the OECD went down by just 3.8 percent, but
taking into account the recovery of the American currency this meant an in-
crease of about 26 percent in terms of CFA francs.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore it is reasonable to believe that unless Gabon's exports went into
a sudden decline towards the end of the year, their value increased in 1981
even though their volume had dropped.

Import Prices—Every 2 months, the Gabonese Statistics Service publishes s
wholesale price index for imported goods but, from time to time, sharp varia-
tions appear in the annual rates of increase reflected by that index and these
variations are hard to explain. We will only mention, without cot-lent, that
the rate of increase. which was less than 9 percsnt for March and July 1981,
jumped to 17.9 percent in May and to 12.6 percent in November.

Volume of lmports--Judging from the traffic of merchandise through the ports
of Libreville and Port-Gentil, the volume of goods inported by Gabon increased
sharply in 1981. During the first 9 months of that year, 305,000 tons of
goods were unloaded in these two ports compared to 258,000 tons in 1980. But '

it must be pointed out that far fewer goods were unloaded in 1980 than in
1979.

Total Value of Imports—In 1981, French exports to Gabon rose by 17 percent in
terms of value (2,158.1 million French francs compared to 1,844.1 million in
1980) but the increase was relatively small in terms of volume. 0n the other
hand, the sum of exports from all the OECD countries to Gabon during the first
11 months of the year rose by more than 7 percent in terms of dollars, which
means around 38 percent in terms of CFA francs. So there is reason to believe
that there was a particularly sharp increase of Gabonese imports in 1981.

Trade Balance-“Tho deficit in France's balance of trade with Gabon was con-
siderably reduced in 1981 due, as already pointed out, to a drop in the pur-
chaes of Gabonese crude oil. Also, the negative balance of trade between the
OECD countries and Gabon was reduced by $100 million during the first 11
months of the year. Although these areprovisional and partial figures, one
may well wonder if , under these conditions, the surplus usually registered by
Cabon's balance of trade was not smaller than usual in 1981.

Balance of Payments and Monetary Situation—Without recent balance of payment
figures, one must look at the changes registered in the net external assets
to have an idea of Gabon's financial dealings with foreign countries. The net
external assets, which had been in the red for a long time, moved back into
the black column as of Noveaber 1980. On 31 October of last year, they
amounted to almost 1.3 billion CPA francs, having increased by more than 47
billion in 1 year. It should be noted that during that period Gabon made
repayments of $6.6 million to the International Monetary Fund and that, by

11 October 1981, its standing debt to that institution was only $13 million.

As for the money supply, it registered gains but the annual rate of increase
(18 percent according to the latest available figures) remains within seemingly
noml limits. 0n the other hand, credits to the economy, which for many
months had increased at a relatively slow pace, rose appreciably up towards the
end of the year (20 percent between 31 October 1980 and 31 October 1981).

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982

8796
C80: 4719/977

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY

DOCUHEITI' DESCRIBE smut: ACTIVITIES II 1981
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX 31' MIDIW in French lb 1909 11 Jun 82 p 1516

[Text] A docunent drawn up by Gabon's general Adainistration of lining and
Geology has just su-srired lining operations in Gabon in 1981.

Production

The nost striking event of the year is the net drop in export of newness
ore, whose tonnage decreased by 30 percent coepared with the usual sales level
in recent years.

Petroleun production also declined towered with 1980. 7,651,864 tone
compared with 8.895.005 tone. or 1!: percent. with recent discoveries not
yet eating up for the nor-s1 drop of the Iain production fields.

Petroleum prospecting is still very active. as in previous years. and is
leaking progress in the nuﬁer of wells bored (29 covered with 20 in 1980)

end the length drilled ($6.791 asters coepared with 37,633 esters in 1980).
Four new discoveries end two confirnations of workable deposits are reported.
As regards develop-eat of the fields greater activity is also observed: 46
wells bored in 1981 conpared with 26 in 1980. the: new fields have gone into
production. Ayol end K'Polunie. The starting of operation of the new
discoveries should stabilise production as early as 1982 end allow an increase
beginning in 1983. the General ministration of Mining esti-tes.

The refineries of Port-Gentil. SOGABA [expansion unknown] and 00083 In!
Gabonese Refining Comeny] have together processed eore than 1.193.633
tons of crude oil in 1981. Export of crude oil was 6.298.803 tone. It was
distributed as follows: United States 23.8 percent. France 1‘ percent.
uracil 12.8 percent. Netherlands 9.3 percent and Chile 8 percent.

Production of nangenese ore was only 1.681.538 tone coepared with 2.163.380
tons in 1980. This sireable decrease in production is uplained by the drop
in sales caused by the liquidation of stocks song producers of ferro-
aenganese which has caused a drop in deund. To that is added a considerable

decrease of purchases by sons Eastern European countries. especially Poland
and llunsnia which are badly hit by the econoeic crisis.

18

MWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however it is observed that as regards the value of the exports of samenese
are, the considerable rise in the exchange rate of the dollar has noticeably
aitigated the effects of the reduction of the tonnage exported. These
exports are distributed as follows: France 22.83 percent, Norway 15.27
percent, United States 12.72 percent, Canada 9.05 percent, Italy 7.80 percent,
Asia 5.72 percent, Eastern European countries 6.86 percent, Belgian b.86
percent, Mexico 4.54 percent, etc. The prospects for 1982 are uncertain,
according to the document which we refer to.

As regards uraniu, the narket situation has shown little develop-ant and
taking into account sales opportunities is close to that of the previous year:
1,360 tons of concentrate containing 1,022 tons of uranium aetal coapared
with 1,381 tone of concentrate containing 1,033 tons of uraniun netal in 1980.
On the other hand, the sales price in current francs is considerably below
that of the preceding year, about 14 percent.

In spite of econonic and operational conditions which are such are difficult
than in recent years, the development progran of the scans of production has
continued. The Boyindzi nine has begun production since the beginning of

the year and the unite of the new processing plant have been conpleted on
schedule, that is the beginning of 1982. Market developnent forecasts do

not allow envisaging a such appreciably higher production in 1982. Tonnage
should increase about 10 percent, with the average price being on the 1980
level.

Mineral Prospecting, Cartography in 1981

Prospecting concentrated on three substances in 1981: uraniua, gold and
barite.

Uraniua is the "number one substance" because of the extent of the facilities
used, the General Mining Adninistration points out. The Gsbonese state
association 006% [General Nuclear Materials Company, crr.)-mco [expansion
unknown] has continued its program of evaluating the indications of the

North Leyou sector in the Lastoureville area, it has done 13,500 meters of
boring there. On the whole, the results of the work are not very encouraging.
COGEMA has continued, on its own account, the geological prospecting of the
South-Franceville area and ends a dozen borings for this purpose anounting to
5,500 neters. com? [Franceville Uranium Mining Conpsny] has done 1,175
meters of boring on its indications in Lekedi and Bagonbe.

In the case of gold, the Eteke :,'ndicate aade up of the Gabonese state,

BRGM [Geological and Mining Exploration Office] and cows has continued its
prospecting in the Bteke-Ovala area. A nulber of extensive aineralized
areas have been revealed at Ovals and hdonbo-Mobi. Proving these indications
by bore-holing will be done in 1982.

As regards barite. after stopping prospecting for lead and zinc, the
Kroussou syndicate concentrated exploration on barite, nunberous indications

of which had been observed along the socle-cretaceous contact. It node a
certain nunber of tests of geochenical anonalies in the Mayo-be loantain

19

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISI-I ONLY

group as well as prospecting indications of already known mineralization.
Two indications on the axis of Hayumba-‘rcnibanga road seen interesting. They
will be studied in detail in 1982.

The program of cartography at 1/ 200.000 and of a nining inventory of the

area crossed by the Tranagabon continued in 1981. A radar survey of all the
territory financed by the development budget was made at the end of December
1981. It was made by the American company. Aero Service Corporation. 0n

the other hand. the national geological service and the BBQ! prospected and
surveyed a section of about 6,500 square meters in the provinces of l'zstuaire
(East-Cocobeach) and Holeu-Ntem (southern nitric).

In 1982, it is planned to make 130,000 square kilo-stars of serogeophysical
survey and 8,000 square kilometers of geological survey at 1/200,000 of these
areas. Part of the geophysical survey will be financed by ED? [European
Development Fund]. with PAC [Aid and Cooperation Fund] contributing to the
completion of the geological work of cartography.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Pbreux et Cie Paris 1982

8690
C80: 6 719/1118

20

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

BRIEFS

INSECURITY 1N LIBREVIILEnSince the middle of May, security checks have
becone sore frequent in Libreville to costet increased banditry there.
According to the govern-ent's daily L’UNION of 5 June 1982, about 500
persons. "nainly nonGabonsse" have been caught breaking the law since the
beginning of the checks. The Gsbonese ninister of external affairs, Hertin
Bongo, sumoned on 6 June all the chiefs of diplonstic nission accredited

in Gabon for a report regarding the security of residents in Libreville.
Hartin Bongo declared the capital is ”unsafe. so the government has taken
naasures to protect the people. Consequently the security forces are going
to proceed with fairly strict checks, especially of all autonobiles moving
about in the city." These checks. the sinister enhasised, are not directed
against definite persons. "It has been ascertained that crininals use cars
with different license plates, so the police not check extensively." even
when it involves vehicles belonging to foreign absssiss. The security forces
which were represented at this nesting by colonel nsjor, Leon Osiali,
director general of documentation, are obliged to "nest violence and shoot
in their turn," the minister declared. A spokesun of the ninistry.
indicated at the end of the report to L'Umou that the nationals guilty of
crines on Gabonese territory would "be repatriated on the responsibility of
their enbassios” without prejudice to the punitive nessures which could have
been taken against thus. [Text] [Paris M30338 TROPICAUX B‘l‘ RENEW
in French No 1909, 11 Jun 82 p 1517] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux st Cie Paris

1982] 84090

moco's GABON ACTIVITIES--President Bongo granted an interview on 3 June in
Libreville to George Tn-p. president and general esnager of Amoco Gabon.
an affiliate of Standard Oil of Indiana, the world's seventh oil conpany.
The conversation, which took place with the United States Meseador, Terry
McNamara. present, involved this company's operations in Gabon, which began
in May 1980. Since this date. it is reported by a source close to the
' Gabonese minister of petroleum, A-oco Gabon has node six operational borings
in the area south of Port Gentil, of which four have shown definite
conercial possibilities. These four bore holes are now producing 10.6“
barrels of petroleun a day. it is reported from the sane source. Amoco
Gabon, which intends to increase this production to 33,000 barrels per day
in 1984. has invested 20 billion CPA francs in Gabon until now and expects
to invest 30 note billion between now and 19“. [Text] [Paris W
TROPICAUX ET storms in French No 1909, 11 Jun 82 p 1517] [common
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 8690

090: 6719/1118

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I“! ("1111“ I"!!! 0NI.\

GAMBIA

BRIEFS

NATIONAL ASSMLY SESIONu-‘l‘he Gambian Netionel Aseeebly, elected on lest

5 Hey, net for the first tine on 2 June st lenjul. The seseebly is ends up
of 27 ee-hers of the PPP [People's Progressive Percy] (the perry of
President Sir Deeds Jsvsra), five independent deputies (for-er PPP nenbere,
elected although they had not obtained the party's epprovel), three esters
of the National Convention Party, as well so five representetives of the
treditionel chieis and eight deputies sppointed by the chief of stete.

The deputies reelected as president Sir Aleieu Soulei-en Jock, vho hes held
this position for 15 years after heving been the lest governor of Gertie
before its independence. In I: stetenent, the vice president of the republic,
Bakery Derbo. congretulsted President Jsvere for hevins "thverted the
attempted coup d'ettt of 30 July 1981 and permitted the holding of free
elections. which proved his populerity." he also eupheeired the increased
inportence of the role of the Cubist: deputies. s certein nulher of who. will
becone nenbers of the Seneaenbis Confederated Assembly. [Text] [Peris
meats TROPICAUX 81‘ EMS in Preach ho 1909. 11 Jun 82 p 1508]
[COPYRIGB‘R Rene Moreux at Ole Paris 1982] 8690

C80: 6719/1118

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

JOINT DANISﬂ SﬂIPPING OPERATIONS-4n October 1981, the Guinean Shipping Co, a
national company of the Guinean Republic, signed in Conakry a cooperation agree-
ment with the Danish shipping firm A/s Deep Sea shipping Ltd (058) based in
Copenhagen. The aim of the contract was to help the Guinean shipping Co by
training its ssagoing and land personnel and chartering or buying ships which
will be jointly operated. As part of the contract, the Danish ship Gudrum-
Maersj has been chartered and will be operated jointly by the Guinean Shipping
Co and the 088. On 15 April, that ship was handed over to its operators in
Hamburg where it took cargo, then proceeded to Ipswich, Antwerp and Rouen en
route for Dakar, Conakry and Freetown. On its northbound voyage, it will unload
in Nantes, Caen and probably Antwerp. It is a shelter-deck ship of 3,700 tpl
[dead-weight tons] which was built in 1977 with two hatchways measuring l9.2 by
10.5 meters and its cargo handling equipment consists of two lO-ton and two 25-
ton cranes. The 068 has already been operating four ships on regular service
to the ports of Hamburg, Rotterdam, Antwerp, Ipswich and Rouen, and in Africa to
the ports of Dakar, Kansar and Conakry in Guinea, Freetown in Sierra Leone,
Monrovia and Buchanan in Liberia. They call in Antwerp every 10 days and in the
other ports every 2 weeks. Out of Europe. they carry miscellaneous cargo in
conventional freight or in containers measuring 20 by 10 feet, motor vehicles
and heavy parcels. They also carry goods from the United States or from the
Far East, mostly from China, after transhipment in Antwerp. It must also be
pointed out that the two shipping companies plan to purchase one or two ships
in 1982 for their joint operations and these ships will sail under the Guinean
flag with Guinean crews. Guinean land personnel will also be trained in the
European offices of the 088. In Rouen. the forwarding agent is the Agence
Maritime de la Basse Seine lBasse Seine Maritime Agency]. [text] [Paris was
TROPICAUX ET HEDI‘I‘ERRANEQIS in French No 1905, 14 May 82 p 1271] (COPYRIGHT:
Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 198218796

SPANISB RELATIONS—After having stopped for 12 hours in Rabat during which he
met Moroccan prime minister. Haati Bousbid, and several mesbers of the
government, the Guinean chief of state, Ahmed Sekou Tours, paid a 3-day
official visit to Spain from 25 to 27 May. The Guinean president had talks
with King Juan Carlos, Leopaldo Calvo Sotelo, prime minister of the Spanish
government, Jose Pedro Perez Llorca, minister of foreign affairs and
lieutenant general Alvaro Lacalle. chairman of the council of the chiefs of
the general staff. The Guinean delegation was made up namely of the ministers
of external affairs, energy, agriculture. fisheries and livestock and

finally education. The discussions involved improving bilateral cooperation

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

In the field of fishing, the coming signing of a cultural cooperation
.mI’eenent--Uhich will allow Guinean students to study in Spain—increasing

trade between the tun countries and the means for Spain to reduce its deficit
with Conakry. Nov very slight, trade between the two countries shows, in
fact. a strong imbalance in Guinea's favor. In 1981 Spain's purchases in
the People's Revolutionary Republic of Guinea anunted to 6.2 billion
pesetaa (about 60 aillion dollars) while Spain's sales were just 920 sillion
pesetas (soae 9 million dollars. [Excerpts] [Paris MICHES 1110lele 31'
HEDITERMNEENS in French No 1909. 11 Jun 82 p 1509] lCOP'YRIGlT: Ms three:

or Cie Paris 1982] 8690

080: 4719/1118

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANALYSIS 01’ m, MUD! LAND 33AM.

London AFRICA 1n Engliah Fab 82 p ‘2

[Ion] F all in mum-faceted political land. Precisely who the ameved'
Oand economic problems. there is party were was not eatabliahed. The
little doubt asto one of Kenya's prime two neighbouring groups are not
and most sensitive tribulations. The known particnhrly to hate one
problem of land ownership is a daily another. But scarcely has it been
preoccupation of the vast majority of km, until the November clashea
the country's populace. It has been that there was a simmering land

debated privately and publicly. has ' between them.
dominated £15m ntary session‘ 3 for involved in the ﬁghtin told
ara.btttt solution sttllappearslar j thatt hadbeenstt iect
the horizon. to persistent lfl attacks over what

tisnotaproblemthatjttstsprun; theNandtssardvatanoccupationof
up theother day. It is a problem theirlandbythethyanheLuhyao

.50....” Kenton m- m Nandi land. the hadle t 2.2mm
m up “2:53.950?“ coking} itandaornesaidtheyh‘a‘dlriv onit

- - , lorten ara.11teysaid couldnot
wmmbma,‘ . m nnderatyaend why the N ntd de
l B'Im cidedtosetuponthem.$omeantd

t even after the arm ‘ 0‘ the that _it the Government was doing
comm regime. there has been no nothing aboutthe . lent. "“an
end in Si I ‘0‘, 'Il‘ld me W "I! left WI"! I'IO but 10 defend
lems mg.” in the past. there has themselves. W “’7“ °‘ ”1'”. .
always been the scent of violence in '02“ Hand». $2M 0"“
the air. No undertaking of Kenya's leaders. clashet °°

two independent administrations to Win WWW by thyaw

solve the land problem has had any leaders. "'3 v "I.- 3 -

mallcomparedtothepltyttcalhoatilt-
”mmdm'm' ties that aeemedtoeacalatebythe
ll ' day. Luhyalantihatﬂed their

It was. therefore. in a sense. not Wmmwwm.

mnehofashoclttontan Kenyanalaat border m Ngdi and
November when theyylearnt that a The

violent clash between the Luhyin mum
of Kenya's Western Province 2?!!!“ _ need inthe
and the Nandi or the Ran Valley tun h!" '2“ W 6'“
mmmnmm WWW w'ﬁf‘m
'II a l t w .

'the W- The ﬁlth! was over Wlth stern verbal warntnptha any
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080052-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eacalatm ot’ the hymn; would lead two years ‘ ‘ _ - ~
toa tough teeponae. Not much attew cannot be Wt! lam
tronwaspaidtotheaetmntnpand warned '

the Government’s next move was to paraded ‘culprits’ to swear never
“I, up ”[5“ Vim W m, repeattheir‘criminalacts’andhm.

When it seetned that police rein- ,
{cm were in pertlof w ””190“? techne- 0‘
mmev ,..._ an”? mmmm"-W
Hezeziah Oyup‘ threatened that the mud; must be seen as what it
Wm; mam" m we ., WWW” m P”:
GSU). As poioe Wu were ms: readéoo much “mum
"ﬁ‘mﬁ'ﬁﬁu yuputolnalert. to ascnbe Marne to either eroup
on .W 06ml "in..."
ptonouncp ementsontheﬁghtiahad " .lﬂhﬂlhlntolhele'b:
not been lorthcoming. But so nly. ‘0' -
on the eve of his departure for
Lusaka. to join eight Heads of State
and Government in si in: the Pre-
ferential Trade Area 51' )ot east-
ern and southern African states
aimed at prontottn reponal econo»
mic cooperation. restdent Daniel
geap Moi issued a terse Them to
two wamn; .

had to end. he 333%. whoﬁtsshg
the current Chairman of the OAU.
saidhewouldnothetitatetoviaitthe
troubled area to give the matter his

personal attention.
Wm

This is precisely what he did shortly
pamedmeﬂ by I?" WHQAM '
er: a o rt

of his Govercgtnent. Moi travelled to
the scene of bloodyhclashes and

peoples. ltvasa uettion.solely.ofa
etv indivrdual‘ a ' ; ethnic ani-
moaitybetveenthemwithaviewto
getting themselves elected to Parlia.
tnent tn the coming general election:

COPYRIGHT: 1902 Africa Journala Ltd., 1881! 0066-6675
CSOt 6700/1653
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBERIA

BR! BPS

ion CREDIT-~‘i‘he International Development Association (IDA) , an affiliate of the
world Bank, approved on 6 May a credit of $15.5 million in favor of Liberia
intended to help that country carry out a project to develop food and cash
crops in the county of Lots. Sane of the crops involved are rice. coffee,

cocoa and cassava. Living conditions in the developed areas will be iwroved by
building roads. sinking wells and creating better health facilities. l‘next]
[Paris W838 TROPICAUX ET norms in French No 1905. 14 May 82 p 1280]
[COPYRIGH‘h Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982) 8196

mums none-rum. National Iron Ore Co (man) of Liberia recently started a
program to overhaul its iron ore mines and has issued s call for bids for the
supply of naterials and equip-ent. Aid for this project has cone fro- the
World Bank. the African Development Bank, the OPE Fund for International
Develop-ent and fro. the Dutch mo [expansion unknown] . [Text] [Paris unease
TROPICAUX 81‘ HEDITBRWS in French No 1905, 14 my 82 p 1280] [COPYRIGEN
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1982] 8796

C80: (719/983

27

“WWW!”
m OFFICIAL USU: ONLV

‘ rum

DESER‘I'II-‘Icmlm ADVANClmuCol Seyni Koontchc, head of state of. Niger. haa
returned from a 6-day visit to the depart-ent o! naradi, in the central part or
the country. and on 8 May he spoke in Niamey aboutthe problea of the deserti-
fication experienced by that departnent. Preeident Kountche aid in particular:
'2: we want to keep the entire country tro- beoo-ing juat a desert. we are going
to have to find a new etrategy.‘ In apite of carrying out vast operations to
fight this desertification, ouch as the ‘Green Sahel" Operation and the canaign
to plant trees in the villages. the desert continues its advance, Colonel Kountche
said. [Text] [Perle WES TROPICAUX 31' mm in French llo 1905,

14 Hay 02 p 1273] (amateur: Rene lioreux et Cie Parie 1982] 8796

33mm COOPERATION-m 4 Hay. Jules Harchal. Belgian albaeeador to money. held
a cerenony during which he ofﬁcially turned over to the Nigerien Govern-em a
hydroagricultural complex financed by Belgium nu couples. built on the

Niger River. 50 has fro. Niamey. at an eatinated ooet of 2.600 nillion cu trance,
will aerve to irrigate 300 hectaree of land and to produce about 2,500 tone of
paddy rice a year. next) [Paria menus TROPICMIX si' mm in French
No 1903, ll May 82 p 1273] [COPYRIGII'rz Rene breux et Cie Paris 19821 8796

(:50: 4719/9823

28

mammouu
FOR OHICIAL USE (NIX

mm SITUATION REVIEWED

UK

‘A in Englieh No 128, Apr 82 pp 33-35

Eddie Itch:

enattivellnchtnety
awhtngwei to!
e net a power balms wen
33%;?3azmguw
as 0 «3' nine downed

tools in a sudden industrial show of

mytmalplungedeﬂotNiguinbto

d"fr a; ' the pm a. «m
We Into r Ill .
the pintwﬁvil Service Technial
Wodms‘ Union of Nigeria (CST-
WUNLbe its own mike action
then (mmnthedianorediu
21-day ultimatum. Consequently the
r9460 "96 w m 0:wa

If

' and
teduwd N‘ lien Airway: mm:
(It hts to 'skeletel services'.

! .
new!“ of the N
Ind over Authon'ty

ﬁle
6 tefused to
m en eeﬂier agreement on

29

NicotNigen'ehed '

'Ilntone Plea: Their ”melee"!

machinery of the Government

Many

Not m the N' ‘ medie inekl‘t
equal tainted tum M .
alone‘ ' the ’ cothe
“WWW“ mm”
”WWW“ tad! “Monty
mot-lung. three tumour
and been”. . ' ”hum the
uncanny . ump'techmal.
hitches It the Kata hydro
clearicdemdidﬂ ' Ie’e'mthete

FOR OYPICIAL 083 MY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500080052-1

FOR OFFICIAL 08! our

will! nu pin; on. not I w'l’W'
s ' them Pedanl Mat-W
of end Power Mohamed
Hanan. W mm °‘ 3
"(ml-3w 0. “WW"
noodoftheenyy '. «rhythm
dmnmel.

in! them with nun
Won
As the nation headed for‘vlnt one
I’ cdﬂOIII-I “M ”“9““
' Preddent Shem Shani»
acting with the we and

a . , h“ . . . . Ih.m°
m moved to invoke limited
executive PM“ ‘0 ”P"? ' '"ﬂ‘
force‘oleﬂlimﬂwmv‘“m
ytoeuentul eem.Buttome
quipped thntthelutn'memoa
igerien e ‘ I: touched a screw-
driver as ' their pmls' in
colk‘g, Thus. cl‘hl days after the
strike was called 00. most of
igen‘n remained without electricity
at ynndthehnrdship continued.
ttliettrikins WWW”
returntoworkntallvunoteomudl
duelonnyecuonoftheexeattiveu
the intervention of the legislature.
Alter a day long 393500 "“0 "‘9
labour Committee of the Federal
HomeofRepreeentntiveeJhemn
of the ' ' workers W “W3"
off the ’ . President 0'
followed by conceding a hastily-
yeheduledrediouultelevisioneddreu
inwhidisorneobeervempeeulntedne
mightiuventndemedrmicdeclen-
tions. including perhaps 1 state of

erne .
aﬁ'if’m efforts Ind mull,”

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Africa Journals Ltd

cso:

4700/1597

30

.“W‘mr-e

in Nigerian histo
resolved. Beforetl
by N.L.C. lied
t; docu
mun/w
enemas dim-cl
henlthenreserviee
nlltlteCollenuol

coon have beer
willow stun
into Lacuna!
striker involving
workeneoel Nigel
million nun-days.

But while the:
more mikes ere
countryinthelutu
three ultimatum

ooehopetthntbo
Gavemmentwill

neceeqltynotonl;
tometnnetto‘pn

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00860R000500080052-1
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5mm

PLANNED CUTBACK IN mm CWPSMTIW “18810! W
Paris WES TROPICAUX 31‘ serum in French No 1905, 14 May 82 p 1269

[Text] On assignment to Senegal since 1978, Michel de Bonnecorse. who was the
head of the French cooperation mission in Dakar and is now leaving for a new
post in Hadagascar, has sunsd up the situation of French-Senegalese cooperation.

During the years of 1980 and 1981. and within the franework of initiative adopted
under the Plan for Economic and Financial Recovery. Senegal received fro-

France not only the yearly programs but also several additional credit facili-
ties amounting to some 40 billion CPA francs. De Bonnecourse also touched on
the subject of the reduction in technical assistance. saying that the nunber of
French overseas volunteers now standing at 1.230 will be cut down to 1.000 by
1985.

“It is not by accident that, along African countries, Senegal stands in first
or second place as a recipient of grants fron the PM: (Aid and Cooperation
Fund). of overseas volunteers and of comitted loans fro. the Central Fund for
Bcononic Cooperation." de Bonnecorse said.

"Every year. since independence, France and Senegal have joined in drawing up
an annual progras of cooperation which, in recent years. has aeounted to between
25 and 30 billion CPA francs.

‘It so happens that during these last 2 years the econonic crisis has forced
Senegal to adopt a recovery plan requiring that we provide new funds. This was
incorrectly called "exceptional aid.‘ It would have been more suitable to call
it I'support aid" for the recovery plan.

"For this purpose, during the years 1980 and 1981, in addition to the annual
programs France has granted to Senegal soee additional credit facilities which
a-ount to around 40 billion CPA francs. They for-ed an ‘assorted basket“
which included grants, advances without interest, soft loans. rescheduling of
debts. It is hard to figure out what all this represents in terns of money.
(especially since sons repaynents are made within a few months but are a great
help for the Senegalese Treasury.

"ralks are now underway to decide on the contents of a new basket, which neans
that we are working together to determine how such aid will be given to Senegal

in the 1982-1983 financial year and to establish the terns and timetable for
that aid.‘

31

”WMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the subject of the number of overseas cooperative volunteers. de Bonnecorse
said: “The policy followed by the two governments is clear: the nulber of
Prench cooperation volunteers must decrease as the Senegalese becon capable of
taking over. Therefore we have a progressive and harnonious cutback in per-
sonnel which is not motivated by financial consideratims but siwly by the
realities of the 'training-job tandem”

'Hhen I first came to Senegal in 197‘, there were lore than 1, 600 cooperation
volunteers here while, today. they nunber l 230...?» French-Senegalese Omission
which net recently in Dakar has set the target of l, 000 French cooperation
volunteers by 1985. This leans that some 100 posts will be elininated each year.
Let us say that there will be a quantitative reduction and a qualitative pro-
gression,‘ de Bonnecorse said in conclusion.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1982.

8796
C50: 4719/98}

32

MOWUSEONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

smvovn m BRITISH mum hthSenegei's sinister of interaction. Djobo
Ks. confined on s nay that British military airplanes are stopping in Dakar on
their way to the British Ascension Island. My British ailitary planes of
various types. but aostly Hercules. were seen to he refueling at Dakar-Yoff
International Airport. Official sources in the Senegalese capital report that
since the onset of the nalvinas conflict. a real airlift has operated between
Great Britain and Ascension Island with a stop in Dakar. [meat] [Paris W
1'30le 31' norms in PrenCh No 1905. 14 May 82 p 1269] [commons
Rene ﬂoreux et Cie Paris 1982] B796

(:80: 4719/983

33
“WW“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMY

L, BCWC BACKGROUND REVIEWED

ERICA in 211311“: No 128, Apr 82 pp 30-32

‘Hobutu walks Measured Stop-"l

mm mm“ I .2.” as:
mwmwm W?“ .m: .1“
mm WWW “mam “mm. ﬁn. WW.”
33%. W m?» am“
Mummwmmym mummmW “MMNMMMM
MM m; www.mmmm

man a ..
m? I?“ “Maw mm mmmwm Wm
my. mm? m 3 mm MW.“ mmmmmw
a. a an m» m ”mun «mmmm Wmmwmm
6” mm“ W. “man. may may:

36

ran OFFICIAL USE DULY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080052-1

amounts}; to II'OtIId live' billion
dolly: wuondfromt'netothe
theoountry'sflnnehlhouoin
onlet. yknowwlleoooghtheta
gmmmecomymbeh
— twouldmvolveomﬁam‘ '
menintlpepﬁoeooﬂbemmtednlo
dmnoods' . .oobolmomooetht
oooo

. rahontheodotofthelntet-
Mom Fmdondthe‘Club
dePuts'mte‘Cl dePui'm
mtheWteaediuwaoﬁ-e).
bothot_ tpomotthe totthe
eoooomnemyof ‘ the
“MWMwm
mg once mm.
PM! .mm‘ Mm
inﬁgemm'ofml “‘32.?“
downward eotetptneo m

m." ' “Am...” °° ”.3

m genocidal hop.
mob; company In
Stub: province. the '

mmmmmm

www.meomoeof
pubheu'mponh ‘uwelluthe
WmofmmA

ftaellu'n‘s'B to! President “Mme . f
t notve rung" too 0
country feces. the Govetumeot in
W htrde tried to dnmtiu the
situationin rtogetnewwppon.
noublytromtheAmeﬁam.

And-continuum

lnoclevermnoetmeMobutnhu
wooeededimeveningthexituanooby
obtaining the mppoﬂ oflthe West.
Aftenomeheduuoojnnoeoueed
toviewthe Nahum mmGovemmentin I
nooektodly ‘ t. ' ve
toMobutuspteumgod M
The lieu/Remit odmmmtnou with
its instiocuve onti-eommnian
Mmlyboameoﬁiendothhe.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Africa Joumlo Ltd

680:

4700/1497

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600080052-1