FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10008
23 September 1981

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 741

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10008
23 September 19

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

FOUO No. 741

CONTENTS

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

OAU Said To Be Showing Its Muscle
("3" AFRICAN, Aug 81) 0......00.0.00!0..OIIOIOOOD'OOOOOOOOIOOOO

'Ini‘rastructural Problems' Hamper Free Movement of Persons
(Mbalia Hangai, Aluem Izeze: NEH AFRICAN, Aug 81) ...........

Africans Feel Dominated by Alien Religicns
(Matthews Ndov13NEH AFRICAN, Aug 81)

Rene Dumont on 'Strangulation of Africa'
(Rene Dumon Interview; NEH AFRICAN, Aug 81) .................

Arming of Continent Examined
("we Humsiz NE“ AFRICAN, Aug 81) 0.0.0.0...000.000.00.00...

Rural Areas Seen as Key to Greater Affluence
(Jimh W'Fadaka; m AFRICAN, Aug 81) 00.00.000.00000000000

EEC Policy Review Tamed Threat to Sugar Growers
(Steve Schifferes; NEH AFRICAN, Aug 81) .....................

Briefs
Hard Decisions Face Africans

Abidjan-Niger Railway Expansion
ANGOLA
Briefs
UNITA Conmunique
Protest Against MPLA-PCP Statement

General Transport Investments
Oil Production Figures

-a- [III-NEGA-IZOE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Details of Emergency Plan for Economic Recovery
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANEENS, 31 Jul 81) ...........

Briefs
Promotions of Officers
CHAD
Restoration of Confidence Must Precede Economic Recovery
(MARCHBS TROPICAUI ET MEDITERRANEEIS, 31 Jul 81) ...........
Briefs
UNDP Financing Agreement
(“1160
Briefs
Lumber Exhibition
PRC Agreement
GABON

Progress Report on Transgabonese Railroad
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAN-IS, 21 Aug 81) ...........

GUINEA-BISSAU

Present Leadership's Reportedly Suspect Motives Questioned
(Augusta Conchiglie; AFRIQUB-ASIB, 17-30 Aug 81) ...........

KDIYA

Press Freedom Seen as Set for Tumble
(Kazungu Kama; “m Amc‘", Aug 81) IQCOOOOCIOOOOCOOOIIIOC

LIBERIA

n03 Reported 'Facing Up to Reality'
(Ala-n Rake; mAmICAN, Aug 81) OIOUOOOOOOIIO.DOODCOIO-OOOI

HAMCASCAR

Briefs
Rice Shortfall

MOZAMBIQUE

Move To Curb Diseases From Unsuitable Powdered Milk
(Brian “0 Mum‘y; NW WC”, Aug 81) 0......OCIIOOOOOQOOOO

-b-
FUIROF11C1AI.USE¢0NLN

Situation Leading to Recent Beira Cholera Outbreak Reviewed
(Paul Fauvet; NE" AFRICA“, Aug 81) oooaaeea.oboe-000.00.000.00

Improvement of Haputo-Matola Port Facilities Planned
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 21 Aug 81) .............

Briefs
Steel Production
Ship Maintenance

SENEGAL

Results of SGBS Activity in 1980 Noted
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITEHRANEENS, 7 Aug 81) ...............

Briefs

Loans to SOFISEDIT
FRO Aid

SOUTH AFRICA

Briefs

Railway Cars Bids
Austrian Tractors for Transket

TANZANIA

Nation Said To Be Undergoing Critical Economic Phase
(MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 1h Aug 81) .............

TOGO
Briefs
Regulations on Export Cargoes
UPPER VOLTA
Briefs
Pours Gold Mine Projects
ZAIRE
President Calls for Expanded Agricultural Production
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS, 7 Aug 81) ..............
Briefs
Electric Power Production Increase
Fuel Price Increase
Zairetain Expansion
Strike Statistics
ZAMBIA

New Crop Producer Prices Should Help Po Revitalize Economy
(”murGottmh81k3NWWCM, Aug 81) COOOOOOOOOQOIIOOCOI.

- c -
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OAUSAIDNBESWITSHUSCLB

DEER-AFRICAN

widen m AFRICAN in English it) 167, Aug 81 p 90

[Articlo :

[Text]

THE ORGANISATION of African Unity
(OAU) hao often been criticiaod for ita
lock of "tooth’. It peeeoe thunderous
rooolutiono. tho critico aey. yet ie impo-
tent to implement them. The critica go on
to etreea that when it cornea to inter-
Africen wranglee. the OAU'e good inton-
tlona moatiy ﬂounder on the iron rulo of
national sovereignty and non-
intorferenco in the internal allure of
membencountriea.

At 18 yeera of ego. the OAU may be
doomed to have come of ego - in June in
Nairobi. The teeth may not yet be fully
grown. but they are there for all to ooo.

The uauai chergo egainet the OAU -
being a paper tiger - hao in foot never
eoeined convincing, not ovu in earlier
daye. One is reminded of tho celebrated
quecion pooed by Joaeph V. Stalin in the
loot European war: "How many diviaione
has the Pope?" People obooaood with
phyeicel power tend to undorertimeu
moral inﬂuence. which ia a force thet not
only impreoooo the do-goodere but in aloo
pertinent in tonne of reoipoliiih.

Wound

The OAU’e moral inﬂuence certainly
hoe made its merit on the political map of
the continent over the peat l8 yoare: 95
per cent of Afriu in now free. We are
witneoaing the ladditch reoiotenoe in
Namibia end South Africa. But boceuae
thia ie taking piece in a particularly
important. strategic and wealthy region
raeialiatn and imporiaiiatn cannot be
oxpeaod to give in oeaiiy.

Eilorta are being made to poreuedo the

1

“can: At Last: me 'Popor ﬂqot' 11: Swing It: Bu Tooth”

world that whitoa in South Africa not
only have a Godendonod jut uuee but
eloothat it is in the self-interest ofothon
to support than. not only in the self-
intarod oftho America» and Europeans
but alao black Afriana thomooivee. The
African ia no longer expected simply to
bow to a hiatorical nocoaaity. Ho muet be
won over for e cruoede against Ruaoia
and communion. ooconding to South
Africa and the Went.

lithe reoolutioneedoptod in Nairobi on
theao mature and no other wrpooe
than to concentrate diet the mica»
wiil not be fooled by such manouovru.
thoy will have been worthwhile.
Attompto to creoteo "l‘aito" independonoo
of Namibia have been condomnod. So hen
"the emerging unholy alliance between
Pretoria and Weahington." France and
Britain. too. were atricturod - i’or vetoing
the reooiution oftho UN Security Council
which had called for mandatory aenc-
tiona against South Africa.

The quick and angry reaction in the
White House to the African oonooneua
voiced in Nairobi.endclumey ettomputo
(ind exam for American poiicieo in
Southern Africa. were proof that the
OAU had driven in point homo.

Moreover. the OAU called for unilat-
eral eanctiono ageinet Pretoria. includ-
ing e cell on all member-autos to can
grunting lending righto to aircraii. ﬂying
to and from South Africa. African coun-
tries ignoring ouch calla may ﬁnd them-
selves in an embarraaaing pooitlon oi. the
next OAU meeting.

indeed. more and more African coun-
trioo have come to the view that they
cannot ail’ord to ignore the opiniona of the

F0! Ol-TICIAI. USE ONLY
OAU when theee are expreeeed force-
fully. Thia waa illuetrated to eomeenent
by the voile face of King Haaaan on the
Weetern Sahara ieeue. Not only that. the
kins decided to grace the aummit person-
ally. which he had not done for many
yeare. and choae the ocaaion to publicly
endoree the African all for a referendum
in the region. An implementation com-
mittee compoeed of Guinea. Kenya. Mali.
Nigeria. Sierra Leone. Sudan and Tan.
zania will now aeek to ensure that the
people of Western Sahara can give their
verdict. under the protection of a peace-
keeping force set up by the OAU and
UNO.

Entertaining aa well aa informative
waa the phyaical conteet between Siad
Barre of Somalia and Menciatu of
Ethiopia. While the outcome of the ﬁght
wee a foregone conclueion. had it been
allowed to continue - bearing in mind the
advanced age ofone and youthful agility
oftheother- thie in no way reﬂected the
state of the me over the Opden.

Cadialtalh

But the moat important event relating
to the Horn of Africa conﬂict took place
outside the Kenyatta Conference Centre.
ea the Presidents of Somalia and Kenya
met for what appeared to be a cordial

COPYRIGHT: 1981 IC Hagaztnea United

C50:

4700/469
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

'MRASW PROW‘ mm Pm swam OF PERSONS
nondon NEW APRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 p 29]
[article by Hbalia Wangai and Aluem Irezel

[Text] Serious infrastructural problems still hamper the implementation of the
free novement of persons within the zone, as ratified by nine of the 16 member-
states of the Economic Conunity of West African States (Booms). Needs of the
comunity heard the no-progress report from Booms secretary-general Dieby Ouatarra
at the recent nesting of the Community in Freetown.

‘l‘he Couunity had set itself a 1989 target to transform West Africa into one free
trade zone with more than l7o-million consuers. This projection is hampered by
protectionist scepticism by the six somber-states yet to sign the agreement, and
Nigeria and Ivory Coast whose economies compete for the sane market.

Nesitation in implementing the free movement arrangement have also been delayed by
recent disturbing incidents which included 46 (mansians suffocating to death in a
gendarnerie cell in the Ivory coast, the elleged molestation of Nigerian nationals
in Liberia, the December 1980 riots in Kano which left 1,000 people dead, and ser-
ious border disputes between Nigeria and Benin.

when Liberia asked the Preetown emit for exemption from ratifying the free nove-
nent clause for security reasons, Nigeria charged it was part of the continuing
harassment of the Nigerian business conunity in Liberia, and a move to restrict
Nigerian imigration in the country.

This tension has cast doubts on the anbitiousness of the three-stage progrw
which allows cOInunity citizens to enter any member-country without visas, provid-
ing travel documnts are in order. The second stage guarantees rights of residence
for five years before which the third stage of permanent residence and the estab-
lishnent of a business or livelihood become a right.

Several countries have so far experienced a high influx of job seekers, to the
point of concern in some cases.

The emit broke new ground in its agreement to establish a framework for a de-
fence association, a step encouraged by some successes in the Community's 1981-1986
programs in agriculture, industry, transport, telecommunication, and the proposed

3
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
me OFFIC‘IAI. INF. ONI \'

postal union. Food production, livestock development. fishing, and forestry were
reported to be working well within the nediun-tern program.

a $35-oillion telecommunication project was expected of! the ground by the middle
of the second half of this year, with the additional $69-nillion pledge from donor

sources which also net in Freetown.

The heads of state were told that the highway links between Baker and Njanena,
Lagos and Nouachott were within their 1986 deadline while the railway to link
Upper Volta. Niger, Togo. and Mali would cae off as planned. The emit ended
with the adoption or a short tern "survival“ energy programs which placed high
priority in low cost joint efforts by numbers.

A three-phase plan will study the energy potentials of west Mrioan countries
while improving the conventional (one of energy. The third phase will be an in-
depth assessnent and planning of the survival projects in individual member-states.
COPYRIGHT: 1981 IC Magazines Limited

C50: 4 700/ 469

)4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Articlc by Hatthm mu: "Scrap mat coo-union mood and Bring On Info and

Pall wine")

(tut) LIBERATION THEOLOGY human to to am to tho audition-l mood and
BMWJuoinwomnthho Wmmwhonthooomnodiﬁoo
Wm mm d tho “do. no not aha-lolly ovoilohloia m.
Mm Wmmod thottho mmmlluuhmnhoﬂahod-
menchbmmmm mMinZomooidhhchuchhod
my cutaway mind tho Watch

Toma}! tho dtuotioa. ' n - thoWoSumud‘wod-edodwtoko
emu-mm» audit uydmuplom-m.”
umw mm woo Mummvuhwhmuovl
hold by tho confoun- ond scold! Ahlo"
dmuofthowmd WWMWWM
FM tn KMO. . nanny. also waking on o no- tnmtohtion o!

Undutholohdﬂ'bobud'ow thoBlblotoomAm m0!»
Wm Who at Socn- ow mmduthoadudonof
wfthomww hon Mppnmmmochm
mﬂMWhﬁdm Umﬁoothoobohuuthotpobpmy
WMthoWoWJt humor-din macaw- on
ohotoumdonvhowd'ohpporum loathing ohoutit Wu»
oooonthl elm an AM” tho thlo. «on tho 'dtooou ﬂy of
horde-l yum God” Included polyunm ouch oo

mamauwmuu WmovidondSolomoo
In loodon «to mind. and W DtM‘Puoml aphinm"thouintbo
Mﬁowm .who Bﬁlodooocodforbidpolypmy
ennui tho . aid. “Tho unity mm may bocouoo
mammals u'owomhtmmw thopooplowhoﬂm mmptoudthombh
muthoWoow-n dbuodond won mood to it u oy thanoolvoo
whom tho ooMofhnlym- pooclood may.
ion? Can’t no hovo our ‘W‘ with 'Nmuhumafnlbloim
nothing thotioouutoplo food? totioo hon mud dim conﬂict hot-
noon tho Church and Am culture.
P was ammo of uric-In out of tho
d’m Church. To Mo thooo Immou.
hWonAfrmthoubloaho-M All-icon“: roimrotthoﬂmlow
mm am.mm.u mtthoirwcb.cnmnndmmn
ooemo. fool thoy ohmld chonco to fufu bioo.‘ . _ .
(panda! coo-on. o root vocablo) and m mu DW- 0‘ DWI. emi-
pun vino fot am Holy Communion cm- Wow-u church who an 3mm!
oomt‘l‘hoymitbunwmblo din-mmuyoz'chonm-onohw

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'!" -— v

“'0 'WS
onq

mu! PM: m
mun-v In PM P" mm

-W {Ii-Jim in

m 1° mum at

'WM mom's )0 "own PWM
comm mom m I w

113mm am In «gum

comm )0 M: «n u! mump- In

W “alum 01 my“:

wwwmmmm

-m'nwv mumsmm

an! mom's
mm 01 um 30
m

as pm

«Mo

an anal anomoa mu
u‘ww u I ‘loﬂ
a

bun Ala
mom
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RENE WONT on 'S‘I'RANGJMTION O? AFRICA'

I Mil-AFRICAN A

Inndon NEW AFRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 pp 42-44

[Interview wtth Rene melon: by Michel uclercq, place end tine unspecified]

[Text]

Michel Leclercq: Do. you condder
thet the bleck continent to none to
ceteetrnphe? le M'rice reelly being
dangled?

Rene Dumont: Abeolutely. lt wee not 1
who invented thie metaphor oi e etreng-
led new. but Edwerd Sotoine. Prime
Miniuer of’l‘eneenie. When we Iell hiln
in Airgun 1979. otter the long inveetige-
tion which we helped tocerry out in hie
muntry, thie wee bie only conclueion'
”And. new they on going to etrengle
ue. .."
Africa in elreedy in e ceteetrophic
condition. Eech yeer ite cereel itnporte
riee. from two million tone in l980 to 12
million in 1978. end from now on it will
hove no currency left with which to pey
for then. Moet of the countriee ot‘tropicel
Al'rice. with oneor two eeceptione. ere up
to their eere in debt. without eny hope of
ever being eble to repey whet they owe.
Yet deepite theee impotte. melnutrition
increeeingly revegee people people in the
slum end ebove nil in the rural ereee.
“verity yeere otter independence theee
countriee ere Ill reelity benltrupt.
reduced to e nete of permenent beggery.
The mod. obvioue ceee ie ol'couree Zeire.
There ie only one reeeon why thiecountry
hee not ee yet gone bankrupt: the
internetionel benke heve elreedy lent it
so much money thet they goon doingeo in
the hope of one dey eelveging their
inveetmente. Bu. now long con thie leet?

ML. How done the Alricene' etete of
benkruptcy concern ue? There ere
eurely eotne people who will think:

7

theee people wented their indepen-
dence: too bed for then: if they
couldn‘t tnenegeit!

ILD. Laving eeide reeponeibility and
internetionel eolulerity. eﬁer indepen-
dence very cloee tiee remeined end new
once. even cloeer. were forged between
Europe. notebly Prence. end Africe.

Todey we would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to do
without ell the things eupplied by u'xeee
countrim. be it oil non: Alger-ﬁe. Libye.
Nigeria. or: Gebon; iron-ore from
Meuritenie (which ie more economic to
exploit then thet of e smell mine in
larreine). beuxite tron: Guinee. cobalt
(run Zeire end Zombie. ureniuin from
Niger end the Control Africen Republic.
end on on.

Atria eleo euppliee ue with egricul.
turel producte: groundnute from Senegel,
coﬂ'ee. cocoe. benenee end pelm oil from
Cemeroon end ielly from ivory
Coeet. cotton from Ched end the Central
Africen Republic. And I out not even
telking ebout the Africen lebour force.
which doce ue much eervioe. France
could not ignore Africe without eutfering
from e coneidereble reduction in ite
etenderd of living.

M1,. Why doyou ley eenpheeie on the
greet reeponetbillty thet the “feet
beere for the etete of Alricen bonk-

ruptcy?

RD. We ere reopeneible by virtue of a
kind of culturel domznuion. beceuee the
Afrimn rulereereour pupile. if they have
succeeded in ruining Africe (end we shell

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the univerml virtues of the Western
model of development. What created the
wealth of Europe and America could not
make that of Africa.

Those. like me. who were trying to
plead for a little more realism. not to say
common sense. were rejected as retrog-
rade old fuddyduddies and enemies of
progress. They had to go fast. very fast.
cut all corners Noone wanted to face the
fact that it might not work. Today it is the
African masses who are suffering from
the dramatic consequences of this failure.

Md. What about the administrative
errors on the part 0! African heads of
state? Even monumental errors. if we
are to believe your bools!

RD. That is quite right. Zambia. for
example. is perhaps on the brink of
collapse. There. they arrested a corres-
pondent because he said that the situa-
tion is very bad. In the old days. the
bringer of bad news was killed.

Aher 16 years of independence. this
country has succeeded in becoming the
champion of bad management - if we
exempt Zaire. which really holds the
record. It became independent in 1964.
three yarn afterTanzania.

It was then relatively rich owmg to
copper. of which it is one of the chief
producers in the world. The Vietnam war
pushed the copper up in price. but with
the millions of dollars profit Zambia
chose to follow the Western example and
build big administrative buildings and
even a sumptuous university hospital.
comparable to that of London or Paris

These were huge investments but they
were totally non~productive. The worst of
it is that today they are not capable even
of maintaining the buildings: the cost is
too high.

Two magniﬁcent brick factories.
entirely automatic. were in operation for
only three weeks. Only alter building
them did the Zambians discover that
tnnmorting bricks up to 600 kilometres
onbadroads-ifthereareanyl-costs
them many times more than the bricks
themselves. Hand-made bricks can be
produced on the spot.

ln Guinea-Bissau the rulers were
advised to cmtralise the husking of rice
by building a big factory near the capital.
They had forgotten that the country
lacked roads and therefore it was imposs-
ible to supply the factory! The money
8 88 9333...: 3....» 132.6 3—.
395.35- 8 83. .38 9.3.x. a.
25.18 8 3.3... .p 2... ..o.. :5 35
v2.2. 8 2.1.3»

.9.- .. «<3 :53 5.. 0.. £18.83.
«5.3 .- 90 Ex 0.. .3083 5.. 32.3.:
312.83. 399.58 .5 9.38 398.
£30.. Ea 2736352. 12. 33.. For.
.8 .5 «8.. 32... 5.. 32.2: 93.5....
33.338 8 26.2... 89.52358...
55 5.938 ﬁ... 83 .335» «.5
3.85 9: so 8:. 138.. 33.11.53 5
annual—i 2.5.33.

.55. 9. .3983. no :8 38. ~23
58:23.. 3.9.3.528 2.9533.
33: 83. 838.58 v.5 so. 0.. 90
13v... 158.9131. .5." .n 503 9-» .
3. 35:... 3.3... .382. 9.. :5... 9Q
.32.. p.35 - 2.88.. 92. 1... 1.2.18
‘06“- ‘qlu Iu-d IGI. :1 1:41;}
2838.30. .35 9:38 .3 no

.252. 82.19. 358:

g. mug—u. 9.: >393 .3 :3
GEE... 1.5 p 82.2. 2.1.an 93.2..
10:358.. ‘3... > 33.3 «33 5.
HEB-EB v.1... ..o.. 399...... .u :3 :8.—
8 £3.53. 80 m3. - <8... 5 :95 u
an... a... v3.2... 33-: a: no 32...
9:. 9-3. .8358 5 833.. $5 .8
8 So «.36. a 8 .o .558 9 an...

3.... we. .9 5-. 88 :53 .u so
3:52..

36. 5.86.8 3:. 85 8.5.8. 9. 3o.
.53 .83 2. BE o: 3.8.... n2. 8 v.33.
5: .22.... .8 930 .o 833... 2..
3.328 on 1.5. nut—.25....“ 882:5.
2.33...

.532 Iv.” - 920.8.3 85.3. 5.5
an: 833 .805...— onvoqpo 8 9b.. 3 on:
n8 :5 .53 23.25. 3 =3..- 8 82. 2x.

:5! ti.» D... _ up... .r. 312...: :3.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WING OP comm EXAMINBD

tendon NEW AFRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 pp 16-20

[Article by Nana Iiunsi]

[Text]

AFRICA’S SECURITY and the state or
its military capability are increasingly
becoming focal points for Afrimn organ-
isations and governments. The Freetown
summit of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) in May
adopted protocols for mutual assiuance
in the defence of the Community. The
Organisation of African Unity (OAU) at
itsconferenos in Nairobi inJune. voted to
increase aid money to liberation move-
ments. and to further study the call to
establish a continental army. But more
signiﬁcantly. perhaps. Nigeria and
Algeria recently agreed to set aside
£26-million from oil proﬁts towards the
formation ofa continental military force.

he idea was born primarily out of the
two countries' unease about the presence
of Libyan troops in Chad. and Africa's
heavy dependence on foreign and United
Nations personnel to keep the peace in
zones of conﬂict.

Some quarters welcome the concept as
a blueprint for the march on Pretoria. a
demand initially made by former Ugan-
dan despot. President Idi Amin in 1976.
Several leaders treated the cell as
stemming from one of Amin's syphillitic
whims. But former Presidents Kwame
Nkrumah and Modibo Keita were treated
with almost equal derision when. in
1963. at the founding of the OAU. they
campaigned for the establishment of an
African High Command.

Mind-boron“

Nigeria and Algeria have essentially
usurped ruponsibilities traditional to

11

the OAU Liberat
coordinates fundi
tions and acts as t
mentor.
Considering thi
tom of the list of
buyers. haaan an:
about ”Million
sst aside by Nige
mocks the cone:
all-African war II
to guarantee
peacekeeper. to
miles of coastlin
apartheid. the c
manpower demai
would be mind-ho
Africa is activel
and by foreign m
the Atlantic an
Mediterranean. tl
In the Atlantic. B
Azores and US ar.
cries-cross the is:
ocean. though the
North Atlantic.

The Cape of I
untegic trade r
Japan. While th
overtheSuuCan
the West. Sout
"keeper of the or
fairly sophiuicat
is equipped wi
Andean and
continent is cord
navy bases. the n
are in the Azore-
lvory Coast. Gt
Africa. Mayotte.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9
tion of the emergent Cairo-Khartoum
uimwﬂhEgyptandSudsnmullngto
woo Ethiopia from the Soviet umbrella.
appears to take the wind out of Elliot's
notion Again. Chootsr Crochet. US
Amistsnt Somtary ol'Stote. justiﬁes the
ll.m2-millicn' military aid earmarked
for the ash alone the Nile River and the
hilt Valley south to Burundi and Tan-
unis. when he allirmsd that his gov-
ernment's lndian Ocean poliq rqanied
East Africa and the Horn. includingsuch
otetos u Sudan. Somalia. and Ethiopia
asshoUnitedaaus'socondmoiorsreaol‘
concentration next to the Gulf.

Cracker emphasised such a strategy
was abolutely vital in view of the
"aggressive opportunism of Soviet enter-
prise in the region and the signiﬁcant

of the American import dqon-
on Mel and non-minerals reduced
in Ml'ica". The situation. in a New
African ansly: (SooJuly l9alldoocribod
as tho“8\vord of Democlos". has int l
connections with the state of the
War. and presents all die ingredients for
a superpowor confrontation in Africa.

‘I‘holndian Ocean teemswith Russian.
British. Australian. Punch and Ameri-
can warships. hey all claim the right to
"protect” the commercial trailic to and
fromtheBast.’l'hoUShas l7 combat
ships in the area. two aircralt carriers
(the larger of which is the 88.000-ton
Kitty Hawk). six destroyers. six frigatoo,
threecruioers. plus 16 support ships. The
Soviet Union stacks against that 16
support ships. and ﬁve combat vessels
lauded by a aulsor.

Thocoup mounted by Bob Dennan‘l.a
French mercenary. against the socialist
government ofProsidoot All Soilih in the
Comoros in 1978. and the Israeli raid on
Entﬁbsesrliorinthedocadopointtoan
insecure continent. France's former Pm
ident Glscard d’Etaina. apart from
stationing 40.000 French troops in
Africa. had quickly adopted the role of
policoman. deploying 1.400 French and
Belgian psratroopers when unrest

in Zairo's Sheba province in
1978. France holds the record for crush-
in; popular rebellions in its former
territories. inﬁltration by US. Finch
and other W-torn intelligence organisa-
tions has fuelled military upheavals in
many parts of Africa. Nigeria and
AltsrlssaythstthisdemondsanAfrlcan
deterrent.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

m” . nuclear device b:
. ac _ lte 10.000-droq
In thecontext ol'etrategy and team. the hen mined
theAfricenarmywouldpr-eeantawide .
range of probahilltice and alumni..." ,0}de- South
aaid Brigadier as. Lehmn. the South Wm WM
AfricanDel'ence Poroeatteaheinbondon. Emmanuel:
”Guerrilla warfare alone cannot take 39° “,‘Wﬂa 9’1
overan entire country. At aonie point you “WW '0'"
will have to light in the open. ‘l'hat'e ﬁlm- What!
where the age-old concepte of war ”Dull 32.170-l
weighed ageinat the principlee of ita ture. Pb!"- ‘7"
actual execution will be problematic for ”d arr [0“! I"
an Ari-sun force." while «mom:
Africe'a mum armies mi about chm and Intel
lb-millionmenendwonrenieeeattached ‘1“ with the
chart) with awe. Ethiopia. Nigeriaend Gm “m P
Morocco boaating the lergeet unite. The 70”! 080- '
collective Ari-sun navy n mom-um, The Egyptian
while ite air force etande a 09.950, with don. Boo-dict 1
Egypt. mm. Morocco. Lybia and ‘5' W" '
Algeria having the law foroea. mun not forget
However. troop movement acroee alone. ”The aitt‘
Africa'a llnillion eqmilee of terrain ”‘0 lereeli-Areh
poeee overwhelming etrategic ohataclea: United Statee
22 per cent in alrnoet impeccable rein Africa againet a
foreat. 35 per cent ia deaert. with only forge thatoould
three Southern Ail-ican countriee with Unron.'l'he Rue
inter-date railwnye of any awniﬁunoe, WW- Spare 1
and virtually no inter-connecting road 'WUh‘lm
ayetetn. are epeaking l'rc
Saya Major Elliot ol‘ the 1188: ”Conven-
tional warfare against South Africa cw
would demand 1.000 tone of food. equip- _
memandaperepertaperdeyperrnan. , Wolverine:
The standard preponderance ratio of the inChed. N an!
attacking force ehould be three to every mm It
one of the enemy. You are talking about WW I" l'
600,000 men in any one etteclr. and up to Phillie!!!» Gou
nix-million men ea long ee the way may mu“ I C058
1.3;." wee left to rii r
South Africa haa 86,500 regular troope 0‘19de and Li
and claime it can mobiliee up to 404,500 Guinea-Conan:
men within a few daye. [to annual mgthut didnol
defence budget iacurrently 82.56-hillion. Nigeria '.' clai
ite ioroee have combat experience from twain lh
oﬂ‘eneivee into eeverel Frontline Statee. um“ “I OWL
lte weaponry. apart from what it man- "I don't “‘
ufectnm, includeuoo Centurion and to entertaining ft
Sherman tanhe. 209 combat aircreit in Jacquee de Leer
addition to the Intel Mirage lighten, ableA/rim Dcfe.
bomber equedrone and ﬂying gun-chine. will be lurnbe:
The navy ie equipped with three politial probler
Dephnecleaeeuhnierinea. lo Britieh Tar it not feaaiblc
mineaweepet'e and other combat ehipe. problems. deg:
South Africa hae nuclear capacity. Thie military aqrhie
wee conﬁrmed by the All-ice Department which make it t
of the US Council on Security which An all-Africa
reported that the "double-ileeh" recorded therefore. probe
in 1979 wee indeed from an exploded tural problemai
13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬁ09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050068-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

primary aetbaclt oi‘ the OAU. Eleven of
the 19 countriea ol‘any military eignii'i-
cance are inclined toward the Weet and
receive heavy euheidim bum the Wu.
and even provide military buee for
Weetern were The remainder look to
Rueeia and have enjoyed Soviet backing
with hardware and advieere. while the
reet ol‘Ah‘im claime non-alignment.

Obeervea Malor Elliot: "Apart from the
politiml amect. a command operation
would achieve little if it did not under-
etand a common e. A way round
the language barrier of a.multi-ethnic
force would be to group cmtingente in
linguietic detachmenta with mecific
reepon-‘bilitiee. Zulue take the eam.
Yoruhaa theeouth. andeoon. But atthe
top. nrategiete and commandeee would
need to be polylingual and well-trained
aoldiere. or the force would never move
from point A to point B."

A former ter in Ethiopia’e
Ogaden ion believee Aﬁican govern-
rumte put etability at riek if they
committed their reguhr forcee to a
continental command. "An African force
today would be cannoml'odder." he aaya.
”And ifwe plan it over the nut 20 yearn.
South Akica will gear iteeli‘ for the
event."

The immediate anewer. the ea-buah
ﬁghter eaid. wee protracted guerilla
actim led by the Afrimn National
Congreee (ANC) of South Africa. and the
South View African People's Organiaa-
tion (SWAPO) of Namibia. 1he black
pockete of Leeotho. Swaziland and Beta»
wana would probably be overmn by the
guerrilla forcce. but thin would need to be
donewithout alienating the allegiance ol'
the citiaene of thoee countriea.

He adds: "South Alrica'e main
headadie in a war with Africa willhethe
22-million black face in ite own back-
yard. The English and the Afrikanen
will eticlt together but they won't truet
any blacha That will be a eenoue
organimtional problem for them."

No chance

Egypt’e Brigadier Ella emphaeieed
that the tint eigne of eerioueneee within
the OAU in the eetabliehment of an
African force would be the {MM ofa
military committee. ”Let them bring
Africa'e military minde in coneultation.
A military committee ie vital before

1h

anything elee.‘

A rmired African gel
{acee in the Congo du:
crime in 1961. told N

- Africalachedthecornr

intelligence network 1
aeeault on South Ah'i
political «imitation of!
to thin force?" he quer
Africa a priority for 3
Will the ProntlineStat
devutating mide by th
We mun not forget t
believea in thelpre-en
larael ie ueing againet
Africa doeen't etand
conventional war."

The general it. ho
that wen-trained guer
the anewer. "Our bl
mobiliee the guerrilla
life impoeeible for the
Ali-ice.” On the peaceh
mined force. the gen
prohlema woreethan w
where eorne26 nationa
UN force. An emcienl
work would be eeeee
light an enemy unlem
dml about him._80m
don't even begin to in:
log the South African I
be. larael ie a good ea
Afrimn force can fa4
Africa."

Coneeneue ie that
will prove the mod
military action agal:
One educated eetimr
context of guerrilla w:
mobilieetion potenti:
”million men and M
“157'” ‘?'°“ “3.71%

rating or-mer

Aa the ea-buehﬁr
methodoi'warfareien
relatively low-mendil
cud m of combal
Guerrillaedotheir job
amount of equipment
long. But that’s the i
Africa and wartheid

ﬁled

How would South
ultimate militarypre
a combination of e
attache plue the pre
tional war and inter:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9
COPYRIGR'I‘:

C80:

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cant;
WM
law
“in
Mina
eu-
Me
A“
Mina
M
Ran
m
Nip-u

FE?
g.

Canaan-m among lunatic «perm
mmhethattheAh-ikam.ioaetint
with a section of the EnglidI-quakina
whiten - thoae who had not already ﬂed
the country - would defend the heartland
with theit liven. having conceded the
fringea of the Republic.

MaioIEuiotofthellﬁgoeaastap
further. He aaya: "If the waiting foreaa
ofthia imaginary army. aa wall aa urban
guerrilla ubotaun. put on extrema
preaaure, the whitea would rather dae-
way what they have than give it up.

1981 1C Magazines Limited

4700/469

 

Undet the stun of war and impending
defeat. if that eve! cornea. they would aay
'lt is our country; we built it’ — and they
will blow everything toduat and die with
it.‘

Henry Kiuingar. in juatifyi as
America's need to pull out of Vietnam.
wrote: "A conventional war that dose not
win. loaea; a guerrilla war that does not
lone. wine."

The right com-ea (or Africa. bent at

it ia on mulling apartheid. might
well be contained in thin Meat.

15

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-MICE

RURALMEASSEERASKEY'IOGREATERWE

London NEW AFRICAN 1n hunch No 167, Aug 81 p 48

[Colman "In Perspective” by clinch (no-twice]

[Text]

A re-definition of Africa's development strategy is called for if the
continent is to lift itself from the quagmire of poverty. Strangely, most
plans devised by African states over the years for their uplift have
skirted around the crucial issue of the plight of rural areas. Now. fresh
African minds are beginning to focus on the options which could lead
to a re-vitalised Africa

THE CAUSE OF poverty in African agricultural productivity can be brought
countries is not hackwsrdneee or lack of to the level at which a sustained policy of

resources. but the decay of the rural
structure. Most of the plans drawn up in
many ofthecountries over theysars have
up till now bypassed the rural areas.
Between ”-90 per cent of the popula-
tions of African countries live and work
intheniralareaswheremouol‘the
poverty is concentrated. althoiuh in
urban areas deprivation is now also
increasing fast.

Economic and social conditions in
many countries are unstableand various
attempts to superimpose s highly
developed. capital~intensiva induurlal
syuem from top to bottom upon such
conditions has worsened the problem of
poverty. Economic and social develop
ment in the rural areas can he fruithrl
onlyonthehaaisofabommtotop
development which talus account of
indigenous conditions and realities.

African countries have the poteuial to
produce enough food tofeed their-upend-
ing populations and excess for export.
But unfortunately they are not dolm so;
ratherthersvsrsassamatobethscase.
The importance of the agricultural base
should be recognised. It is only then that

16

industrialisation is possible Therefore
the basis of development should be rural
not urban.

The villagers will need technology to
achieve their development goals. Such
technology should hecheap and available
to everyone in the village or community.
rather than to a privileged few. It should
be labourinteosive to reverse the trend
towards increasing unemployment and
rural-urban migration. Finally, such
alternative self-help should be capable of
being repro'd‘tlrced loc‘rdly. thereby
encouraging ‘ iganous ' uetries.

‘Ihls emphasis on rural development
does not than that local villageactlvitiea
should prevail in all cases. Certain
services may needtobeprovidad attlte
national. urban. state. provincial or
district levels. tion networks
need national coordination. Copper
mines. molten. petroleum reﬁneries.
will rsqulremaadveinputsd'energy and
labour.‘l‘hey cannotbesupplied byafew
wind generators.

Equally. however. one does not need a
gigawatt power plant to meet the energy
demands of farms and villages. In fact.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

COPYRIGHT!

CSO:

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eupplyin‘ energy neede in eudt e wey
inevitehly ereeteeendreeultein feelince
of elienetion. dependnce end helples-
neee when one hee no under-tending or
eontroloverone’emeeneot'eurvivel.

'l'hetendencytouekeevemhing huge
end heevy end on e lerge-eale ehould be
evoided ee l’er ee poeeihle. Bnpheeie
ehould. ee fer ee poeeihle end pI-eeticeble.
be on lightneee of conuruction. Urhen
end rurel development. ehould he omen-
Ieed epociﬁcelly to euit oonditione in
citiee. towne. villegee end rurel corn-
munitiee.

In the urhen centree there my he need
for lerge-ecele oepitel-inteneive lnduv
try. But within the urhenheeed induetry
iteelf. there ehould be e perellel
development of emell-ecele lebour-
inteneive induetry. Thie economic
development. ehould be 'dtnlietic" with.
on the one hend. e modern lene-ecele
oepitel inteneive sector end on the other.
e treditionel lebour-inteneive eector.
This in celled 'welking on two Ice".

The elm ie to build e divereiﬁed end
helenoed ecmotny. e belenee between
induetry end egriculture. between light
endheevy indum. endthedevelop Inent
within each region of e country the
energy beeie on which induetry muet
rut.

Al'rieen end other Third World coun-
triee heve celled for the implementetion
of the United Netione Decleretion on the
Eetebliehment of e New lnternetionel
Economic Order INIEOI. to replete the
preeent internetionel eocio-economic
reletione which they regerd ee umuu. To

198]. 1c Magazines malted

4700/469

17

quote Mr AA. M
Minieter of the Net
choice ie between at
eyetetn. which ie 1
menipuleted for tht
countries end opt
directed towerde l'In
problem of equitebl
end proeperity. of
reeourcee end the I:
Iontnent".

At the netionel
eyetetn in my A
lenely guided end
beneﬁt of the rich nI
internetionel econ:
not only eeploitetivt
eerve the powerml I
et the netionel end
Whet ie required tht
equitehle dietribut
reeoureee.

NEIO celle for
philoetphy". In thie

economiet. Gunne
edvoatee en "inve
which would mu
eocietiee in such e
euﬂ'ering". He melt
in: the meteriel ete
emuent doee not he
ee suffering etill
Nobody ehould int
unleee everybody ht
ll'thie view ie eceept
N130. it will "melt
the meteriel reeouI
more on our more!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IN!

sac POLICY REVIEW m THREAT TO SUGAR GROWBRS

London NEW AFRICAN 1n Bagueh No 167, Aug 81 pp 45-46

[Article by Steve Schittereel

[Text]

Tl-IE LIKELIHOOD of major chang- to
the Contact Agrlwlutrol Policy (CAP)
of the Bulwean Economic Community
hae long-term implicatione forthevlobll~
ity of eugar production in the Third
World. ooeciolly theACPooumioe with
guaranteed oooeoo to the EEC market
thmgh the euger protocol of the lame

Convention.

Major chanson

TheEEC ioengagedinaniaiorreviev
of its policy and ﬁnding. pndled on by
Britain. which medully negotiated a
reductlon of 21.400-Inillion in ite net
contribution to the EEC. But major
ee are inevitable when Britain'e
"temporary" roduction rune out. ao Weet
Germany and the Benelux countnee are
nolongerproaredtohethernajorEEC
contributonontheironAoover'IOper
oentol'theBECWlornodeupof
enheidieo to agricultural produaion the
preeenreieonforchangoetnthoCAP
eyetenl.
‘I'hehudget eqoeeeewillcolneatatirne
when EEC beet eugar production hoe
been greatly expanded through the nu of
the euhaidy medioniern. In April the BBC
egreedtoartend itempportofhoeteugar
production for another ﬁve yearn. and
agreed country-wide quotae very elmllar
to thooe existing provioualy. ‘I'he reeult
haebeenthatB Cbeeteugorproduction
reached levele ae production
exceeded oonniniption and etocke of
l.66-million tone were built up. In order
to reduce thlo politically embanning
”sugar mountain“ the EEC hao been

18

mount‘ a major expor'
dinning the world Ina:
fallen aharplyeinoethei
and now etand'at their!
January 1980.

The EBC'o ougorpoll:
World in eev
the EEC. which ie not a
Internntional r A]
to nee enhoid oalel
market and thue put I
eive inveetntente in ex
tion that moral Africa
ae Somalia. have reoe
ondly. the EEC price n
he boetougorhae erode:
of cane sugar reﬁning h
the United Kingdom. I
bulk of ACP eugar. in:
Lone Convention. in e
the Liverpool reﬂneryc
one major Tate & Lyl
Greonock. Scotland.

Reduce}:

1he mahod by which
in the future to redo
burden of agricultu
unlikely to he of mud
World producer-e. The
cone thio year when tl
two per cent levy on E
help meet the coet of
eurpluo. :3; refueod *
PM” nicer
aloo hit by ﬂannel:
reteetEEC intervention
delivered price). ‘I'hue A
beingﬁlcedtoooneptlo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000‘00050050-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

we OFFICIAL USE UNI)

remain competitive.
The other long-term coneequenee ot‘ the

produoere like Sw:
the older. more eat.

EEC‘e reluctance to aocmnulate agricul- racing pronoun.-
tural aurplueee will he continual pree- exhauuion and a
sure downwarda on the market even Almod a decade
without auheidiee. due to overcapacity. auger plantation:
The BBC opened more sugar (3.9- euheidiaryJamai-
million tone) than wee produced in the win Seaca cover:

wholeofAh'icain 1980.andtheEBCia
the eeoond large: sugar exporter in the
world aller Cuba.

in; taking them
management com
Lyle derivea ite

Yet augar etill remaina crucial to the trading operatior
economy of a number of African and ﬂak-ridden produ
Carihbnn countries. Mauritius. which management pro:
exports nearly all ite auger. dependa on The futureof'l'l
ita aeceaa to the European market therefore likely tn
through Mme; roughb one-third to dependenceonexI
(me-half of ite GNP ia made up of auger are two promiaing
production. aaare twothirde oﬂte export in the [armed of i
ear-hinge. Swaziland ear-na half of ite trade. foraucaroo
foreign exchange through auger which it rising in the Soutl
has been expandingrapidly; theEEC and hae become ataxn
USaremalormarkete. LikewiaeJameica triee like Nigeri:
remainadependentonitaatatuaaaen fromtheEEC.Se
ACP producer for a guaranteed market. tion of marhata i
andtheniaareoaoriehyl‘arthelargeu products. and eh
employer of labour. lowed the exampl

Jamaim'a eituetia: alao highli‘hte ethanol the] from
another production problnn: while new

COPYRIGll'rx 1981 IC Magazinea Limited
C80: 4700/469
19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000400050058-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONUA‘

DEER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

HARD DECISIONS PACE APRICANS-African delegates attending the July 1-24 meeting of
the 54-member United Nations Economic and Social Council (scosoc) in Geneva have
received a tough evaluation of current conditions which calls for some hard deci-
sions. The report. part of a series of regional economic surveys covering Asia,
Africa, West Asia and Europe, projects a period of "negative growth” in per capita
income among low-income African nations and says the sub-continent is set to remain
the least industrialised region of the world for the foreseeable future. The im-
mediate problem, says the report, is food. Emergency projects to promote food
production and trade between African nations must be set in motion. 'The aim
should be to reduce Africa's food imports by 50 per cent by 1985‘. A regional food
plan, it is estimated, would require investments totalling 27-billion dollars.

Some of this money would be used to try to overcome poor performance of the agri-
cultural eector, the small size of the domestic market, lack of capital, and short-
ages of imported raw materials and skilled manpower in an effort to spur industrial
growth, particularly in non-oil-exporting countries. However, there are many more
obstacles to industrial growth. The report says these include inefficient manage-
ment, ineffective national industrial development, a weak infrastructure, and the
protectionist policies of western industrialised countries. The report points to
specific programmes in some countries which seem to be assisting the struggle for
food self-sufficiency. Consolidation of land tenure laws and credit facilities for
small farners in lesotho and Zambia are noted. Nigeria's efforts to use modern
technology in the fishing industry are considered exemplary. Yet the report does
not see these moves as capable of raising the dismal conditions of life for those
in the 20 least developed African nations, whose per capita income should remain
below 100 dollars for the next decade. In these areas the report predicts ”possi-
ble economic and social collapse”. (Text) [London NIH ArRICAN in English No 167,
Aug 81 p 47]

ABIDJAN-NIGER RAILHAY EXPAN810ﬂ-The Abidjan-Niger Railway Administration (RAN),
which operates a 1.154-kilometer-long rail system between the Ivorian and Upper
Voltan capitals, Abidjan and Ouagadougou, is going to invest some 10 billion CPA
francs in the purchase of rolling stock. Work is currently underway to adapt the
railroad to the continued growth of traffic. There are plans to double the track
along 324 kilometers between Abidjan end Bouake. The improvements will make it
possible to increase the current frequency of 36 trains a day up to 68 trains.

In addition, in a few years, 600,000 cubic meters of oil products will be hauled

as far as the Boueke depot, now under construction. A program to purchase rolling
stock costing 10 billion C?A francs is planned for the coming years. French enter-
prises should participate in the program. It should also be noted that RAN traffic
has been partially interrupted in recent days in Upper Volta because of repair work
on the track, work made necessary by the heavy rainfall in the Comoe regions.
[Text] (Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBENS in French 7 Aug 81 p 2051]
(COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,66b

20
IHJRIOFFICJAL.USEZCHNLY
FIMRl3FF1C1Al.lEﬂE(NULY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

UNITA COHMUNIQUE-The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA),
which opposes the regime in power in Luanda, states in a communique sent to Paris
that it continues to control the city of Havinga, taken from government forces on
28 Hay. Havinga is located in Cuando-Cubango Province, on the border of Namibia
and Zambia. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICADX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1867,
21 Aug 81 p 2178] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,466

PROTEST AGAINST HPLA-PCP STATEMENT-The Portuguese Government has just protested to
Angolan authorities about statements contained in a communique published jointly

by the HPLA and the Portuguese Communist Party, stating that the "government of the
Democratic Alliance (Portuguese center right) is practicing a policy of subservience
to the imperialism of the United States vis-a-vis the People's Republic of Angola."
[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICADX 8T HBDITERRANEENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81

p 2178] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux at Cie Paris 1981] 11,664

GENERAL TRANSPORT INVESTMENTs-According to a report from the transport committee

to the Angolan People's Assembly, some 4,257,400,000 kwanzas is to be invested in
the field of transportation in 1981. The investments will include: Road trans-
port: Angola will buy 1,150 trucks, 550 buses, 4,300 light cars and 1,600 special-
ized vehicles, along with spare parts, all for some 1.6 billion kwanzas. Rail
transport: A study for the construction of railroads between Luanda and Viana

is planned. The Luanda-Zenga section will be straightened. In addition, the layout
of the north-south transversal railroad will be defined. Also planned is the build-
ing and assembly of railroad equipment, all costing some 720 million kwanzas.
Maritime transport: Plans include the purchase of 5 mixed freighters with an over-
all tonnage of some 80,000 tons. In addition, the Luanda port will be asphalted

and construction of the Cabinda port begun. Total expenditures will be around
1,128,000,000 kwanzas. Air transport: Freight transport increased 546 percent
over 1979 and passenger transport 55.8 percent. Repair of the Benguela, Uige,
Lubango, Chitato and Henongue runways is planned. Later, a new international air-
port for the capital is planned. Quantitative and qualitative improvement of
domestic and international service must be relentlessly pursued. The financial
effort will amount to 1,367,000,000 kwanzas. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2178] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct

Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OIL PRODUCTION FIGURES-The annual report of Texaco Petroleos de Angola for the
1980 fiscal year indicates that the company's share of crude oil production in the
area on land being worked totaled 2,376,376 barrels, or 2.2 percent more than in
1979. A total of 1,360,766 barrels were sold to the Luanda refinery and 751,310
barrels were exported. The company participated in the boring of six development
wells. Beginning in June 1980, the General Geophysics Company completed seismic
surveys, 362 kilometers of which were done in the concession area, within the
framework of the research and development program. After completion of the first
phase of the Quinfuquena terminal, which included a maritime loading tower and

a 20—inch loading pipe, a contract was signed with the Industrial Enterprise Union
to build the second phase, which includes two 600.000-barrel tanks and a pumping
station costing $25.5 million. Completion is planned for the middle of next year.

[Text] Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81
p 2179] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,666

C50: 6719/366

22
IN)R 0FF1C]AI.IJSII(NULY
F0310FFMHAI.USE(NVLV

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

DETAILS OF EMERGENCY PLAN FOR ECONOMIC RECOVERY
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 31 Jul 81 pp 1976-1977
[Report of UN Conference on Least Advanced Countries (Paris, 1-14 September 1981)]

[Text] when this country was still called Ubangi~shari, it was mainly known abroad
by stamp collectors and geographers. The latter actually had a very significant
example of geology, "the Uhangi threshold" separating the three major basins in

the heart of Africa: the Congo River basin. the Chadian depression and the Bahr
al-Ghazal River valley in the east. As part of former AEF [French Equatorial Africa].
Ubangi-Shari struggled along, far removed from major economic trends and great changes.
In proclaiming the Central African Republic [CAR] in 1958, Bartheleny Boganda, who
soon disappeared. tried to make this region the nucleus of a "Latin Africa." but

he failed and, with a heavy heart, he had to resign himself to withdrawing into

his own sector, that former Ugsngi who, without belonging to any group, had to deal
with serious problems: few inhabitants. meager resources and above all, an outlet

to the sea that was 1,800 km away. Ubangi-Shari became the Central African Republic,
isolated at its doorstep, and returned to a certain anonymity.

More than 15 years later, when pine posts were shipped by air from the southwestern
part of France to this country of forests so that oriflammes could be hung from
them. it became obvious that something was not quite right in the way that govern-
ment affairs were being handled. The spotlight of current events was then focused
on this wedge-shaped piece of land which. because of its strategic location and

its uranium reserves. was an important pawn on the political chessboard. Everyone
knows what happened following the final convulsions of a dying regime.

Disturbing Economic Picture

Beginning in 1976-77. it can be said that the trade situation started to deteriorate
seriously. Its decline was rapid. The figures also speak for themselves: from

1967 to 1975, average annual growth was 4.7 percent; then it slumped and became
negative. Thus for the entire 1967‘80 period. the average annual growth rate was

only 2.6 percent, i.e., barely higher than the rate of population growth (2.5 percent).

To determine the extent of the decline. only the agricultural production for those
final years need be considered. Production of maniac, the principal crop, dropped
from 280,000 tons to 256,000 tons. while corn production dropped from 62,000 tons
to 33.000 tons; thus it became necessary to import and to keep on importing foodstuffs.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI“. ONLY

It was not a bright picture for export crops either: cotton: 61,000 tons in 1977,
27,000 tons in 1980; tobacco: 2,400 tons in 1977, 1,800 tons in 1980. On the other
hand, coffee production remained stable.

The exploitation of forests, an important part of the country's economy, also de-
clined considerably. In the case of rough timber, for e lo: 197‘: 331,000 m3,
exports 131,000 m3; 1979: 250.000 m3, exports 125,000 I .

Finally. diamond production, which represented roughly 30 percent of export revenues.
dropped from 538,000 carats in 1965 to 284,000 carats in 1978.

But even more serious was the disorder which prevailed for years in the administra-
tion of transportation systems. Rural roads and highways were not maintained. The
Central African Agency for River Transportation (ACCP), the public agency administer-
ing river routes, was managed chaotically, resulting in a more than 50-percent drop
in trade.

All of this meant an almost strangled economy and very harsh living conditions,
especially in isolated villages. The change in the GDP [Gross Domestic Product]
is a good indication of that situation: 1977: 115.2 billion CPA francs; 1980:
102 billion CPA francs (at constant prices for 1977); or a decline of 12 percent.
Per inhabitant, this same GDP declined 18 percent, dropping from 53,160 CPA francs

in 1977 to 43,700 CPA francs in 1980.

Disastrous Financial Situation

The financial situation was only a corollary of the economic situation. It was
a classical pattern: the machinery of trade slowed down and financing ground to
a halt, but operating expenses continued to pile up, thus it was not long before
payments were in arrears ....

The state deficit rose from 1.3 billion CPA francs in 1971 to 9.9 billion in 1980.
This decline was mainly due to the rapid increase in the number of public employees
(16,000 in 1976 and 26,800 in 1980). The budget's structural imbalance (due to
spending) grew considerably worse as a result, since government operating expenses
in 1980 accounted for 84.9 percent of all expenditures!

The balance of payments in turn obviously deteriorated, its various components them-
selves showing negative figures: balance of trade, -19 billion CPA francs in 1980;
balance of services for the same year, -21.9 billion. Thus the current balance

of payments finally dropped from -9.5 billion in 1977 to -63.6 billion in 1980.
Public transfers, due to a massive increase in foreign aid, which were approximately
10 billion CPA francs in 1976-77, then greatly increased: 26.2 billion in 1980.
Thus the net balance of payments, which had been positive for so long, dropped to -
-2.5 billion in 1977 and to -5.1 billion CPA francs in 1980. Subsequent deficits
were offset by special financing. It should be noted that public foreign indebted-
ness was 52 billion CPA francs at the end of 1978 and that domestic indebtedness
was 10 billion, totaling practically half of the GNP [Gross National Product]. Under
these conditions, it is understandable that the public treasury could no longer
provide for government expenditures and amortization of the public debt.

2h
FOR omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recovery Plan

The situation was serious enough for the UN General Assembly to issue an appeal
in December to governments and specialized institutions "to contribute bilaterally
and multilaterally to the reconstruction. recovery and development of the CAR."

The most urgent matters took priority, thus this emergency plan was spread over

2 years and can be considered the guiding force. if not the driving force, for the
entire decade. It provides for 45 billion CPA francs in investments. Investments
made last year totaled only 9 billion CFA francs. whereas 17 billion had been
scheduled. It should be noted that 4.5 billion francs have been earmarked for infra—
structures. Recent events have shown. if there was any need for it, that prolonged
interruptions of shipping routes. already long and uncertain, quickly result in
bringing the country to a standstill. For example, when it was learned that gas
and oil once had to be imported by air to prevent the suspension of economic opera-
tions. the authorities were determined to make sure that such a situation would

not occur again.

Priority was thus given to two projects. which are also underway. The whole struc-
ture of the 2-year recovery plan and the 10-year plan depend on them. They are:

the reorganization of the Central African Agency for River Transportation (ACCF).
which administers Central African river routes, and first of all. the former Bangui-
Brazzaville "federal route"; restoration of the Bossenbele-Bouar-Garoua-Boulai
(Cameroonian border) highway.

To a good extent. the first project will determine the CAR's future. If it fails,
everything may well be thrown into disorder again. Actually. the transequatorial
route is now the only one that can really be used for foreign trade. It mus- there-
fore be reliable and profitable. A new company has been established for this purpose.
SOCATRAF (Central African Company for River Transportation). which will be in charge
of everything concerned with transportation by water. It is significant to note

that 49 percent of its capital is held by a private company. with the remaining

stock owned by the Central African Government. This arrangement has also been used
for reorganizing other public corporations. SOCATRAF‘s directors are not faced

with a bright picture. Trade declined by more than one-half between 1970 and 1979:
from 267.000 tons to 114.000 tons. The length of the journey on the Bangui-Brazzaville
route has increased from 220 to 330 hours. SOCATRAF's working capital is in the red.
it is in arrears with all its payments, it is overstaffed (650 full-time employees)
and its equipment needs to be modernized or replaced. In short, it will have a

lot to do to correct the situation.

A reorganization program has been started and investments of 4.3 billion CFA francs
are scheduled over a 2-year period. The new company's goal is to quickly bring
about regular supplies. The Brazzaville-Pointe-Noire railroad link, on which the
CAR depends. obviOusly remains a factor. but that is another problem.

The second project is the restoration of the Bosaembele-Bouar-Garoua-BOulai highway
(AbJ km). which will make it possible to improve communications, now quite precarious,
with Cameroon and Douala. The work has already started and w‘ll last until 1983.

The Bangui-Bossembele highway is also being asphalted at the same time; the route
through Cameroon will then be a reality when this work is completed.

25
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus if these two projects are successfully completed, it will be a great step forward.
The reliability of the two main routes of communication abroad, to Pointe-Noire

and Douala. will restore the confidence of investors and it is the most natural

thing in the world for them to start "bidding" again for Bangui ....

Of course, the recovery plan and the 10-year plan include a whole series of other
projects covering the various sectors of the economy. To complete the road portion.
first of all. we should mention that there are 18 other projects in addition to

the 2 major projects mentioned. including the construction of an all-weather road,
in the distant future, to the "uranium" of Bakouma. In the case of roads, all pro—
jects taken together will represent an investment of 119 billion CFA francs. But
their completion would be to no avail if maintenance services are not totally re-
organized. This is absolutely necessary.

The Bangui-H'Poko airport will be modernized to permit Boeing 747's to land there;

the Berberati airport will also be improved. Total cost of these two projects:
2.7 billion CPA francs.

Rural development. together with agriculture, livestock breeding and forestry, repre-
sent 51 projects totaling an investment of 108 billion CPA francs. Cottonseed pro-
duction should reach 76,000 tons by 1985.

Development in the social sector (education. training, health care) also constitutes
an important aspect of the plan: 51 billion CPA francs allocated.

Overall. the 1981-90 plan is scheduled to provide an investment of more than 400
billion CPA francs. If such a sum is provided from "abroad." that will only be

the first step. so to speak. Such financing actually still needs to have preferen-
tial conditions, unless it is desirable to reduce its beneficial effects, i.e.:
recurrent project expenses to be assumed by financial backers, loans made without
interest or at very low interest rates. renewed moratoria or abolishment for foreign
debts. etc. Like other countries. the Central African Republic hopes that such

an arrangement is possible. In its case. at least, this procedure would be largely
justified.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11915
C80: 6719/299

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

BRIEFS

PRGIUI‘IONS 0F OFFICERS-ﬁn 30 July, President Dacko promoted a number of officers
to higher ranks, while the Central African National Army was invested with all
powers with respect to the maintenance of order following the 14 July bombing in
Bangui. Gen Andre Kolingba, chief of staff of the Central African Armed Forces,
was promoted to the rank of army general, the highest grade possible in the National
Army. Promoted to the rank of brigade general were Col Alphonse Hbaikoua, deputy
chief of the general staff of the Central Armed Forces, Col Abel Nado (Operational
Intervention Regiment), Col Sylvestre Yangongo (Support Regiment) and Col Paul
Bangui (Air Force). These promotions were reportedly based on the "loyalism"
demonstrated by the Armed Forces during the events following the 110 July attack.
[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET MBDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81

p 2057] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,461.

C80: 4719/287

2?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

RESTORATION OF CONFIDENCE HUST PRECIIE ECONOMIC RECOVERY
Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 31 Jul 81 pp 1975-1976
[Report of UN Conference on Least Advanced Countries (Paris. 1-16 September 1981)]

[Text] The violent contrast between the arid lands of the Sahara and the Shari River's
humid aavannahs seems to have influenced. as though by osmosis. this unfortunate
country's political life. which has been marked by bloody conflicts for several

years.

Those who always have ready a good oral or written explanation say that the Arab

"lords" of the North. formerly powerful but new only poor. nomadic shepherds. have
angrily watched the Christian farmers of the South. already rich from their cotton.
acquire control of the government as an added bonus. This is held to be the cause
of the tragedy. It is very possible. But external influences must also be con-

sidered. in particular one which many people. thinking too much of Libya,'have for-
gotten: the war in the Sudan. which lasted 17 years. from 1955 to 1972. -

Moreover. who could claim to draw a clear picture of the Chadian imbroglio. whose

confusion has increased from one month to the next? For the time being. however.

a relative calm has apparently returned to this country. "which has more of every-
thing than the others. except wealth"....

Limited Possibilities

Located in the heart of the African continent. everything is a problem for Chad.

As in 1962. it is enough for Lake Chad to overflow its banks as a result of recurrent
rainfall and blockage of the road from Nigeria to interrupt. for several weeks.

the shipment of goods routed. at the time. through Lagos and Port Harcourt. The
cameroonian route has since taken over and there is less rainfall ... but the fact
remains that Chad is dependent on its neighbors for its trade. Hith Douala 1,500 km
away and Pointe-Noire. the "unattainable." 3.000 km away. what a handicap! Especially
since resources for a population of 4.500 million inhabitants are far from adequate.
Everything has to be imported. except foodstuffs. which barely cover the country's
needs. presently no longer the case. Except for cotton gins and two breweries,

there are only small crafts-type companies (leather. textiles. etc.).

These are the most recent official figures. published for the 1976-77 period: millet
and sorghua. 560,000 tons; peanuts. 95,000 tons; maniac. 50,000 tons; fish. 110.000

28
FOR‘OFFK]A1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tons. 40,000 tons of which were marketed; livestock: 3.500 million head of cattle.
As for cotton. which in 1974 represented more than 70 percent of export revenues.
the 1976-77 harvest was 164,000 tons (cottonseed); production dropped to 83,000
tons for the 1980-81 season.

There has also been much talk of uranium and other rich ores discovered in the area

of the famous Aozou Strip, in the extreme north, surrounded entirely by desert.
Exploitation of that wealth will continue to be a dream for a long time. inasmuch

as investments would be enormous because of the distances involved and the environment.

50 when two scourges such as drought and war rained down on this very fragile economy.
the country could not withstand then. Thus according to IMF estimates. the GDP

[Gross Domestic Product]. in current value. rose from 162.2 billion CPA francs in
1976 to 179.8 billion in 1977 and to 208.6 billion in 1978. This is equivalent

to an annual growth rate of barely 2.5 percent, which is less than population growth.
The latest status of the balance of payments is not known, although it had already
started to decline in 1977 with ~I.l billion CPA francs as opposed to +5.6 billion

1 year earlier. Imports for the same year amounted to $150 million as opposed to

$40 million for exports, which indicates the extent of the deficit.

At the time. Chad had prepared a 4-year development plan for 1978-81, which would
have provided for investments of approximately 226 billion CPA francs. including
70 billion for the secondary sector (30 billion for manufacturing industry). As
might be suspected. the least effort was never made to implement this plan.

Rebuilding the Ruins

In February 1979. the bloody conflict turned into an actual civil war. which sub-
sided in November but resumed with more intensity in March 1980. Ndjamena was at
the center of the fighting. Calm was not restored until 9 months later.

In view of these events. the UN General Assembly proclaimed a kind of state of emer-
gency and Chad has become the focus of concern of various UN agencies. Missions
have been sent to the country. In cooperation with the Chadian Government. they

are evaluating immediate needs and arrangements for aid may be made immediately.

In short. an emergency plan has been set up for the various sectors of the economy.

Infrastructure: It seemed essential to quickly increase the capacity of the Kousseri
ferry. the only link between Chad and the outside world. The following measures

have been taken: 2 unused ferries. l weighing 30 tons and the other 60 tons. will

be restored to operating condition. which will require 2 months' work; completing

the construction of a 60-ton ferry, which began before the fighting.

The cost of these two operations is approximately $600,000. The unbilical cord
represented by this route across the Shari River to Cameroon will thus be reinforced
and will make possible a considerable increase in trade.

The Ndjamena airport has suffered extensive damage. The main installations are

no longer operable and only the runways have been spared. But without a control
tower, without a radio beacon and without essential installations. there is no ques-
tion of its being used for the time being. inasmuch as ICAO [International Civil

29
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aviation Organization] standards constitute a decisive obstacle, of course ....
In any case. 6 months' work. including the installation of a prefabricated control
tower. will be required to make the airport operational. Cost: $5 million.

Food, Agriculture: Ndjamena and certain regions urgently need grain. An initial
contribution of 12,000 tons is being provided. In the present situation. logistical
problems of shipping, distribution and storage are difficult to solve. Grain eleva-
tors must be restored to operating condition and vehicles must be provided. The
country is totally without means of transportation.

Seeds are absolutely necessary for the new harvest. They will come from Cameroon
and Nigeria: 360 tons of millet. 70 tons of sorghum, 40 tons of rice and 100 tons
of peanuts.

There are many boreholes and equipped wells which are no longer operating in rural
areas. These water-supply installations must therefore quickly be put back into
operation to prevent a disaster for cattle and a mass exodus of the rural population
to Ndjamena (which is also without water).

Health Services: Almost all health services and medical installations are no longer
operating. They were inadequate before the conflict and are now almost all beyond
use. The central hospital has not been seriously damaged. but all the equipment

has disappeared and there is a shortage of drugs. Serious cases are treated in
Kousseri, Cameroon. at the refugee camp's very well-equipped hospital. "“0 has
allocated funds of nearly $1 million for the most urgent needs and in particular

for the supply of drugs.

Other steps are being taken: restoration of telecommunications, schools. etc.,
which would be too tedious to mention. They are among the priorities which have
been established by the minister of reconstruction.

More generally, the Chadian Government is currently trying to restore confidence

in the country. It will soon be necessary for proper restoration of public services.
In fact, many people have fled, at least 300,000, including a number of civil ser—
vants. And their return will begin as soon as order and safety are really assured.
It is under these circumstances that Chad will initially be able to get back on

its feet.

Later, when fears have disappeared and rivalries have subsided, Chadian leaders
will be able to think about really getting the economy back on the right track.
whether from Abeche or Lere, Toubou or Sara. Chadians profoundly want peace and
the term "recovery" has never been as meaningful in this country. in which the North
and South must find the points of anchorage for reestablishing the Chadian community.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11915
CSu: «719/299

3'.)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

UNDP FINANCING AGREEMENT—A financing agreement to provide new equipment for the
Ndjamena airport was signed by the UNDP (UN Development Program) representative

in Chad, Placktor. and Chadian Hiniatar of Public Notice Pacho Balm, at the end of
July in the capital. Total coat of the operation is 707 million CPA francs.
Placktor told APP that the agreement is for the purpose of "helping Chad to restore
its means of commanication and exchange with the international calamity." The UNDP
representative in Chad also announced that the Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
will soon provide equipment and send six experts to undertake repairs on the control
tower at the Ndjanena International Airport, which was heavily damaged by fighting.
Finally, Placktor said that the m (World Food Program) would supply food totaling
$2.6 million. According to Placktor, the UN High Comiaaion on Refugees is cur-
rently providing Chad with assistance coating some $6.8 million. [Text] [Paris
HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MBDITERRANBENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81 p 2057] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

C80: 4719/287

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

LUMBER EXHIBITION-Pron 13 to 17 October, the Congolese Hood Office will hold the

first African Hood Exhibition in Loubomo and Brazzaville. as part of the fourth
forestry and wood week. The exhibition, in which all international lumbernen will
participate. will include the aspects of tree planting, reforestation, lumbering.
industrialization and the important problem of marketing different varieties,
especially the so-called "secondary" or "promotional" types. Hithin this context,
special attention will be paid to the presentation of secondary woods in various
forms, ranging fron logs to furniture and including sawn lumber, plywood, and so
on. [Text] [Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81
p 2059] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,666

PRC AGREEMENT-—An agreement on cultural, scientific and technical cooperation was

signed between China and the People's Republic of the Congo on 30 July in Brazza-
ville. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French No 1865,

7 Aug 81 p 2059] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,664

CSO: £719/287

32
FOR OFFICTAL USE ONLY
FOR OHM’IAL USE ONLY

PROGRESS REPOBI ON TRANSGABONESB RAILROAD
Paris MARCHES TROPICADX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2171

[Text] An activity report from the Ministry of Transport and Merchant Marine for
the August l980-Auguat 1981 period emphasizes that the Transgaboneae Railroad
office (OCTRA) is operating under satisfactory conditions. There has been an in-
crease in the activity of rail transport. resulting in regular growth in the

number of passengers carried: 68,000 in 1980 leaving from Libreville or N'Djole,
and 36,000 for the first half of 1981. Freight traffic has stabilized at 300,000
tons a year. There will be a definite increase in 1982 and especially 1983 when
the railroad penetrates the forest area called the ”railroad attraction zone."
However, it is in the field of major undertakings that the essential activity re-
sides. These mainly involved the N'Djole-Prancaville route, while studies actively

continued for the Booue-Bongobadouma-Hoanda section.

The first section of the Transgabonese, from Libreville to N'Djole, was opened
three and a half years ago. The section is 185 kilometers long and cost 66 bil-
lion CFA francs. The second phase began with a special project: the opening in
1975 of the Junkville tunnel (kilometer market 230), 286 meters long. Since Janu-
ary 1979, work has continued with the laying of track beyond N'Djole as far as

the Lebe station (kilometer marker 192), in order to make it possible to ship out
lumber from forestry permits located south of the Ogooue on the left bank.

Between N'Djole and Booue, major earthwork continued. The total now amounts to

28 million cubic meters, in cuts and fills, including 3 million in rocky excavated
material. Some 10 kilometers of metal pipe has been laid and 13 engineering works
completed, including the bridge over the Ogosue downstream from Booue, 676 meters
long. The laying of the track should resume in October 1981 and reach Booue at the
end of 1982. The cost of these operations is 65 billion CPA francs.

0n the Booue-Franceville section, everything will be done so that work will be
spread out from January 1983 to December 1986, the date on which the railroad will
finally reach Pranceville, which requires the construction of 19 engineering pro-

jects and the laying of 310 kilometers of track. It is also important to recall
that 30 kilometers of platform have been completed at Franceville. On this section.

there remains the assembly and the installation of the metal flooring for the
Ogooue VI bridge, 430 meters long, and construction of the bridge over the Lebonbi

(over 100 meters).

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UI'I'ILIAL USE ONLY

In order to complete the progrsn of works entrusted to it, the enterprise responsi-
ble for the projects had to bring in lsrge mots of heavy equip-eat, including

250 eartlnovero and some 2,550 eliployees, including 1,457 Gsbonese. or a total of
2.200 Africans.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux er Cie Paris 1981.

11,664
cso: 47191344

31;
FOR OFFICIAL (EB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-3188A"

PRESENT LEADERSHIP'S REPORTEDLY SUSPECT WIVES QUESTIONS!)
Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French No 246, 17-30 Aug 81 pp li-lS
[Article by Augusta Conchiglia: "An Appointaent on 16 Novenber")

[Excerpts] On 16 Novenber, the anniversary of the coup d'etat, the extraordinary
congress of the PAIGC will be held in bissau, slated to undertake the "revitaliza-
tion" of the party. The choice of the date is quite significant. The overthrow
of President Luis Cabral and the ascent to power of a council of the revolution
headed by Joao Bernardo Vieira (Nina) bore an undeniable anti-party connotation be-
cause of the aethode used and the positions seemed. The absence of any real al-
ternatives in the coup nakers' declarations and the lack of serenity in the criti-
cisn addressed to those who were violently overthrown, as vell as a nirture of
racist and anti-Cape Verdian statements that detracted free the real objectives and
the successes achieved by unity, had perplexed all those who had closely followed
the PAIGC's history and struggle. Has there been an evolution since those days?

If one is to refer to the resolutions that cane out of the party's national con-
nittee meeting at the end of May, anbiguity still prevails-mat least at the theore-
tical level-«as to the respective roles that must be played. today as well as in
the near future, by the party and council of the revolution.

The latter had inediately dissolved all the institutions set up by the PAICC during
the first 7 years in power, but had simultaneously renamed the coup d'etat "a
resdjuatnent sovenent." In a transitioned phase, the party "achwledgea that the
council of the revolution has a leading role in society as the suprene organ based
on the principles of the PAIGC." There has just been an integration at the sunit
between these two institutions: the we [National Council of Guinea] has co-opted
two members of the government, both very active in support of the coup d’etat, and
5 members of the council of the revolution--already admitted into the ranks of the
CNC--ere entering its pernanent col-ittee. Hell ahead of the preparations for the
congress, the leading organises of the party have thus been slightly renodeled ac-
cording to the viewpoints of the council of the revolution. This is a questionable
practice when engaging in the democratization of the structures and the redefini-
tion of political action.

Actually, the council of the revolution. which, at any rate, has not planned to
abdicare in favor of the party, whose "instrument" it defines itself could not pre-
vent this clarification fron falling due. A masher of government officials and

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FAIGC militants had agreed to cooperate with the new government, hoping to completely
re-establish its primacy over all other institutions of the state. This was also
eyed favorably by the people who. either directly or indirectly, had supported the
PAIGC since the war of liberation.

Narrow Nationalism

Hasn't "Nine" the son of the revolution and one of the very first fighters of the
PAIGC? In the eyes of the people, too, the difficulties encountered in daily life
because of the country's serious economic situation, could be imputed, finally, to
the overthrom leaders. The anti-Cape Verdian campaign, for its part, opened the
way for an argument that could be well received by the bulk of the people: narrow
nationalism. Following the speech made, a few days after the coup d'etat, by the
traitor Rafael Barbosa, it became clear that this aspect would largely determine the
actions of the new leaders. While an unconditional overture was made to those
counter-revolutionary movements opposed to the PAIGC, such as the FLING [Front for
the Struggle for Guinea-Bissau Independence], the UFANG [expansion unknown], etc.,
these were organizing committees in support of the council of the revolution abroad
and were full of praise for the authors of the coup d'etat-maintaining that they
even participated in it--stressing, in particular, the canon defense of the "authen-
tic sons of mines."

Since the "historic 110 November," appeals to reconciliation have abounded; former
opponents are returning to Bissau, puppet organizations are dispatching delega-
tions galore to negotiate their official adherence. Returning to Dakar, Vincent
Co, president of the committee in support of the coup d'etat in Dakar-wand another
champion of the struggle against the PARC-declared that "the time has come for

all the sons of Guinea to return hose."

Indeed the time has come, because government posts have already been discreetly
entrusted to former opponents. Victor Pan, the new attorney general of the Republic,
is well known in the anti-PAIGC circles of the Portuguese capital.

with the exception of their nationality, what do these former militants of the
reactionnsupported, once upon a time, by France and the United States through Tuni-
sis and Zaire—have in canon with the serious FAIGC militants?

This question cannot be evaded. On what and on which projects has it been possible
to reach an agreement since, on the one hand, the Bissau officials vigorously
proclaim themselves the heirs of Aailcar Cabral and on the other, all these opposi-
tionists have not abandoned their objectives, which run totally counter to those of
the PAIGC? Nevertheless, the most aabitious among them are conscious of these
differences. Kankoila Handy Francois, president of the FLING couittee that met in
Dakar on 30 March, categorically denied the ininent dissolution of the front an-
nounced a few days before.

For the moaent, this measure has been delayed, because no similarity of viewpoints
has been agreed to as yet. And, as Kandy Francois noted, "the FLING is in good
health."

This prudence can be explained by the fact that outside the council of the revolution,
government officials and former FAIGC leaders enjoying international prestige are

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tenaciously defending the political plan developed by the PAIGC and initiated during
recent years.

The 30 March arrest of Rafael Barbosa on the initiative of Minister of Justice
Pidelis de Almada after more than 6 months of freedom during which he had received
housing and a pension, as well as the vigilance of Minister of Planning and Economic
Coordination Vasco Cabral against discreet and subtle atteapta to impose contracts
or "solutions" of nee-colonial inspiration. must have contributed toward alerting
the puppet groups.

These are spreading the belief that they the support of privileged members of the
council of the revolution, but are awaiting a formal invitation to join the govern-
ment. They are even basing their hopes on economic catastrophe: the drought has
aggravated the shortage of food, and the cruel lack of foreign exchange leaves the
country at the tender mercies of international assistance, which is often late in
coming. They can then appear as saviors, and impose their conditions, as well as,
it goes without saying, their international alliances.

Present Vagueness

The counter-revolutionary groups and their allies are seemingly only half-satisfied
with the changes that have taken place in Bissau. If, on the one hand, the objective
of destroying the unification project between Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau with the
concomitant weakening of both has been attained, and if the PAIGC's prestige ac-
quired in the course of a courageous and exemplary struggle for liberation has been
tarnished, a number of obstacles, even fragile ones, are raised to prevent the sell-
ing out of the country.

The hoped-for changes in international policy have not been initiated, for whatever
reasons. In the present mood of vagueness due to the lack of decisiveness on the
part of those who got hold of the government by force, the initiative of some leaders
can still be a determining factor in the leaders of the state.

President "Nina" himself contributed to this as well. Together with narrowly nation-
alistic positions and all sorts of accusations hurled against the former leaders-
which totally conceal the responsibility of the entire team then in power-he in-
sisted that some leaders about whom he already knew that they would fight against

the total recovery of the country, should, nevertheless, become part of the govern-
ment. In this context, it is difficult to forecast the meaning of the upcoming
extraordinary congress.

Even if one of the CNc's self-assigned tasks for the next few months is to conduct
an enlightenement campaign on the reasons that brought about the coup d'etat, one
can rightfully hope that the party leaders will realize the threat now weighing
on the country. Heavily decimated, the leadership of the remnants of the party seem
quite heterogeneous. Among historical cadre, one must indeed exclude those who
perished during the coup, those who were fired while abroad-many members of the
general staff were in fact in Cape Verde at the time-those who have left the country
and, finally, those who are still jailed.

It is difficult to predict whether one can hope that the congress will put a stop
to the low-key penetration by counter-revolutionaries of leadership positions and

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

admit the legitinacy of the establishent of the PAICV by the Cape Verdians by
accepting to renew relations between the two fraternal countries. Finally, it is
difficult to know whether the congress will set a definite schule for the re-
establislnent of a democratic leadership of the state under the party's control--
even if this party is a different one—and whether it will draw an anti—imperialist
and coherent economic development policy. Perhaps the resolutions of the congress
will satisfy the bulk of these questions; however, this will require such a ratio

of forces as to guarantee their application. At any rate, contradictions abound at
the present time.

The statements made last February by the neubers of the council of the revolution
about the ininent release of former President Luis Cabral and of other jailed
leaders have been subsequently refuted by the vice president of the council of the
revolution and minister of foreign affairs, Victor Saude Maria, who did not deem

it necessary to provide an explanation. What can one think of those——in the majority
for now—who prefer Spinola's agents retrieved by an already moribund Portuguese
colonialism when they were on the verge of being stricken from the pages of history,
to those leaders who so generously contributed to national independence?

What can one think of this t-porary majority, too, when they torpedoed the meeting
arranged between Aristides Pereira and Joan Bernardo Vieira in Maputo for last
March? Another such meeting is still viewed, and it seems that "Nino" has evidenced
a sincere desire to participate in it to provide a concrete impulse toward the
normalization of relations between the two countries.

however, the one rumbling opposition to such a meeting is evidenced by certain
members and collaborators of the council of the revolution, as well as to the release
of Cabral and other leaders, who have been detained for over 9 nonths; indeed,

all of this does not bode well for the future.

WPYBIGHT: 1.981 Afrique-Asie

(:80: (0718/2554

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400060088-9

Due. mus t Lt \ .ee. tut ‘

PRESSWSBENASSETPORW

Inndon NEH AFRICAN in English No 167, Aug 81 p 88

[Article by Mungu ntene)

[Text] THE KENYAN PRESS. once one of the
freest inedie institutions in Bleclt Africe.
is running into trouble with the
authorities -just three months eiter the
International Press Institute ended ite
ennuel general euemhly in Neirohi.

The government move to tuck down

on the Prose surprised Ineny Kenyon

- ' journellsts who immedietely eher Deniel
- erep Moi beanie president enjoyed e new
freedom. They were retnerkeble deye.

For the lira time. Kenyen newspepers

were ehle toreveel scendeleend corrup.

tin st the highed levels of the privete

mun be ellom
eeet.
The governnn

of the Seete." 1
Preee to evold "
decisions thet l
tive.‘

end government secton. ’Die Nation n-
‘nut honeymoon is now over end the The eeme u:
Preesisfecingitsmoetcrucielperiodin journslin Brien
neny yun. his bane by eec
guerVievv wit!

eview alter hi

Hersh response lad spent 15 -.

The «mom truihlee ere lergely e endSecretsen
remit of political developments here: The moon l‘c
squehbles within the echelons of the connected wil
ruling KANU Perty, the government ellegedly sediti
doetore' strikes and the students‘ unrest egemst the gov
et the University of Neimhi. Tetley told tl
lt ell erupted in April when KANU they picked me
bened rennet Vice-President Oginge every piece of
Odinge from contesting his old Bondo leturnedteme
comtitusncy by-election. e eeet veceted Late in April
for him by Heultieh Ougo. westeeted mi.
The Nation newepeper v-rote e strong Tourism Elijel
editoriel questioning the perty's deei- gested thet l
eion. noting that the iesue hed streined "liceneed". So:
the febric of the country's unity ”not argued. would:
merely oi. the seems but through the bility end rospc
cloth.‘ Stir] the No.
In the interests oi our nntion's unity. Rodrigues: "Lac
the peper continued. Oginge Odinge end would du:

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400060068-9
pu.rnslism "

Mﬂihu Ng’weno. editorlpublahsr of
the Weekly Review: 'Anothsr name for
liceming joumelists to Press censorship.
We don't need it in Kenn."

The independent Keuyl Union of
Join-mime scorned the Minister's sug-
gestion. Ssid its secretary- general.
George 0diko: "We don't think he (the
Minister) was serials.“-

Minuet Mwangele hsd by this time
received enoush’rebulfs for his "unpro-
fessional" suggestion. He has not reised
the matter since.

A month Inter Press freedom wee min
under stuck by the authorities. Once
agein the Nation was the target. This
time it was over the report of s KANU
statement on doctor’s strikes and expel-

COPYRIGHT: 1981 10 Magazines united

CSO: 4700/46?
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000400050058-9

ma OFFICIAL NSF ONI.\'

DOB REPORTED 'rncmc UP TO REALITY'
IDndon NEW AFRICAN in English lb 167, Aug 81 pp 28-29

[Article by Alan Rake]

Ll

[Text] MASTER SERGEANT DOE ettended meat compleinedth
the recent meeting of the Economic bed let! the enpt
Community of West African Staten MiniaerDr'l'oghel
(ECOWAS) in Freetown. Sierra hone. Liberie only had I
nolomerdreeeedin bettledreee. but ina bank and an oven
conventional darlt euit. Afrimn leeden with the Nation:
who hed rejected him when he carried a challenged by otl
gun. liatened politely when he molte. He pointed out that th
madenomention ofthe'oeuee" ofthe thownnooigne of
people or the 'eontinuing etruggle". the eeonom

dig: depreeeed in
dtuatlou we:
Snags at home at“, my.“ a
lneteed. he wee concerned with the “UMldWDI-ﬁ
common problems of hie brother heade of MP"! end e run 0
etete. It waa Liberie which wee not keen "“31 hid 5090 I
to carry out ECOWAS policy and open ita United 3am. Doe
burden to other Aﬁicene from neigb- aimed inﬂetioner
booting countriee promeot of large b!
And beck at home he wee recing rapid deteriontion
probleme Thirteen junior eoldiere were the govemment or
on trial for attempting a counter-coup eminence.
and allegedly planning to murder ' At first. the U-
Sergeant Doe end his eeeoclaue. They internetionel ine
had epperently acted without any They wanted aeeu
ideological motive. eimply wanting to tione wouldetopen
taete power for themeelvee. All 13 were W m ind
sentenced to death. they m prepen
Sgt Doe’e objective when he tool: power the option were
wee to do eornething for the ordinary "'0 government/‘01
people. One ofhie ﬁrst moves wee to put into a tighter rel:
up the beeic eelery of ell workers to 8200 than ever before. I
e month. But herdly wee this done when Cuba has now g:
economic necessity forced the govern- ahnoet eole depent
ment to cut top ealeriea end to uke baclt The People's Be
one month'e wegee from workers of ell done everything
renhe. foreign investor“
The economic coneequencee ofthecoup which was forthct
had become clur by the time of the 828-million leet
budget of September 2. The new govern- matched by Wee

FOR omcw. use ONLY '

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9
continue to train Liberian troope end
heebunurryingouttheMJoInt
military aerdeee with the Linnea
ermyeinoetbeSeooodWoeidWer.

Survive]

Since the coup. Import: have fellen by
40 per cent (run 1979 lovele. budget
deﬁcite hove been growing end enact-no
revenue bee been feniu At the ante
time. expenditure has been rieim ee the

t has improved vegee.
and {min excl-Inn reeervee ere now
well into the red

The government bee responder! by
roe-urine foreign inveaoro. mid“
topreeervetlufreemerketeyetemendto
keep the Amerioen donor. et verity ee

The preeeum onLibeﬂeeinoethecoop
heveellbeeoinonedireotioo- touerde
edoptinc e convention]. pro-Weaern
ounce end to preeerviu the eociel order.
Andthe Libet'ien Government headroom
iteelf willing to comply. The revolutio-
nery idea." of Dr Tocbe Neh-‘l‘ipoteb’e
Movement for JIIetioe in Anion. end
time of hie colleague Deane Metthm’
People'e Progreeeive Petty. have been

boomed in the mule for intone-
don-l survival.

Foreign policy and rel-time with
neighbour: ere much the some ee they

COPYRIGBT: 1981 1C Magazines Limit“!

CSOt

4700/468
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

RICE SHORTFALL-Harvesting of paddy began in July in the Lake Alaotra region and
due to poor climatic conditions it promises to be a poor year, 30 to 60 percent
lower than last year's harvest. Area cultivated by peasants dropped tron 77,073
hectares last year to 51,086 hectares and peasant output is expected to drop from
161,000 tons to 90,000 tons. The drought also induced many peasants to turn to dry
crops. such as maniac, beans. onions, and potatoes. [Excerpts] [Paris MARCHBS

TROPICAU'X ET MEDITERRANEENS in French “0 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2175] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
Horeux et Cie Paris 1981]

080: 4719/361

143
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nova '10 CURB DISSASES PROM UNSUII'ABLB mm!) MILK

mndon WWW in 31911th 167, M 81 p 46

imicle by Brien M. mphyi

[Text]

COPYRIGHT t

CSOi

'dered milk products will

Am REPORTS of illness end duth
tamed by the mieuae of milk producta
thrwghout Atria. Moumbique he
moved to control the input end merm-
inaofmilh euhatitutea.

in adaal atruckbetvean the Mozambi-
can Mining of External Trade end the
Nutrieie company of Holland three pow-
be imported
under the watchml eye at the Minietry of
Health.

The international Baby Food Action
Network has documented instance
where acme ern milk anhcitute
mpniea use high-powered ldvertiein‘
campaigns in rural area encouraging
breast feeding mothara to switch to
powdered milk. onen with Mme
reaulta.

The mein problem has been that the
milk «Minna are oﬁen undiluted
with a“ impure “It! and I!“ in

1981 1c Magazines united

4700/4“

umrilieed feeding bottles.

The Mauritian Miniatry of Health
nya the new Dutch milk products will
require pee-boiled werm water to recon.
etituu them in addition. the agreement
with Nutricie nipuletea that Mozambi-
que will approve the name of the produae
and what eppeara on the labels.

Eventually three producta will be
auppliedze modified milk for infenu up to
aix montha old; e full cream product. and
e cereal food for family me.

The cereal food ie a mixture of rice.
milk. auger. viumine. minerals and
vegetable fet.

The time produeta ahonidhe on eaie by
eerly 1982. in the maentime euppliee
from other Weetern comp-nice will be
run down. Mime intends to pro-
duceiuwnearealfoodwithinacoupleof
yeara and ia currently experimenting
with verioue mixes.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SITUATION LEADING TO RECENT 88m CIDLERA W REVIEWED

tendon NEH ”RICA“ 1n mglish NO 167, Aug 81 p 89

[Article by Paul. Pauvae]

(uni

THE ROAD from Beira airport into the
city takes you along a magniﬁcent
sis-lane highway. But this colonial
showpiece suddenly peters out in a mass
of potholes and a dismal array of ﬁlthy
hovels thrown together out ofcorrugatsd
iron. wooden planks. hits of tin and any
other matarisl to hand. You have arrived
in the baim lurban neighbourhood) of
Munhsva

Munhava must euﬂ‘er some of the worst
urban housing in Moumhique. Many of
the shsclts are built back to back. with
the population of 16.000 crammed
densely together - in brutal contrast to
the luxury villas and apanmsnt lists
that the Portuguese built elsewhere in
thecity.'l'hernodern roadrunsabovethe
level of Munhava. and lacks any adequ-
ate drainage system. So when it rains.
water simply pours off the road and into
the hair-re.

'l'hereere no latrines in Munhava. The
Provincial Director of Health for Sofala.
Dr. Rui Bastos. describes sanitation in
the area as "precarious. elmost non-
existent".

During the rainy season Munhava is
regularly ﬂooded. Water invades the
houses and the inhabitants resignedly
sleep on table tops. Under these condi-
tions. with no adequate sanitation or
drainage. water-borne diseases are easily
greed. The appalling housing situation
in Munhava and several other peripheral
boime in Beira makes it extremely
difficult to break the chain ot‘ disease
transmiuion.

It therefore comes as no surprise to ﬁnd
that Munhsva was the centre of Beire's

hS

cholera outbreak earlie
was the monaerious of:
in venom parts of the c

The first case of choli

detected in January. 2
raged for two months i
330 positive cases were
cent of them coming In
these. 33died.’l‘hie deal
10 per cent. is considers
Dr. Bastos attributes it
If thediaease is caught e
the victim sent to hospi
treatment is relatively .
can usually be prevents
The city health autl
erel measures to check I
first and mom importer:
ate campaign of he
Brigades were formed
from the political org:
bdrm - PREUMO eel
women's organisation:
grassroots structures. 1
directed by a health wot
intensively in each 61
house to house. giving
preventive measures. t
to spot cholera symptc
ing anyone who might I'
visit hoqital at once.
The brigades ltept u|
weeks. which was as l
workers could be qme
tasks. Special efforts l
on fishermen and a
involved in the hardlil
A mass VleciltlliOl
carried out which reac
the city’s population.

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9
phadoeine tablets were distributed on a areoutoftl

massecaleintheleoirroamoCatrielt. "“9” “I
By April the outbreak was under continent
control. New cases did. however. con- mm"!!!
tinue to occur. but on a small scsle. For 0“)“ WI?!
every new case detected. the health MUN. f0|
authorities threw up a cordon oonitoin. The projl
That is. they immediately contacted the moment. N
infected person's family. friends and as to whet]
workmates and took potential carrier-sol be provide
the disease to hospital. Dr. Bestoe each houe
believes that this constant vigilance has munal lat-
been a major factor in checking the "le that th
qmad of the disease. clean. 0th
But theprovinciel health direaornte is grad oh!
well aware that these short-term meas- ‘l‘he rem
urea. succeeeful though they may have hecarried
been. do not really tackle the root of the euthorltiea
problem. As long as etenderds of sanita- with the r1
tion are minimal. and water is easily boinoe to
contaminated. then the rich of further they wouli
outbreaks will remain. No ﬁnal d
ﬂue health authorities are oollahoret~ hearing it
ing with the Beira City Council.and with have to ea
the local delegation of the Ministry of There \
Public Works in eﬂ'orte to improve d-the fro:
housing conditions in Munheva and being. Bu
other slum areas. The priority is to build when the
decent latrinse Unfortunately. the pit Munlmva

latrines normally used in Moumbique improved
finally ren

COPYRIGR'I‘: 1981 1C Magazines Intuit“

CSO: 4700/464

1:6
FOR Oil-10“.. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000400060068-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

IMPROVEMEMT 0F MAPUTO-MATOLA PORT FACILITIES PLANNED
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French No 1867, 21 Aug 81 p 2179

[Text] The capital of Mozambique enjoys particular importance in the southern re-
gion because of the strategic location of its port. Divided into two parts:

Maputo and Metals, with very different functions, the port was designed to serve
its South African and Rhodesian neighbors. The general wharf, which handles 4 mil-
lion tons of goods a year, now has an infrastructure capable of ensuring the port's
profitability.

The Maputo port (commercial) also has its general pier, a container warehouse,
special facilities to handle products such as coal, sugar or rough timber for ex-
port, and tanks to store molasses.

The Matola port complex (industrial port) is located about 6 kilometers from the

Maputo port. It handles tankers and has the necessary equipment to do so. mainly
pipes directly connected to fuel dumps. The port also has warehouses to store

lumber and specialized, automatic facilities to handle unrefined ores.

Most of the freight traffic of the Maputo port comes from or goes to neighboring
South Africa and consequently, any policy to stabilize labor and investments en-
counters the same difficulty: When they wish to do so, the South Africans can
paralyze a considerable share of the port traffic, thereby disturbing the economy
of the entire country (on the difficulties of the Maputo port, see MARCHES TROPI-
'CAUX, No 1862, 17 July, p 1900).

And yet, projects to reorganize and expand the Maputo port (Maputo and Matola
are considered as a whole) are ambitious, APP notes. Mozambican port and railroad

authorities consider the political and economic tendencies of the region as they
are expressed within the framework of the Southern Africa Development Coordinating

Conference (SADCC, to use the English acronym). Leaders therefore follow very
closely the evolution of the world market and the technology of maritime transport.

Within the framework of the SADCC, to which nine countries in the region belong
(Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and
Zimbabwe), proapects for growth in rail and port traffic are considerable. which
requires a transformation of the current infrastructure.

1;?
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An American consulting firm has recently submitted to Mozambican authorities a
master plan for development of the Maputo port up until the year 2000. Although
the plan has not yet been approved and appeals for funds have not been issued, one
can already state that Mozambique is preparing to face up to a considerable in-
crease in its traffic and a modernization of its ocean shipping techniques.

By the end of the century, traffic of nearly 50 million tons a year is expected,
while current traffic is some 8 million tons for Maputo and Matola together.

The American project provides for four possibilities of merging the two ports (the
industrial port and the commercial port). It also provides for construction of a
pier in the extension of the Maputo Bay, which would make it possible to accommo-
date ships of 300,000 tons.

According to these development plans, the port should cover 11 kilometers and its
activities would be multiple: general handling. storage and handling of large con-
tainers or liquids, transoceanic traffic, lighterage, passenger traffic. fishing,
pleasure boats and careenage. There will be a free trade zone and transport to

the interior will be organized.

In short—range terms, a terminal will be built at Matola for coal. The project
includes construction of a system for the continuous circulation of railroad cars.

An international call for bids was issued last year for the financing of this pro-
ject and the proposals received are being examined.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
C80: 4719/354

ha
won omcut use ONLY
FOI10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

STEEL PRODUCTION-The first production of Mozambican steel took place in July at
the Industrial Foundry and Rolling Hill Company (CIFBL). This plant plans to pro-
duce 6,000 tons of steel ingots next year. The startup of Mozambican steel produc-
tion should enable Maputo to reduce its economic dependency on Pretoria. It was
made possible thanks to aid froa the United Nations Industrial Development Organ-

ization (UNIDO). It should be noted that PIDBL, set up in 1955, belonged to the

Portuguese firm Champalinaud before Hozambique's independence. [Text] [Paris
7, 21 Aug 81 p 21791 COP

MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in french No 186
[COPYRIGHT' Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11.666

SHIP MAINTENARCE-oA unit made up of a floating dock and shop for the repair of
lighterage vessels and other boats will arrive in Mozambique in November. It
will be set up at Maputo with the assistance of 70 to 80 Soviet technicians, who

will also be in charge of ensuring its maintenance. Work connected with the pre-

liminary phase of installation will be finished in Hatch 1982. Investments will
total an estimated 450,000 contos. The dock will be able to accommodate ship weigh-

ing up to 4,000 tons, on the condition that they are not over 120 meters in length.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS in French “0 1867, 21 Aug 81

p 2179] 11,464

CSO: 4719/3hh

h9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-1(1AI. INF 0N! \'

SENEGAL

RESULTS OF 5688 ACTIVITY IN 1980 NOTED
Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRAN‘BENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81 p 2049

[Text] The activity of the General Banking Company of Senegal (5685) has been
hurt by the serious crisis affecting the Senegalese economy. Growth in business
slowed down substantially during the 1979-1960 fiscal year and results showed a
tangible decline. The balance sheet on 30 September 1980 totaled 61.6 billion CPA
francs, compared with 58.6 billion at the end of September 1979, with the increase
amounting to 5 percent.

Concerning customer deposits, efforts nevertheless made it possible to consolidate
gains made in 1978-1979, with the volume of call deposits and fixed deposits repre-
senting 26.8 billion CPA francs at the end of September 1980, down 2.9 billion com-
pared with September 1979.

Difficulties in the economic situation caused the bank to adopt a restrictive policy

on the granting of credits: Overall comitments went from 43.4 to 1.5.3 billion
CPA francs, an increase limited to 4 percent. The share of nationals in bank aid

rose from 50 to 54 percent from one fiscal year to the next.

Outside the balance sheet, commitments with security and guarantees and credits
opened confirmed for customers total 15.7 billion CPA francs, compared with 16.5

billion on 30 September 1979.

The restrictions: Checking the distribution of credits and an increase in treasury
charges affected the working account, with gross results amounting to 6.2 billion
CFA francs, an improvement of 13 percent compared with 22 percent the previous
fiscal year. Trading results before taking the balance amounted to 1.7 billion CPA
francs, down 8 percent compared with those registered at the end of September 1979.

Because of the establishment of substantial funds aimed at covering risks on a
clientele affected by the decline in activity and the difficulties of collecting
administrative as well as private debts, the net result, after amortizations. de-

posits and taxes (up 560 million CPA over the previous fiscal year), is 123.1 mil-
lion CFA francs, substantially lower than in 1979, when the figure was 682.2 million

CFA francs.

Because of the decline in results and as a result of the poor economic situation,
the general assembly on 24 January 1981 decided not to distribute dividends and to
put all profits in reserves, with a sum of 100 million CPA set aside to meet

50
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
IYJR10FTWCJAI.IISEI(NULY

circumstantial risks. The 8638's capital of 2.2 billion CPA francs is matched by
.8 billion in reserves and funds.

The board of directors includes the General Banking Company, the Dance Rationale

del Lavoro, the Bayerische Vereinebank, the Swiss Credit Bank and the General Com-
pany of Belgium.

Idrissa Seydi takes over as chairman of the board, with Ousmane Noel Hbaye acting
as general director.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

11,660
C50: 4719/28?

51
m omcm. us: ONLY
FOR OFT-10“. USE ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

LOANS T0 SOFISEDIT—In Washington, the world Bank just joined with the Senegalese
Financial Company for the Development of Industry and Tourism (SOFISEDIT) in signing
two financial agreements totaling some 2.6 billion CPA francs. The first, an IBRD
[International Bank for Reconstruction and Development] loan agreement, will give
SOFISEDIT the resources needed for investments in the key sectors of industry,
tourism and fishing. The second, an IDA credit agreement involving the granting
to the government of s 52.10.111.101! loan, $1 million of which may be reconveyed to
SOFISEDIT, is the first endowment from the participation fund reserved for the use
of the company in buying into companies benefiting from its aid and controlled by
nationals operating in areas deemed to have priority. The aid of the Horld Bank
will also be used to improve SOFISEDIT's expertise, through the granting of a non-
repayable subsidy amounting to $500,000 for teams of consultants and experts.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81

p 2069] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,666

FRG AID—The West German Government will provide Senegal with aid amounting to

75 million Deutsche marks (172.5 million French francs) for 1981 and 1982. The
agreement was reached in Bonn at the end of July between the Senegalese minister of
planning and cooperation, Louis Alexandrenne, and the chief of staff of the min-
istry in Bonn, Willi Bl'unann, following 3 days of negotiations between the two
delegations. The aid granted is in two parts: a long-term credit totaling 54 mil-

lion Deutsche marks (124.2 million French francs) and a nonrepayable subsidy of
21 million marks ((98.3 million French francs). The cooperation projects essentially

concern the development of Senegalese agriculture and improvements in the water
supply systems in regions the hardest hit by the drought. [Text] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANBBNS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81 pp 2049-2050] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

CSO: 6719/28?

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOUTH AFRICA

BRIEFS

RAILHAY CABS BIDS-South African railroads have issued calls for bids for the
supplying of: 1) 1,000 STLJ-type cars to haul rough timber; 2) 75 tank cars

of the XQIJ-J type. Bids should be addressed to: South African Railways, Chief
Stores Superintendent Office, P. O. Box 8617, Johannesburg 2000, before 23 October
1981. [Text] [Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French 14 Aug 81

p 2122] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,466

AUSTRIAN TRACTORS FOR TRANSKBI--Edward Booi, minister of agriculture and forestry
of the Transkei, recently told a South African economic weekly that his ministry

had ordered 8,000 tractors from the Austrian firm Steyr-Deinier-Puch, which will
be delivered at a rate of 500 s year. Already, 450 of the tractors were delivered

in 1979 and 500 in 1980. The rest of the order represents a value of over 70 mil-
lion rand, revenue thus taken away from manufacturers that assemble tractors in
South Africa. For the minister, the Austrian order is justified by the fact that
previous negotiations with South African manufacturers led nowhere, with the com—
panies contacted refusing to provide free repair service. However, the Austrian
company agreed to grant a 30-month guarantee for repairs and spare parts, training
programs and the construction of maintenance depots in the Transkei. [Text]

{Paris HABCBES TBOPICAUX BI MEDITERRANEINS in French 31 Jul 81 p 2011] [COPYRIGHT:
Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,466

CSO: 4719/317

53
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TANZANIA

NATION SAID TO BE UNDERGOING CRITICAL ECONOMIC PHASE
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1866, 1“ Aug 81 pp 2089-2091

[Text] When, in 1977, President Julius Nyerere drew up the balance sheet of the
action he had launched 10 years before at the time of the historic Arusha declara-
tion, he appeared to be somewhat disillusioned1 and admitted that despite certain
achievements, his country was far from having reached socialism and economic inde-
pendence (self-reliance [sic]). One must add that Tanzania's stability had been
hard hit by the oil crisis, which coincided with a long period of drought. In addi-
tion to these outside causes, there were those due to what was cautiously called
"the lack of production incentives" - in short, to put it plainly, the lack of
efficiency of the entire government apparatus.

In the foreign policy field, however, the melimu (teacher), as President Nyerere

is fondly called in his country, could boast of some successes. Uithout exaggera-
tion, his role in southern Africa could be compared with that of the successive
Algerian presidents in North Africa. This preeminence. this uncontested leadership,
would reach a peak in 1979, when the Tanzanian troops successfully intervened in
Uganda and overthrew an unspeakable regime.

Since “the 1977 reflex," the president has not been discourage in his search for

a truly socialist society and the forward march of the Ujamaa, the basis of Tan-
zanian socialism, has not slowed down. In 1979, the Ujamaa village communities
destined to promote agricultural cooperation expanded further and now take in 8,000
villages with 13 million persons. But the current situation seems to indicate that
this movement did not create an economic springboard strong enough to make the coun~
try achieve rapid progress.

In fact, Tanzania is going through a critical phase. The 1979 floods, followed by
a recent drought, do not explain everything and economic independence, or better,
food independence alone, has never seemed so far off. Economic matters must there-
fore take precedence over political affairs. Tanzania must live and measures must
be taken, some immediately, others in the more distant future. They constitute the

plan of action drawn up by the government. Above all, let us look at the current
situation closely.

1 See the—brochure "The Arusha Declaration: Ten Years After."

 

2 The Ujamaa can be defined as the social relationships lived following a pattern of
relationships within a large family.

Sh

Pf“! 09“""1 "C9 OUIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Poor Country, Slow Progress

Aside from the bloody interlude with which we are all familiar, Uganda has always
looked rich alongside Tanzania. Here we are in a tropical zone with irregular
rainfall, on a plateau with relatively poor soil, an area where the resources of the

subsoil have not yet been demonstrated. Consequently, 945,000 square kilometers
with 17.5 million inhabitants and a SOO-kilometer coastline do not make prosperity,

even with an uncommon president who is unanimously respected by the international
community.

was it the attempt by the Laborites in 1947, trying unsuccessfully to give Tangan-
yika the structure of an African peanut belt with their Groundnut Scheme, that

put the evil eye on that country's future prosperity21 It is quite possible. At
any rate, what is certain is that Tanzania has never given its inhabitants a

soil capable of great yields. When, to the natural calamities, drought, floods,
grasshoppers and tse~tse fly, one adds a tense international situation: oil

crisis, monetary inflation, fluctuating prices for products, it is difficult for a
country with mediocre resources to develop without setbacks.

Despite difficulties, the gross national product, which was 3,701,000,000 Tanzanian
shillingsz in 1960, rose to 5,869,000,000 in 1968 and 11.18 billion in 1978, more
than double in 10 years. In real terms, this corresponds to an annual growth of
3.6 percent, slightly higher than the population growth. There is one significant
figure that must be emphasized: that of the growth of the industrial sector in the
GNP. In 1962, it represented 3.4 percent of the GNP, rose to 8 percent 9 years
later and 9.3 percent in 1978. Moreover, the second five-year plan (1969-1974)
provided for investments on the order of 3.5 billion shillings, including 2 billion
for industrial projects, but the latter, as in the case of the future Ketewaka-
Mchuchuma coal mining operation and the Ligango iron, did not pan out.

More specifically, in the field of agriculture, what were the variations? When
one realizes the importance of the primary sector in the life of the country:

90 percent of the population and 40 percent of all income, it is interesting to
know these elements.

Food crops were promoted to the maximum extent: corn, sorgho, wheat, beans, millet,

and so on, but they were not enough to meet the needs of the inhabitants. Produc-
tion of some even dropped (figures in tons):

1975-1976 1978-1979 1979-1980

Corn 91,100 ,127,500 161,500
Rice 18,500 52,300 46,500
Wheat 25,500 28,800 26,500

Rice is declining, for example. This is mainly due to a lack of fertilizer and
a lack of machinery. As for the export crops, the situation is not brilliant.

I This plan provided for 1.3 million hectares and was a failure. It cost the Bri-
tish Treasury 36 million pounds, "the price of a cruiser at the time."

2 8.2 Tanzanian shillings - $1.00

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sisal, of which Tanzania was the top world producer, saw its prices drop because
of the competition from synthetic fibers and production slowed down: 200,000 tons
in 1964-1965; 90,000 tons in 1981! Coffee, which totaled 55,000 tons in 1975-1976,
dropped to 42,000 tons. Cotton is doing better, if one dares say so: 234,000
bales in 1975-1976 and 357,000 bales in 1979—1980. Finally, tea has improved,
going from13,goo tons in 1974-1975 to 19,000 tons in 1979-1980.

Nevertheless, there is currently a serious deficit with respect to food and Tan-

zania will in the coming months have to import at least 50,000 tons of corn, 15,000
tons of wheat and 40,000 tons of rice, without counting the fact that manioc,
sorgo and millet production is also inadequate.

Already in 1973-1974, the country experienced a serious drought and the authorities
were able to face it with foreign exchange reserves. Today, the government's cof-

fers are empty. The war in Uganda and the increase in oil costs particularly ex—
plain this troublesome situation.

The trade balance is therefore obviously negative. In 1978, exports amounted to
3,573,000,000 shillings (including coffee, 1,303,000,000) and imports totaled
8,789,000,000 shillings. In 1979, the figures were 4,531,000,000 and 8,941,000,000.
As for the current balance of payments, it had a large deficit for the same year.

For the time being, foreign aid is the only remedy to meet the emergency. The
Tanzanian Government has asked the BBC and several Western countries for aid. One
of those countries is Sweden, which to date has been one of the main backers. Aus-
tralia and Japan have also been approached.

Plan of Action for 1981-1990

In the course of this decade, planners foresee an increase in the GNP of 6 percent

a year. For industry specifically, its share of the GNP should go from 9 to 16 per-
cent during the period. Every sector has been largely provided with projects.

Let us point out the most characteristic ones.

Rural sector (agriculture): The goal is to increase food crops in order to achieve
rhat food independence so desired by Tanzanian leaders. By 1985, the following
totals should be met: corn, 328,000 tons; rice, 120,000 tons; wheat, 60,000 tons.
Sugar, whose marketed tonnage amounts to 119,000 tons, should go to 200,000 in
1990 (reconstruction of the Kagera sugar nill). By the end of the decade, cotton
should reach 1 million bales (400,000 at present). The sisal harvest should return
to the 1964-1965 figures, or 200,000 tons a year. Exports will be improved.

Irrigated crops will extend over 10,000 hectares a year; the establishment of large
state farms; integrated project for the lower Rufiji Valley including 20,000 hec-

tares and covering 130,000 hectares by 1990 (rice, cotton, corn mainly); development
of the Usangu Plain; development of the Kilombero Valley, where arable land totals
an estimated 400,000 hectares (agriculture, forests, fishing); the "Stiegler gorge"
project in the Rufiji Valley (250 kilometers from the mouth of that river), consist-
ing of the construction of a retention dam to irrigate 130,000 hectares, plus the
production of energy.

56

Ff“? 00""‘1'51 "CF ONIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These few examples are part of a total of 52, but it will still be necessary to
import rice, wheat and powdered milk until 1990.

Livestock raising: In Tanzania, livestock raising is mainly practiced by the Masai.
the once famous warriors, who have always had the greatest scorn for farmers and
who, like many Africans, have a social rather than economic view of their herds.

We find the same problem as in Uganda. At the present time. it is scarcely possi-

ble to impose on them what the English call "mixed farming," that combination of
livestock raising and varied crops.

Whatever the case, there are 12.5 million head ofcattle,5.5 million goats and

3.6 million head of sheep, and the main projects principally deal with milk produc-
tion. The prime objective is to increase milk consumption to 28 liters per person
per year (48.51 per person for the urban population; 22.5 for the rural population).
The increase in meat production, improved pasture and veterinary care are other
objectives.

Industrial sector (industries, mining, energy): One cannot say that there are
spectacular projects in this area. Still cited is the Kidatu-Mujindi hydroelectric
dam, which is to supply the city of H'Beya (project that should have been completed
in 1982). For industries, however, there will be few new units for this decade;
rather, there will mainly be projects to be completed (Tanga cement works, 500,000
tons per year, planned for 1982) and the rehabilitation of plants scarcely operating
at SO—percent capacity. The lack of credit needed to obtain raw materials that are
indispensable to some of the factories is mainly the cause of the poor figure. In
1980, for example, only 35 percent of the credits available for the industrial sec-
tor were released. It is anticipated that for the 1981-1982 period, some $302 mil-
lion in imports will be needed to operate the plants at 70-percent capacity and

in order to meet the people‘s food needs. This sum will increase 10 percent annu-
ally until 1985.

For several years, however, the industrial sector has made progress and its share
of the GNP has increased substantially, as we have seen. In 1965, it employed
28,179 persons and in 1978, 85,493. It is heavy industry that will receive the
favor of investors in the coming years (metallurgy. production of motors). But
all the large enterprises that are part of the National Development Corporation

should have their management reorganized as it is inefficient in most cases.

Planning of an industrial strategy for Zanzibar (attached in 1966), a long-term
strategy to support its industrial zone; increased use of local raw materials; and
utilization of agricultural waste products.

These objectives are part of the projects for the sector. It should be noted that
the Dar-es-Salaam refinery will have its capacity increased. Connected by an oil
pipeline to the Zambian Copperbelt, it is a strategically important enterprise.

As for mining research, it continues at a speed in keeping with the credits -

that is, slowly. There has been talk of uranium and nickel, but for the time
being, iron and coal could perhaps be worked in the future. There is also some
hope of oil. The Algerians connected with SONATRACH have resumed offshore drilling
not far from Mafia Island. It will be necessary to wait and see.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Transportation and infrastructures: A very great effort must be made in this sec-
tor. whether it be a question of the railroads, which are unreliable and poorly
managed, the badly maintained roads, ports or airports to be modernized, there is
nothing in the transport sector that is satisfactory.

The techncial feat of construction of the Tazara (Tanzania-Zambia Railway) is far
away and much work has to be done along the 900 kilometers of the Tanzanian por-
tion. without counting the purchase of new equipment. It will be remembered that
the Americans connected with the IDA [International Development Association] had
duplicated the work of the Chinese, if one would put it that way, with a road that
followed the railroad nearly exactly. It did not have a better fate and its
nickname "Hell Run" [sic] is well chosen. Work is planned on several sections of
the route.

The chronically congested Dar-es-Salaam port will be expanded. Eight additional
berthing piers are planned. The airport of the new administrative capital, Dodo-a,
is under construction and that in Kilimandjaro will be modernized. Over 152 pro-
jects have been worked out, ranging from the purchase of three mobile cranes for
the Kigoma port on Lake Tanganyika to repair of the essential roadway: Biharamulo—
Kamanga—Hwansa-Nyanguga (200 kilometers). This is a very long-range series of
undertakings to complete and continue. Naturally, the main lines have already

been worked out, but more than elsewhere, they are quickly lost in tine if they

are not regularly redrawn. This is the entire problem of the maintenance of trans-
portation infrastructures.

Education, health: These are fields in which "socialist" countries excel..as we
have already seen in the case of Ethiopia and Somalia. In Tanzania, a major effort
has been made in literacy training and by 1976, 67 percent of the people were no
longer illiterate. The official language, Swahili, has greatly contributed to the
effort. By 1977, elementary schooling was widespread. The development of educa-
tion at all levels remains one of the prime concerns of the leaders.

In the health sector, where there are still few hospitals, clinics and doctors,
large investments are planned.

Unrestricted Aid

Planned investments have been divided up into major categories and the percentages
are as follows: production, 29 percent; economic infrastructures, 33 percent;
social infrastructures, 38 percent.

The foreign aid that will be necessary to carry out this program of action has not
been specifically calculated. One can state without fear of error that it will
amount to a respectable number of millions of dollars, but that is not the real
problem, which is currently to be found in the talks of Tanzanian leaders with
officials of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. It would in fact
appear that there are some difficulties between the interlocutors. 0n the one
hand. the financial backers will "execute" only if certain conditions are met, but
on the other hand, the beneficiaries do not intend to be limited by outside restric-
tions. President Nyerere wants to have sole control, along with his sides, over
the socialist development of his country, over economic decisions. One can under-
stand his attitude, even if one does not share his ideas.

58
ma omcm. ass. 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fact that Tanzania is one of the least advanced countries does not mean that
the option taken by the leaders is erroneous. The failures have never "emptied"
ideological causes of their substance, but on a more practical level, the appli-
cation of a plan, whether or not it is liberal, puts men into action. when they
have a heavy and impersonal yoke to bear, the force of the ideological impact tends
to be diluted in the direction of station and bureaucracy and the economy suffers.
Some countries have already experienced this. Even in Europe, it would be a good
lesson for the future. The ransom of a so-called modern world, Tanzania needs air
to breathe, foreign aid in order to get out of the rut, and one can easily under-

stand the reticence of its leaders faced with conditions set forth by donors.
However, there are few disinterested moneylenders. Balzac was right.

Tanzania From Day to Day

One cannot recommend too highly the book by Bernard Joiner, "Tanzania, Hanger
d'Abord" [Tanzania: Eating Comes First].1 A missionary in that country for

15 years, the author, who in 1977 already published "Le Soleil de Dieu en Tanzanie"
[God's Light in Tanzania], has now given us a work devoted, not to Tanzanian social-
ism, which is so attractive for sociologists, but to the daily life of the Tanzanian
people, most of whom are peasants. This book blends, with the simplicity of a con-

versation, facts and figures, personal memories and general observations of a Catho-
lic priest who is also a man curious about all that surrounds him.

Bernard Joinet analyzes with a great deal of finesse Tanzania's economic difficul-
ties. At the same time, he ruffles the feathers of Rene Dumont (p 190), who in his
opinion pays too much attention of the city-country opposition.

The conclusions of this work are not to be sought only in the last pages, as is
customary. On page 179, we are told that "Tanzania will only be able to attain

food self-sufficiency while industrializing if yields increase." On page 63, it

is emphasized that "Tanzania has.some 50 years to industrialize. Otherwise, it
risks being suffocated." As for the sum of information on current agricultural
difficulties. the author emphasizes the enormous distance between theory and prac-
tice in a country such as Tanzania: It is too great and is impossible to sun it up.
Let us simply advise the reading of a book which mainly talks of men and which also
teaches much more than an impeccable but arid economic analysis.

Not all the readers will have Bernard Joinet's sympathy for Tanzania. Nor will

they all be sensitive to an unadorned style, but I doubt that one can avoid learning
something new from the book. (F. Gaulme)

1 Bernard Joinet: "Tanzania, Hanger d'Abord"; 261 pp (13.5 X 21.5 cm), Editions
Karthala, 22-24 Boulevard Arago, 75013 Paris, 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981.

11,464
CSO: 4719/301

S9
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TWO

BRIEFS

REGULATIONS on EXPOKI‘ CARGOBS-A notice to shippers recently published in the local
press informs them of "the enforcement of effective supervision of the distribution
of loads by the limited emission acting as the National Council of Togoleae
Shippers beginning 1 June 1981. "All bids for export shipping sust be submitted
for the approval of the comission and presented on a special for- required for
customs formalities. These forms are available at the cmission's headquarters
at the Ministry of Comerce and Transport." In addition, "importers are informed
that all goods and products imported by sea from countries in the northern and
southern COWAC [Continental West Africa Conference] (port of the Bordeaux-Bremen
range, Rostoclr. and the Scandinavian ports) are required, in order to pass through
custms in Togo, to be accompanied by a reservation or exemption certificate issued
by port agents of the Iogolese Maritime Shipping Company (50mm!) with authority
from the CNCT [expansion unknown]. These conditions will be applied gradually and
will be enforced by 1 October 1981 at the latest. They will be contained in a no-
tice to importers." [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBBNS in French
31 Jul 81 p 1997] (COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeur et Cie Paris 1981] 11,664

050: 6719/31?

60

PM nnrnu. "SR ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UPPER VOLTA

BRIEFS

POURA GOLD MINE PROJECTS—0n 27 July in lose, the West African Developnent Bank
(WADE) granted the Upper Voltan Mining Research and Operations Company a loan of
908 million CPA francs to finance the project to reopen the Pours gold mine. On
behalf of the Ministry of Comrce. Industrial Development and Mines, the Council
of Ministers of Upper Volta acted on 30 July 1980 to approve an agreement concluded
between the government and the Alsatian Machinery Construction Company. The con-
tract involves the supplying of two Sim-kilowatt generators for the Pours nine

at a cost of nearly 65 million CPA francs. A call for bids (No 1667) has been
issued by the Republic of Upper Volta for an infrastructure project to acconpany
the reopening of the Pours nine (first phase), financed by the BBC and the Euro-
pean Development Fund. The subject is the supplying and startup of four 900-
kilowatt generators driven by diesel engines and a 630-kVA transforaer, to be used
to supply the electricalsystena of the Pours mining facilities. [Excerpt] [Paris
meats TROPICADX ET HEDI'I'ERRANBENS in French 14 Aug 81 p 2107] [COPYRImh

Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,461.

680: 6719/3317

61
FOR OPPTCTAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

naszm CALLS FOR EXPANDED AGRIGTLTURAL PRODUCTICN
Paris mamas TROPICAUX 31' WITERRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81 p 2059

[Text] In a speech delivered on 26 March before members of the Central Committee
of the Popular Movement of the Revolution (HPR), President beutu Sese Seko defined

the new agricultural strategy of Zaire, which is primarily aimed at achieving self-
sufficiency once again by calling upon the private sector. A little later, in June,
the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development organized a seminar on the defin-
ition of the new agricultural policy, held in N'Sele.

Consequently, as '1phasized by the state commissioner for agriculture and rural
development in a speech given at the International Fair in Kinshasa at the beginning

of July, there is now greater awareness and a marked political determination to
develop agriculture. It is a new and extremely important element. It will now be
a matter of arousing new motivation in rural areas in order to increase production,
inasmuch as the system of force employed during colonial times is no longer con-
ceivable today.

In the meantime, production of food crops is insufficient, as shown by imports of
corn and wheat. Regarding wheat, imports rose to 166,356 tons in 1980, compared
with 150,023 tons in 1979 (up 6 percent) and 64,000 tons during the first 6 months
of 1931. wheat is mainly imported from the United States by HIDEHA [expansion
unknown], 40 percent of whose capital is owned by the Zairian Government and 60
percent by Continental Grain in New York.

For their part, corn imports went from 146,047 tons in 1979 to 167,435 tons in 1980
and 64,000 tons during the first 6 months of 1981. It should be noted that in

order to cover the entire demand of the region of Shaba, it would be necessary
to import a mini-um of 200,000 tons annually; corn imports in 1973 had already
risen to over lh6 tons.

Coffee production has remained around 80,000 tons and exports for the 1979-1980
coffee season amounted, according to OZACAF [Zairian Coffee Office], to 1,065,102

bags (nearly 64,000 tons). In addition to these official exports, some 8,000 tons
were smuggled to Sudan and Rwanda. The change in monetary parity on 19 June 1981

should substantially reduce the interest of coffee smugglers.

Palm oil dropped 5.5 percent, going from 98,500 tons in 1979 to 93,150 tons in
1980.

62
FOR orncm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rubber production dropped from 20,600 tons to 19,500 tons, as a result of the aging
hevea plantations. 0n the other hand, industrial crops showed substantial progress.

Cotton production showed a clear recovery in 1980, with 29,200 tons of cottonseed
compared with 18,800 tons in 1979 (up 55.5 percent).

Tobacco continues to improve, going from 1,500 tons in 1979 to 1,700 tons in 1980
(up 13.3 percent) and predictions for the 1980-1981 season now underuay are for
more than 2,000 tons of dry tobacco.

Production of rough timber is down. On the other hand, exports of finished products,
particularly veneer, are clearly up.

The company SIFORZAL [expansion unknown] (number 1 for Zairian wood),uhose capital

is divided between the German firm Dancer (95.18 percent) and the Finance Company
for Development (SOFIDE: 4.82 percent), exported 8,609,621 square meters of veneer

in 1980, compared with 6,097,536 square meters in 1979 (up 51.2 percent).

It should be added that wood is one of the prise resources of the Republic of Zaire,
and:its development is only beginning, considering the fact that the country has

47 percent of all the dense forests in tropical Africa. The African countries

have entrusted the duties of secretary general of the African Hood Organization
(0A3), located in Libreville, to a Zeirian.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie Paris 1981

11,466
080: 4719/321
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

BRIEFS

ELECTRIC POWER PRODUCTION INCREASE-Production of hydroelectric and thermic power
in Zaire has risen substantially for the first time since 1977. It rose from
4,068 gigawatt-hours in 1979 to 4,200 gigawatt-hours in 1980 (up 3.2 percent). It
would have been even greater if it were not for the rate revisions in October 1979
and January 1980. Sales of high-tension power essentially increased as a result

of industrial consumption in the Shaba region. Copper production, which returned
to the 460,000-ton level, caused intense activity in metallurgy plants. On the
other hand, industrial and domestic consumption in the rest of the country declined
because of the rate increases. 0n 1 July 1981, the installed power of hydroelectric
plants in the Republic of Zaire amounted to 1,002 megawatts. This power will be
increased to 2,300 megawatts (up 132 percent) with the startup of the Inga II
powerplant. The plant, equipped with eight 159-megawatt turbines, or an installed
power of 1,272 megawatts, is entirely set up. Testing of the powerplant and the
very high tension, continuous current line, 1,820 kilometers long, between Inga and
Kolwezi, is planned for January 1982.snd will last for about 6 months. Operation
of the powerplant and the Inga-Shaba line will begin normally in July 1982. The
trade balance with other countries regarding electricity has remained favorable to
Zaire, with an operating surplus of 96,787 megawatt-hours in 1980, compared with
92,891 megawatt-hours in 1979 (up 4.2 percent). [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX
ET HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1864, 31 Jul 81 p 2004] [COPYRIGITz Rene Horeux
et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

FUEL PRICE INCREASE—According to an order from the state comisaioner for economy
and industry, fuel prices in Zaire will increase very substantially effective

20 July. A liter of gas (super and for private use). which was 4 zaires (about
$1.20), will now cost 5.5 zaires. A liter of oil will henceforth cost 2.5 zaires
(compared with 1.5) and diesel fuel will cost 1.8 zaires (compared with 1.2).

The order emphasizes that the new oil products sales prices include consumer taxes,
entry duties and fiscal taxes, the road tax, taxes for the intervention and stabil-
ization fund, the diversification fund, within the framework of development agree-
ments binding the Zairian Government with oil companies, the security fund and

the royalty to be paid to the Zairian 011 Enterprise. [Text] [Paris HARCBBS TRO-
PICAUX ET HEDITERRANBBNS in French No 1864, 31 Jul 81 p 2005] [COPYRIGHT: Rene
l-lou-ux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

ZAIRETAIN EXPANSIONuThe report of the Belgian company CECE-115155 [Geological and

Mining Company of Belgian Industrial Engineers] for the 1980 fiscal year indicates,
with respect to activities of Zairian subsidiaries, that the firm ZAIRETAIN
[Zairian Tin Company] recently submitted to the Zairian Government a very important

6!;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

study and investment program appealing for foreign credits, among other things.

The program, based on studies underway and begun several years ago, has three
phases stretched out over 5 years: The first two phases of the program should
gradually lead ZAIRETAIN to produce 2,000 tons of cassiterite a year. Phase 3.
which has to do with the operation of the primary deposit of unaltered pegmatitas,
has caused the Zairian Government to request financing in order to complete studies
being done by ZAIRETAIN for three and a half years, with the support of GEOMINES
consulting offices. If the pegmatite feasibility study should lead to positive
conclusions, then investments could be extremely large, on the order of several
billion Belgian francs. The Manono primary deposit is the largest in the world

in the hands of a single holder and contains mixed tin and lithium ores. Concerning
the program, a question was posed at the recent GEOHINES general assembly with re-
gard to the quarrying of hard rock in Zaire and the major energy potential which
such an operation requires. The president responded that the company had an auto-
nomous hydroelectric powerplant in Zaire: "It is an asset of the company that it
is normal for us to want to use. The problem of the hard rock is important, but
we hope to solve it in the coming years." [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITBRRANEENS in French No 1864, 31 Jul 81 p 2005] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et
Cie Paris 1981] 11,664

STRIKE STATISTICS-—In recent days, Zaire has experienced several strikes: by admin—
istrative and paramedical personnel at the Kinshasa university clinics, who resumed
work on 28 July after a week-long strike begun for wage demands; by personnel of

the Zairian National Posts and Telecommunications Office (ONPTZ), who resumed work
on 27 July. ONPTZ employees were demanding an allocation for transportation ex-
penses, housing allowances and regular promotions. The Executive Council renewed
contact with social partners in order to seek agreement on the pending demands.
[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French No 1865, 7 Aug 81

p 2059] [COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie Paris 1981] 11,464

050: 4719/321

65
ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RODUCER PRICES SROULD HELP TO REVITALIZE ECONMY

AFRICAN in English No 167 Aug 81 p 38

y Arthur Gottschalk]

“Opetation Incentive" is Zambia’s moo-million booster plan for
farmers and aims at making the country a maior food producer by the
end of the 19803. Arthur Gottschelk reports

IN A MOVE aimed at reatoringlambia’a
troubled agricultural eectoe to am pro
ductivity. the Zambian Government has
lined the two-year-old ceiling on
producer prieea for the 1981-82 man.

The new pricea, which average 20 per
cent over the old once. are designed to
provide farm with the inc-mu to
produce more food for the national
matket and to provide Zambia'a pane-
tatal food ptoceaeiu indunriaa with raw
matan'ala. It in alaohoped that than"
prices will help craatea tam eurplua for
export.

According to Unia Mwila. Miniuer of
Animlture and Water Development. the
price humane were necessary topmvide
the Zambten farmer with a reasonable
return on hie inveaunent after the coat of
production nu taken into account.

‘l'hecxwaincludadintbenewpﬁee
strum" are maize. aunﬂowet. mund-
nun. can baane. rice. wheat. cotton. and
milk Rice wee given the large: incteaae.
{tom K1830 for an 80“. be; to K28.
WhaatmraiaedtoKasfromet‘ora

90kg. baa. Cotton. the only crop that

6‘,

Zambia cunently producea in aurplua.
wee given the amallaat nice to K047
from K046 a kilo. Maia. Zambia’a major
foodaop.waaincnaaedtol<18from
K1350 for a 90kg. bag.

Otharincentlvae oﬂ'ered in the recently
announced fnnn programme include
exemption: on the taxation of {am
dividenda {or the coming aeaeon and the
maintenance of the come-tonal, tax
rate of 25 per cent on aecaeaable farm
income. It lahopedthatthe new incen-
tivee will enable the fame: to go all out
to inn-ace production.

The new price inaeaeee are a further
etep in "Operation Incentive“. Zantbia'e
K400~million agricultural booaer plan
for the 1980's. The plan forms a central
part of the UNI? platform and in
designed to make Zambia into a major
food producer by the end of the decade.

Put into action in May. 1980.}.he plan
cloaely links agricultuye to mdum-y
thmugh comprehenetve planning.
Included in the plan lethedevelopment of
large aale ecri~induatriee. the formation
ol'producae marketing cooperatives. and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9

COPYRIGHT:

CSO:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the development of common immo-
ture tot family, poeeont and private
comment! (em.

The operation hoe revloed Zombio'o
form untied ottoman end lowered the
cost. of {milieu through govunment
ouheidy, which inane-co the tannin of
proﬁt. But ptoducer priceo have been
held to the 1979 level for two you-o.

Zombie's unite production ruched e
high in 1975 of 83-million bop. Since
then. howevet. o oombinetlon of odveno
ocmomic and climotic conditione hod
deluged «aunt. and in dmnght-otrickon
1919 Zombie produced only four-million
boo. three-million leeo than needed for
home mmtim. The ohcetfoll hod to
bemodeupwithcootlyimpoﬂopeldfor
with precious fotein exchange.

This yet. due to the new ocheme and

1981 IC Magazines Limited

[0719/1061

67

END

adequate rein. Zombie
moiu homot. Eetinu
crop rouge from o
million hose to ll-mil
in {our oeoeonl.

The Zemhion Govt
that the Mn
yeer‘o uccoooful he
throughout the form 1
ooumrytoreolioeitou
tore! iol. Feet
ehon supply for th
pmiooo to be non
coming eon-on. Thin
cottle. pork. and chid

Thempﬂcooohot
roinvoounont in our
blood elfecto shook
towordo revitaliotl
economy.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000400050058-9