APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R00010004001 1-4

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040011-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

spas L/8375
5 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 628

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040011-4
NOTE

JPRS publications contain inforntion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was au-marized or e-.tracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nausea preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'i'imes within item are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGlT MUS AND REGU'IATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPMDUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0:- T5 IS PUBLICATIOX BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 10’82
5 April 2

TRANSLAUONS on SUB-SAHARA?! AFRICA

9000 No. 628

Coureurs
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Africa Realises Ineffectiveness of One-Party Systems
(Siradiou Diallo; JEURE APRIQUE. 21 Feb 79) ..........

KhF-Aquitnine Projects in Africa
(HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS, 16 Feb 79) .....

Briefs
French Fear Unrest
EDF Financing
Consider Break Hith PRC

ANGOLA

UNTA Labor Role, Objectives Analyzed
(Augusta Conchiglia: APRIQUE-ASIE. 5 Mar 79) .........

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

Briefs
Diamond. Precious Stones Regulations
'Cotton Cinning Plant
Roads Fund
Direct Flight to Gabon

CHAD

French Inperislisn Believed To Be Cause of Clashes
(Han Cue: AFRIQUB-ASIE. 5-16 Mar 79)

ooseocoelsOOOOOOl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
EQUATORIAL GUINEA

Briefs
African Development Bank Loan
GABON
Recommendations on Agriculture of FDG Congress Listed
(HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HBDITERRANFBNS. 9 Feb 79) ......
Briefs
Belinga iron Ore Reserves
GUINEA
District Ferns To Be Established for Modernizing Agriculture
(AFRIQUB-ASIE. 5 Mar 79) .............................
LIBERIA
Briefs
President's French Visit Scheduled
French Reciprocal Invest-ant Agreement
MALI
Pctroleue. Mineral Resources Attract Investors
(Mohamed Maine; JEUNE AFRIQUB, 1‘ Feb 79) ............
Briefs
Probable Uranium, Oil Deposits
RNODESIA

Private Armies, Mercenaries Compound Confusion in Rhodesia
(Various sources, 15, 5 Feb 79) ......................

Growth of Private Arnies. by Francois Soudsn
Mercenaries Reported by OAU

Briefs
Nercenaries Recruited

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Cont inuod)

SM) TOME Min PRINCIPE

Details on International French Assistance Provided

ZAIRB

Nation Said To lisvs Horn Debts Than Any Black African Country
(Francisco Versus; JEUNB APRIQOB. 21 Feb 79) .......

ac-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁllOFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

AFRICA REALIZES INEPPBCTIVBNESS 0P ONE-PARTY SYSQEMS
Paris JHUNB APRIQUE in French 21 Feb 79 p 70

[Article by Sirndiou Diallo: "The worm II in the Pruit']

[Text] Africa had become accustomed to a system of elections
without surprises: “Candidates” appointed by the authorities
in accordance with criteria that were often quite irrational,
winners of plebiscitss with scores close to 100 percent, chosen
by a prefabricated electoral body, politically badly educated,
insufficiently informed and completely ”anesthetized." This
system is aimed at making the people, who are so much spoken of
in official speeches, into absolutely nothing in actual fact;
for it is the chief who is everything. The result: the people
becrnc less and less interested in public affairs, whereas the
leaner floats in the splendid isolation of his authority, at
the risk of sinking into the general lethargy at the slightest
impact. '

Nearly JO years of this solitary exercise of power have motiva-
ted certain leaders here and there, it appears, to cast a
thouchtful glance at their actions and to think about emerging
from this cocoon, which, though walled with silk, remains a
fragile and even dangerous habitat. Thus on 8 February, the
meeting of the central committee of the Congolese Labor Party
(the sole political party) awakened a profound and lengthy demo-
cratic debate. The debate tenminated with the defeat of the
head of state, General Yhombi Opanco, by his challenger, Colonel
Denis Sassou Ncuesso. A capital event in the political matura-
tion process of the nations of our continent. For this was the
first time in the history of Africa that an incumbent president
was dramatically removed from office by a regular vote of his
party a

nut to be seen in its full significance, the Congolese affair
must be compared with similar happenings elsewhere. Thus at the
end of January, the convention of the Gabonese Democratic Party

1
FOR OFFICIAL USEtnﬂN
FUIOF?RHALIEB max

gave rise to critical debates that became particularly bitter
at times. And the members of the party’s central committee were
ultimately chosen from among a group or several candidates.

At the same time, the Zairian deputies were giving one another
strong signals in the form of peremptory questions and harsh
criticism directed against GeVernment officials. They even went
so far as to reject the budget proposal presented by the latter.

Coming after the multipartite experiences of Senegal, Upper Vol-
ta and Gambia, and especially after the announcement of the im-
minent sign-over of power to the civil sector in Ghana and Nige-
ria, the process of democratization is proving to be irreversible.
It is even tending to become a fashionable phenomenon, Just as

was the single-party system at the beginning of the sixties.

or course, the advocates of the single party will not allow them-
selves, without a struggle, to be deprived of the fruit on which
they have been nibbling for what will soon be 20 years. But there
is no longer any doubt that henceforth they will be on the defen-
sive, whereas the partisans of the democratic confrontation of
ideas and options have a favorable wind behind them. Of course,
the struggle will continue for several more years: but with the
increasingly involved economic difficulties faced by the nations
of Africa, it is certain that the time of resignation to the sta-
tus quo is over, and that in Africa, too, we are on the eve of
great scale-political upheavals. 0n the outcome of this confron-
tation depends both the future of the continent and the outlook
of its people, who are more than ever enamored of democracy and
social Justice.

COPYRIGHT: qune Afriquo GRUPJIA 1979

8117
050: ”“00

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
F01 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mun-um“ WIS

III-WITH” M II AFRICA
Mo MN!- menu '1' MIN“ in hutch 16 Fob 79 p 5638

[Tort] In opito of o omidonblo doctoooo in its um volu-o of in-
volt-onto and m 21mm. tho m-Aqniuim lotionol cm (3m)
hon phyod tho Africa and in o dooioivo ny during 1979.

Ion-1y no gun-tor of tho 'o 'oxpluotion' Wt (572 uum homo
outei’ototnofzdsunioa booboonopoatinhlukkmu (umoood
to 30 potent in homo on! Mayo). m ooquioition or o unto:- ot ox-
plmtioa ponih (mum thno in licor. m in mm. as no in
Sonogol) hoo oponod not ponpootivoo. 1n oddities. tho diooovory of Putin-
oorboao in Cohen on! Author Innu- find in licorio dong with not in-

diootiono of goo in Connor: hon «mom tho notioon cup-ny'o
utivitioo.

Rovioviu 1976 apontiono for tho moo on 31 Jomuy 1979. I: Albin
Won, claim of tho m. Minot! thio “min yolioy in
Atria'o noon bolt. Vo on hotti' on thin ontinont'o titan in push”.
mo ujmtyofouron iowoduoodthonoondvomgoiu todovolopou-
utivitioo in tho 6x11: o: Gain“. in ligorio oo tu- oo tho Goose. and ooon
in Axon. At tho oo- tino.‘ ho mod. 'oo no outed in tho intoxior
oootiono of Africa Imam“. Gubio. on! cm, with W for no!
uplontion pnito.“

III-Aquita- no (not hopoo for loath Africa. Motion” M unau-
nyoithAlgoz-ioooyhoomlmoithioyoor. cnmntoﬁorto “mun
ho ohm up. no only qmotioa io mt I111 ho tho nyonnooioao of tho
honin- diopoto bot-ooh Minis on Lib”.

Author an intention aux-ix 1978 In tho oottin up of o Ion ”auntie
tndo loch-nio- with licorio boon on 'cooponootory punts-noon m- oyotoo.
found by tho huh niniotor o! inﬁnity. im1voo um production
ondpotzolmpunhuoo mmmmvum Moo fox-Ida «ﬁnch
nourish. homology. on! urviooo. m moo-oat, Ihioh win to oinod in
moo. ookoo particula- pmioion for portioipotion by othor hue):
indutino in odditioa to tho potalm iﬂntry.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iho fo11ovin¢ to a mpitulotion of tho 1978 moot on! pmpooto for tho
omont you for oxplontioh (potnlouo and ninoral) and production. by
country:

North Attic.

In leypt tho north Aloxandria offohoxo oxploration poi-nit hao noultod in
too diooovorioo of oomoonod gao. Gan hao boon found also in Idhyo. In
mm. doVoIorpoont work io continuing on tho thtort dopooit. In addition.
on agnooont wont into ottoot on 6 Pom” 1978 hotooon tho govoxuont o!
Mina Ind tho Moioo Potrolann Activitioo lotorprioo (om) on tho ono
hand and am on tho othor. RAP thuo ooquizod o 50 pomnt intonot in tho
ponit to oxplozo tho Gulf of Cohoo and in tho thtart oonooooioo. Aloo.
Sonpt hao boon ootmrtod into n hanoo-Nnioian partnorohip for «or-
oooiu work n1otod to an of sum uplontion ponito in Moia.

Black AM“

In Cohon tho doolioo in tho group Gohonooo pmduotion hao bacon to anon-n
.1 ninion tooo in 1978 oooyuod to 9.? union tono in 1977. no. 61

union hdo ootoxo in 1977 tho pxoduotion o! goo hao to11on to 56 ainioo

in 1977 m]. lovortholooo. sun-m Gobon'o oyonu uplontion mort-

havo boon oointainod at a hishor 1m1 than in 1977. I‘ho lining oootor

hao inonoood ito activitioo thank: to tho ooouioition of nor ponito.

partioolany tho Pogan ponit, and by tho obtoiniu o! additionol

participation in miono of oooth Cohon and 1.1mm which an Judgod

to ho particﬂarly intonotilx. A toot horo ot tho ooa11 oooan tiold of

Bolioto hoo oooﬂnod tho ooopany’o intomts it io p1annod to p1aco it

in opontion in lay of 1980.

In tho couo uplontion of tho ooo hao wound. Dania ot tho hadiogo
yonit hao zovoa1od tho piononoo of coo. Production ot tho loonodo dopooit
hoo rioon to 1.10 ni111on tono ond ito ”vino doolino hao boon otohiliood.
Donlopooot of tho Loauo dopooit io shoot oooploton {no 1 nillion tooo in
1978. it in oupootod that poodootion I111 M 1. 5 aimoo in 1979. hoduotioo
ot tho Likouolo dopoait ohou1d hogin tonnd tho oiddlo of 1960.

In Common. 20 drillim hovo oontinod ouopootod potzoloun an! goo dopooito
at tho Rio do1 by pox-lit and. to a 1oooor oxtont. at tho Inkolo pox-lit.
Production ot noundou-eonth hogan not Detour. ‘Iho bod ot Botiho ohou1d

ho phood in ptoduotion thin oonth and tho ooo at Ko1o ooon oftor. Aloe.

a 42mm plotforn n11 ho inotouod at looho. Pnduotion in 1978 no on
tho ondor of 0.6 union tono.

In ligorio. m-luoria hao nado on offohozo diocovoz-y at tho Otoo South 1
drininc oito. Production in 1978 two to 3.1: union tons or condo ino1odin
1.9 ninion tooo pndnood by ito pat-toot tho lotiooal ligorian Potnolouo
Coopony um). III-lions handlod tho oukotilg of on of thio production
on oo11 ao on additional 1 oinioo tooo Wt back by m. hoduotioo
ohou1d hogin to {:11 thio yoor.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIN. USE ONLY
0thor hplozotiono tn Hook Ari-too

In an on ocxoooont hon boon oicnod giviu sun I 50 ”moat intonot in
tho Goo ponit. Two otho: ponito hovo boon canton (llooino on! Mono).
Drilliu ot Amouo hoo snot town.

In ligor thnoo ponito (Voot licor. an... out Homo) won oooiguod loot
lovoobor.

Tho oianive of on omooont with Sonogol on 9 Joanna 1978 hoo moltod in
on uplontion pox-1t for tho Mom-boil. on! Zianinohor aciooo.

motoothomoot Sink-unmou- oooplotodon19llomh1978withont
roonlto. 0n tho otho: hull. Win hon onnomood ito intontion to
mourn tho uplmtion pouito thot it holdo (lino Dinoh on! uni-no). In
tho Soyoholloo. am hno noqnixod n 25 pomont intonot in on «urination
invootigotitg fivo offshou blocks.

Southox-n Union

In smug. minim noulto hovo boon om nt Auooinonio out! who.
with: to“! potontin of 6.000 tono of main: 308. 'tho quontitioo no
onn but tho coalition to: niniu fomhlo.

In tho South Art-icon Ropuhlio. ohoxo Wimp io mooiotod with Africa
Solootion Mot hplontion out Dnooor Mum: Intomtionnl Inn. o non

dopooit of block oulphur with high oonoontntiono ot oino m oilvox- hon
boon diooovonti.

mom Iono Hot-on! ot Cio. Porto. 1979

7779
6303131100

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

FRENCH FEAR UNRBST--The rise of a new axis of destabilization

in Africa, extending from Addie Abebn to Brazzaville, where the
pro-3oviet forces soon to be asserting their power, is reared

in French diplomatic circles. Between the two ”red" capitals
lies a vast region of disturbance: Chad, the Central African Em-
pire, Zaire and Sudan. In the case of the latter, France espe-
cially fears the action of the communists and the separatists
(in the southern )nrt of the country), who enJoy the support of
tho Ethiopians. t‘l‘ext] [Paris Jmms Amman; in French 21 Feb
79 p 26] 8117

ID? FIIANCIIB-Uithia the fleaswctk of theicP ‘LAIIicsa. Caribbeaaluﬂ
Pacific Counties/Imps“ looaoaio Omit: Leas eczeeaeat. the hm
Develop.” hulls Omittee has Just given its emval to: the timing
ct the followiu seven projects: helawiu mate of 7.9 aillica empeea
scaetasy units for the soul develop-at mas and 2.3 aillies tes- med
commotion: nets-ass: a nest of 1.835 aillien unite to: a service to
benefit livestock owners is the canoe). soaesn assailed: mate of 2.5
sillioauaits fcrthellhlanoaeuslsdtoel. licen smotcfll aillioa
units to: secondary geaenl education schools in Isle. use. III lie-isms:
Casement a past or 2.5 aillioa unite to: the equipping of six colleges
an! industrial technical iostruotica. 57 unit sections and 35 doaestic
science sections; Zeabieo 8.55 ailliea for a lens ten tniaiu process
(1976-1960). M] [Paris tum mam n m in beach

16M79p 3217779

CONSIDER BREAK HIT“ PRC--Consultations have begun along certain nonalined
African countries with a view to suspending their diplomatic relations with
China if the latter continues its aggression against Vietnam. "The tine has
cone." an African head of state has cabled sale of his colleages, "to en-
visage taking reprisal measures against a power which claims to be a Ienber
of the third world but which pursues a military superpower policy...." [Text]
[Paris APRIQUE-ASIE in French 5-18 Her 79 p 50 L0]

080: 6400

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

UNTA LABOR ROLE, OBJECTIVES ANALYZED
Paris AFRIQUE -ASIE in French 5 Mar 79 pp 22, 23
[Article by Augusta Conchiglia: "Let the Workers Speak")

[Text] The new UNTA [National Union of Workers of Angola] leadership is
accomplishing a twofold tesk: defending the workers' interests and. above
all. awakening their political awareness.

Hith the object of restructuring and democratizing the country. the Assem-
bly elected by the Angolan people will. in the near future, replace the
Revolutionary Council. It is within this same fraaework that the organi-
zation (already well advanced) of the Angolan union. the UNTA. is pro-
ceeding. The UNTA will be responsible for "the political guaranty of the
rights of all the Angolan workers."

All those who work. whether or not they belong to the HPLA [Popular Hove-
ment for the Liberation of Angola]. can (and must) belong to this labor
organization. which will include several professional branches. In fact,
at the October 1978 meeting. President Agostinho Neto declared. "The labor
organizations must voice not only the desires and viewpoints of the HPLA
membership. The workers will be able to discuss and judge freely the
decisions of the party. so that the latter will not have too theoretical

and purely formal a view of the practical problems that arise at the base."

The 500.000 Angolan wage-earners will thus all be represented next May. in
the capital and in the provinces, by 10 elected union commissions, each
covering a specific sector: agriculture. coffee. construction, health,
public administration and services. heavy industry. light industry. food
industry. fishing. education and culture. and social matters.

Since a large number of enterprises are already nationalized (and there
will be many more) and since the state has chosen the socialist way. the
leaders of the UNTA will be able to take part in the meetings of the high-
est organa of the executive apputus: the Secret Council of Ministers and

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

the Revolutionary Council. There they will express the concerns and as-
pirations of the workers and see to it that the legal nor-s regarding
wages. working conditions and production are respected.

The UNTI in the process of organization had. during the restructuration
which was to neutralize the fractionalitza. already requested a change

in its relationship to the state. so that its different branches would
no longer appear simply "as an appendix of each ministry." The free-
tionalieta had watered down the role of the unions. likening it to that
of government adsinistrative organs. which constrained the operation of
certain enterprises. To clearly distinguish itself from the state and
assure its economic independence. the UNTA collects dues froa all workers
equal to 1 percent of their wages.

Produce More

As a result. the UNTA will be able to finance all its activities. and
especially the education and training of basic cadres.

Thus strengthened and reorganized. the UNTA (whose leadership is 85 per-
cent workers iron productive sectors and whose aenbership cannot include
any government eaployee) is beginning to inpleoent the law of July 1977
on the administration of state enterprises. which provides for compulsory
unionization of the workers. Hhen unionization succeeds--which is not
always the caee--the results are more than satisfactory.

Thus. the Luanda textile factory (the Textann). which esployn 1.200
workers. is producing at the sane level today as before the war. "hen

an enterprise cannot maintain its productive level. the causes of its
malfunction can. at the very least. be deterlined (low wages. onerous
working conditions. indiscipline. etc.) and an effort node to resedy then.

The distribution of staples and essential goods in production centers
still poses an urgent problem which the new UNTA leadership is deter-ined
to resolve by opening or reopening cooperatives. run by the workers and
which will receive 65 percent of the stocks available to the Hinistry of
Cosmerce as regards clothing and household electrical appliances. As for
foodstuffs. the supply. which is still irregular and inadequate. will be
maintained by the state warehouses and supervised by the UNTA. 0n coffee
plantations. which employ 98 percent of the agricultural work force. a
distribution is already in operation.

As regards the sniial injustices that still exist ("I note." said Agostinho
Neto during a oeeting in Cabinda. ”that a skilled worker earns less than

a stenournpher. That in inadoissiblc.“. they are already the concern of

a UNTA coenisnion which is recum=ending to the dee'ﬂinistry the solutions
advocated by the president: "Favor those who produce the country's wealth
and get rid of the privileged ones of the parasitic sector." Much remains
to he done in this domain. and to resolve the problene it will not be
sufficient to simply increase wages. That. on the contrary. would give
rise to an inflation which would benefit toe speculators. what is needed
is to produce more. 8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0081.?

Thu UNTA (joined to the pnrty. aince Punconl Luvualu. nether of the poli-
tical bureau. van elected to the new leaderahip) euet therefore accoepliah
the untold task of protecting the intereete oi the uorkera and developing
a political avnreneee neon; then auch that they will dedicate thenaelvaa
to tlw nntionnl roconntrurtinn.

Thia aecond teak ia neither the least ieportant nor the leaat urgent.
Preaident Neto hineeli haa said it: ”To achieve the eocialiat objective.
the labor organizatione euat fulf ill an educational role of enoraoua
ieportance." And he added: ”So long aa there reaain in our country
aocialiet ae ueli aa capitaliat enterpriaea. ao long ea there aubaiat
private production aectore. so long ea there reaaine collectiviution to
be accoepliehed. particularly in the fielde. it ia aheolutely eeaential.
it to vital that Angolan uorkere he inbued with the advantagea and the
neceaeity of aocialiaa."

lt ia up to the UNTA to fulfill this eiaaion.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Aaie

9399
C50: 61.00

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFF ICIM. USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN WIRE

DRIBFS

DIWND. PRECIOUS STONES REGULATIONS--by inerial decree of 2‘ January 79.

it is forbidden that managers and directors of diamond purchasing agencies
sell or purchase gold or precious stones outside of their officially recog-
nized office. Violators risk a fine of 50 to 500 million CFA francs and
confiscation of the stones figuring in the transaction. The secret sale

of dianonds as one of the lain reproaches ads by Emperor Bolteaea I to

the bebencse nationals. In addition. by decrees of 9 January 79. the Yangon—
Diamant company was authorized to open an office in bangui for the purchase
of precious stones. mg [jinn mamas rnoncwx r1- umnrnmcaans in
French 9 Feb 79 p 121 917l

COTTON ClNXlNc PLAN-“In baebari. on lb January. while touring Ouaha.

Dr Abdoul. Central African aspire aini_s_ter of agriculture. inaugurated e _
new cotton ginning plant of the UCCA j_Central African Espire Cotton Union].
This plant. coating the UCCA 180 million CPA francs. will be able to treat

25,000 metric tons of cotton seed annually; [text] LParis liARCIIEs TROPICAUX
ET HZDITZRRANEENS in French 9 Feb 79 p 321/ 9l7l

ROADS FUND-~A contribution to the Road Maintenance Fund was established by
ordinance on 9 January 79. This contribution will be levied on fuel sales
and deposited in 0 bank account by Centre-Hydro. At the money-lender's

coating on road maintenance, held at Bangui in April 1977. it was foreseen
that the Central African government would for: a lined haintenance Fund of
$00 nillion CPA francs. Up to now. this fund has not been financed due to

lock of available funds in the Treasury. Tex£7 [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX
ii? hﬁDlTERRM-‘EENS in french 9 feb 79 p 121 9171

DIRECT FLIGHT 'ro GABON-4 direct flight to Gabon was opened 13 January by
CENTRAFRICAIR. CENTRAFRICAIR will guarnstee this flight each weekend and
will give preferential rates to travelers taking a round trip during the
ueeitened. The opening of this line was decided at the occasion of Marshal
Bokassa's visit to Gabon in October 1976. l‘l'ex_t_7 LParis HARCHES TROPICAUX
tr MEDITERRANEENS in french 9 Feb 79 3) 32179171

C50: 1.600

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GRAD

FRY-INC" IHPERIALIM BELIEVE!) TO BE CAEISE OF CLASH'ES
Paris AFRlQilE-ASTB in French 5-19 liar 79 PD 20. 21

[Krticln by Man Eng

ﬁoxg Are we headed toward a partitioning of the country in accordance with
the wishes of the Elysee?

After the. nurderous confrontations which brought N'Djaaena to the point of fire
and blood in February. anxiety persists in Chad. where peope live with the oh-
session of a resusption or extension of hostilities.

The ilabm-iiallous operation. which consentators describe as relevant to oppo-
sition between the Hoslea people of the North and the aniaiet people of the
South. contains a such deeper significance. which. to be sure. efforts are be-
ins nade to hide. The fact is that the interests at stake are too iaportant
and France's role too decisive in order for the cards not to be shuffled by
every nsans possible.

However. the general political crisis which Chadian society is experiencing and
the various ntteepts to Balksnise it are far fro- beinr; satisfied by a brief
analysis sisrepmoentinn the facts and reducinq then to a hatred asonn peoples
whose coexistence would he aade possible only by French presence.

The nnderlyinr causes of the low crisis splittinp. Chad aust be nounht beyond
imdiate appearances in the general process of the penetration of French is-
perinlina into this country. The sad spectacle presented by the N'Djasena con-
flictn. encoumed by Paris. cannot be understood by passing over this reality

in silence.

In fact. colonization and then the for-nal independence of the 1960’s have led
to unequal but Joint developnent of the country's various regions. thus causing
a char-1c in the socio-econoeic structures of certain reeions while penittinr
others to continue to function with outnoded structures.

This contradiction. which born at. early as 1926 with the introduction of
forced cotton plantinn. remitted the enemncs of capitalist relations in the
whole of the cotton area: and. at the sac tine. that of a local political

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

class. it 10 in thoee areas that induotriee are installed (half of thoa being

located in P'DJaaena) providing for the processin-t of the cotton and replacinr.
fomr iaports of foodstuffs.

in other areas. when the people traditionally practice noaadic stock breeding.
colonialisa was content to take a share of the stock without asking an effort
to install any kind of infraatructuro. This in true to the extent that social
relations did not undergo any appreciable chanzo. The probloa is still sore
apparont in an area like the B.B.T.' whose sconoav is liaited to the production
of datcn, nalt and natron and the raising of goats and canola.

it in this aituation of structural imbalance. which took place at the ties of
colonization and which is otill going on. that some observers describe ao.op-
ponition hctwocn the North-including. all of the amen having precapitalist
rtmctunnuand the South. which produces the cotton.

0n the political lovel. thin iaperialint division of work resulted in 1960 in

handing the central power over to tho oririnal political class of the cotton-

raininn areas. In this aanncr. France was hopinp. to auzzlo the growing anger

of the peasants, who had hcen promised the cliaination of forced labor on the

cotton plantationn. At the cane tiac. the minor ocononic iaportance the other
rczions held for the france of that era resulted in the absence of any strong

alliance hetwcen the foudality of those regions and the political class of the
cotton-minim: areas.

This fact was illustrated by the political crisis the country was destined to
cxpriencc at that tiac. In fact. front 13 March 1957 to 2‘) August 1962 there
were einht nuccessive governaenta in Chad. which. at tho sane tine. oxpcricncod
three cabinet renhuffles. The year 1963 waa aarked by a confrontation between
the supporters of the oripinal ainiotcrs of the neglected regions and the sup-
porters of Toahalbayeo-hackcd by French troops at tho tine. This was the
hmakinr point of the fratvilc alliance.

This ohviour. failure of French policy was destined to he brounht to liqht with
the unlcarhlnn of the armed conflict of 1965. The establiahacnt of FROLII'AT
[Ehadian liational Lihsration Front7, whose rconraphic iaplantation eabracen all
the anus which do not raise cotton. being three-fifths of the national torri-
torv and one-third of the total population. was an answer to that situation.

in this connection and beyond anti-iaporialist inu-ntions. the cmrgence of
aracd opposition aakcc it nemasary to mvanp the country's ceopolltical nap
a: a wholc.

1‘hin requirement is all the pore iapcrative. since French iapcrlalisa. thcn
pn-y to a dreadful crisis. it: icon and let; inclined to support a war effort

 

' Rorkou, Enhedi. 'fihccti.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is woinhinr. sore and acre heavily on its treasury. iiith the Bouneac
failure. the iaportance of cotton (which repmocnto 80 percent of Chad‘s ex-
ports) in relegated to secondary ntatun in the concerns of the French indus-
trielinte. who do not conceal their increasing interest in tho exploitation
of the iuenae resourcer. hidden in the country’s subsoil. This explains eany
thinrn. when one considers that. at the present tine. the Aaericen coepany.
Conoco. associated with Shell and Chevron. have a Ionopoly on the research and
exploitation of oil in Chad. And also when one considers that uranlua and
any other resources. which Paris now thinks it is tine to develop. have been
discovered in the areas controlled by FﬂOLlNAT.

In them circuantances. how can one be astonished about the political and ail-
itary nupport the Elysee has created both halioue and the for-nor Jailer of tho
Cleuntm couple? Although the aboutface of Paris in regard to iiisaene Hebre
lent Aueust had scoured sons ourprine and rancor. it appears that this tactic
is now enjoying increasinsly creator support by French industrial and financial
eirclcr. despite obvious hostility by the French secret services. who are not
foreettinn the decisive role played by liabre in tho assasnination of their coa-
rade-in-areo. Gossamer Celopin. Tn any case. the objectives which the Elysee
wan tryinr. to achieve. at that ties throuqh the appointment of Hiasene liabre to
the position of prise eininter were hindered by the Helloua-ﬂabre conflict and
aado it necessary for the French leaders to iapose a coeproaise solution. ob-
viounly teaporary and illusive. based on a precarious cease-fire.

The 'liscard Solution

However. in the hackrrounvl of this operation there is already another plan
which farts is tryinr to not acccpted—-by rum-hot for the sonnet. It is the
fcdcraiine solution about which iir Cincard d'Eotaing spoke but which. in fact.
would end up partitionin". the country. Moreover. it will be noted that llisscne
ilabm. who only recently presented hinoclf as a great patriotic deibnder of
Chadian territorial into-trity. wao careful not to tales any stand on this setter.

i'ennwhile. here and now, the N‘Djanena confrontations. the fierce resistance of
Lieutenant Colonel Kaeeungue and. ntill sore. intensification of the offensivcs
of armd opposition in the central-eastern part of the country salts it apparent
that peace is not inainvnt. Likewise. all these uneuvcrs dressed up in the
winrn could be for the purpose of confusinr the protagonists still sore.

commm 1979 Afrlqne-Anic
use»

".30: M00

13
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE (WIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

BRIEFS

AFRICAN otvemmm BANK manna w [African Development mg granted

its first loan to Equatorial Guinea on 21 December of last year. This loan
of 6.6 million units of account. or about 1.886 million CPA frances. is
earmarked for financing of a project for reclamation of cacao plantations.

lt carriee interest of 7 percent (plus commission) with a term of 25 years.
The project aims to renovate 5,500 hectares of Cacao plantations, of which
500 hectares are small. family plantations. It constitutes the first part

of the program proposed by the Equatorial Guinea Govern-ent to give a new
impetus to the cocoa industry. This project will be carried out over a
period of 3 years. beginning in 1979. It will be followed immediately by

a replanting progral. This second phase of the total program will be
financed with revenue from the first part. The project will be adninistered
by a semi-autonomous office. the creation of which will ensure general super-
vision by the intermediary of a management unit. Operations foreseen in

the framework of the project are as follows: 1) acquisition of machines

and equipment. 2) construction of buildings. 3) restoration of processing
plants. 4) acquisition of agricultural production supplies, including fungi-
tides. and fertilizers. 5) creation of food crops. and 6) technical assistance
and for-scion. Total cost of the project is valued at nearly 15 million
units of account. which will be financed by the SAD (6.6 million) and by the
government of Equatorial Guinea (8.6 million). The BAD loan will serve to
finance the total project costs in foreign currency and part of the costs in
local currency relating to the equipment. buildings. restoration of process-
plants, and agricultural production supplies. [Iexi7 [Paris HARCRBS TIDPICADX
tr MEDITBRMNZENS In French 9 m 79 p 3217 9171

CSO: 6600

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

REOOHBNDATIONS 0N AGRICULTURE OF 906 CONGRESS LISTED
Paris MARCRBS TROPICAUX 8T HEDITBRRANEBRS in French 9 Feb 79 p 327

[Text] During the second special congress of the Gabonese Deaocratic Party
(906). held in Libreville 26-27 January (HTH. 2 February 1979. p 282). the
econooic policy committee drafted a resolution partially critical of past
parforaance in that area and proposing a future line of action. The Iain
parts of the resolution are: ”1. Whereas directed end planned econoaic
liberaliaa. the pillarc of our econoaic policy since 1960. has triggered and
sustained a savage capitalise that has had bad and haraful effects on the
econoeic. social and cultural develop-cot of our country; 2. Whereas deno-
cretic. concerted progressioniso (the doctrine of president Bongo) was born
froa our awareness and will to better control the cconoay in order to haVe
better coanand over and provide better guidance to our expansion in the
national interest; (...); 5. whereas guarantees for balanced. sustained
develop-ant rest mainly on rational exploitation of our perennial resources;
(...) 10. Aware of the need to lay down a new econoaic and social develop-
aent strategy; (...). The second special congress of the Gabonese Deaocratic
Party recon-ends that the central cosnittee. the political bureau and the
govern-ant take the necessary steps with a view to introducing new orientations
to continue the developaent of basic infrastructures and foster invest-eats
in the productive sectors."

The resolution than cells upon those institutions to "reatfira the priority
nature of agriculture in our country‘s developnaat and to iapleaent the goals
of the third agricultural plan.

"For this purpose they should undertake action as soon as possible to:
increase food production and exports; raise the standard of living of the
fat-ere; proeote integrated ogre-industrial operations ear-arked to obtain
foreign exchange. guarantee the education. activation and training of peasants
and far-era; allow the creation of production and marketing cooperatives.
facilitate the regrouping of villages.“

The econonic policy coanission also asks the party and governaent to "pro-etc
the eaergence of a genuine class of national entrepreneurs. artisans and
Ierchants."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Hornux et Cic.. Paris. 1979

9268
C80: 6600 15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML US! ONLY

BRIEFS

BBLINGA IRON on RESERVES-d atudy ovaluating oxploitahlo iron oro
rucma in Bolinga band on 1977 drillinga ohova tho oxiatonco of 300
million tom of lov-phoophoruo iron oro which could ho exploitod at a

tote of production of 7.5 to 10 uillion tom pot yoar. Gobon'o Hiniator
of Hinoa ”bony-noun“ racoivod tho roprooontativoo of tho Auotrian V038!-
ALPINE 60me on 23 February; thio colpany io raportodly intorootod in
participating in tho capital of tho SNIPER [Hob-ho Iron Hinoa Coopany]
which will ho in chargo of oxploiting tho Iolinga ainoo when tho Tuna-
gahoncoo Railroad will ho conplotod. [Text] [Patio mamas TROPICAUX 31'
MEDITBRWS in Punch 9 Hot 79 p 637]

080: M00

16
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

DISTRICT FARMS TO BE ESTABLISRED FOR MODERNIZING AGRICULTURB
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French 5 Her 79 p 50

[Text] In accordance with the decisions of the llth congress of the
Deaocratic Party of Guinea. President Ahmed Sekou Tours has announced
that hfa country will launch a green revolution with the establisheent
of district agricultural end animal ferns (PAPA) designed to aodernite
Its agriculture.

"These fares.” said Guinea’s leader. "will enable Guinea to becole self-
sufficient in food and to achieve a surplus designed to finance its equip-
nent. The yields fro. about 500.000 hectares of cultivated lend in Guinea
out of its 7.500.000 cultivable hectares are poor and coepel the country
to inport substantial quantitites of foodstuffs paid for in hard curren-
cies. These yields anount to between $00 kilograns and 1 ton per hectare
of hushed rice. compared to 15 tons in other countries."

The PAPAs will build their own water supply and nanagenent systems to
achieve two or three crops per year. The district agricultural and
animal fares will be staffed by cadres graduating fro- Guinea's agricul-
tural colleges.

in this regard. the chief of atete said that ”the nuaber of engineers and
engineering assistants will be increased to 3.000 in 1979 (compared to
1.700 in I978) and to 6.000 the follouing year. to reach 6.500 in l98l."
Besides. 8.000 new students. that is. 70 percent of the high school grad-
uatea. have enrolled this year in agricultural colleges.

As regards the 20 eillion dollars granted by the 330 [European Beononic
Con-unity]. they will be used to finance equip-ent for saall projects
designed especially for water control

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

9399
050: 6600

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIBERIA

BRIEFS

PRESIDENT'S “ENC" VISIT SCHEDULED-~01 6 February, during his dinner with
Cecil Dennis. Liberian minister of foreign affairs. Olivier Stirn. secretary
of state for foreign affairs. announced that President Tolbert would make
an official visit to France at the end of March. Stirn stressed the isport-
ance of the agreement which had just been signed concerning the guarantee
of French investments in Liberia (see below). He recalled that the English-
speaking country would be represented for the first tile by an observer

at the French-African suuit st Kigali. and also that President ‘l'olbert
would be the next president of the 0M). Also present at the dinner were
Sieone Veil. sinister of health. and Jean-Pierre Prouteau. secretary of

state for small industry. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUR ET mnsmmns
in French 9 m 79 p 3237 9171

Film}! RBCIPROCAL INVBSMNT scum-4 delegation led by Mr Candessus.
director of the Bureau of International Affairs under the Treasury Directorate,
visited Liberia in late January and on 26 January drew up an agreesent for
reciprocal promotion and protection of invest-ents. This agreement sarks

the opening of a new chapter in the economic and financial relations between
the two countries. It is also of interest that Cecil Dennis. Liberian
minister of foreign affairs with whoa the delegation had net at Monrovia; -
visited Paris this week on a trip which will also take his to Madrid. [text]
[Paris meats TROPICAUX ET EDITBWNEBNS in French 9 Feb 79 p 3237 9111

C80: 4400

[3
NR OWICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

PETROLEUM. xterm Resources ATTMCT mm‘rons
rm. JBUNB "1110113 no 956 in French 14 m 79 pp 38. 39
[imam by Mohamed 11.1.97

[50x57 H111 Heli becone the priority terget for foreign investors in the
1980's? One night think so to judge by the new interest they ere showing
in the egriculture end eubeoil of s country classified snong the poorest
in the world.

Before being penelized by 3 years of drought (1972-1975). Heli had tried to
recepture its plece es the trsditionel breedbesket of west Africs. en erduous
teek which required foreign eid thet wee es niggerdly se the country wes
poorly neneged. Only the sgro-induetriel couple: of the Niger Office in
Segou end the CHI)? (He1isn Textile Gospeny) ettrscted foreign lenders. Since
1973. however. etudics heve shown thet Mali. crossed fron west to eeet for

e distance of 1.700 he by the ﬂiger end its neny tributeries end wetered in
the west by the Senegal. offered greet egriculturel potentiel.

Thet wes ell thet wee needed for the country to be turned into e vest fen
work cenp wetched over by the BBC. 1111’. the world lenk. Cenedisn eeeistence.
the eocielist countries. Chine. the Development benk of the Republic of Hell
(BORN) end SCAER (Per- Credit end Rurel Equipnent Ooupeny).

Rurel Develop-eat operations ere under wey in the country'e seven sdninietrstive
regions. linking noney crops (peenuts. cotton. tobecco. tee. sugsr cone.

etc.) with food products (rice. sorghum. Ierkst gerden crops. etc.). Results
ere encouraging end ere ceusing enthusiese on the pert of the peessnts. Ink-
ing n French expert fro- the ﬂorid Ienk eey thet "in e few yeers lbli's
pesenntn have changed their thinking in e wey it took the Europeen peeeent e
century to do." Grazing lends. 60 percent of which were deetoryed between

1972 end 197‘. ere well on the wey to reconstitution thenke nsinly to Libyen
end Algerien eid. Privete Anericen groups ere working on rench projects in

the regions of liopti. Tosbouctou end Geo.

True expectetione. however. ere focused on the subsoil. Their nenes ere
ureniun. oil end beuxite.

I9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Anaongo. in the tar northwest of the country. the office of Ibrahima Syllu.
the 30-year-old circle coriander. is scarecely ever empty. He is melting a
careful recruitment of dozens of volunteers to mine the uranium deposits
which. according to some reports. will get underway in the early 1980's. In
that region of Gao (the northwest). the Japanese company Power Reactor and
Nuclear Tuel Development Company (PMC) has been prospecting since 1976. The
effort has paid off. In the Kidel circle. the some company has updated some
deposits that. cowined with those in Ansongo, are an extension of the ore

in the Nigerien Sahara. There is likely also some on the Volta border.

606m (Muclear Materials General Comany). with ties with the French nuclear
energy co-isuriat. has discovered other still more important deposits near
Taoudenit in the 16th region and Kenieba (Kayee region) near the Guinea border.
The Malian deposits are probably among the largest active mines in Africa. but
the figures are carefully suppressed.

Oil prospecting. in which several Western companies have invented almost

2 billion Mslien francs. is mainly an achievement of the French company ELF
Aquitaine. with Texaco and the British company Murphy involved in prospecting
in the northwest. The only remaining problem for study is pipelining it to
the comet. As far as the oil companies are concerned. it is understood the
price for crude would justify construction of pipelines.

Bauxite deposits are probably much greater today than former estimates

(750 million tons) indicsted. Pechiney (Prence). Alusuisse (Switzerland)
and China are interested in deposits localized in the south and southwest
(kayee region. which also has iron ore) not far from the Guinean border in
the area where the Msnsntali dsm will be built within the framework of OMVS
(Senegal River Development Organization).

The Office of Geological and Mining Research (DIEM, France) is surveying
gold potential near Reyes. In the past. the Soviets have been mining the
large gold reserves in Kslana. near Sikaeeo. living there in isolation.
They are no doubt still there. while other "technical advisers" prefer the
open spaces of Tombouctou or Geo. attrscted by oil. uranium or bauxite.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

9268
080: 4400

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

BRIEFS

FROBABLF. URANIUN. on. DEPOSITS--Banako--A1though it is not yet sure that
uranium and oil explorations in Mali have achieved conclusive results.
peraistent ru-ora continue to circulate in certain foreign circles in
Bamako. according to which "auspicious develop-ems" are to be expected.
The Japanese company PRC [expansion unknown] is exploring for ureniun

in the region of Kidal. while drilling operations are being carried out
in Ansongo by the Elf-Aquitaine company. According to the Malian minis-
ter of Industrial Develop-eat and Tourism. Hr Laaine Keita. it is prena-
ture as yet to affirm the existence or nonexistence of uraniun or oil
reserves in Mali. however. my French and Malian technicians have
always believed their existence to be "almost certain," based on studies
carried out during the French colonial era. [Text] [Paris APRIQUE-ASIE
in French 5 Her 79 p 10] 9399

080: “00

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RRODESIA

PRIVATE ARHIES. HERCENARIES COMPOUND CONFUSION 1N MODES“
Growth of Private Aroies
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE in French 16 Feb 79 p 33

[Article by Francois Soudan]

[Text] After a heated referendue held against a backdrop of war. "Rhodesia-
Ziababwe" we: the new official name chosen by Ian Snith and his sta‘f for
the former Rhodesia. On Tuesday 30 January. 90.000 white voters were asked
to speak out on a draft constitution providing for a shift of the theoretical
power to the black eajority. starting in Hay. A power in naae only. which is
opposed by the guerilla fighters of the Patriotic Front, insofar as the key
posts (stay. police. governaent and econooy) will rennin in white hands. The
result of this referendum (nearly 85 percent of "yes” votes) was surprising
because of its wide margin: the proposed constitution. which had been
represented by lan Snith as a last chance to prevent Rhodesia'a total isola-
tion on the international scene. had indeed been strongly opposed by followers
of Rollo ﬂay-an. a former interior sinister and head of the extruiats.

warlordn

This In undoubtedly a personal victory for Snith. which paves the way for
holding the first elect ions by universal suffrage en 20 April next. But the
extremely tense climate surrounding the 10 January electiono (generalized
curfew, deploy-eat of troops around the polling places, praliainary arrests.
etc.) gives a poor prospect of blank participation in those elections. And
the advent of the private anies as a third component on the Rhodesian nilitary
rhassboard is Quite likely to add even further to the prevailing confusion.

The "case" of the private arnles (those parnnilitary groups recruited by each
of the three moderate black leaders allied to Smith: Huzorewa. Sithole and
Chit-nu) recently had a new develop-ant when soee 100 followers of Abel Hurosewa
arrived in Salisbury from Libya in late January. They were Ien who. Colonel
Qndlvllmfi had agreed to train in 1975. when nest Rhodesian nationalists were
still gathered under the banner of the ARC (African National Council). "hen
the latter crumbled in 1976. the Libya-trained oen renaiaed loyal to Bishop

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPPICIAI. 083 ONLY

Husorewa and refused to join the ranks of the Patriotic Front. For a while
Qadhdhafi continued to train then before sending then back to Rhodesia. one
sasll group at a tine. but. especially after the internal agreeaent was
signed on 3 March 1970. their presence becane too such of an esbarrassaent.
The nen who arrived in late January are probably part of the last of those
groups. They Joined the ranks of acne 1500 ailitiaaen of "Iiusoraws's ' 1y"
stationed in the "tribal reserves" around Salisbury under the wand of a
for-er officer of the Patriotic Pront. The Reverend Sithole. another aoderste
black leader. also has his own troops: sore than 1000 men. sons of who- are
still being trained in Uganda. They are apparently the best equipped and
nest effective but also the nest violent. bed by veritable ”warlords." they
are leading an sutonoaous existence in the Heetern part of the country. liv-
ing off extortion and terrorizing the villages. In conclusion. Chief Chirsu
also anintains a sail army consisting of £00 to $00 auxiliary troops.

A Shifting Reality

Those armies. nade up of young unenployed people. of deserters fro. the
Patriotic Front or the regular Rhodesian arny. are reported to control a
little over 10 percent of the Rhodesian territory. Since 1917. the Salisbury
governnent has given than free rein. It has even provided then with weapons
recovered froe Rhoso's and Hugabe's guerilla fighters. although it strongly
diatrusts than: Indeed there is great peraeability between aiailar ethnic
groups. whether they are fighting for the Patriotic Front or against it. In
addition. the private areies have sonetines had violent engage-ants with each
other. and the Rhodesian array had to intervene. with sone losses. Those pri-
vate arnies. then. do not really constitute a cohesive third force but rather
a shifting reality which should probably be taken into account in the Rho-
desian inbroglio.

Mercenaries Reported by (MD
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French 5 Feb 79 p 9

[Text] Dar es-Salaar-T‘here are 13.000 western nercenaries in the ranks of the
Rhodesian any. Hr Nicholas Kuhanga. Tanzanian minister of education. an-
nounced as the ow Liberation Conittee opened its 32nd session.

The intensified Rhodesian attacks against Hoes-bique were on the 0A" Libera-
tion Committee‘s agenda. The cousittee considered it indispensable to take
joint steps to put an end to those crises couitted against the peaceful pop-
ulation of hotenbique. The nercenaries consist of 1.800 French-en. 2.800
Portuguese. 2.300 Anericsns. 1.500 Nest (Screens. 800 Israelis. and others
from various nations. including Great Britain. Australia. Canada etc.

Still on the subject of Rhodesia. the Ziabsbwe Patriotic Front categorically

rejected the idea of any intervention in Rhodesia of an Anglo-Auricen expedi-
tionary force. to which 0.5. Ambassador Andrew Young recently referred. "The
Zi-babwe people." the front declared. "do not need British or Alericsn libera-
tors. as they have co-itted the-selves to the tsslt of their own liberation.”

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our readers will recall thet in an interview with the mricen ugeeine NM-
HBEK. the Tanzanian chief of etete his-elf hed recently Inked for an Anglo-
Aeericen eilitery intorvention: "One or two bettelione." he eeid. "end in
a tow dnye it would he. ell over..."

The Patriotic Front end the countriee in the forefront of the etruule would
be well-edvieed to nintein better coordinetion between their poeitione.

comment: 1979 Afrique-Mio

11936
080! “00

21.
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPfICIAL USE ONLY

RHODBSIA

IRIEFS

MBMCBNARIBS RECRUlTnuo-The recruitment of nercenariaa for Rhoda.
aia oontinuoe in Europa (eapeoially in Great Britain, trance,
Spain and Portugal . The 'Horriblea' are receiving the equiva-
lent of 10,000 P? French francs] a month paid in South African
randa (more than 5.000 F? ae an enliatuont bonue and 5,000 FF in
risk pay). Arriving in Salisbury fro. Johannesburg, they may
receive three poaeihle aeeicnnente: aoldiarinu in the regular
Rhodesian Army, on officer's berth in the black moderate leadara'
militia, or coat recently, a poet in the training ca-pe for the
”Africa lere” [Free Africa] Connandoa, a up made up of Mozam-
bicona hoetile to the Maputo Government. 7;:xt] [Paria JEUNB
mum": in French 21 no 79 p 26] 3117

C50: 6500

25
FUR OPYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'l'lOlAl. 0!"! ONLY

8A0 TON! AND PRINCIPE

DETAILS ON INTERNATIONAL ma! ASSISTANCE PROVIDED
Perle HAWKS TIDPICAUX ET MITIWBINS in French 9 Feb 79 p 327

[text] Since the procieeetion of its independence in 1975. the Doeocretic
Republic of Seo Tone end Principe bee been receiving eid froe e nueber of
countrics end internetionel institutions. es follows: the 083k. Chine. Cube.
North Koren. the Ger-en Deeocretic Republic. Sweden. the Netheriende. Portu-
gel. Frence. the European Develop-ent Pond (IF). ﬂorid Bank. end eeverei
UN sgenciee (UNDP. mo. no). The eforeeentioned socielist bloc countries
provide technicel eseietnncc eeiniy for public works. heelth. defense. end

nieceiieneoue equip-ent end lending. Swedish eid is concedtreted in the
heelth eector.

Under Title VI of PM: (Aid end Cooperetion Fund). the French Hinieter of
Cooperetion is helping eetebiish e cocoe fueigetion center 0.015 billion
Prench frencs). which in iqaroving conservetion for export of Sen Toee'e
prinicipei eource of foreign exchenge. A cold storege feciiity. costing
770.000 french irence. wee elso opened in Herch i978 within the context of
essietence dietributed by PAC. In June 1978. eleo under PAs’s ‘l'itlc Vi.
the decision use eedc to estebiieh s cuitursl center on the isiend (French

liousc) end three coopereting centere with one eesistence adviser es pert of
its technicel essistencc effort.

Ongoing operetions include the following: 1.050 tons of grein. 50 tons of
eiik. end 200 tone of butter oil in 1979; essistencc to the Principe hospitei:
study to orgsnire e workshop eensged by the Industriel Developeent Center

(Chi) in colleborstion with the ﬂorid lenk; provision of public works eetcriels
(300.000 ECU [Europeen Currency 0ni57); study to set up e brick works. In
eddition. the ED? wes working on future developoent of fisheries end egricuiture
(coconut end peln trees).

COPYRIGﬂT: Rene Horcux et Cie., Perle. 1979

9268
680: £000

1’6
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAI RB

NATION SAID TO HAVE NONI: uan'rs TNAN ANY BLACK AFRICAN COUNTRY

Paris JBUNB AFRIQUE in French 21 Feb 79 p 66

[ieport on interview with President Hobutu by transisco Vorgars. "The host
Debt-Ridden Country of Black Africa." date of interview not give§7

(jug by the end of um the um public foreign debt slounted to 3.5
billion dollars. of which 2.6 ailiion were actually disbursed. This is the
figure alluded to by President Hobutu in our interview.

A nuaber of underdeveloped countries hsve a larger debt. Along those at

the head of the list is Brasil. with 22 billion dollars. out these are
countries with an industrial and agricultural production forty or fifty tiaes
that of Zaire. in Africa. the seat indebted countries are. in order. Algeria.
with 9 billion dollars (in 1975). Egypt. with 5.7 billion dollars (in 1975).
Zaire. on the sane level of indebtedness as fbrocco. a country whose revenue

is four tiaes higher. Aaong block African countries. Zaire is by far the soot
deeply in debt.

The greater part of the Zairian debt was contracted between 1973 and 1975
(2.3 billion). in order to set up a costly undarstructure. It differs free
that of other very poor countries (those which have an annual revenue per
inhabitant of less than 265 dollars). in that 60 percent of it was consented
to by private banks at high rates of interest. It is therefore very expen-
sive: if the nest disinherited countries now pay aoderate rates of interest.

of about 2.6 percent. Zaire. on the other hand. sost disburse very nearly
7 percent in finance charges.

Also. the timing of payaents is shorter. in spite of the increase in exports
in 1976 and 1977. the country was not able to eeet its payaenta. of which

60 percent were in arrears between l97$ and 1977. The total debt aaounts
to the equivalent of l6 months of national production.

In l976 and 1977 Zaire received "oxygen tents" fros the international
Monetary Fund (268 alllion dollars) and (to. Hestern countries (260 ailiion).
lt consented to a refinancing of the conditions of repay-ent on the part of
l06 creditor banks. along which Citybaak. Norgah. the Credit Cos-arcial of
France. the Societe Generale. etc. This was done in exchange for a prosise

to put into effect an austerity prograa. which has been several tiass delayed.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

In order to reeolve the problee of the debt. e two-tier policy le envieeged:

-e ntnblieetion plen has been eleboreted by the Internetionel Monetery Fund.
It telle for e reduction in ieporte. end e reetoretion of heelth to the
econoey end iinenoe. to be pleeed under the direction of foreign experte.

-e plen for the development of production. eleboreted by the world lent.
which eepheeieee the export of Idnerele.

In the beginning of I979. the unpeid erreere. eccordina to the FINANCIAL

TIMES. eeounted to ebout 700 eillion dollere. Heetern countriee deeonetreted
their underetending by edventing 650 eillion dollere: The Internetionel
Nonetery ﬁned 30 percent. the United Stetee IS percent; Belgium 15 pertent...
but more then 50 percent of the debt in due before 1983. In Nerch. Zeire'e
creditore end friendly countriee vill tether esein in lrueeele to exeeine

the eituetion in teree of the good will deeonetreted by Zeire in the epplicetion
oi the plen eleboreted by the Internetionel Honetery Fund.

COPYRIGHT: Jeane Afrlque GRUPJIA 1979

934.7
cso: mo m

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040011-4

- END OF
FICHE
DATE FILM

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPS2-00850R000100040011-4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040011-4

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-R0982-00850R000100040011-4