APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007I02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 00030002-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030062-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE (XILY

JPRS L/8359
28 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOU0 No. 627

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030062-9
N011!

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
trans-lesions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro. English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and asterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was susnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion earl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ite- originate with the source. rises within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the pol i-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Coverment.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGUIATIONS WERNING GI'NERSHIP OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
m ”M ms L/eass -W

em 'ece
rmsunous 0N SUI-8W AFRICA. 3000 No. 627 28 March 1979

.- Pyle-neg Quantum-I Rep.

       
    
    

' . mum-m. cheelaeuee Nun e“ Mano
Joint Ml icatiou launch Service

1000 North Globe Rood n. Coma/rum No
Arlington. Virgina 22201

‘1 Seceeevie. cueeluuee lie-e eel Mine- ”. Type a Moon on Pond
Ceuml

l0. Poona/tunic“ Um: No.

   

  
 
 

Ae above

"I“.

' The report contain: intonation from African and opecialiud Hes: European
publications end radio on political. ecomic. and eociological develop-cute.

W. icy 'evde eel Dore-at Aenlyeie. In auction"

Policicel Science Liner-African Aft. __chcna __Rvende
Sociology ___mola _cuinee _Seo Tone and
homo-ice _leoin _Guinea-Bieaau Principe
culture (Social _llotmne Livory Coeet LSenegal
Sciencce) _Burundi _K enya _Scychellce
Technological _Cueroon _Leeotho _Sierre Leone
_Cape Verde __Liberie __Soulie
Lemuel African __Hcde3eecar LSouth Africa
Empire _uelevi _5veziland
LCM __Heli __'ron:ania
_COI°!O Ielenda _Neuritiue _'I'ogo
LCongo _ Hozubique _Ugande
Lbjibouti __Nanibia _Upper Volta
__Bquarorie1 Guinea :uiger _Zaire
"k “emime/O'ea-Euu Tene::::::P1. ::::::: __Zaubia
_canbia _Rhodeeia

m. cosnu Field/GM 02.50.56.“

II.Aveel-buhiy State-0M 2' A. d Page:
roa omcm. use cum. Limited Number or m 58

'0..- ~vn n I..'. It’ll Tun ‘0‘“. MAY 5': “(PRODUCED uggg... 9‘ .0". In
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.1938 n/ease
28 March 1979
TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARA?! AFRICA
F000 No. 627
. Cameras PAGE

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Min. Nyerere Rivalry Examined
(Jm mm. 7 mt 79)....O00.00.00...0.00.00.50.000000

Inevitable Confrontation
The Schoolteacher's Revenge, by Francois Soudan
'Big Daddy's' Last Round, by Francisco Vergara

Disputed Zairian Intervention in CA2
(Jm WQW. 7 Feb 79)sasooossesaaoaaaasoosaossasosoaoe

Develop-ant of Black African Marxian, Leninisn Traced
(Jean Copana; AFRIQUB-ASIE, 5 Feb 79).....................

Swiss Diplonatic Interest in Africa
(Francoise ﬂnbscher; J88“! AFRIQUE, 10 Feb 79). . . . . . . . . . . .

C£NTML AFRICAN mm

France Unable To Dissociate Itself Pros lot-sea
(Jean-Marc Zaidi; JEUNE AFRIQUE, 7 Feb 79)................

Possibilities of Nation's Survival Discussed
(Jacques latrenoliere; means 1110th ET
HEDITE'RRANEENS. 16 Feb 79)................................

Real Conflict Said To Be Between lien of the North
(Abdelaziz Dalmani; Jam AFRIQUE, 7 Feb 79)..............

mougue Seen as Possible New Strong Han
(Jam th2. 21 Feb 79).aseeaooossaaoaaoossaaoosaossoss

10

12

l7

19

22

32

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page

CONGO

Ssasou Ngusaso, Backers Said To Represent PCT Leit "in;
(Jos-Blaise Alina; JEUNE APRIQUB. 21 Feb 79).......... 36

DJIBOUTI

French Economic Aid Reported
OIARCHES TROPICAUX ET mnmms. 16 Peb 79)...... 40

Briefs
Mirases Arrive 1:3
Islamic Aid ‘3

IVORY COAST

Merchant Shipping Industry Development Discussed
(Ls-ins Psdiks Interview; JED“! APRIQUB. 28 Feb 79).... bk

NIGERIA

Briefs
Dunlap-Niehelin Rubber Project 68

SENEGAL

Press Said To Peel Threatened by Press Code Bill
(Sennen Andrisnirado; JEUNE APRIQUE. 7 Feb 79).......... 69

Alleged Shortcomings of Press Code Noted
(Sennen Andriasirado; JEUNB APRIQUE, 21 Feb 79)......... 52

SOUTH AFRICA

Briefs
French Marine Supplies 56
Uraniul to Belgium 56

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

AMI". NYERERE RIVALRY BXAHINED

Inevitable Confrontation
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 7 Mar 79 pp 22-23
[Article by anonyaous author-7

[Text] Calm and discreet. Julius Nyerere had hesitated a long tile before
confronting his hot-headed neighbor. Idi Anin. He finally decided to begin
the conflict and scene to be on the verge of winning.

It is a aortal conflict between Idi Anin Dada. president of Uganda. and Julius
Nycrerc. Tanzanian head of state. Their troops have been facing each other
for 3 sonthe and. at the end of February. it appeared that the aarshal-preai-
dent--who has been in the world news for 8 years--was seriously threatened.

On 2‘: February the Ugandan city of Hasaka. located 60 ha froa the Tansanian
border and 120 Rs from the Ugandan capital. Kaspala. fell into the hands of
the troops directed by Idi Anin's opposition and bachd by Nyerere.

This rivalry between the two nan is a particularly rare phenoasnon. It is
true that there was a confrontation between King Hassan II and President
Houari Bouaediene. But opposition between Algeria and Morocco has always
been greater than any personal conflict.

This is not the case in East Africa. here it is less a territorial or ide-
ological dispute than an incompatibility of teaperanents. Uhat is there in
couon between the coaaonwealth's foraer boxi chanpion. who weighs sore than
120 kg. and the respectable "nwalisu' (uachezg of trail fora? Idi Aain is
an intuitive person. devoured with aabition and devoid of all scruples.
Nyerere is a hueanitarian intellectual. eninently pragaatic. Therefore. all
undertakings of the two sen in dosestic and foreign politics are aarked by
diametrically opposed measures.

A ﬂoslen of aodest beginnings and casing fros an ethnic group near the Sudan-

cse bonnet. Idi Main suffered from doaination exercised within the any by
the Lanai and Acholi tribes. He bitterly resented the cents-pt displayed

by the Christian aristocracy of the foraer kingoa of Buganda and the trades-
people of Asiatic origin. Coaing into power in 1971. he does not wait lens

1
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to satisfy his desire for vengeance. As early as January 1972. he aassacres
the Langis and Acholis and reaoves the Bugandans froa the administration.
Seven nonths later. he expels sore than b0.000 Asians. He then persecutes the
Christian clergy. Undoubtedly. some of these decisions are acceptable to the
people and. for a part of African public opinion. exeaplary. Idi Aain wanted
only personal revenge. Nonetheless. he becones the syabol of the struggle
against privileges and foreign doaination.

Much more than his rival. Nyerere is a progressive nationalist. Hie patriot-
isa is enbodied in the ”cultural revolution.” which enables Tanzania to de-
velop its heritage: architecture. the arts. the national Swahili language on-
riched by a vocabulary borrowed neatly froa the country's dialects. Contrary
to his rival. "years is a dyed-in-the-wool socialist whose drean is to trans-
form Tanzania into a federation of cos-unity villages. “ujanaas.” But. in
contrast to Idi Aain. he deteste taking drastic neasuros. his religious scru-
ples and concern for efficacy lapel hill to favor persuasive aethods rather
than the use of force. He constantly searches for interaediary solutions (dc-
collectivization of several hundred villages. denationalization of certain
businesses) to deal with the citisens and adapt the goals he has set for hin-
self to the dismal reality of a country which ranks among the world's poorest.

Is it any wonder that the expeditious aethods of the Kampala aaster earn his
more of an audience in certain circles than the slow plodding of the “awaliau'?

At the J uncture

Like Tanzania. Uganda is at the Juncture of Black Africa and the Arab world.
of Islaa and of Christianity. But the two leaders have led their countries in
different directions.

A hoslea governing a country of Christian anority. Idi Aain felt hisself in-
sulted by the arrogance of certain Israeli officers who had installed several
bases in Uganda in the 1960‘s. Horeover. he quickly grasped the political and
financial advantage he could draw free a disasntling of these ailitary instal-
lations. veritable sources of anti-Sudanese and anti-Arab sutNersion.

Suspicious Tradition

Four years before the 16 July 1976 Israeli raid on Entebbe. the Ugandan head of
state had severed all relations with Tel Aviv. He sided with the Arab world

and Palestinian Fedayeen--to the great satisfaction of his fellow countrymen
and a number of his African peers.

In contrast. Julius Nyerere. a fervent Catholic in a country of Tslasic aa-
jority. is the eabodiaent of a suspicious tradition in the black continent in

regard to the Arab world. The huaanist in him disapproves of the pro-slavery
undertakings in which certain sultans of East Africa had engaged until the end
of the 19th century. The tactician understands the advantage of anti-Arab

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

propaganda among the black peoples of Zanzibar. for a long time dominated by
the original dynasties of Dean.

With his neighbors of the Indian Ocean and of East and South Africa. the
"nwaliau" has always striven to reconcile the politics of principle with the
strategy of the possible.

He aaintains the best relations with Rwanda and Burundi. small bordering coun-
tries which. with Tanzania. make up the Organisation for the Adninistration
and Dcvelopaent of the Kagera Basin. He cooperates wholeheartedly with nearby
progressive governaents (Seychelles) and with his ”front-line” partners (par-
ticularly Hozambique and Zasbia).

Moderate

On behalf of revolutionary solidarity. Nyerere discreetly supports various
movements opposed to the governsents of Coaoro Islands. halawi and Zaire.

In Dar es Salaaa he protects the Liberation Comaittee of the OAU and furnishes
considerable ailitary aid to the underground forces fighting against Rhodesia
and South Africa. But. being realistic. Nyerere preaches Ioderatien to the
Rhodesian and Nasibian guerrillas. To prevent either of those powers free
gaining a foothold in Tanzania. he aaintains equal balance between then.

Nyerere is benefiting froa Chinese aid. which has particularly made it possi-
ble for him to build the railroad connecting Tanzania with Zasbia (Tasara).

He is accepting Soviet-puban military support. Lastly. he is maintaining very
cordial relations with the United States and. especially. Great Britain. ap-
proving the Angle-Aurican plan for Rhodesia.

Difference of Style

To be sure. Idi Anin has also carried out a nationalist policy which has safe-
guarded his freedom of saneuver with regard to his neighbors and the big
powers. His aethods are often peculiar and strike the iaagination of crowds.
as when he had hisself carried in a closed litter by Hesterners to'syabolise
"the revenge of the blacks." He willingly resorts to blacknail conducting a
see-saw policy between the East and Rest. Libya and Egypt. Or to violence. to
straighten out his former partners of the East African Coamunity (Kenya and
Tanzania).

As we can see. there is fereaost a difference of style between Idi Aain and
Nyerereo-much sore than a conflict in doctrine.

Only a few aonths ago. the two leaders seemed to be solidly installed in power.
In a matter of tine. one of then will perhaps have given up his position. for
Julius Nyereze. normally patient. has been shocked by the invasion of the
northern part of his country in November. For the first tiae. he appears
quite detersined to fight--on the field of battle--for lack of a boxing ring.
as the Ugandan president wanted.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For Africa and the whole world. there is a new stake involved: it is that
of knowing whether a discreet idealist can win out over a cynical coaedian.

The Schoolteacher's Revenge
Paris JEWE AFRIQUE in French 7 Her 79 pp 24-25
ﬂrticle by Francois Soudaﬂ

ﬁexy "In capitalisa we have a headache. In the construction of socialism
we plan a headache. which does not sake it non uncoaaon. Quite the contrary."
Those few lines in the fora or a prophetic sails, the work of the Latin Maor-
ican poet, Rogue Dalton, could undoubtedly been written by Julius Nyerere.

"In 1967.“ he stated one day. "a group of young people asked no how long it
would take for Tanzania to become socialist. I answered 30 years. I was
aistaken: I an now sure that it will take such longer!“

This for-er “maliau” of 5? years of age. with slow and serious gestures.
father of independence and Tansanian head of state since 1962. is not unaware
that hie eyes will close long before he feels the effects of that aspirin
which would cure his headache: sooialisa.

M. a Snail's Pace

Tron Dar es Salsas. tenporary and somewhat antiquated capital whose naac sig-
nifies "house of peace." to Kigoas. on the shores of Lake Tanganyika passing
via Dodoaa. the future aetropolis in the heart of the Masai plateau. no one
will tell you that Tanzanian socialisa exists. Especially not Julius “yours.
It is true that 11 years ago, in 196?. there was the faaous declaration of
Arusha in which the "awalinu" had revealed soae of the essential principles
of his political options: self-sufficiency on the subject of investaent and
consuaption. collective tons of production (the well-known cos-unity villages.
"u,‘]aaaas"). popular control of administrative and political organisations. re-
forms in education and health service and the like: but the Tanzanian plan is
not designed for ailitants who are in a hurry. and ”ujaaaa' society advances
at a snail's pace.

“Ten years after the declaration of Arusha." Nyerere wrote in 197?. ”Tanzania
is certainly neither socialist nor self-sufficient." And it even seeas that
the country is now mgr-easing in this connection. Host of the retail busi-
neoses. nationalised in 1967. have been returned to the private sector. Many
state coapanies. particularly in the distribution sector. are being subjected
to seasuzcs aiaed at iaprovinc their finances and profitability. A recent
directive free the "Chan cha Hapindusi.“ the country's only political party.
spoke of an "intense fight against corruption.“ Even adainistrative decen-
tralization. one of the key points of the declaration of Arusha. is now being:
disparaged: it is being accused of proaoting sore bureaucracy.

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A reversal has begun. It has taken the fora of a rapid “docollectivisation.”
Of the 8.000 ”uJanaa" villages only two are still of the totally coamunal
tYPeI one of these is the pilot “ujaaaa” of Hwendapole. about loo km from
Dar es Salaam. hereov‘er, this change is identical to that experiencednon a
more modest scale--by neighboring Mozambique. to that now being experienced
by Angola and to that which perhaps. tomorrow. will be experienced by China.
However. these readjustments should not give one the idea that Nyerero has
supposedly had a sudden change of viewpoint or policy. Foreign investors are
undoubtedly better received at the present tine than previously. but nothing
basic in the socialism of Arusha has been altered: neither its internal de-
mocracy nor the constant criticism of positions taken.

Pragmatism

Sinply stated. it must not be forgotten that one of the fundamentals of
Nyersre's thinking is praguaties. Tanzania's Hestern admirers will perhaps
mash their teeth to some extent. The "awalimu" does not care. the Heat is
of little interest to his and his headache is sufficient.

However. the Heat is very much interested in Julius Nyerere. This is true to
the extent that his country is one of those which international financial or-

nisations aid the most: in 1978 this aid came to about $20 (“.500 CPA
African Financial Conunitﬂ francs) per capita. To be sure. the socialist
bloc and especially China. which built the famous Tasara railroad. are also
providing for the Tanzanian needs. but to a lesser extent.

However. for the Western institutions the Tanzanian case is soaewhat grati-
fying: contrary to what is happening elsewhere, no attempt is being ads .to
control the use of the funds. as it is taken for granted that they will not
be diverted or wasted.

Anti thesis

To this confidence, often exaggerated. it must be said, is sometimes added

a veritable fascination: for everything which Europe and the United States
value in the fields of agronomy. sociology and African history. Dar es Salaam
has become a sort of hecca where one comes to take the pulse of an African
socialise without pretense. Many subjective factors play a role in this re-
lation: the fact that Nyerere is a fervent and practicing Catholic, the fact
that his condemnation of capitalise and the neocolonial systea is founded.
above all else. on moral grounds ('Capitalisn.“ he wrote in 1962. ”is. sore
than anything else. an attitude of ninth”). and the fact that the declaration
of Arusha associated a whole series of subjects with the attribute of honor
in circles of the Uestern liberal Left (self-aanagement. self-sufficiency.
agrarian reforms and the like). This noticeable iaage is particularly im-
pressionable among members of the British Labor Party for when Nyerere is

the precise antithesis of Idi Amin: on the one hand. the exeaplary legacy
of the colonial era and. on the other. the shameful descendant.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

nod and the Devil. hereover. Nyemre is not nilitantly and violently anti-
Hostern: his very practical sense of efficacy does not lead his to highflown
diatribes at the rostrus of international organisations.

Respect

For example. he has never concealed his support for the Anglo-American settle-
sent plan for Rhodesia and. in the eyes of sany Western intellectuals. his
nonalinesent sakes his the last representative of the genuine Third world.

Paradoxically. Nycrere is less known in Africa than in the Western world. Not
fascination for the sun but. rather. a sort of respect. Respect for one who
has succeeded in instilling in his people a single African language: Swahili:
respect for this sodern loader still close to the traditional isage of the
chief. wise. deep-rooted and affable and whose power rests such some on col-
lective opinion than on force. Respect. also. for this country which is at-
tespting to plow socialiss as one plows a furrow. a practical and austere so-
cialiss. not a socialiss confined to books.

Nyercre is not speaking to the outside world: he is not proposing any univer-
sal theory and has never tried to begin a dialog with the Vest on this level.
This militant nationaliss. this socialise of lasting quality is a discreet
process. To be known these days when one is a statessan. one sust. first of
all. "engage“ in foreign politics. Nyerere is not a showy individual. but
that has never prevented his free living up to his responsibilities: fros the
East to the Center. passing via South Africa. sany of the continent‘s libera-
tion sovesente have begun their operations fros Tanzania. Nyercre is not one
to arouse passional reactions. Moreover. he does not want to do so. But.
nevertheless. for Africans he resains a head of state who is sosewhat differ-
ent iron the otters. if only for the fact that his regime is one of the rare
regises in Africa in which corruption and ostentatious wealth are not the
principal characteristic of daily living: luxurious autosobiles. such as the
inevitable Mercedes. are not allowed to be isported into Tanzania.

Prior to the risks of his Ugandan offensive. the ”swalisu" had used the force
of arss only once. In January 196“. a silitary rebellion by young officers
supported by the unions drove Nyerere fros his capital. A few days later. he
returned to Dares-Salsas thanks to the interventton of British troops.

higraine

Nowadays. when he resiniscee in the presence of visitors. he always recalls
those somber tises with bitterness. This latest cosbat against the Kampala
"dictator." this "purification task“ conducted by the austere Nyerere is un-
doubtedly not. even if he considers it necessary. for the purpose of firing
his with enthusiasm. The socialist sigraine of the Dar es Salsas schoolteacher
thus feeds itself on these sesories: how such servitude is necessary to
achieve freedos?

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Biq Daddy's' Last Round
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French ? Har 79 pp 25-2?
ﬂrticle by Francisco Veraarg

[Tag How has Idi Anin kept himself in power up to now? Is it only owing'
to an army which terrorizes a people hostile to the aarshal-president? That
is the most widespread answer and true to a great extent. But that is not
the only factor. Despite his extortions. Idi Main has acquired (genuine popu-

larity in certain strata of the population. and one cannot say that he repre-
sents absolute evil in the eyes of the 12 million Ugandans.

The problems of Uganda. potentially East Africa's richest country, did not
begin with Idi Amin.

It is his predecessor. Hilton Obote, who introduced violence into political
life. Following a dispute with Parlielnen. :n 1966. he suspended the Consti-

tution and had those who were opposing his arrested. five of when were ain-
isters in his own (governnent.

It was he also who ordered the army to occupy the palace of the ”Kubaku." the
Bugandan king who was standing. up to him. The monarch was very popular. and
the aanner in which Obote evicted his brought on a crisis resulting in the
coup d'etat of 25 January 1971 and the assunption of power by Idi Min.

Opposition parties were forbidden under Obote's reign. The any was composed
more than 50 percent of two Nile ethnic groups from the North. the Langis and
the Acholis, who represented 10 percent of the population. Hilton Obote had
been the target of several assassination attempts. he was even wounded at
the end of 1969.

The Savior

In 1971 Idi Main was welcomed as a savior. The Asiatic tradespeople who were
frightened by Hilton Obote'e nationalization plans. the Begandas who were
dreaninp of a restoration of the monarchy and the British and Israelis were
Jubilant. Only the Soviets considered that it was an ”imperialist operation."

Everyone was mistaken. Obote’s distrust in regard to London and Tel Aviv gave
way to a militant hostility. and the timid measures relative to the Asiatics
and traditional chiefs were replaced by a brutal defeat. Very quickly Idi
Aaiu upset Uganda's ethnic. religious and social balances.

He launched a recruiting campaign to bolster the any. which nunbered 6.000
son in 1971. Lanai and Acholi soldiers were completely eliainated. The am
increased to 12,000 men. Privates rapidly replaced the officers who had been
disaissed. The new president gave special privileges to the original soldiers
of the ilestern Nile and to Hoslems.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. this replaceaent of an elite group by another group contained
a certain saonmt of rebalancing. The country was divided into 10 new regions
which were no lonper based on ethnic strains. In 1971 Swahili. which does

not helonr, to any particular ethnic group. was proclaiaed the national lan-
«ease.

Anin tried to eliminate the traditional chiefs. In 197‘) their position becaae
elective. In places where former leading citizens were reelected. Aain ap-
pointed nenbers of the military to replace then. lie developed a policy of
direct contact with the “older inhabitants.“ thus ivy-passing the traditional
chiefs. liis provincial tours were very popular. '

Decisions which caused indignation abroad toward Aain were welcoaed with re-
lief in Uganda itself. This was the case. for exasple. with the expulsion of
the Asiatics. who were a privileged ainority. Better educated and wealthier.
they had refused to six with the Ugandan people. The narshal's attitude
toward then nade hia appear as a courageous leader in Uganda. Nevertheless.
it had disastrous consequences for the econoay.

Production Declining

The absence of skilled labor affected textiles. the sugar industry and trans-
portation. Exports decreased considerably. The drop in production anounted
to 10 percent for coffee. 50 for cotton. ‘32 for tea and 6‘! for sugar. The
result was a serious deterioration in the livinn, conditions of the urban pop-
ulation and especially of the Hesternized Christian elite who Joined the
tennis and Acholis in offering opposition.

The property of the Asiatics was distributed seem; the healer: ailitary. which
increased the bitterness of the vast anority of citisena. The repression of
all these groups was brutal.

In the country. alone, the traditional peasantry. who account for 90 mrcent
of the population. the situation was different. Although the cotton. coffee
and super-cane crops lost ground. that of foodstuffs developed. Between 1971
and 197? the production of com increased 216 percent. that of rice 212 per-
cent and that of potatoes 320 percent.

According to the .3 Scenoaic Coasission for Africa: "Food production has been
sufficient in general" due particularly to ”the importance given to food crops."

Reduction in Incoee

An increase in food production per capita is an exceptional phenomnor. in
Africa. Moreover. in the case of coffee. although the velum of exports de-
creared. the unit export price advanced: free 1975 to 1977 it was aultiplied
‘8 and 1/7 tines. As a result. and owing to a sudden drop in iaports. Uganda's
trade balance reasined largely on the surplus side free 1971 to 1977. The
for-elm debt decreased.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 19?" the oituetion chenmd. The drop in the urkot price of coffee nduced
l'mnde'n export incom by half. The year 107') nhould he still more difficuit.
The prenident for life has had to reduce hio nny'e privileges. During the
last few ueelm there have been more of considerable delays in the ooldicm'
my. rerhepn it in this situation which decided Idi Alin's opponents to
launch their offensive. an offensive whom obJectivo is not: very clear: to
drive ”Bin, buddy” fron hie Ugandan kingdom

COPYRIGHT: Jenna Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

9,568
6801 MOO

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER 1mm mums

DISPUTE!) mam 1mmvmrou I] OLE
Pnris JME “31005 in French 7 Feb 79 p 65

{Textj Bid 00.0 units of the Zeirien em actuelly intervene on'Seturdey,
0 January, to restore order in Bengui during the violent denonstretions
that shook the cepital?

There ere two conflicting theses. Punch goverment sources essert, without
being willing to neks e public ststenent, thet the intervention did actuelly
take place; e high Centrel ifricen officiel, and travelers arriving hoe
Bengui, are entirely of the sane opinion. But seen fron Africs, things
appear different. Our special correspondent Siradiou Diello, in Zsire in
person, picked up items that cell the intervention thesis in question egein.

Thus, eccording to the high Gentrel ifricen officiel lentioned shove, “the

reguler em, stetioned in the capitel, wes quickly sweeped by the young
deeonstretors on Bogende evenus, in front of the edeinistrstion building,
housing severel Iinistries, including those of lationel Education end
Higher Bducetion. Thet is when hperor Bohesse celled out his Preetorien
guard, stetioned in the Palace of Berengo; it fired upon the crowd of
high school end college students, killing and wounding severel.‘

Clsshes ere then supposed to heve occurred between the sepsror's personel
guerd and soldiers of the Central African em, sickened by the repression
of school children. Iotified of this situetion, Bokesse is reported to
heve decided to confine the em st Bangui to the Kesei ceep, end sppeal to
French troops (which is cetegoricelly denied in Trench officiel circles).

According to this report, Bokesss is then supposed to heve epproeched Zeire.

In Kinshese, an entirely different version of the fects is given. The con-
fusion is seid to heve erisen heceuse of the presence st Bengui sirport of
two Hercules c IJO-typs eircreft belonging to the Zeirien eir force. They

are supposed to heve lended during the efternoon of Pridey, I9 Pebruery.
The first wss returning froe the United States, where it hed been fitted with

t

10

FOR omcilu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special equipment. It received the order from Gen Kikunda ubaia. chief of
the Zairinn air force general staff, to change direction after a stop at
Dakar, and aake a refueuina stop before nesting, at Genoa, in the north
of hire, President chutu, who happened to be there because of a family
bereaveeent. is for the second aircraft, it had on board soee venen bring-
ing to Genena various objects needed for the funeral ceremony. In Zairian
circles, it is thought not inpossible that the authorities at Bangui any
have used the chance presence of these two military aircraft to scare the
denonstratcrs.

009mm“?! Jeane Afrique. MUPJIA 1979

1211.9
080: M00

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

DEVELOPMENT OF BLACK AFRICAN HARXISM, LENINISH TRACED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French 5 Feb 79 pp 50-52
[Article by Jean Copana: "Africa and Marx"]

[Text] Latent Europeocentrisa and New Tasks for African Marxists The
dominant ideologies of the Western world attack. criticize or manipulate
Marxian according to the relationship of the political forces at the so-
aent. Bad faith say follow (apparent) benevolence. Thus we see the re-
cent university consecration of Marxian in Europe. or even in the United
States. These consecrations are nevertheless nest often poisoned gifts.
which result in the destruction or subtle weakening of the revolutionary
charge and of the criticise of the established order. which is at the base
of the theory developed b/ Marx. Engels and basin.

Having said that. there still remain blanks. silences in the theory of
Marx. which have per-itted doubts to arise as to the universal value of

its concepts and of its point of view. That is the situation in Black
Africa. The relative weakness of the theoretical Marxist analysis produced
in Africa and by Africans certainly has historical causes. which go back
essentially to the vision spread by the dog-atlas of Stalin. to the in-
existence of a real Internationale after World War II and to the opportunis-
tic and cheuvinistci colonial politics of the European Conuniats. After-
wards. the renewal of Marxists (toward the end of the 1950's) often took

on sophisticated forsa. transforming the confrontation of ideas into a
theological debate (each faction against the other) or an "archeologieal"
one (the rereading of the texts of only the founders). In short. Mantis-
has often remained bookish and ouch inortance has often been given re-
aarks made in very specific circumstances. even conceptions outdated by
historical evolution and by the knowledge of various social fonations.

Unfortunately. this Uestem practice of theoretical development has had
repercussions at the level of forms of the assinllation of Marxis- by
African intellectuals. ‘he approach consisting of an African reappropria-
tion which would be. at the sane tine. a specific creation has not really
taken place. One of the resons for the "delay" (which also concerns the
western powers. who have to analyse Africa from this theoretical perspec-
tive) cones fro- the relationship of Marx to Africa and the way he took
(or continued) the analysis by Ilegel.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This rereading. which is concrete. political (with respect to the struggles
of the African masses and not Buropean struggles. historically dated),
is indispensable and it is entirely to the credit of the Senegalese econo-

mist and philosopher Amady Ali Dieng for demonstrating this to us in his
recent collection of articles.1

But let him speak for himself. for the clarity of his study is undeniable:

"Marx chose to be interested essentially in the capitalist method of pro-
duction, which, conceived and developed in Western Europe, has created the
material and social conditions for the passage to a higher regime: com-
munism. In these conditions. countries which have not known the develop-
ment of internal capitalism, and on a large scale. could only occupy a
marginal place in his work. The countries located in Africa. Asia. America
and Oceania have only been studied as a function of the development of
Western capitalism.

"Marx and Engels had not completely broken with the Hegel of "Lessons from
the Philosophy of history"2 on the problem of Asia. They were able to
escape. thanks to the experiences of social struggles in Europe, and par-
ticularly in England. in France and in Germany. from German ideology and
particularly from the ideas of Hegel. But they did not live through the
social struggles in the countries of Africa. Asia and Indian America and
thus become able to test seriousl the ideas which were current in the cul-
tivated circles of their period."

Dieng in fact deals with two different subjects:
--the knowledge and the place of Africa in the work of Marx;

--the major problems of contemporary Africa, which present a challenge to
logical Marxist analysis.

Just as the two preceding quotations suggest. Dieng refuses both the
fetishism of Marx (a theory perfected and closed once and for all) and

the trap of African chauvinism (which would justify itself through a de-
magogic anti-Europeocentrisso. The honesty and effectiveness of this analy-
sis leads to a new political psychology. Dieng invites his comrades to an
intellectual adventure: the Marxist tradition as it exists is not up to
the level of the historical requirements of the present development of
African societies.

The only way for Marxism to become a truly universal doctrine is to show
that the analysis of the social and historical formations of Africa can be
made on the basis of the principles of dialectical materialism. This posi-
tion is not as obvious as it seems because many African Marxists (French-
speaking) "have been influenced by the ideology of the French Communist
Party. which has not always had a correct attitude on the problems of the
independence. the culture and the languages of Black Africa.“‘

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mot Infsllible

It is too bad. perhaps. that in his analysis of the relationship of Marxism
to Africa, Dieng restricted himself to the description of the works of

Marx and Engels and of their non-rupture (unconscious) with Megel. The
influence of Lenin. of the Bolahevik thinkers of the Third International.
the dogmatism of Stalin. the theories of Mao on classes in the colonial
countries are merely new sedimentary layers placed on top of the involuntary
Europeocentrism of Marx. And when we assess African Marxism. it is cer-
tain that the political constraints have played a greater role than the
response of Marx to Megel.

Nevertheless. it must be said that Marx. Just an any revolutionary thinker.
is neither totally competent nor infallible and that the point of departure
of the analysis comes from the place given specific class struggles.

This timidity on the part of Dieng is even more noticeable in the second
part. because he is content to criticize a certain number of works. without
making a thoughtful. personal argument. Taking up first the nature of
civilizations. he goes on to a reevaluation in glowing terms of the his-
torical work of Sheik Anta Diop.6 I confess that I do not entirely share
this point of view. but Dieng rightly points out the revolutionary quality
of the affirmation of Black civilizations in the face of a "profoundly
Jacobean" Marxism. Dieng then examines the realities of negritude and of
African philosophy. he agrees with or anticipates Mountondji on numerous
points and explains that one must separate oneself "from those African
intellectuals who strongly decry cultural qtaimilation. but who are the
moat consciously assimilated. what we reject is the nsivete with which
certain African intellectuals. who consider themselves as the csstaways

of civilization. hang on to any life-buoy. held out by any expert in negro-

logy."

After the philosophers. it is the mathematicians and sociologists (in par-
ticulsr Msjhmout Diop) who attract his attention. Me wonders why Senegalese
mathematicians have never become interested in the cowuting methods and
mathmatical thought of the various local populations. instead of singing

the praises of pure and basic mathematics. As for the works of Diop.7 they
are both empirical and dogmatic and do not bring to bear a truly Marxist
analysis on the history of classes in Senegal.

1 would like to emphasize. in conclusion. one or two parenthetical comments
by Dieng concerning the non-use and silence on African languages. The
problem is complex and the banal generalities. for or against a single na-
tional language. often a foreign one. do not fundamentally solve anything.
But the fact that all the philosophic. scientific. literary work is written
in a foreign language is scandalous. Because. if we wish to speak to the
masses. to put theory and practice together. we must transmit through
writing (which poses the problem of the transcription of African languages)

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or orally (the new audio-visual methods can certainly be useful in this
regard) this new critical thought. To quote Dieng: "The young African
philosophers and scientists have before then the task of expressing then-
selves, of forging scientific and philosophical concepts in the languages
of their countries. It is in this way that they will better be able to
express the concerns of our peoples."

In spite of the uneven quality of this book, the contribution of Dieng

is extremely valuable. his modesty, compared to the outbursts of an Adotevi
or the subtlety of a ﬂountondji, is all the more effective. To denounce

the consequences of the Burepeocentriatic interpretation of Marxian on
African thought was indispensable. To point out a few landmarks for the
building of an authentic Marxian by Africans is more than useful.

We regret, certainly. the absence of a full-fledged program for the areas
to be explored. concepts to be constructed, actions to be taken. But.

first of all, the psychology must be changed, even the reflexes of the in-
tellectual African. and there will never be too many studies of this sort,

"to find ourselves in the apparent chaos contained in the history of our
countries."

Bxamlea of courage and intellectual honesty are such too rare in today's
Africa to fail to bring attention to then and encourage then.

FOOTNOTES

1. "ﬂegel, Marx and Engels and the Probless of Black Africa," San Kare,
'Cabrel-Panen' collection, Dakar, 1978.

2. Here is how the greatest German philosopher spoke of Black Africa:
"It is the country of gold, turned inward toward itself, the country
of childhood, which beyond conscious history is enveloped in the dark-

ness of night. The Negro represents natural nan in all his barbarity
and his absence of discipline."

3. And Dieng concludes: "Europeocentrian is not dead: it threatens the
creative development of Marxian. The Marxists of the non-European
countries must read the works of Marx and Engels using their sethods
of reading."

0. Let us point out on this point the excellent and well-documented book

of G. Madjarian: "The Colonial Question and the Policy of the PCP
(l96b-l967)", P. Maspero, 1977.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Dieng is the author of several original studies (on the social classes
and the slave system of production in the csttle trade in Senegal. etc.)

6. "Negro Nations and Cultures" (1956), "Anteriority of Negro Civilian-
tions" (1967), etc.

7. "The llistory of the Social Classes in West Africa: Seneasl," P. Haspero,
1972.

COPYRIGHT: Jeuns Afrique GRUNIA 1979

3‘, n,

8956
cso: 6600

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAI RS

SHISS DIPLOMATIC INTEREST IN AFRICA
Paris JBURE AFRIQUB in French 16 Feb 79 p 36
[Article by Francoise hubscher: "An Unusual Swiss"]

[Text] For the first time. a chief of the Swiss diplo-
matic service has set foot on Black African soil.

Until now. all Africans knew of the Swiss were its businessmen and its
foreign aid personnel. "The Red Crow and the strong-box" were all they
wished to be known for. Is this image going to change sf ter the visit
which took place from 1!. to 28 January by the federal counselor for Foreign
Affairs. Pierre Aubert. to five countries: Nigeria. Cameroon. Upper Volta,
Ivory Coast and Senegal?

This is the first time in Swiss history that the head of the diplomatic
service, upsetting just a little the stay-at-hone habits of his cowa-

triots, has set foot on African soil. "Switzerland." Pierre Aubert er.-
plained during his stay in Ouagadougou, "has never possessed colonies.

we can therefore offer Africans conletely disinterested aid, technical
or financial cooperation."

Just the same. one can point out in Africa the very small share of the
Swiss national product (barely 0.2 percent) which is devoted to aid for
development in the Third world. "The Swiss are rich, but Switzerland is
poor." answers Pierre Aubert. "The annual budgetary deficit of the Con-
federation is on the order of 1.5 billion Swiss francs (3.75 billion French

francs) ."

Did the explanations of the Swiss chief diplomat. who was pleased with the
friendly reception he was given everywhere, convince anyone? In any case.
Swiss industrialists certainly intend to profit from this trip, in their
own way. They hope that after the trip of the federal counselor to Lagos,
the stock of watches which were ordered and then blocked at the frontier.
since the higerian government decided to iapose quotes on its imports. will
finally be delivered (watch sales amount to more than 50 million Swiss
francs per year).

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Active Neutrality

1hey are also counting on the visit of Pierre Aubert to help then invest
more easily in Caleroon and especially in the Ivory Coast. where they are
already in second place, just behind France. with 5 percent of the capital
of Ivorian industry. But they seem to lies the old days when Swiss foreign
affairs were their private donain. They are especially afraid that the
"active neutrality" called for by their ninister will result in interfering
with the good relations they have with South Africa.

OOPYRIORT: Jeune Afriqus GRUPJIA 1979

8956
680: M00

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cnmm. AFRICAN WIRE

mos mum to mssocnn mm non sonsstt
Perie am “RIO!!! in French 7 [eh 79 pp 611,65
[Article by Jenn-Marc Zaidi: “Is the Crown Going to hll?‘ J

[Text] hperor Bokesse has had sane trouble because of
the 20 January riots. But he has not lost power over it.

Does the explosion on 20 end 21 Jenuery 1979, which revealed the deep dis-
contentment of a portion of the Central African population, endanger
neperor Bokasse I's regine?

Are changes to be expected at the heed of the state, or at least, a weeken-
ing of the government? The alarm has been a sharp one, and the authorities
in Bangui are not mininising the seriousness of the events that bloodied
the capital. 0n Fridey, 26 January, one week after the duonetrations, the
creeticn was announced of a “national co-ittee' charged with paying civil
servantv salaries and student grants. ll'his neesure, which incidentally
confirns intonation according to which no salaries have been paid for
several nonths, shows that the governnent is seeking pecifioetion. Other
decisions should follow, with the same goal. That does not of itself assure
that all discontentnent will cone to an end. But if the recovery of control
by the forces of order had not sufficed, the risks of new riots would have
to he renoved. With cal- restored, there is no indication that Bokassa's
throne is seriously threatened.

Spontaneity

The events of 20 end 21 January showed that the leans of repression avail-
able to the government functioned with a certain 'efficiency.‘ Taking into
account news items reporting clashes between Central African soldiers of

the regular am end elements of Boksssa's personal guard (see inset), the
emperor should however be concerned about it. The spontaneous nature of the
demonstration also favors Bokassa, since it is a sign that there exists no
orgenized opposition.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A short-lived parliamentary opposition, the Central African Democratic
Evolution hove-out, led by Abel Couaba, was banned in 1960, after elections
in which it won 20 percent of the vote.

Since hie accession to power at the tins of the 1 January 1966 coup d‘etet,
Bokassa hee successively eliminated all those who could represent a potené
tial danger to hinself, starting with his two inconvenient deputies,

Col Alexandre Dance and Captain Halendoaie, with when he overthrew President
Decko. The latter is now an inperial adviser; seas people wonder if he
night not regain power some day. It is not very likely. His presidency,
which did not leave the best of neaories behind it, and his close associa-
tion with the present regine, seen to rule it out. He should also add that
even though he has no adversaries of any stature, the awperor has little
trouble waking up the teens which back hi- up in power.

Despite the successive sliainations which give political life its rhyme,
there are always son who will accept, often with little conviction, sinis-
tcrial responsibilities. Including sole anong foner militants of the
Iationel Union of Central African Students (m), an organisation inbued
with ideological currents, usually leaning toward the left. Once they are
in power, they can do nothing. The slightest hint of opposition on the part
of a minister provokes thunderbolts fro. Bokasea, whose touchy euthoritarisn-
ion and impulsive reactions are well known.

These reactions by the emperor, “haunted by the idea of seeing a potential
rival appenr,’| his son, Prince George, told us, have also affected his
relations with France. Under the presidency of Georges Poapddou, notably,
Bckassa frequently accused the French services of plotting against hin.

He showed his ill huaor by fostering relations with eastern countries (the
Soviet Union, Ronnie) or by expelling french cooperators. The uperor
used to go back on his 'inpulsive aoves' later, as he did on his adherence
to “scientific socialis' or his short-lived conversion to Isles on

20 October 1976 after a visit to Tripoli.

Despite the estrang-snte, Paris, which can be counted on for financial aid ,
continues to be Bangui's privileged partner. With Valery Ciscard d'sstaing,
relations see- to have improved aarkedly. France cannot dissociate itself
from the empire, firstly because of its uraniu, but also because of its
location, between Chad in the lorth, which is still causing concern, and
Zaire in the South, which is not yet on the road to recovery. Bokassa knows,
noreover, how to play upon this aspect of things, by letting it be understood
that he could find other allies. Did he not send an emissary to Colonel
Qadhafi on 2!: January? with no serious rival on the horizon, Bohessa can
still count on France's support. That is probably his best trap-card. The
financial aid he so Inch needed see-s to have been granted. According to
Prise Minister Maiden, who aade an official visit to trance and Belgim at

the end of January, the talks were positive. The success of this aiseion
will not prevent, in the good old Bangui tradition, a big ministerial shuffle,

20

YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

probably in Februu-y. um: | new tan in charge or current Arturo, the
super» will In nblo to go back to his palace ut Box-once and forgot. the
unploucntnoous on 20 And 21 Jimmy.

COPIRIOHT: Janna Arriquo. GBUPJIA 1979

121h9
030: M00

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

POSSIBILITIES 0F NATION'S SURVIVAL DISCUSSED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 16 Feb 79 pp 1033-636
[Article by Jacques Lstremoliere: "Chad’s Survivsl end its Future"l

[Text] The political tension which had been hatching for several weeks
in Ndjemene ended by degenerating into an open confrontation between the
men of Prime Minister Hebre Hissein (Armed Forces of the Rorth. or PAN.
numbering over 1.000 troops) and the Chad National Army (numbering about
11.000 men plus 3.000 gendermes cos-ended by Lieutenant Colonel Kamougue).

Quite severe street fighting broke out on 12 February. in the morning. in
the cspitsl of Guild. their outbresk seems to have been caused by the pro-
clsmation of n strike by secondary school students. After opening fire
on the national army soldiers. who returned it. ﬂebre Hissein's men at-
tscked and seized the radio building protected by gender-es who withdrew.
Lieutenant Colonel Ksmougue then mounted s counter ettack with the gen-
dsrmerie egsinst the residency of the prime minister. in Chngua. The
prime minister was either absent or is ssid to have fled on time. while

a Chsd squadron was flying over the city. whose pilots. certsin inforns-
tion notwithstsnding. were neither psrticipants in the French cooperative
program nor members of the French military.

In the morning of ll: Pebrusry the city of ﬂdjsmena appeared to have been
split in half. The Africsn districts were being held by the FAN while the
modern sdministrstive town by the national army forces.

In Hnbre Rissein's stronghold. in the northeastern part of the country.
the FAN have reportedly encircled the nationsl army garrison in Abeche.
and occupied the entire city of Biltine.

The French forces ststioned in Chsd have at no point intervened. They

would do so should the ssfety of the french be threatened. which was not
the case on 16 Februery.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The number of civilian victims in the capital is reported high. The
situation remains confusing and contacts with Ndjsmens difficult as a re-
sult of the destruction of the telecommunications station by ﬂabre His-
sein's supporters. The article which follows is an effort to describe the
Chadean political-economic development.

Two men were vying for power in Ndjamena. The ferment in the southern re-
gions was enhanced by fights and the distribution of pamphlets. The
French army is present in the capital and the main centers of the Sahelian
Zone. Aozou and the former bBT (Borgou-Ennedi-Tibeste) are in the hands

of the Libyans and the Goukouni. The Ouassi. Baths. Snlamat and Guerra are
crisscrossed by rival gangs which claim to belong to an organisation about
which no one knows whether it is centered in Tripoli or Algiers. in addi-
tion to the personal underground which Mr ﬂabre Hissein has developed in
the Biltine prefecture. There are patronages attributed or claimed to be
attributed to the protagonists in the dress: Col Qadhafi to Goukouni. that
of Gen Numayri. to Habre hissein. and that of Mr Senghor to Abba Siddick.
Press correspondents bet on their "winning horse" and reject all others.
One can see the difficulty experienced by French readers to find their way
and see through such troubles the future of a country which is presented
both as an artificial creation of colonialism and the key to the center of
Africa.

Is it a question of the final spasms of a dying corpse? Or else. converse-
ly. could the real Chad work through such upheavals. the nomad following
his ancestral Sourhal. the merchant exporting his cattle to Nigeria. the
peasant planting his cotton seeds and cultivating his plants. and harvest-
ing and selling his crops? In a word. will the Chad of underground forces
go through a sisple event such as that of the "majors" which leave on the
ground no more than shallow tracks which disappear with the first gush of
wind?

Yet. a federal system seems to correspond only imperfectly to the essential
features of the Chad. The two Chads. willingly discussed. the useful and
the other. the white and the black. the Noslem and the fetishist or Chris-
tian. are based on the morale of a fable. Hhereas the Southern chad was
administratively assimilated by the old colonial power. the northern Chad
remains a mosaic of Saharisn. Sudan. and Nilotic populations among which
move big bedouin tribes coming from the Arab Peninsula and some Bororo
Peuls.

The cement which keeps all this together is. unquestionably. the Islamic
legal tradition. however. it is above all. a certain sense of statehood.

a feeling of belonging to old political entities. Therefore. the restruc-
turing could be undertaken only from the bottom. That is perhaps what

Gen Halloum thinks about when he speaks of "an administrative and political
reorganization. redivided. and decentralized." In fact. he speaks of s
north-south federation. whose northern part would. itself. represent a
federation. unfortunately. this target would be difficult to achieve under
present circumstances.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Good and Bad Cards

It would be presumptious to suggest, in the wake of so eeny other. e eireele
prescription which would resolve the Chadean crisis. however. we could try
to set up a local scale of values which would enable us to identify in this
gene the worst cards.

The south rel-dine united and fire as it was in Gentil's tine. It is also
the only productive area in terns of a earhet econoey or. at least, a
controllable Isrhet econoey. It is clear that in no case would France
give its preference to the north at the expense of the south to the extent
to which it intends to help to ensure the political balance in Central
Africa.

Periodical information appearing in the press on the contenination of the
south by the northern rebellion is pure fantasy and proves. above ell. the
ignorance of those who disseninate it. The truth is the opposite. The
southern cities are the eerchant areas inhabited by lernou or Ilsousse
Hoslens some of when. in fact. have been effected by PROLINAT propaganda
and have triggered soee incidents such as the one in the course of which

a French nun was killed several Ionths ago in Hemdou. however. the popu-
lar excitement is a reaction to these facts and the recently distributed
tracts are a warning to the ”brothers free the north" who are reninded.
for the sake of calling then down, of the fire which destroyed their shops
in Houndou in Decenber 1971. The love-ent is spontaneous. The Ndjaeena
governnent hes been able so fer to suppress its violence. however. the
movement could also be "taken into consideration" should the north-south
rivalry becole acute in the capital. The naee of its supposed or probable
leader is already largely familiar.

The truaps of the northern resistance. whether operating up front or vege-
tsting in greater nediocrity in the distant bush. can only increase their
fighting spirit lacking as they are of a legitieacy rooted in a political
past. Such lilitancy is linked with the effectiveness of foreign support.
From this double viewpoint the iaportance of Couhouni. an offspring of the
Tibesti Derdei--who is not an esperor of the desert but. nevertheless. re-
eains an authentic chiefo-could not be underestieated assuaing that he
does not venture too far free his own grounds. Hr llabre hissein's clan-
destine forces are suitably armed. However. he profits nest fro. his
agree-ant with the chieftans of Tana end Zaggewa who use his forces to
chase the other gangs fro. their lands and who give hie legitieacy as he
protects then.

Born of the breakdown of an official authority. such clandestine forces.
in their totality. would be as fragile as that power if not supported by
or profiting from the coeplicity of the existing custonry tradition coe-
plicity. Since such support and comlicity could be withdrawn at will.
their influence could be determined only in terns of their stocks of
weapons and munitions. Therefore. at any tine they could find the-selves
in a position of inferiority should a rival gang affiliate itself with

a supporter considered eore generous and regular in his deliveries.

24
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Theen facta enable ue to underetand the difficultiea facing Gen Halloun in
the courae of hie iong aearch for a euitable partner with who to promote
the pacification of the north. a eearch which took hie from Khartun to
Shebha. Benghati. Tripoli. and Libreville. The aolution to which he fin-
ally reaigned hinaelf had the eaaentiel aerit of weakening the forcea of
hie opponent by rallying to the national cauae an energetic Ian believed
capable of underetanding that. cut off henceforth fron hie old friende.
hie eupport could be baaed only on achieving perfect hareony with the rep-
reeentativee of the eouth. Our aebaaaador in Ndjaaena. involved in thie
matter by virtue of French eilitary eupport to Chad. apent. it ia aaid.
hie norninga with Gen Halloue and hie afternoona with Mr hebre Hieeein.

The Libyan Proble-

Outaide the bordere we auat diatinguiah between the eupport which Col
Qadhafi givea Goukouni'a FnOLlNAT. hie own incuraiona on Chad territory.
and the international recouree which Chad could eventually uae againet
Libya. Support for Goukouni ia evident and the latter hee no intention
of denying it. while pointing out that he doea not approve of the eeieura
by hie protectore of the Aozou Strip (100 kiloaeter wide and 2.800 kilo-
natere long) and that. in the peat. there have been ahoot-oute between
then. epecifically at Ounchi. in 1976. True. thie waa at a time when he
had not yet broken with habre hieeein.

In fact. Libya haa eet up ita own aupply etoree on Chadean territory. at
Oumchi. Gouro. and Ain Calaka. The preeence of ita forcee in the Aotou
Strip ia juridically indefeneible. The old problce of the deaarcetion of
the Chadean-Libyan border and the heppenetencee which coeplicated it. baaed
on the hole egreemente of 7 January 1935. were. in fact. finally aattled
with the friendehip and good-neighborly Franco-Libyan treaty concluded in
Tripoli on 10 Auguet 1955. Article 3 of the document unqueationably vali-
datea the Knee agree-enta which are not included in the liat of valid
international acte on the border. attended to the treaty. "recognizing"
--the very word used in the text-the track of the bordere aa etipulated
in the French veraion.1

Following a violent parliamentary debate. ae the treaty called for aban-
doning our claine on Fettan. the 6 Dcccebcr 1956 law authorized the
preaident of the republic to ratify the treaty. The exchange of ratifica-
tion inetruenta took place on 20 February 1957. Becoeing independent.
Chad eubaequently proclaimed that the bordere inherited froa the coloniea-
tion period were to reeain untouchable. Thie poeition wae reiterated

with the Addie Abeba charter of 25 Hay 1963 which gave birth to the Organ-
ization of African unity (0A0). It wae reaeeerted even eore eephatically
and conciaely with the reaolution adopted in the courae of the conference
of heada of etatee held in Cairo between 17 end 21 July 197‘.

Therefore. it ia totally illegal for Libya to continue to occupy a part
of the territory. khe reaaon for which the Chadean governaent did not
preeent thie queetion to the OAU or the United Rationa Security council.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL US! ONLY

as Gen halloun intended to do at the end of 1977. was to preserve the
possibility. subsequently invalidated. of a reconciliation with Couhouni.
Actually. Libya does not even argue against Chad's rights. Having spread
the legend that President Tombalbaye had agreed to this occupation in the
course of his visit to Tripoli in June of l973--had such an agreement
existed the question is why is it not produced by Col Qadhafi-it is set-
isfied. in fact. with the silent occupation of the area.

The presence of precious minerals in this area has been cited to explain
the attitude. Interesting indications night have been found. However.
the nozou treasures are. sore likely. of the same legendary nature as the
Golcondinn. had they been extent. a joint exploitation would have led to
a conciliation between the interests of the two parties better than could
be accosplished with an interminable conflict. In fact. the presence of
these forces synbolizes the claim of the Jasahiriya to exert alone an in-
fluence in the traditiOn inherited from the Senoussis in this Central
African sector.

The legal aspect of the problem should be exploited. Asking an internation-
al ecurt to condemn Libya. based on the solidity of its case. the Chadean
government may not succeed in recovering what belongs to it. however. it
would force. something which would be of greater iaportance to it. the
various competing clandestine forces to adopt the type of position on a
national problem which. if negative. would net enhance their status in
the eyes of the population but which. if positive. would openly oppose
them to Libya. The sane choice would have to be made by their core or
less acknowledged protectors. All in all. the operation would lead to a
reconciliation within and outside the borders. to the establishment of a
specific coanon interest base. and the development of new support asking
this base sore solid.

teenomic Survival

Long before the rebellion broke out. Chad was characterised by the coexis-
tence of three different economies. it was based on the one erroneously
described as self-subsistence which. in fact. is self-subsistence in terms
of food without being miserable. It is familiar with the notion of trade.
with little cash changing hands. true. considering the value of the cap-
ital in terns of livestock. and involving anything related to the esthetic
aspect of existence governed by immutable values: Tea. sugar. arms. and
women's Jewelry. It has always been difficult to control. and the isola-
tion of the northern districts is less responsive than ever in this area
to the activities of an administration henceforth limited to administrative
centers.

Official statistics show fluctuations in the tonnage of food crops which
seem quite controversial: 850.000 tons of various cereal crops in 1970.
650.000 tons in 1975-1976. and 550,000 tons in 1976-1977. Actually.
there has been no famine in Chad and food gifts shipped by international
organizations have been substantially lesser compared with those received
by other Sshelian countries affected by the drought.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand. conceivably. the presence of rival gangs in the northern
plains discourages the population from engaging in farm work. fearing
pillage and the extraction of booty. It would unquestionably be an exag-
geration to depict the Volcan. Bsglany. or the Third Army Clandestine
forces as models of integrity. however. there in general testimony to the
effect that they are not short of money and pay for the food they requisi-
tion. This tends to prove that such food exists. that the rebellion is
financially supported from the outside (not by Libya alone). and. finally.
that the clandestine forces are aware of the severe disagree-ants they
would be exposed to in terms of the environment in which they must operate.
which is not exactly their own. should they behave like regular soldiers.

The next level is that of a sarket economy covering an extensive geographic
area. for it is related to two adjacent countries. Exclusively African.
from the seller to the intermediary and to the purchaser. using secret
channels to avoid customs. avoiding all conversion to cash inside borders.
the smuggling of cattle to nigerie is equally difficult to assess. It is
estimated as reaching annually 200.000 head of cattle. whereas the offi-
cial slaughterhouses in Parcha handle 6.500 tons. or approximately 50.000
head. therefore. slightly over one-third of the amounts exported as frozen
meat. Dried fish caught by the fishermen of Logone. Cheri. and the lower
Sslamst is exported under comparable conditions to Cameroon and Nigeria in
substantial quantities yet even more difficult to assess.

Finally. drawing the factual balance of Chad. we should not ignore the
importance of "invisible income" brought through the wages of the Ouaddaisn
Chekalln thousands of which have migrated to the plantations of Sudan's
Gezireh. This is a population migration which the insecurity prevailing
along Chad's border areas has naturally only increased.

There is a third level. that of a modern type market economy. It is based
on cotton and. henceforth. other products such as oil (from cotton or pea-
nuts). beer. wheat and. unquestionably. tomorrow. petroleum. Chad's "writ-
ten “ economy acknowledges exclusively this output. hence its apparent
weakness in terms of a population numbering. in theory. four million
people. This is the only economy which feeds the state budget. 55 percent
of whose revenue comes from customs fees. the balance coming from industry
or trade taxes or indirect taxation. By virtue of the prevailing circum-
stances. the personal income tax which could have provided us with valuable
information on the factual taxation power of the Chadesns. plays an infin-
itesimal role. Due to the lack of an up-to-date census. its distorted es-

timate could only represent a reason for additional trouble in areas unaf-
fected by the rebellion.

unless considered exclusively in terms of the recorded economic figures.
the sum total of the official gross national product would be 100 billion
CPA. or approximately 25.000 CPA per capita. Such figures would provide
insufficient estimates concerning self-subsistence and the movement of un-
controlled goods. Unquestionsbly. it is here that we should look for an

explanation for the astounding resistance of the population to current ad-
versity. 27

ion OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cotton

As the base of this "recorded" econony. cotton would account for about

7 billion CFA (50 CPA francs per kilo for white cotton. or 90 percent of

the crop. and 25 CPA francs for yellow cotton) for 1978-1979. In terms

of value. it accounts for 75 percent of exports and for 10 percent of the
internal state budget revenue. The fund for the Stabilization of Cotton
Prices and the Coton-Tchad nixed economy company are the only Chadean source
for economic investments.

The National Office for Rural Development (anon) is in charge of organising
the cotton growing population. Coton-Tchad is in charge of the picking.
ginning. and selling the crop with the help of capital and technical aid
supplied by the Compagnie francaise pour le developpement des fibres tex-
tiles (CFUT).

This is an unquestionable technical success. which deserves even more
credit considering that the cotton crops have had to surmount the handicap
created saong the peasants by the authoritarian methods used to ensure
their development preceding and immediately after world War Two. This
success also contains an important moral element. having proved that the
Chadean farmer could improve.

This is eloquently confirmed by a few figures. The marketed output, to
begin with. rose from 46.800 tons of cotton seed in l961--a tonnage whose
low level experienced the fluctuation triggered by the departure of the
colonial authorities--to 165.000 tons in 1978-1979 (estimate). with peak
production of 158.000 tons in 1968-1969. and 174.000 tons in 1975-1976.
Yields have equally shown an encouraging progression: From 150 kilograms
per hectare in 1961-1962 to 510 for the last crop. The area cultivated
with draft animals or mechanized facilities rose free 115.000 hectares in
1971-1972 to 195.000 hectares in 1977-1978; areas on which fertilizers were
used rose from 3.695 hectares in 1961-1962 to 120,200 hectares in 1977-1978.
At the same time. the use of insecticides rose from 280.000 to 1.126.000
liters. Finally. ginning yields rose from 36 percent in 1961-1962 to

61.6 percent today.

was this technical success accompanied by a financial success? Unfortunate-
ly. cotton has remained a speculative crop whose rate experiences substan-
tial fluctuations specifically in function of the American output and

world consumption. The use of fertilizers and insecticides for productive
crops is profitable only if it is converted. in terms of gross yields. in-
to "traditional" crops through an additional increase in output whose

sale price should be higher than the purchase price of the products used.
Overall. this ratio has remained positive.

Over the past few years the converse development of goods. rising. and of
staples. declining. has. nevertheless. greatly lowered the profit from
Chadean cotton. Predictions for 1979 global consumption are more favorable

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

compared with 1978 by about one million bales. however. this advantage
is hindered by a better global crop compared with last year’s end the
existence of a higher stockpile compared with 1978. At worst. we could
conceive. if not of the risk that the profit from cotton crops would be
eliminated. of the necessity to abandon the use of fertilisers and in-
secticides. This would lower tonnages and. consequently. the farmers‘
income. unless they expand cultivated areas to compensate for this de-
cline. which seems difficult.

Let us ad to cotton growing the establishment of the Noundou-Koumra Cotton
Extraction Complex. which opened in April of l978. At the conclusion of
the 1977-1978 campaign it had produced 2.6 million liters of unrefined

oil or 2.4 million liters of refined oil. 60 percent of which was exported.

Other Agricultural and Industrial Activities

Rural development accounts for the majority of foreign aid. the only
source. together with the Fund for the Stabilization of Cotton Price. for
public investments. The South Chad Agricultural Development Project.
jointly financed by this fund. the PAC [Aid and Cooperation Fund] and the
EDP. covers 280.000 projects and has four objectives: Production diversi-
fication. yield improvements. soil protection. and socio-professionely
action in peasant areas.

The development of the lake polders is assisted by the PAC. the World

Bank. "SAID. and the PAD (African Development Fund). Agricultural water
projects involving canals. collectors. and drainage and irrigation stations.
are based on the establishment of family units of about one hectare each.
Two poldere totaling 1.200 hectares on which wheat and cotton are grown
are already in operation.

Along with the United Nations development program. the USAID. and the
Commission for the Basin of Lake Chad. the PAC is engaged in a long-term
and multinational operation, for it involves Cameroun and Nigeria as well.
in promoting livestock breeding. it applies to 200.000 breeders and
300.000 head of cattle for the three countries. its purpose is to develop
the best poasible sanitary infrastructure. a more satisfactory management
of cattle drives. a more efficient exploitation of the cattle. and a more
developed form of farming and livestock breeding combination.

The Societe nationale sucriere du Tchad (Sonesut) developed. through the
initiative of a French private group and in association with the state.

an agroindustrial complex whose first section spreads over 1.500 hectares.
its facilities were opened in Sahr in March 1978. This is an extremely
fast implementation of the project. the agreement protocol having been

signed in 1977.
in the infrastructural area. following the repairs and expansion of the

Ndjamena Airport in 1976 and the various projects for the straightening
and study of roads. a major project is underway: The Houndou-Guidjibs

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Axis (304 kilometers. 116 in Chad) totaling 17.1 billion CPA. jointly
financed by the world Bank. the FED. the Saudien funds. the African Devoi-
opeent Bank. and the Bank for the Develop-ant of Central African States.
The financing of another project'covering the Bangor-Lei Axis (198 kilo-
neters). estimated at 1.9 billion CPA. is currently underway.

Pinally. let us point out that the satisfactory start of a tobacco indus-
try (16 million packs in 1978). the Houndou Brewery (1&0.000 hectoliters).
the building of a new rice-hailing plant in Lai and. finally. the building
of a small refinery which will be linked through a pipeline to the Kane-
0il Deposit. The installations will becoue operational in 1981. with a
150.000 ton processing capacity it will ensure Chad total petroleus inde-
pendence. This would be an appreciable saving of foreign exchange for a
comtry where a liter of gas-oil sells currently for 85 CPA francs in
Sahr.

hopes for the Puture

For these reasons. the ratio between output and the population aeess ob-
viously disproportionate. In terms of strictly orthodox financing. the
servicing of the foreign debt being below the 20 percent fatidic ceiling
of foreign resources. would be adsiseible if the gratuitous nature of a
large percentage of the foreign aid granted Chad did not distort its seen-
ing. Actually. it is the ratio between a budget of 17 billion CPA. run-
ning a chronic deficit ranging free 2 to 3 billion. and the annual foreign
aid (27 billion CPA) which shows best the iebalance of the Chadean econoay.
Over one-half of this aid cones froe Prance. True. 50 percent of it goes
to silitary support. One-third of such expenditures are borne by the
Chadean budget itself. Therefore. the factual ratio between the civilian
budget and econoaic. technical. and financial foreign aid is. in feet.
11.4 billion:20 billion CPA.

In the case of any other country living on this basis one could think in
terns of bankruptcy and of a fictitious existence or else in terns of the
fact that financial efforts deployed by others to ensure its development
would be disproportionate in terns of its possibilities.

The truth is less severe and sore cosplex. The profitability of aid
granted Chad should increase in terns of the official structures which
account for merely a part. not only of the potential. but of the factual
activities of the country. Nor should a realistic look at things ignore
the strategic isportence of the Lac basin whose occupation by an aggres-
sive power could have aost disastrous consequences on the effectiveness of
tee efforts to prosote the developuent of African resources and the pos-
sibility for a balanced econonic dialogue between that continent and
Europe.

Whereas it is true that. geographically. Chad is the African keystone.
conversely. it is not accurate to say that as a state Chad was a purely
artificial creation of the colonizing power. Had that power really wanted

30

EUR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to shape for its sole convenience a political geography. it would have
failed. In fact. it made use of the conflicts existing along African polit-
ical entities to impose its alliance. followed by its military supremacy.
imposing on the whole a cash econosy based on the satisfaction of its own
economic requirements. Nevertheless. nuserous political entities survived
and traditional trade mechanisms have not disappeared. The profound reason
for Chad's troubles may be found. in all likelihood. in the error of the
government which prosoted the independence and which could not have avoided
it. of wishing to play. without having the means. by forcing it. the game
which the old colonizer himself had learned. meanwhile. to moderate.

In the same way that Chad's real economy cannot be seen through official
statistics. its political future would not be decided on the basis of the
rivalries which merely scratch its surface. It goes on living beneath
figures and consuniques. Its unity will be gained on the basis of the
immutable unities which compose it and its possibilities will be really
determined the day when these two images of a single country. the recorded
and the one based on custos. will finally coincide.

FOOTNOTES

1. On this subject we refer to the accounts by Bernard Lnnne on "The
Frontiers of Chad and Libya." submitted as a paper for the diploma
of the Ecole des hautes etudes en sciences socielee (1977). Mr. Lanne
has subsitted on the same topic an important report to the Academies
of Overseas Sciences. in 1978.

2. The figure is based on the extrapolation of polls taken between 1960
and 1963 in urban and rural areas. The breakdown of medical facilities
over most of the country makes such extrapolation clearly doubtful.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie.. Paris. 1979

5157
C30: 6400

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

REAL CONFLICT SAID TO 38 am an 0! THE NORTH
Perie am: UNIQUE in French 7 Tel: 79 p 18
[Article by Abdeleti: Del-mi: 'Ie the Rupture in I'Djenene Irrepereble?:7

[ Text The ehedow or Ooukouni creepe in between Preeident
tell: lone end hie prine ninieter, ﬂieeein Hebre.

Armed vigil in N'Djeeene. The leck of truet between President Telix
xenon- end hie prise ninieter, Hieeein Hebre, hecene public knowledge et
the end or Jenuery. On both eidee, provecetion eeeee to heve been eoucht.

Firet it ie Bieeein Hebre, the for-er reeietence fighter, e non of the North
end e Hoelel. young end epirited, heving Nehelet Seleh, chienen of the
Netienel Council, end theoretical: the third noet inportent pereon in the
etete, erreeted. Hr Seleh ie beeten up by the wine ninieter'e lien, eubere
or the m (Ar-ed Forcee or the lerth) for 'epreedin; felee intonetionﬂ'

Next it ie Felix Kellen, e level-heeded nen, e cereer eoldier, e Chrietien,

ieprieoned in President lgerte Toebelbeye'e tine, teking retelietory neeeeree
eceinet certein Triende or ﬂieeein llebre.

The teneion reeched ite height on Sundey, 28 Jennery, when e round or rifle
fire in the very eiddle or the cepitel reeulted in two deed end eeverel
wounded. Thet ie ﬂieeein Hebre'e FA! een, eey eoee people. No, it ie the
police, etill feithfnl to Mellon, retort the othere. The eituetion hee
deterioreted eo Inch thet civil eervente end etete orgenizetione ere begin-
ning to teke eidee with Hebre or Mellon. The heed or etete, notebly, de-
nouncee the ATP (Chedien Preee Agency), the officiel egency, which ie enpo
poeed to heve epreed 'tendentione runore intended to eow penic end dieeen-
eion."

Though the rupture ie only hen‘lng by e threed, neither labre nor Mellon,
neverthelee', hee dered teke the decieive etep. For two reeeene:

I: the control thet eech or the two eon bee over e portion or the
32

FOR OPTIC!“ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

am, the police, and powers of decision is only partial. Both have to
reckon with other forces that are not under control, and the powerful resis-
tance fighters who condemn then both.

2: hence, whose financial and nilitary aid is a deciding factor,
and which sponsored the reconciliation of Felix Mellon and hiseein liabre,
has signified its displeasure at the deterioretion of relations between the

two nen, which would play into the hands of ens-ion of a 'stable and noder-
It." We

Il'hough l-‘rence‘s approach has been discreet, the president of the Oil],
Oaafer el-hinsiri, its anbassador to N'Djamena -- on behalf of the Sudan -
and the charges d'affaires of Egypt and Saudi Arabia have intervened with
both nen. 'l'c defuse the crisis. In this connection, acne people are talk-

ing about a “holy war feeling“ said to be prcnpting the noel-s in the lorth.
Reconcilieticn

In fact, the real conflict is anong non of the North. hissein ﬂabre does
not sce- to appreciate an appeal's being node, in the franswork of national
reconciliation, to Oouhouni Oueddei, who holds the northern sequin, in the
nane of mount (Chadian letionel Liberation Front) and whose forces occupy
over 50 percent of the country.

A possible rapprochaasnt between Oonkouni and Mellon could only take place
at the expense of hissein ﬂabre, who would see his influence dininishing.
The nere nention of possible negotiation between Hallm- and Ooukonni, which
could be the forerunner of an end to the lennth Chadian dress, has revived
the appetites of all the splinter. groups claining to be part of room“.

For staple, snall resistance groups, like mama-«1cm, and mm:-
third any.

Ito-one wants to be left out of the big scoount settling along Gladians now

outlined upon the horison. But still, for the national reconciliation to bo

founded on sound, well-balanced bases, sectarianis- end interpersonal
conflicts nust be left behind.

COPYRIGHT: Jenna Afrique, ORUPJn 1979

1211.9
cso: hhoo

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KAMOUGUE SEEN AS POSSIBLE NEH STRONG HAN
Perie Jam APRIQUE in French 21 Feb 79 p 17
[Article by A. 0.: "Chad-11» New Her")

[Text] For weeke now the regime in Ndjemene hee been perelyzed. Preeident
of the Republic Felix Helloum end hie Prime Hinieter Rieeein llebre heve
not epoken to eech other. end the Council of Minietere hee not met.

The perelyeie hee effected ell etete bodiee. Eech eide hee rellied militery
forcee end medie eupport behind it. However no one hee dared to eeeume

the reeponeibility of etriking e blow. The interior of the country iteelf.
more then helf of which ie controlled by Goukouni'e PROLINA'I', hee felt the
effecte.

Lecking the power of decieion in Ndjemene. the prime ninieter hee focueed
hie efforte on the ﬂeet, in the Biltine end Oueddei regione, beyond the
control of the centrel euthority end Goukouni. It wee to thie eector thet
llieeein llebre withdrew in 1977 with hie Armed Forcee of the North (PAN).
efter tengling with Goukouni. Theee regione eleo offer en adventege: their
populetion ie helfwey between thet of the North end thet of the South.

Renting to be eure of e reer beee in the event of e politicel deteet in
Ndjemene, the prime minieter leunched cn offeneive on 10 Pebruery to win
control of Abeche (35,000 inhebitente, loth lergeet city in the country).
But thie bettle brought e new pretender to the centrel regime into the
political erene--l.t Col Hedel Abdel Keder Kemougue, e member of the Higher
Hilitery Council, former minieter of foreign effeire, end preeent heed of
the police force. He too regerde Abeche ee hie "territory." heving on
eeverel occeeione directed the deetiny of the eeetern region.

Hill Hedel Abdel Keder Kemcugue be the new "etrong men" of the country?

In eny ceee. he ie pleying e leeding role in the preeent crieie thenke to
hie police, the lergeet ermed body (6,000 men) end the beet dieciplined of
eny in the whole moeeic of combet forcee in Ched. It wee Kemougue'e men
who profited from further incidente, on 12 Pebruery. to etteck the reeidence
of Prime Minieter ﬂieeein hebre in Ndjemene with entreme violence, ueing
mortere, rockete end heevy mechine gune.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The battle began in the morning, with Chadian Netionel Army (ANT) eoldiere,
loyal in principle to Malloum. fighting the FAN troope of llieeein llebre.
After the police arrived and joined forcee with the AM. they epreed
throughout varioue eectore of the city, caueing panic among the people and
killing a number of individuale. On 13 February. the city wee cut in half.

llieeein llebre ie believed to have left hie roeidence before the attack.
Just prior to the incidente, according to acne reporte, he wee preparing
to publilh a etatement proteeting the meeting of the Chadian Military end
Political Cemittoe, a body including eupportere of both factione. which
Proeident Melloum hed demanded.

The chief of etate had nought thie meeting after deciding that "the people
of Chad were threatened by their fellow citizene." Nothing wee eettled,

but Felix Nelloum, end thie ie important, yielded to Kemougue, agreeing to
give him heavy weepona previouely the prerogative of the army. And thie
deepite the fact that Kamougue had been euepected of plotting a coup d'etet
juet after Hieeein hebre took government office (Auguet 1978). in which
connection the chief of etate took him violently to taek. Ae a dieciplinery
meaeure. he wee traneferred from hie foreign affaire poet to the police.

In extremie, France and Saudi Arabia hed dieeuaded him from attempting hie
coup.

Kamougue wanted the reconciliation with the PROLINAT to be effected through
Goukouni, who in hie eyee wee the real leader of the rebele in the North.
rather than hieeein habre. On 12 February, he abandoned hie neutral peei-
tion. Will he be tempted to play hie own card or will be atom! with
Preeident Halloum? Thie men emerging from the current crieie hee experience
and unprecedented drive. In l97l he headed the national police force and,
with the reeponeibility for the operatione bureau. wee eecond in comend to
the head of the army general etaff. In comend in 1973, then a lieutenant
colonel, he became minieter of foreign affaire in 1975 after the coup d'etat
againet Tombalbeye. Teeny there are come who expect him to inpoee hie
authority, to the detriment of Hieeein Bebre, by reaching agreement with
Goukouni.

Hill Chad, battered and divided, find peace again thereby?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique. GRUPJIA 1979
5157

C50: 101000

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

SASSOU NGUESSO, BACKERS SAID T0 REPRESENT PCT LEFT WING
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 21 Feb 79 pp 32-340
[Article by Jos-Blaise Alina: ”The Victory of Sassou Ngueaeo")

[Text] The Congolese had no idea the session of the Control Cousittee of
the Congolese Labor Party (PCT) which began in Brazzaville on 5 Februery
would hold such a surprise for then. President Yhoaby Opango. who hed

in fact intended to ask for the resignation of the 36 ale-hers of the highest
party body. was forced to sub-it his resignation. Senething even rarer in
Africa, which on this occasion wee sonswhet unexpected. wes the fect that
it was following the regular elections that the outgoing president hed tc
yield to Col Denis Sesaou Ngueeeo. long regarded as number two nan in the
regime.

The scenario perfected in advance by General Yhonby did not work, we were
told by a leading Congolese political figure. The former chief of state
had intended to nelw an asseeenent of alnoat two yeere of edninistration
before asking those present to renew their confidence in him by entrusting
him with the provisional political leedershin with responsibility for
preparations for the third congress of the PCT, which wee initielly scheduled
for Deceaber 1978. . lie hed no idea that two of the participants in the
meeting had elso decided to seek the sane post. Thus he wes greatly eur-
priaed to see two of the regine’s star performers, Jean-Pierre Thyatere
Tchiceye, organizetion official of the party, end Colonel Sasaou Ngueeso.
present their candidacy. It then became necessary to win a two-thirds
majority. 0n the first ballot, General Yhonby. with IS votes. held the
leed over Mr Tchiceye, with l6 votes. while Colonel Sesaou Ngueseo trailed
fer behind with 7.

Furious et failing to obtain the necessary najority, General Yholby then

suede en error, threatening the participants in the congress about the risks
failure to elect him would mean for the country. The members of the Central
Couittee, from which Yhonby was excluded after Herien Ngouebi beca-e
president, were only awaiting this opportunity. it would seen. to proceed
with the "egenda." The civilian candidate. Hr Tchicaye, then announced his
withdrawal in fevor of Colonel Sasaou Nguesso. Thus the two nilitary officers

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were pitted one egainet the other. And 8aeaou Nguaaeo wee elected without
difficulty, thue taking over from Yhonby. Thie wee the end of the third act
of a play in progreee without interruption aince the eaaaeeination of

Haj Marion Ngouebi on l8 March 1977.

Suapicion

The former preeident of the republic wee killed in hie office on that date.
The circumetancee of hie eaeaeeination have remained a myatery deepite a
trial which wee widely publicized by the authoritiea (JEUNE AFRlQUE. No
895). "hot ie known. on the heeie of the trial hearinge. ie that two coe-
mendoe entered the office of the preaident of the republic. harien Ngouabi
wee negotiating with Naeeemba-Debet. hie predeceeeor, whom he intended.
according to reperte, to reinatate. lt wee within thie context that an
officer cloee to Haeeenbe-Debet, Captain Kikadidi, wee diepatched to Marian
Ngouabi to invite him to a meeting with Maeeembe-Debat. officera eppoaed
to the reinetatement of the civiliane in power are then believed to have
intervened by having Preaident Ngouehi eeaaeeinated. at the very moment of
the arrival at hie office of the emieeery from Naeeemba-Debat.

The second act wae their following trial, including the aentencing to
death end the execution of eix individuala. Meanwhile, Neale-be Debet
himeelf had been ehot following a epeedy trial. But the feeling of die-
content had not been dieeipated thereby.

General Yhomby and hie government have alwaya repreaented thanaelvee ea

the heire of Ngeuabi. and referencee to the former chief of etete haVe

been lendmarke along their route. Even today, the portraita of the leet

two Congoleae preaidente hang aide by aide in every office. Above hie
photograph. it eaye: "Eternal glory to Comrade Harien Ngouebi." however
even theee precautione were not enough to diepel the auepicion hanging over
the military who took over in March 1977. An etmoaphere of mietruat de-
veloped among then which led to the aplintering of the coalition into eeveral
fiercely hoetile fectiene.

The firet evidencoe of their claah were to be eeen juat houre after the
death of Harien Ngeuabi. At that tine. according to the official report,
the preeumed aeeeeain wee Captain Moutondo. an officer cloee to Yhomby.

A few houra later evente took a dramatic turn: the name being mentioned
was no longer the tame. Now it wee Captain Barthelemy Kikadidi. Nean-
while, the military had entrueted the exerciee of power to Major Saaeeu
Ngueeeo. he then paeaed it on to the moat eenior officer with the higheat
rank, i.e. Yhemby. Thus there wee no lack of deele made during thia inter-
lude. From that to preauaing that the exoneretion of Captain houtande wee
linked with Colonel Yhomby'a taking mettere in hand wee only one etep.
which the Congeleee oppoeition wee quick to take.

Moreover. the viciaeitudee eurrounding the eacape, capture and execution
of Captain Kikadidi remain to be clarified. Thie condemned man revealed.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

juat a few minutee before hie execution, that contrary to the government
veraion, the proeumed aeaaaain of Marion Ngouabi had never left the Congo
and that the military knew thia very well. It ie oven aeid that Kihadidi.
wounded, waa taken to the World health Organization (uno) camp in brazza-
ville, where he wae vieited by euch leading lighte ae Yhomby, Sylvain Come
and Saaeou Ngueaeo. Ngueaao. moreover. ie reported to have been enraged
to learn that Barthelomy Kikadidi had been ehot. and to have demanded that
he be buried with full military honore.

The loaat one can eey ie that there waa latent teneion between Saeaou
Ngueaeo end Yhombi Opango. The fall of Yhomby wee doubtleea a reeult of
the political uneaae prevailing in the country. The achieme and ambitiona
of the men in power have created an atmoephere of chronic inotability.

For a number of yeere the Congo haa lived in a continuing etate of aiege.
lnnumerable aaaaaelnatione, cenapiraciea and purgea followed the ejection
of Pr Fulbert Youlou in Auguet of 1963. Juet recently two attempte on the
life of the chief of etate in Pointe-Noire failed. and there are aome who
aay that they were the work of eupportera of hie predeceaeor.

Contradictione

Parallel to thia, economic cheoe haa deepened ouch that the dimeneiona are
cataetrophic today. The inflationary fate ie near 90 percent, while the
majority of the factoriee ere idling and acme havo cloaed their doore.
Travelera from Brazzaville report amazing acenee: in linoa hundrede of
netera long in front of the ptymaatere' window. etate employeoa are at-
tempting to collect their three-monthe-overdue wagee.

Political etrugglee have mortgaged the future for a long time. In the
peat. the party waa all-powerful and the people'e militia were the law.
Today, it ie not too clear where the authority ia. A number of timee
General Yhomby hae complained of being the priaoner of the party. In view
of the dramatic turn taken by eventa, it ia aaid, harien Ngouabi had
decided to put the authority back in tho honde of Haaaembn-Debat. Thie
maneuver waa fatal to both men. Their eucceeaor did not even eucceed in
getting the machinery of etate moving agein.

The palace confrontatione ere paralleled by etrange contradictione. in-
conaiatent with the revolutionary rigor the merite of which are to loudly
preiaed along the banke of the Congo River. For example. a plan for the
building of 500 houaing unite in Moutondo, in the Brazzaville auburba. it
ie reported, will be financed by South Africa.

Vengeance
Given thia context, the repreeontativee of the left wing of the PCT are
likely to emerge the victora in the teat of atrength which developed in

the Central Gum-ittee. hoe it not long been thought, moreover. that
Colonel Saeeou Ngueeao intended to appeal to Ambroieo Noumezalaye? A former

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N1?
FOR OPPKCIAL USE ONLY

atudant at Toulouao. the man who var prime uiniator under Haaoauba-Dobat
vaa conatantly at tho aida of Jaan-Clauda Brnaat Ndalla, today in axilo in

Europa, tha rapraaantatﬁva of a pura and uncouproniaing aooialian and a graat
admirer of Fidel Caatro.

It ranaina to ho aean if he who vino the day can euro hinaalf of that

atornal malady. vangaanco. which for more than 15 yaara haa rapaatadly takan
the Congo baok to the atarting block.

COPYRIGHT: Jenna Afriquo CRUPJIA £979

5157
080: 5600

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DJIBOUTI

FRENCII ECONOMIC AID REPORTED
Paris MARINES TROPICAUX 31‘ HBDITERMNSBNS in French l6 Feb 79 p 462

[Text] During the debate in the French National Assembly on the bill au-
thoriring approval of the economic and financial cooperative agreesent be-
tween France and Djibouti (signed on 27 June 1977, followed by exchanges
of letters of 26 January 1978), the report presented by hr Georges Gorse
focused particularly on econonic relations between France and Djibouti and
foreign aid.

Economic Relations between France and Djibouti

These relations show a large deficit in trade exchanges to the detriment
of Djibouti, offset by significant public assistance.

A) French trade with the Republic of Djibouti shows a large surplus for
France, since french iworts have dropped greatly since 1975 because of the
political and economic events which have occurred in the area. The follow-
ing figures are in French francs:

1975 1976 1977
Imports 21,955,000 3,124,000 4,706,000
Exports 161,765,000 110,143,000 130,162,000

s) Public assistance froe France in 1978 to the Republic of Djibouti (ex-
cluding military aid) can be evaluated as follows (in nillions of French
francs): economic aid (PAC [Aid and Cooperation Fund] investments). 7.3:
technical personnel assistance, “.6: other technical assistance. 6.8) so-
cial and cultural program, 5.3) total, 84.

This total. which does not include assistance related to military technical
cooperation and to theaides provided to set up the Djibouti Arty, neverthe-
less represents 31 percent of Djibouti's national budget (247 nillion
francs in expenditures in 1978) and 8.6 percent of the 918 [Gross National
Product) (975 million francs), as estimated in 1976.

100

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the area of investments. the PAC exacutiVe cosmittee authorised financ-
ing of several projects for 7.3 trillion Prench francs during 1978: partici-
pation in financing an earth station for satellite telecosmunications. LS:
study of a pilot (are in Attar. 0.3; teaching college for elementary school
teachers (first stage). l; antituberculosis camaign and hospital equipment.
105.

Several projects are under study and should be submitted to the PAC execu-
tive comuee in 1979. in particular the coupletion or‘ the Attar farm end
cospletion of the teaching college end of the Doulaos C86 [college
d‘enseignemsnt secondeirer College of Secondary Education].

since Djibouti's independence. the Central Fund for Economic Cooperation
has not yet had to examine any loan application.

In the area of technical assistance. Djibouti has 502 jobs for technical
assistants. As of l Novelber 1978. the number of positions available was
still only 360.

France is thus already responding. at least in part. to the urgent need for
technical aid and training evident in practically all sectors. On the
other hand, the portion devoted to investments remains modest. inasmuch as
a deVsloplnent program or plan for Djibouti has not yet been worked out.
However. the PAC expects to consider measures for enlarging and outfitting
the port oi‘ Djibouti.

Although it is not economic aid in a strict sense, it should be mentioned
that the cost of military cooperation amounted to 57 million francs in 1978.
The pay of French troops stationed in Djibouti Isust be added to this.
amounting to 270 million francs in 1978, which benefits the Djibouti econ-
on; either in the form of taxes or as expenditures.

Hith regard to the Addis Ababa/Djibouti railroad. whose legal status is
not settled, the Preach Covernment is encouraging the quest for a solution
favorable to Djibouti interests.

France's significant aid continues to be attractive despite the appearance
of other public assistance. In fact. with the exception of the assistance
granted by Saudi Arabia. other loreign aid remains limited and irregular.

Before its independence, Djibouti received foreign aid only from France and
the European Development rund [EDP]. Since 27 June 1977. the new nation
has applied for a amber of assistance programs. in particular with the
specialised organizations or the United Nations. Bgypt and oil-producing
Arab countries. as well as with the United States. It has usually obtained
positive responses which have resulted in the approval or numerous credits.
currently representing a total of more than $80 million. But those are
comitmsnts over several years. some or which remain uncertain.

41

M OFFICIAL L68 ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Only the contributions of Saudi Arabia on the bilateral level and those of
the 80? on the multilateral level appear significant. Saudi Arabia has al-
ready diepeneed 910 million of the $70 million which it has pronleed.
Fulfill-ant or omer co-ltaente nest be epreed out ovu J or d years. In
the case of the SW. 510 nillion has been allocated to: 4 years. ninly to
guarantee financlng of project atudiee.

Other comitlente haVe been made by Iraq, the Eairatee or the Pereian Gulf,
the Development Aid Fund of the Arab League and UN agencies. which heVe al-
ready granted aeeietance to the Ogaden refugees. The United States and the
PM have not yet determined the program which they plan to finance.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena ct Cie Perla 1979

11915
CSO: “00

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

DJIBOUTI

BRIEFS

amass ARRIVE-About 10 ”Mirage 3 c" fighter planes of the French Air
Force were sent to Djibouti at the end of January. These aircraft. fro-
the Creil (Oiee) base, will guarantee Djibouti’s air defense. in accordance
with the defense agreements concluded between France end the new nation.
They replace the "l’ 100 Super Sabre“ planes of the French Air Force. which
were practically no longer in use except in Djibouti. [Text] [Paris
NAMES TIDPICAUX ET MEDITBWEENS in french 16 Feb 79 p 462) 11915

ISLAMIC him-The Islamic Solidarity Fund has presented two checks in the
anount of 5350.000 to the Republic of Djibouti. This gift, Djibouti
foreign affairs minister Mr Hounin Bahdon stated. is intended on one hand
to offset the effects of the drought which has recently affected Djibouti
and. on the other. for the welfare of Djibouti youth. [Text] [Paris
annexes TDPICAUX m HEDITBRRANEENS in French 16 Feb 79 p 4621 11915

C80: 4400

63
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

MERCHANT SHIPPING INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT DISCUSSED

Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 28 Feb 79 pp 60—51

[Interview with lamine Fadika. minister of nerchnnt marines by Siradiou Diailo:
"A New Order for Merchant Shipping"]

[Text] The merchant marine was for a long time a domain reserved for the
colonial shipowners. The Ivory Coast is one of the first African countries
to have ventured into this sector. Since 1973 especially it has been
feverishly active. at the regional level as well as within the AC? [African.
Caribbean and Pacific Countries] or UNCTAD [United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development] framework. aiead at convincing the other African
states of the need to promote a new international order for merchant shipping.

The man who embodies this new policy is no longer an unknown quantity:
Lieutenant Commander Lamina Fadika. the Ivorian minister of merchant marine.
a graduate of the Brest (France) Naval College and with a certificate from
the Paris "or College. was kind enough to talk over this issue with us.

[Question] The merchant marine was for a long time the special preserve
of the colonial powers. What led you to break up that monopoly?

[Answer] we have been interested in that sector ever since the outline law
in that it was in 1959 that the first ships flying the lvorian flag were
launched. But it has been only since 1976 that we have made the merchant
marine a national cause. The rise in the price of hydrocarbons that year
severely affected the open economies with respect to international trade.
such as that of the Ivory Coast.

[Question] You were quick to make decisions.

[Answer] Yes. President "ouphouet-Boigny then created two new ministerial

departments. one responsible for trade. the other for the merchant navy.
with respect to the aerchant marine, imagine that every ton of merchandise
we export or import covers an average distance of at least 7,000 kilometers
in each direction, as opposed to 1.000 to 2.000 for the developed countries.

46

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New. for the very reason that we are underdeveloped. we export the aajor
share of what we produce and iapert the major part of what we consuls.

[Question] In other words. the I973 crisis played a reVsaling role.

[Answer] It brought out all of the factors of our foreign trade's iabalance.
Since then the chief of state has giVen us the mission of consolidating our
econoaic independence by correcting the iabalances. And in order to do so
we believe that it is essential to establish a large national fleet. hence
the creation of SITRAH [Ivorian Haritiae Shipping Company].

[Question] But in back of a fire such as SITRAH. aren't the old shipewners
who becaae rich on the colonial routes continuing to exploit Africa?

[Answer] On that subject I an categorical: SITRAH is a 100 percent national
concern. of course until March I976 it was a semi-public fire. And. even
though the state was the aajority shareholder. I admit that the decision
centers were in Europe. however. we have achieved a policy of national in-
dependence. for which JITRAM was to serve as the spearhead. could not be
conducted under those circusatances. Ihat is why the government resolved

to make SITRAH‘s capital :00 percent Ivorian. to transfer to the Ivory Coast
all of the decision centers and to proaote a very active policy for the
training of national cadres.

[Question] Yes. of course. but what has really changed since the state's
intervention?

[Answer] SITRAH now has a sizable fleet which is already handling Jo per-
cent of our imports and exports to and froa the European countries bordering
on the Atlantic and on the North Sea which are our first trading partners.

[Question] The change resides at the level of the aaounts of aerchandise
transported.

[Answer] The policy that has been iaplesented for 6 years is enabling us

to attain a deeper knowledge of the asritiae market's aechanisas as a whole
in a sphere essential to our foreign trade. In addition. it confers upon us
a decisive weight in detersining the freight rates which affect us. This is
why SITRAH's existence makes it possible for the Ivory Coast to economics
and to earn were foreign currency than in the past.

[Question] th does the Ivory Coast keep itself to itself in a sector so
vital to all of the African countries?

[Answer] We have always sought to unite our efforts with those of the sub-
region's countries. It is in fact thanks to this coordinating that since
1976 the freight rates for eerchandise consigned to the area can be in-
creased only with the agreeaent of our trading partners. Horeover. it was
on President houphouet-Boigny's initiative that a ainisterial conference of

65
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the states of Rest and Central Africa.was set up. Thanks to this cooperation.
the abusive aanipulating of freight rates was terminated.

[Question] what percentage of the merchandise originating from or consigned
to Africa is transported by ships flying a genuinely African flag?

[Answer] I do not have any specific figures in my head, but I believe that
percentage does not amount to 5 percent. which is very low. Imagine that
Africa‘s total share of world shipping was less than 1 percent in 1976.

[Question] What is the share carried by the Ivorian merchant marine?

[Answer] Ten percent of our foreign trade is effected by sea. Our goal is
to increase this percentage to 20 percent at least by 1981.

[Question] By developing its merchant marine as it is doing. isn't the Ivory
Coast very simply aiming at replacing the traditional shipmers?

[Answer] Our merchant marine has as its essential goal defending the pri-
mordial interests of our development. So there could be no question of our
fleet replacing foreign shipowners in the pillaging of African resources.

[Question] In this sphere as in others the pursuit of profits nonetheless
leads to domination of those who are weakest.

[Answer] In 1977 SITRAH realized 750 million CPA [African Financial Com-
munity ( annetary unit)] francs (15 million French francs) in net profits
after amortizing its debts. This means that it is perfectly capable of pro-
viding for the shipping of our basic products under optimal market conditions.
But SITRAH for all that is not exploiting and is not dominating any country.
i: has no isperialistic goal.

[Question] You have made yourself personally the precentor of a new inter-
national merchant shipping order. Isn't that a more political slogan?

[Answer] The new international order that we are championing in the Ivory
Coast has regrettably not become a reality. between now and April 1979 we
will see more clearly how things stand. It is on that date that the 5-year
period for ratifying the code for the conduct of maritime conferences ea-
tsblished by UNC‘I'AD expires. If at the end of April 25 countries repre-
senting a quarter of the world's merchant shipping tonnage have not ratified
the convention. well. that will he proof we have failed—for the time being
at least.

[Question] Even at the level of your turopean partners linked with the ACP.
isn't it possible to win out?

[Answer] Adherence by the countries of the European Com-en Market to the
merchant shipping convention we recourend could of course provide a sub-
stantial boost. But we must not have too many illusions. ‘Ihe traditional

b0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

maritine powers are at this tine openly opposed to the convention. Just the
sale we do not despair of seeing good sense and justice prevail. In any
event. the ACP states meeting in Bangui last year decided to include UNC‘I‘AD's
code of conduct in the negotiations on the future home convention.

[Question] Does the Ivory Coast on its own have qualified nan available to
operate a merchant marine worthy of that none?

[Answer] We have given the training of men first priority in our merchant
shipping policy.

[Question] And you think you are sufficient unto yourselves outside of any
cooperation of a subregional or regional sort?

[Answer] Not at all. On the contrary. we have decided to join our efforts
with those of the subregion's fraternal countries with a view to establishing
an academy of sciences and technology of the sea in the Ivory Coast. An
academy having as its nission the training and perfecting of cadres and
merchant shipping personnel in all branches and at all levels. IMCO [Inter-
governnentel haritine Consultative Organization] (a specialized agency of
the United Nations in the ophere of aeritine navigation) is in charge of
carrying out and supervising the educational and technical part of that
project. It will be an establishnent with a 7SO-student capacity (cadets
and students) toning fro- all of the French-speaking countries of Heat and
Central Africa. Its opening is anticipated in 1981.

[Question] All of that is being done with or against the old colonial ship-
owners?

[Answer] Our maritime policy and in particular the organizing of our mer-
chant marine is not directed against anyone. However, we are determined
not to leave up to foreign interest groups the task of deciding for us and
in our stead the Ivory Coast's policy in such a vital sector. What could
be sore natural than that this should lead in fact to a real setback for
the traditional shipownera. But for all that we do not nurture any feeling
of animosity against anyone at all.

[Question] th doesn't the Ivory Coast envisage joining other African coun-
tries to create a multinational nerchant shipping firm?

[Answer] In Hay 1975. at the ties of the constituent meeting of the Abidjan
ninisteriel conference, President Felix Houphouet-Boigny stated: "No
country in our subregion can establish on its own a fleet completely meeting
the vast and complex requirenents of our foreign trade:" this means that we
Ivorians are convinced that the future belongs to regional fleets.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afriquc CRUPJIA 1979

309‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

DUNLOP-HICRELIN RUBBER PROJBC'ru‘rhe Dunlop and Hichelin tirc conpaniea have
agreed on a joint invcaent of 21 million naira in a heven plantation in
Bendel state. It will be the largest of its kind under single ownership

in all West “rice. The Nigerian Rubber Board has requested the ministry
of land and housing to make the necessary land available for the project.
[Text] [Paris WORKS TROPICAUX ET mnmuunazus in French 2 Mar 79 p 576]

080: M000

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

masssunrormmrmmmms CODEBIIJ.
Paris JME AFRIQUB in French 7 Feb 79 P 23

Article by Sennen indrianirado, s cial correspondent in Dakar: "the
egaleee Journalists' Grievance“).

gut] One of the treeest press bodies in Africa reels
eatened.

hon our special correspondent in Dakar

“This is not the ninister or Intonation ruoving you, but Deouda Bow
throwing you out." Without aincing words, the Senegalese ninister of Infor-
nation was lldriving away" a Journalist from the debate held in Dakar on

27 January on the theae of freedo- ot the press in Africa. Jacques 8:, a
teacher at the Baker school of Journalisn and a correspondent for the news-
peper nun, had Just stated that he was speaking for his party, the RID
(National Denocratic Lees-bl}, as yet unauthorised) in denouncing “the gov-
ernnent's dealings with France, its refusal to play by the mles or the
democratic gene, and its intention of gagging the press of the nation.‘

A manifest digression iron the thane or the debate, the first of its kind
in Africa, the speech nevertheless served as an indicator of one of the
greatest problems of the African press: the eternal confusion between
Journelia and political ailitentiua. And In lass Die, director of the
satirical paper 13 P01111013 end organizer of the debate, had chosen his
nonent well: a tine when the rich Senegalese press feels threatened with
being stifled.

(lag

is a latter of fact, there is a bill in preparation ained at instituting a
press code, but which the baker Journalists -- including sone close to the

goverment .- are already calling a gag law or a villainous law.

Concern is aroused by two points. The first is the possible creation of a
lo9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’HCIAL USE ONLY

control comission, charged with "continuous check of each publication's
accounts" and preparing a quarterly report on the- article 25 of the bill).
According to rucrs circulating in governnental corridors, the objective

is said to be the masking of organs subsidised by foreign governnanta.

In particular, they say here, by Algeria, Iraq, and Libya.

Blaclaail

Thus the collilator would be on LB moms. belonging to the Senegalese
Denocratic Party (the legal opposition), which in reality now appears only
periodically; the ”D's unw, end for-er council chairman Manadou ma's
ANDE SOPI.

Whatever the facts are, the accounts check envisaged is felt by nany pro-
fessionals to be dangerous interference that could lead up to the disappear-
ance of several nest-heads; nest-heads whose diversity makes Dakar the
undeniable capital of the African press.

Second source of anxiety: the intention ascribed to the government of trying
to have all the texts in a publication inspected by a couiesion, and before
printing. In fact this is by no loans the case. The bill lorely states
(article 37) the tile linits for depositing duty copies: before distribu-
tion, for the dailies; 2!; and 1:8 hours, respectively,fcr weeklies and other
periodicals. Nonetheless! The director of a publication printed in Dakar
but distributed in the west of Africa, assured us: "The institution of
these limits barely conceals the ir‘ention of censoring the press. for
Senegal and its relative denocracy, it would be a great leap backwards.’

however, no decisions have been nade yet, and Douda Sow did state, on

27 January: “There can be no discussion about a text which does not legally
exist yet.“ The fact remains that the discussion has started so that there
will not exist a text that would be like a strait-Jacket for a press which
until now has looked upon itself as the nest free press in Africa.

Officials are of course disclaining an intention of gagging the press.
According to than, it is Just a question of organizing and raising the numeral
standards of the press -- transfoned, it is true, by some, into an instru-
nent of all-directional pole-ice, defanation, or even political blackmail.
According to information leaks, however, the government's concern really is
in fact a political one. In a country where the constitution linits politi-
cal consents to those of only the four authorized parties, the unaccepted
opposition has found in the press an indirect way of expressing itself and
creating new currents of opinion.

Bartender

The debate is then indeed a political one. And is indeed taking place among
political cliques. The only ones left out of the business: the Journalists.
which caused Man has Die to say: “Hy newspaper is not a party one, and l

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

put all pus-tin, authorized or not, in the am has. But 1: this In is
voted in, I (in up. I V111 shut. up shop, and not. be a Joni-mutt any
longer. I would rather be a Ins-tendon"

COPYRIGHT: Jenna Atriquo, ORUPJIA1979

121119
cso: hhoo

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SWBGAL

ALLEGED SHORTCOHINGS OF PRESS 0003 NOTED
Paris JBUNE APRIQUE in French 21 Feb 79 pp 29-30
[Article by Sennen Andria-irado: "Which Causes the Press to Gossip")

[Text] 0n 7 February. the government approved a Press Code bill. Sennen
Andrianirado saw the confidential report that inspired the bill.

Planned since Pebruary 1976. the Press Code (see JA 9“). designed to
organize and to regulate the profession in Senegal. became a bill only in
January 1979.

In the snail world of the opposition of the underground and of the
“independent" press-mot affiliated with a political aovenent-wit had at
first been thought that the purpose of the bill was to prevent certain
excesses. A publication. PROMTION. since Novenber 1978 had been the

prise nover of those long debates that delight Senegalese journalists and
political ailitants. Accused of libeling a good half dozen personalities,
PRDHOTION later lost all of the cases that were brought against it. which
hardly nilitated in favor of its credibility. 0n 2 February 1979. the

courts once nora found it guilty of insulting a foreign chief of state.
Zeirisn President nobutu Sese Seko. whom the newspaper had inplied was at

the button of the fortune of a rich Senegalese businessman. ”The PWION
affair. a thorn in the side. very nearly caused the govern-ent to give up its
project of naking the press toe the line." a baker colleague told us...But
the director of a periodical-mot suspected of having any antipathy toward
the govern-ent. says: "The desire of the government to regulate the press
has nothing to do with the memos affair. It is a very longstanding
aatter. Try to find out nore ab0ut the Biondi report." That Biondi report-—
named after Jean-Pierre biondi. technical adviser to the directorate that had
responsibility for final editinguhaa becone the Dakar press's Loch Neas
nonster. Everyone is talking about it. No one has read it. The govern-ant
is not publishing it and it took sone doing for us to obtain it.

The history of this phanton report goes back to the end of 1975. Democracy
at that tine was just groping about. The only authorized opposition party
then was Abdoulaye Rede'a PBS [Senegalese Denocratic Party]. On 27 Novuber
1975. Prine Minister Abdou Diouf instructed a work group to draft acne

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

"specific proposals to better coordinate or express information."

Directed by Dsoude Sow. minister of Information and Telecommunications. the
group consisted of officials. for example, press professionals: Jean-Pierre
Biondi. presidential adviser. was designated general reporter; Habib Thiaa.
deputy and director of the periodicals. ETHIOPIQUES and l'UNITB APRICAINB:
lbrahime Dan. chief of the Presidential Press Corps; Obeye Diep. founder of
l'OUBST APRICAIN: Bars Diouf. director general of the national daily.

LB SOLBIL;Saliou Fall. chief of Information; Justin Mendy. editor in chief
of HONlTEUR APRICAIN; Asssno Ndiaye. director general of ORTS (Radio-TV);
and Ciro Thian. director of the Senegalese Press Agency.

Curtailment

On February 1976. the report on "Information in Senegal." was ready; the
proposals were subnitted to the prime minister. The last paragraph of

the document reeds: "This report ends with a final specific proposal: the
publication by the Senegalese government of a pamphlet entitled. for
example. the Senegalese Press Code. to establish in a basic text the Inform-
ation Charter of a country that is sufficiently self-assured to be able to
face today's world without apprehension." Three years went by before the
timid appearance of a Press Code bill. nicknamed in advance the ”Gag Law."

Precisely what threats do hang over the Senegalese press. in any case one

of the freest in Africa? Actually. less from specific repressive measures
than from the spirit that emerges from the famed Biondi report. The February
1976 work group based its proposals on concerns for which some give it credit:
the inadequacy of the texts in force (law of 1881 in particular); bungling

of the freedom of the press owing to lack of respect for professional ethics;
anarchy in the proliferation of titles that prove to be ephemeral.

Other statements in the report are entirely of a political nature. Thus.
the document criticizes (page 5): "the absence of any precise conditions

for the effective control of the national press (...) by the public author-
ities (seizure). Actually, seizure is conceivable only in the case of a
serious threat to law and order." The work group thus considered it necessary
to make some proposals which. ”without going back on the principle of free-
dom of the press. (...) would make it possible for the government to take
better precautions against excesses and license of freedom." That was the
germ of what the journalists now perceive as ”threats against freedom of

the press." There is a connection. It has inspired measures which. withOut
aligning Senegal with the sajority of the African countries in the matter

of the press. are all the same disquieting for the future.

The direct and legitimate brainchild of the Biondi report. the Press Code
bill. which is circulating now along the ministers while waiting to be sub-
mitted to parliament. as a matter of fact contains sons provisions that are

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

anodyne only in appearance; in particular, two conmitteea are provided
for. which might change many thinga.

Control

The first. the National Preaa Comaittee. is to be charged (art. 16 of the
bill) with "ruling on the validity of the preaa organs." Compoaed of a
Judge. two newapaper repreaentativea, two printera. and two journaliata.

it will judge. with full aovereignty. on whether an article ia worthy of
being publiahed. In nonofficial Dakar preaa circlee. it in atated that:
“Thia committee will be eaay to handle and to be manipulated. Only the Judge
will have aome leeway. but the printera will be at the mercy of the govern-
ment. They already have been given to underatand. unofficially of courae.
that if they print this or that newspaper. they no longer will have the
benefit of big atate contracta."

The aecond eomnittee. the one to "control publicationa," ia nlao being con-
aidered beforehand an the future "performer of directed control-type jobe
(aee JA 966). Coupoaed of three peraonalitiea (art. 26 of the bill). a
judge, a repreeentativa of the hiniatry of Information. and the director

of the publication with the largeat circulation. it "vouchea for the contin-
uing verification of the accountability of each publication and preparea a
quarterly report of it; nakea a semiannual review of the management of each
publication and forwarda it with ita commenta to the minister of Information;
makes a periodical verification of the circulation of publicationa and
publiahea their reaulta."

Codification and Regulation

If control of the actual frequency is not diaputed, on the other hand verifi-
cation of accountability is allegedly reaented an an intolerable interference
in the internal affairs of preaa enterpriaea. A Dakar journaliat. while very
close to the government.haanevertheleaatoldua: "The government in reality
wanta the preaa that it controla to make a good iapreaaion. the newapaper
with the biggeat circulation ia the daily. L8 SOLEIL. in which the atate

haa intereata. The director of LB SOLBIL will therefore be a menber of the
committee. The latter will work aa a small entity: a judge, an official.
and a journaliat with a quaai-official atatua will be the cenaora of the
entire Senegalese preaa."

If the Preaa Code bill ia adopted. there may be a general Outcry from the
independent preaa or that of the oppoaition. There is only one conceaaion:
the independent Journaliata acknowledge that the profeaaion needa to be
"codified and regulated." But they add that, "with reapect to profeaaional
ethica. certain colleaguea no doubt are open to criticiam; but, here as in
France. one begina by condemning bad newepapera and enda by gagging the
good ones."

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thst is doubtless why the Press Code bill also provides. end this is not its
leest disquieting espect. thet prior to distribution. sll publicetions lust
Iske e prelisinery delivery to the Iinisterisl offices. Thus. control of
esch hesdlins will serve es s ssfety nessure end 0111 Iske it possible to

handle one of the major concerns of the Biondi report: the possibility of
seizure before distribution.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique. GRUPJIA 1979

080: £600

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

800?" AFRICA

BRIEFS

FRENCH MARINE SUPPLIES-.Harine materiel for civilian use supplied to the
South African merchant aarine accounts for the 60 percent increase in
French-South African trade in 1978, according to the AF? bureau in Johnn-
nesburg. According to the latest available statistics on the first 10 months
of the trade year. total trade exceeded by 192.5 million rand (962.5 million
francs) the 1977 figure. which was estimated at 468.2 lillion rand, that is,
a bl-percent increase. However. during the period January to October 1978,
the French shipyards delivered to South Africa ships with a total value of
215.6 million rand (1.07 billion francs). in particular the container ship
S.A. Heidelberg. These deliveries inflated the total French exports to
South Africa to 427 million for January-October 1978 compared to 239.5 mil-
lion for the entire 1977 trade year. Subtracting the marine materiel (which
can be regarded as exceptional). French exports to South Africa during the
first 6 months of 1978 totaled 211.6 million rand (1.05 billion francs).

In the sane period South African exports to France totaled 233.5 million
rand (1.16 billion francs) compared to 228.2 million rand (1.1b billion
francs) for the entire 1977. [Text] [Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX ET MEDITER-
RANEBNS in French 9 Her 79 p 657]

URANIUM To BELGIUM-~The Belgian Government on 1 February gave its approval
and guarantee for a contract to purchase South African uranium valued at

5 billion Belgian francs (730 million French francs). This contract. which
covers a 10-year period. was arrived at between the Synatom company and

the South African Government. It was announced several months ago. A num-
ber of anti-apartheid organization addressed protests to the Belgian Govern-
ment when the decision was announced. [Text] [Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX ET

HEDITERRANBENS in French 16 Feb 79 p ‘66]

650: 5600 END

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY