APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00050R0001000‘0029-5

L was". 0" "F
11 ”iL 1979 PM N0. ‘29
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400296

- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI‘RS 1/839 3

11 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 629

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400296
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfulliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WRSRIP OF
MATERIALS ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE MT DISSEHIMTION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OP?ICIAL 083 (Illa!

JPRS 13/8
11 April

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

3000 No. 629

Commas
mat-mm ms

mien Countrteo Continue To he]. Effects of Colonel”.
(m mom, 7, 1h Feb 19)

Redeem: To Survey Reported

Britten, French Colonial“. Vieved, Brutal-1e].
by Rte:- Debora

Franc Zone'a Bunnie]. Mined

hetern Wee Shncned by Her
(m “RICA, 115 len- 79)...

Third world ﬁlm To M Stand on Moved Principles
(Bennen Andrienlrado; mm: AFRIQUB, 1'6 Mn- 79)

lone Convenuon Mb, Md Mecuued
(mam TROPICMIX er 1130mm, 2'4 Dov 78)

Details on Club of Dem Propoedlo Given
(W moncmx x: mm, 9 Mn- 79)

PAC Aid to Africa in 1978 Reported
(mm momma 81‘ mm, 2 Mar 79)

mum‘s mammtton Considered Poeoiblltty
(M1321: m1; m Maroon, 7 un- 79)

WWW OUDIEA

Nation Garneterued by ‘l‘error, Boone-dc Stagnation
(mm Benolet; Jam muons, 7 un- 79)
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)

03AM
Briefa
Austrian Livestock Cooperation
USER-Ghana Prcaa Cooperation
new Money Iaanc
GUINEA
Britta
French Inn Feasibility Study
LIBERIA
Tolbert'a Viait to France Bipccted to Strengthen Tica
(Jacqnan Iatrclolicrc; mam mmmux at
mm, 2 h:- 79)
MALI

IDA Poroatry Developnant Loan To Help Environ-ant
(means ROPICAUX in mm, 16 m 79)..

Corruption Trial Ends, Verdicta Rendered
(MAR. mm m m, 16 hr 79)..

-b-

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

INN-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

AFRICAN WEIR MIN!!! 10 ran. 3mm 0? oomuusn
leection to Survey Reported

Perle J8!!! W003 in head: 1‘ Feb 79 pp 9-11

[Articlu ”Decolonisetion Bysluetsd by Africene")

[Excerpts] Us ere publishing here the nost significent resctions of our
reeders to a exclusive survey. "Bow French-en todey eveluete colonielisn."
which eppeered in am "[1002. lo 933. The selple with follows is chsrec-
teristic of the whole. of which 70 purcent of the letters cene iron hence.
fron notionels or Africens who hevs enigretsd. 0n the other hand. we ere
the ones duo esked J. Ki-Zsrbo. Selly hdongo. end 1.. 8. Sughor for their
opinions.

Bow'l'hey tool

Leopold Seder Senghor. Pruident of the lepﬁlic of Senegel: Yirst en ob-
servetion in light of the results. Pmdsnentelly recise does not exist in
Ireneeuperticulerly with regerd to blechn. beceuse the Iejority of French-
nen heve nede their congenislity towerds Africen countries obvious. whetever
perry they belong to. but I stress fir-1y thet I heve dwelt principslly on
Ileck Africe.

Second observetion. Opinions differ nevertheless between the eejority end
end the opposition on the queetion nore ethicel then politicsl. i.e.. the
bleeeings of colonislisn. Host of the nejority feel thet colonislisn wee e
blessing for hence. Host of the opposition feel thet it wee not s blessing.
but s significent pert of the opposition feel thet it wee s blessing. Thou
who feel so ere. in wy opinion. the ones nest loyal to true socielict theory.
They heve set forth there en honest opinion.

For historiens of colonielise edlit thet Europe we sble to becone industriel-
issd es s result of its colonies. At first glence. we would tend to nie-
judge those were of the opposition who fse‘ thet it wee s blessing for
hence. lesicslly. thet is the truth. The othere sre observing sctiviste

of the left superficislly. btionelly. In ehort. the survey you heve

1
FOR ontcm. US! ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

undertaken is in favor of France. There is the congeniality towards Africa,
on one hand; and there is condemnation--subtls condesnation-of colonialisa.
on the other hand.

To return to French raciss. It is not really racism. It is a social pheno-
senom. People are against ilaigrsnts who compete with thee. regardless of
the color of their skin. Of course skin color does not reduce hostility.
And the color of their skin has not given North Africans any privileges.
They are, as a rule. whites. in contrast to black Africans. The ones affec-
ted here are the Arabs. It is towards Arabs that aversion is expressed.

And I think that the reaction is much more against Arab civilization and the
oil policy of OPEC. lost of whose neaber countries are Arab.

There is also a najority of Frenchmen who say that, since independence.
Africa is rather less well off. This is reacting out of spite. The French
are taking their desire for fact. In Senegsl'e case. our per capita income
has increased from 160 dollars to 360. despite draught in nine years out of
18. The number of salaried jobs has more than doubled. The economy, which
represented 10 percent of gross doneetic production. now represents more
than 27 percent. So let no one tell us Africa is not as well off. French-
sen have reacted out of spite-jealous spite.

Prince Joseph Ki-Zerbo. a historian and politician fro. Upper Volta:

Objectively. racis- has increased. Before there were not very sany Africans
in France. People then looked at us with an ethnologist's eye. soaewhat
saused. Today the number of Africans has grown. The tolerance threshold
has been passed. Frenchmen think that every black they see in their country
has cone to steal their jobs fros thee?

Sally Ndongo. secretary general of the General Union of Senegalese Workers
in France:

I feel that this survey reselbles all surveys. The questions are no better
worded. They do not concern the people most directly involved. Apart from
that. I so not surprised to see that most french-en. for the seat part. are
in favor of colonialisa. How could they hava survived without it?

As far as finding out whether things are rather better or less well off in
Africa since it became independent? "Better" or "less well off" means there

was a change in rule. If Africa was really independent. then yes. you could
ask the question?

Furthernore. I like South African racism better than France's current atti-
tude towards Africa. At least it is frank. But the racism of Prance‘s
authorities is underhand. How can one say. "Africans are our friends“ or
"Africa for Africans" and. at the ease time. reinforce Africa's eaeaies?

who is arming South Africans? And. in Prance. they prefer to expel Africans

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Forth Africans, who are today more aware and lore aggressive. so as to
open their arns to Asiens because. for the tile being. the latter are nore
eesilv handled and will not dare open their Iouths. Bnigrants in France are
no lore than dowestic colonialian.

Wen all is said end done. the danger of a survey like this is that it starts
public opinion and that. in the case of interference abroad. the govern-eat
can always point to it. Furthemre. I would say that it is interesting
because it hears out what we already knew.

British, French Colonialism Viewed
Paris .1801! AFRIQUB in French 7 Feb 79 p 76

{Editorial by Peter Enahoro, a Nigerian journalist: ”To Each Its Colonizere:
The French and British Left Specific and Iudelible Marks on Africa“)

[Text] why do Africans not denigrate the French as each as the British and
Anericans? were they not victins of their colonialism? I-ediately follow-
ing independence. did they not suffer the burden of their interferings?
Hithout s doubt. the explanation lust be sought deep within colonialisn's
history. Take the British. They called their colonies. not mcynically.
"possessions." and their inhabitants "colonial subjects." The French did

not lake a distinction. As far as they were concerned. the Africans under
their authority had full French citizenship. They lived in "overseas deport-
nents."

British colonists lived in isolation. Not for anything in the world would
they have ventured off of their "reserves" or golf clubs. This scorn was
severely resented by the "colonized." The French were not as distant and
willingly shared their privileges with some Africans.

Their educational policies were also different. The British, as a result

of their horizontal system. teught more of their "subjects" to read and
write than did the French. But the vertical systen of the letter was more
selective. hence France's reputation for having provided Africans with bet-
ter education. Some French-speaking African leaders were class-ates of poli-
tical authorities in the nether country. Some even eat in the National As-
senbly as sewers of French political parties. This type of relationship
fostered that characteristically French teen spirit between colonialists

and the colonized that is not found with the English. The British estab-
lishllent. the product of a few very exclusive gra-sr schools, never nixed
with the future leaders of English-speelring Africa. )breover. it is diffi-
cult to ilsgine the English-speaking countries asking the Govern-en: in
London to help then establish an African deterrence force as the leaders of
former French colonies did at the Paris sun-it in 1978.

lien like Felix Houphouet-Boigny and Leopold Seder Senghor. who are soeetines
irrevere..tly called "black French-en." have few counterparts in English

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"punklng Africa. ﬂul if we must condenn. in a general aannsr--and with rea-
son--the destruction of Africa's cultural heritage. we have to admit that
french-speaking Africa suffered sore serious daaage. The English never auc-
cccdcd in really imposing a cultural inperialisn. It is difficult to believe
in the cultural superiority of an absent-eluded official, who wears a nono-

cle. stuttsrs when he speaks his own language. and is unable to nele sons of
his country's best writers.

It is understandable that the redirection of "past investnents" in sen.
sensitivity, and techniques has kept French-speaking Africa frol putting
France in the sans class as English-spanking Africa puts Great Britain. 0n
the other hand. it is difficult to explain why English-speaking Africa so
often renains unconcerned by French scheming.

Perhaps France's image is the reason for the way things are. English-speak-
ing Africans do not know the French. Therefore, they do not understand
then. Their only objections to France have been passed on to then by the
English. But the picture of the voluble and excited french-an contrasted
to that of the stiff and imperturbable English-an is considerably note at-
tractive to then. So they think the French are not shrewd. sly. crafty.
cunning. and deceitful but, instead, slightly insane.. Perhaps English-
speaking Africa is also of the opinion that the actions of the French in
French-speaking Africa are only the result of their sphere of influence.
In which case. it is difficult for it to see itself taking on the role of
its African brothers' watchdog.

Whatever the aotivee holding English-speaking Africa fro. opposing francs.
it is still true that the latter will pursue its destructive policy in
French-speaking Africa until a spoke has been put in its wheels. But in
this area. one can scarcely depend on french-speaking Africa. because France
holds most of these countries in the pain of her hand. And it is certainly
a pity.

5-UEUNE AFRIQUE does not necessarily support the opinions published in this
coluan under their authors' responsibility.

Franc Zone's Survival lxanined
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE In French 7 Feb 79 p 76

[Text] The franc zone is in good health. faithful to their annual nesting.
the 14 neeber countries--13 African countries1 plus Prance-are nesting in
Paris on 5 February. So. even though the sterling zone has not weathered
decolonisation and the dollar's zone of influence is a collection of coun-
tries linked to the United States by very diverse. reciprocal aonetary ties.
the franc tone is continuing to exist in the niddle of controversy.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Devsluatione

Its detractors see in this a vestige of colonialisa and an instruent for
economic and .liploaatic domination. Its supporters-~sone of when quote
socialist theory-ace here priaerily a franeworh for sonetery stability
strongly proacting econoaic development. we cannot forget that the franc
zone cane into existence in 1939 to associate the French bit... aonetery
reserves in the protection of the franc.

For this reason. as soon as they became politically independent. certain
aeaber countries rejected this tutelage. The countries of Indochina in 1956,
Guinea in 1959. ‘Dunisia and Horocco in 1955. and Algeria in 1964 created
their own currencies and thereby took thmelvea out of the franc zone.
Nevertheless. the affects of this decision were gradual. It use not until
1967 that the four African countries regained coqlete independence in their
financial relations froa abroad. thereby breaking the last tie binding then
to the zone. Mauritania and Hsdagaacsr left it in 1973. Hali. duich had

left it in 1962. returned in 1968. Mauritania could well do the same in
the near future.

how can one establish a stable currency when the econo-y. coapletcly oriented
towards the for-er aother country. is too weal: to open up the resources.
particularly the exports. necessary to Iaintain the new national currency?
Mali use not able to solve the problennhauritanie is struggling with it to-
dsyuand the Malian franc returned to the franc zone at the cost of a 50-
percent devaluation.

Moreover. this desire for aonetary independence is aanifested in varying
degrees by all comtries. owing to the fixed parity between the franc and
other currencies in the zone.2 France iqoses on aenber countries succes-
sive devaluations fro. which they do not derive any profit because their
exports are auch too inflexible. 0n the other hand. the cost of their ia-
ports froa outside the zone constantly increase and prevents then fron
diversifying their trade partners.

In 1972. the disenchantaent of soae Deters and the sullennees of others
led France to pledge the 1972-1975 reform. which gave the franc zone its
current structure. African comtries are now grguped into two mnetary
unions each equipped with a joint central bank. French authorities sit-
ting on the administrative boards of the central banks no longer have the
power to resist statutory decisions taken unaniaously by African aeabers.

The sone's currencies are henceforth ensured against an eventual develuation
of the french franc.

Thoee opposed to the zone. however. have not been appeased. They are ex-
pounding three najor argunents. They see the freedon of mnetary transfers
as an obstacle to the creation of donestic savings and an opportunity for
foreign businesses to send their gains back to their countries. They add
that. because there is a structural surplus in the foreign exchange reserves

5
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of African countries in the zone| France continues to manage them in its
favor. paying nominal rates. They begrudge finally the fact that France has
the opportunity to thus impose a deflationary monetary policy on them that
scarcely favors the financenent of their development.

Renewal

To respond to the first point. supporters of the zone say that. on the con-
trary. monetary stability and guaranteed transfers attract private foreign
investors and encourage them to reinvest their profits locally. 0:: the
second point. they feel that. while Prnnce is indeed managing almost a

nil lion francs in foreign exchange reserves belonging to its African partners.
it is devoting two-thirds. or two billion francs. of its public assistance

to Africa to members of the franc zone and that one equalizes the other. As
far as the last point is concerned. supporters of the franc zone readily
point to Zaire to show that inflationary ease leads to bankruptcy instead of
development.

The iminent prospect for a European monetary union. however, could change
the terms of the debate by inviting 5/; African. Caribbean and Pacific (ACP)
countries. which are currently negotiating to renew the Lone agreements with
the European Con-unity. to add a monetary dimension to their cal-unity of
interests. how long until an African association of pay-ants linked to
Europe and to the major monetary zones via negotiated ties?

WOTES

l. Benin. Cameroon. Central Africa. Comorss. Congo. Ivory Coast. Gabon.
Upper Volta, Mali. Niger. Senegal. Glad. and Togo.

2. One CPA franc - 0.02 French francs; one halian franc - 0.01 French
Francs.

3. Central Bank of the West African States (BCEAO); Bank of the Central
African States (MAC): Mali and Conores have their own institutions.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA l979

9064
CSO: 4600

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

EASTERN AFRICA SNACKLBD BY "All
Paris JBUNE AFRICA in French 16 Her 79 p 21
[Article by H. Y.: "Transport Paralyaed in Central and Eastern Africa")

[Text] The Ugandan-Tanzanian war was all it took to complete the total
confusion of transport in central and eastern Africa.

Threatened by the raids of Angolan anti-Harxist guerrillas, the Benguela
railroad. which crosses Angola and links Sheba Province in Zaire and Zambia
with the Atlantic Ocean, had already ceased operating. Because of a lack

of maintenance. use of the Tatara (Tanunia-Zaabia railroad built with the
aid of the Chinese) was becoming increasingly hazardous.

Crossroads

As the crowning blow. the taking at the end of February of the important

crossroads of Naseka and Hbarara in southern Uganda by Tanzanian trcops
upset land and air cosmunications between over a half dozen countries.

Uganda was actually a couercial hub linking the Nile Valley, the Horn and
the heart of the black continent. Along a horizontal axis stretching from

the Kenyan port of hoabasa to the isolated regions of Rwanda. Burundi and
eastern Zaire (livu Province). trade was constant.

Split

Even at the beginning of February, the presidents of Rwanda and Burundi.
Juvennl ﬂabyarimaoa and Jean-Baptiste Bagsaa. concluded important agreements
with their Kenyan colleague, Daniel Arap Hoi. for the purpose of facilitating
the transport of goods through Uganda as far as the Indian Ocean. But the
intensification of the fighting forced Kampala and Nairobi to introduce a

ban on 26 February banning access to Ugandan territory to the trucks carry-
ing loads going to hands and Burundi. As a result, nearly 200 vehicles,
mainly tank trucks. were blocked at the border.

Between the Arab world and black Africa. the "split" is also spectacular.
This was demonstrated on 1 March by the forced landing in Wants, Tanzania,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a Boeing 707 cargo plane headed for Kampala from Djibouti. The aircraft.

helonging to a Belgian company. was to carry Ugandan coffee to Europe via
Djibouti on its return. At the GAO Council of Miniature meeting in Nairobi,

the delegation free the young republic did not conceal its apprehension be-
cause. deprived of mining and agricultural resources. Djibouti is basing its
hopes exclusively on the development of transit traffic.

Sudan. whose southwestern r¢.;on is far free the ports on the Red Sea and
therefore risks suffering the economic and political effects of the var be-
tween Uganda and Tanzania, has expressed its concern. Chief of State Ja'far
Huha-nad Nunayri, currently president of the OAD. has intensified his efforts
to find a peaceful solution to the conflict.

Egyptian Products

Even Egypt. uhich in February proposed sending commercial uieeions to central
and eastern Africa to facilitate the marketing of its products. rinks being
caught short by events.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

ll,h66
C80: 4600

8
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

THIRD "ORLD SW TO TAKE STAND 08 AVG!!!) PRINCIPLES
Paris JBUNE APRIQUB in French lb Her 79 p 94
[Article by Scnnen Andria-irado)

[Text] The Third Horld ia at war. lta traditional apokennen pretend not
to notice it. Under our very ayea. principlea are thwarted and the elogane
that once eerved aa a kind of force for unity -- albeit relative -- arc
contradicted.

When Vietnan. behind a "Cambodian Front" that cane out of nowhere. invaded
the People'a Republic of Caebodia. our leadera remained ailent. When. in
order to "puniah" the Vietnaneaa. China aent ite troope into Vietnan.
Africa'a rcactiona were confined to thoee -- ae could be expected -- from
Angola and Ethiopia. which were joined by Mozambique. diaappointed for
aeveral nonthe over the de-Haoiration. and by Tanaonia. which exprereed ita
"aynpathy with "letna- which ia fighting to safeguard ita territorial inte-
grity." Free the other African nationa. nothing but ailence.

what ia aore aerioue. the war haa alao taken hold of Africa againat the aene
background of ailence. when. in October 1978. Harahal Idi Alin Dede had his
troopa occupy the Tanzanian region of Kagera. the Africana anid nothing.
officlelly becauae the natter had not been taken to the OAU. The Africnna
undoubtedly needed a neeting to expreee thenaelvea and condemn an act of
apgreaaion! Since that tine. thinga have changed. Counterattacking. the
Tanzaniana have penetrated Uganda. coordinating their attiona with thoae of
the Ugandan opponenta who have decided to have done with ldi Azin Dada. but
rere again. while one nay grant Tanzania the right to repriaala. the Africans
reaained mute. Only the Front Line countriea of eouthern Africa. meeting in
Luanda on 3 and 4 March. aupported Tanzania and condelned Uganda. Pro-

the other Africana. nothing but ailence. ailence like that they have obaerved
ever aince Libya haa occupied part of the Chadian territory or aince Chnd

haa henrd France'a propoaal of a federal solution. a vynonyn. in thin cone.
for dianantleaent.

Hhat hna become oi the principlea ao dear to the African leedera? “hat haa
becoee of the principle of the intangibility of bordera. whoae aeteguarding

9
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OP'FNZIM. "SK (MIN

would this time hsve serited the estshlishsent of en inter-Africsn force to
«top the war between ”sends and Tsnzsnis ss early ss October? Hhst hss

hecosc of the condssnstions of inperisliss which this tine could hsve sp-
pliod to Vletnen ss well ss to Chins?

Actually. the Africans are now living through the crisis of conscience that
has seized the leftists in Europe for several yesrs. Europe experienced
Budapest in 1956 end Prsgue in 1968. The Third World is now fslling spsrt
in Cssbodis. Vietnsn end Chine. Beiore long. Africs will he forced to look
reality in the (see. for exssple. when it will heve to tske the side of

Chad assinst Lihye. or perhsps. when the Heuritsnisns ssh the Moroccan
troupe to lesve their soil.

COPYRIGRT: Jeume Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

mm.
(‘50: 6600

10
FOR OFFICIAL ESE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Im'AFRICAN AFFAIRS

IONS mmnmou TALKS. AID 01801.88“
Mle MARCH” TROPICAUX IT autumn? in ﬁend: 2'0 by 78 pp JON-3&0

[Text] 1he hampeen One-unity hee Juet coepleted e etudy of trede betueen
the m ed the ACP [Atrium (hrihbeen end hoiﬂc countriee] duritu the

period 1972-1977. Ite ehelyeie hrooput out the fella-ling oherecterietice
of thie trodes

me ‘6? countriee repreeented only e reletlvely eeell pert (between 3 end ‘0
percent) of totel world trede (incluiilu petroleue). me ehere repreeented
by the developing oountriee ee e ehole lee euhetentielly let-get. homer:
epproxieetely 30 percent.

me no continuee to pley e very ieporteht role in the trede of the AC?
oountriee: in 1977. '03 percent of ell exporte no- theee oountriee eent to
the rec. m:- vhich they received '08 percent of their totel ieporte. Ibet
of the ACP countriee depend on two or three produote for their export
revenues in trede eith the (lo-unity. e totel of 10 pruducte or coupe of
produete eeke up 80 percent or ell ieporte of the nine eeebere of the BC
Roe the ACP. In the cue of oertein heeio prodeote. the he? oonntriee pm
e very ieporteht role ee euppliere of the m. ehioh FIRM '65 percent
of ite coffee. 83 percent of ite ceoeo. bi percent of ite copper. 6? percent
of lte eager end 510 percent of ite peenut woduete m. the Ac? oountriee.

Propoeel {or Oontimetion of the Speciel I’Beet" Prop-eh

The Mpeen Oouieeion hee Juet treheeitted to the Council of llinietere of
the me e propoeel to extend until hrs: 1980 (the «into of expiration of
the preeent [one convention) the epeeiel x-eguletione covering exporte of
beef hoe Botevene. Kenye. Megan: end Smilhnd to the One-unity eerket.
Theee requletione provide {or e 90 percent reduction in ihpoete (other then
duty) levied et the eoesnt of ihporthtion. on condition that e tea in en
equivelent munt he collected by the {our oountriee et the talent of
exportetion.

theee epeciu eeeeuree eere eoheduled to expire on 31 Deceeher 1978. but e
deleption eent by the oo-ieeion deter-ind thet the incoee of the eeet
Name in theee oountriee would he eeriouely inpelred in the event the
Ieeeuroe were eoeled den or elieineted.

Ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

Prlncuul Curronto of ISO/AC? Trodo In 19??

” $1.45...- oo-nomo (“moo CIIIACO on I!"

u Imam... cc: (1) m m m

 

00* M ”on
(2) mm H on...» u no.» «an
1: a. .. n .H oovovvo oaoavro 21o
1.734....(7). umm "dun no
out... .. H. N. covoooo oo:o::: :1.
l W .. .. "0)" 0| I
Juan $8.)... .. "om you no 41
oz mm. .. . .. noon ionooo o.)
u but. (9) ...... ooom tooocm n
or on. . ._ maoo onono n

In! .. . - nuono -
I! loaoﬂlt‘ono C" (10)
1 u __ .. .. «um comm ooo
1:11:31.” . . . . mono noun oo
)um, .... .... mm omm 03
«M (1.1) ..... mm 0mm oo
M on. ........... . mono vnouo oo
o. la... . ......... m 100 "um u
n no. .. . .. «out oomo to
"(m . . . ”I” 000.)” 8C
u~.. ..... . Hanan -

any:
1. SEC Input“ 7. Ivory Gout
2. ()rlgln 8. Common
3. 5.1.1 mu. (1.000 uc: [mm of «comm 9. mm.
a. Cumulouvo voluo (1.000 110:) 10. know
5. No.1 voluo (1n porconucu) 11. am

6. Cnoulouvo voluo (1n porconugoo)

Pro- 1 Jimmy 1979 to 1 Ila-oh 1980. tho roducuon 1:: upon loud of. tho
tonne. of “paranoia would ho oppnooblo a follow:

Pro- 1 Joann-y 1979 to 31 Dooolbor 1979. o um of 27.532 tom of bonod
out. would ho onslblo. dlou'lbutod a follow: Baum. 17.360 tom.
Konyo. 130 mm Mame". 6.956 was; anon“. 3136 tom.

Pro- 1 Johnny 1980 w 1 Hatch 1980. I am o¢ 5.595 “no, «humans a

{011mm lounm. 2.5195 mm; Rom. 25 «no; War. 1.160 oonou
8m11on1. 515 Conn.

Conunuouon ot thlo prlvnogo roam mall for tho 00.111111] 1. o

docrouo 1n rovomo (nourocdpc. of A port. of mo noun" doducud 1.0151an
33 olllion who of “count 11: 1979 m 5.6 “111011 in 1980.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ ()PFICIM. “SI-I ONLY

Tho non moldont of tho Ropubnc of Konyo. [Intel Atop Moi. wont rocontly

to Bruoolo. Ihoro ho oonforrod Ilth tho choir-on of tho Mopoon nonunion.
Roy Jonkm. ond tho oonioolonor 1n ohorgo of ooopontlon for dovolopoont.
Cloulo Choyooon. mooo oovorol conforonooo doolt booiully nth the current
nogotlotlono for ronolol of tho lolo Convontlon rnd oloo with tho vol-10m
for” of oooporotlon lithln tho fro-over]: of tho Oomontlon. Tho progn-

ot tho forth Mom Molopoont m wovidoo {or gronto to Konyo totonn;
72 ”Mon unlto of occount. ‘l'ho grootor port of tho ﬁnancing hoo urow

boon or- 'od. on! tho routndor 1o oxpoctod to bo opp-cud during tho tint
Ml! ‘179o

Bolonco of No of tho no luth tho ACP Gountrioo no- 1972 Through 1977

(loloncoo oxprooood in union of ”(SI courage of importo by oxporto
oxprooood in porcontogoo)

-_ —-

 

 

 

.olooco emoulolo do |o C"
ovoo too you AC? do I”) I m!

"Mo on «Him Iva. Cowman. omovulnw m u

  
    

an nu out
”31:53....“ (2) . an: «on. Jon
hmMS) .. . on u.) on
tho-”om“-
vaum-uob -Itlo -)ono .1".
mow-con . . . n 1 u I I0! 1
”aw-«ma.-
Gino-moon . ”A I . you i - 1100
lm . .. . you no no
bnmmfw - woo - tom - on
(wk-UH . ....... no to I N.
7mlm... . u - u . on
(who-v . «no on u v
amtknob . . . M!) II. - ‘N‘
Mal-on .. uoo "so on
9’00“!!!"
Dunno—om“ - u i . uoo . no).
(my... ...... no tn an
Koyu
lo mm for “:91 6, “It mxm
2. blonco of trodo 7. Indian (moon
3. Poreontogo of loporto eovorod by oxporto 8. Culbboon
“o “it ‘ﬂlc. 9o hc‘t1c

5. Contxol mm
«MIGHT: kono Moron: ot 01o. Porto. 1978

10992
030: M00 13

’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

DETAILS ON CLUB OF DAKAR PROPOSALS GIVEN
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDXTBRIANEBNS in French 9 Mar 79 p 616

[Text] 0n 1 March in bruaaela. Hohaaed T. Diawara preeented detaila on the
proponela adopted at the and of Nova-bar in lereville by the Club of Dakar
of which he ia preaident. propoaala aiaed at renewal of the BIC/AC? [African.
Caribbean and Pacific countriea (aaaociated with the EEC)! Lone Convention
(aee HARCNBS TROPICAUX. No 1726 of 8 Deceaber 1978). Theee auggeationa.
grouped together under the topic "tor the Strengthening and Bxpaneion of
Cooperation Between Europe and Africa." were nun-ad up aa followo by the
former planning ainiater of the ivory Coaet:

Legal and inatitutional aapecta: The drafting. by the BBC and the ACP na-
tions. of a tre ty of aaaociation of an unapecified duration. It would
resemble the Role Treaty and would define the Iain principlea and tar-a

of cooperation.

An organic reorganization. involving the eatabliah-ent of an annual confer-
ence of chiere of atete which would exerciaa the powera of orientation now

belonging to the Council of Hiniatera and the eetting up of a co-ittee
emanating fro- the Council of Hiniatera to enaura. on a baaia of equality.

continuity in the aanageaent of joint policiea between the aeaaiona of the
Council of Hiniatera. which aeaaiona ahould be lore frequent.

The budgeting. at the EEC level. of reaourcea going to the ID! [European
Develop-ent fund].

Finnnciol cooperation: A aubetantial increaae in financial reaourcea fro-
the BBC and aade directly available to aaaociated nationa through the ID!
and the European lnveetnent Bank (3:1). The Club of Dakar'a nininun pro-
poaal of a doubling of auch reaourcee would not even correapond. by 1905. to
the aid objective of 0.7 percent of their GNP aubacribed to by the EEC na-

tione within the franework of the United Nationa. aince reaching that objec-
tive would require that current funda be incraaaed 2.2 tilea on the baaia of

on inflation rate of 7 percent.

Concerning the allocation of funda. priority given to the pooreat aaaociated
nntiona nnd projecta which. beceuae of their nature. would not have other
ween: of financing.

1h
’03 0!?ICIAL USE 0N1!
The establish-ant. within the framework of the BDP. of e guarantee. rebate
and consolidation mechanism aimed at helping the associated nations -- in
keeping with their repayment possibilities -- to mobiliee the largest possi-
ble voluse of capital available at market conditions.

The establiohnent at the Conunity level of an investment guarantee system
to complement existing national systems. which would make it possible to
have a substantial increase in the investment flow. particularly in the
mining and energy fields.

Expansion of the mechanism for the stabilization of export receipts of
associated countries. coupled with partial consideration of the effects of
inflation during the period of reference.

Commercial cooperation: Continuation and expansion of free access of agri-
cultural and industrial products of associated nations to EEC markets.
(Exceptions made necessary by circumstances should be the subject of pre-
lininsry negotiations and be expressly limited in tine.)

Industrial cooperation: Hith a view to vigorous concerted redeployment
between [urope and the associated countries. it would be a question of
combining the actions and grants of the BOP and the 331 with aid given by
the EEC for regional. sectorial and specific reconversion within the
frnaework of its own industrial policy. Procedures for concerted efforts
could be followed within the association. which would include public offi-
ciala. investors and corporate partners in the study of the wutual implica-
tiona of the redistribution of activities between Europe and associated
nations.

This orientation would be expressed in e redefinition of the Industrial
Cooperation Committee set up by the Lowe Convention. with this committee
being called upon to proaote a continuous and active policy of cooperation

for the redeployment of industrial activities between the SEC and associated
nations.

The Center for Industrial Development (CD!) would have increased leans and
its action would have new foundations. particularly through the organization
of s more effective liaison with promotional bodies of the associated no-
tions and with private investors in the BBC countries.

Energy and mining cooperation: The application. in the field of new types
of energy. particularly that of solar energy. of specific scientific and

technical cooperation in the direction of the research and development of
products and procedures suited to the needs and limitations of the asso-
ciated nations.

Regarding the conventional forms of energy. particularly hydroelectric
power. an effort toward cooperation is necessary and will involve terms

suited to the financing conditions relating to the equipping of hydroelectric
sites in the associated countries.

15
Fox orrlcuu. us: 031.?
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

Regional cooperation: A aubatantial incraaoo in tha portion of the EDP
sun rooerved for the financing of regional projects and prograla.

The drafting of proapactiva develop-en: piano for the aaoociated nations
based on major gooacononic ragiona.

COPYRIGNT: Rona Horoux at Cio. Paris. 1979

ll.66b
C50: 6600

16
ton OFFICIAL US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI! ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

FAC AID 10 AFRICA IN 1978 REPORTED
Pnris MAROiES TROPICAUX ET NBDITERRANEENS in French 2 Mar 79 pp 555-556

[Article: "Aid and Cooperation Fund [PAC] Assistance to African and lndian
Ocean Countries in 1970)

[Text] in 1973 the Aid and Cooperation Fund (FAC) gave assistance to African
and Indian ocean countrits totaling 515.5 aillion French francs. Another 5
Iiilion francs vent to the Republic of Haiti for agricultural develop-out and
airport construction.

These contributions cone under title Vi of the budget (investeent expenses)
and so do not include expenses for technical. budgetary and research aid also
covered by PAC.

The sectoral distribution of Aid and Cooperation Fund for 1970 (in nillions
of francs and percentages) breaks down as follows:

M.F. fct
General studies 2l.5 4.1
industrial and lining developaent 2ll ll.9
industrial and aining developeent 50.6 9.7
Infrastructures 97.7 18.8
Health 35.2 6.8
Education 78.9 lS.2
Cultural relations and inforaation 16.9 3.2
General expenses 1.7 0.3
Total 520.5 M.F. 100 pct

The aain contributions break do~n as follows (in aillions of francs):

General Studies

Congo: Equip-ant for the Congolese Geographical institute ".SZS
Operations of general interest: Basic cartographic equip-ent 3.8
Technical and aconoaic studies 5.7
inter-governaent operations: Ougadougou regional teledetection center l.0
Energy use: General Sahel prograa 10.5

17
IUR OﬂilclAL Uﬂlilnl'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rurnl Development
Benin: Ouidah-North pal- grovo irrigation
Burundi: Forestry pilot project and reforestation in Hunirvo

Cameroon: Technical aid for the development of Upper Nkaa
Participation in the cocoa development program
Participation in the Yagoua rice fields developeont prograa
Participation in the Mbandjock feed lot

Cape Verde: Research and develop-cot of underground water
Dovelopaent of Sao-Nicolau island
Scientific research support for rural developeent
Establish-ent of a diagnostic veterinary laboratory

Central African Eapiro: Logistics support for the technical planning
bureau

Congo: Agricultural projects studies
Fncnlyptus plantings in the Pointe-Noire region
Agronoaicai research support

Ivory Coast: Financial participation in the sedentary cattle raising
project of the North region
Participation in silk development

Djihouti: Coapletion of a pilot project for irrigated crops in Attar

Guinea-hissau: Peanut production-developaent
Shriap fishing develop-ent: one fishing boat

Upper Volta: Sourou threshing works
Development of the Volta valleys and agricultural projects
Study of Sourou valley hydro-agricultural develop-ent
Participation in agricultural development
lest Volta food products project
"oil drilling in the western Sahel

Madagascar: Continued manage-cot staffing in coffee cultivation on
the east coast
Nanageaent staffing in cotton cultivation
Support to Tananarive University for training researchers
Agro-industriai studies

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

1.8

usage—-
. . . .
—°N€‘

N—D-‘H
. e e e
”09“!

1.7

s-e—O
MUM

O —'N
90 0°

gar-
e .
OO

MNNHQO
. . . . . .
OMU‘OOM

s-o—ee-Ia—
a . e .
MOON
Mall:

Mauritius:

Mauritania:

Niger:

Rwanda:

Senegal:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

laguineda truck garden‘ng end cannery production

Mopti operation rice fields development

Manage-eat staffing of the Kayes region hydro-agriculture
perineters

Technical support for the aarketing of fruit, vegetables
and cereals

Reforestation in the Baaako region

integrated development of peanut-growing regions

Prograa for the intensification of corn cultivation
Support for cattle raising in the Sahel zone

Port-Louis slaughterhouse and pork treataent
uxperiaental fishing trawler

Establish-cut of a research station in the Bane d'Aguin
national park
Construction of the Kaedi agronomic research center
Pulp irrigation of villages in the Senegal valley
Neil maintenance at Tidjiija
Hydro-agricultural studies in the Senegal valley
Study of hydro-agricultural develop-ant of the R'Ki: lake
Hydro-agricultural study for Taaourt in Naaj

Establishaent of the National Office of Agricultural Projects
Agricultural develop-ent of the Dosso district

Develop-eat of the Niger river; develop-eat of the Tiaguirire
basin and the Lassa periaeter

Participation in the progral to restart peanut growing

Cotton and cooperative aanageaent staffing

Rural develop-eat in augesera-East and Gisaka Higongo

Establish-ent of a hydrogeologic service

Develop-eat operations in the Senegal river valley (construc-
tion of a dike. Debi-Leapsar project. N'Diaye center, cattle
and goat feed lot)

Crop protection

Thies-Dakar fairgrounds study

Contribution to repair of the tuna fleet

lntensification of cereals production in eastern Senegal
neonoaic reforestation

experinental irrigated reforestation unit

19
rot omcm use mm

ON

GOSH-
00‘ch

GO
MO

-—a——e——
. - - . e . e
MNMOOOV‘I

NO!
90

-——u
. . .
”mu!

0‘
O

|.0

OU-NOOON
U‘M—OAOO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Seychelles: Creation of tuna Fleet
Chad: lntegreted dovelopnent programs in south Chad

Togo: integrated developaent of the uaritiae region I
Cocoa and coffee production developaent
Cotton zone development
Research on the swollen-shoot cocoa disease virus'

Zaire: Develop-ent of the Kinshasa truck gardening bolt
Developnent of grape and vegetable crops around Hbanza-Ngungu
Establishaent of an agricultural action group

Operations of general interest:
Participation in establishing rural family houses
Subsidies to private works (Benin. Upper Volta. Mali. Chad)
Participation in the expenses of the secretariat of the .
Sahel Club

intergovernmental operations:
Subsidies to the Lake Chad Basin Coalission (developaent of
cattle raising in the regions of Assale. Chad. of Serbeouel.
Caaeroon. and of Borneo. Nigeria)
Subsidy to the Inter-African Coalittee of Hydraulic Studies
Subsidy to the lntergrovern-ental Coalittee to Coabat Drought
in the Sahel
Subsidy to the Association for the Developnent of Rice Crops
in West Africa (aiscellaneous projects)
Contributions to the Cooperation Council (integrated rural
developaent of the savannahs of the northeastern Ivory Coast.
cattle-raising developoent prograa in Niger, Senegal and
Mauritania)

Industrial and Mining Dovelopaent
Benin: Allahe industrial unit for citrus juice and extracts

Central African Elpire: Subsidy for the Saint-Floris operation
(Manovo-Gouda zone)

Ivory Coast: Participation in financing the Borotou sugar coaplex
Gabon: Mineral prospecting

Guinea-Bissau: Geological and aineral prospecting lapping in the
Gabu region

Upper Volta: Phosphate research in Arly-Kodjari-Tansarga and Aloub-
Djonana

20
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

B-Ou-o

01°

05——
MO‘O N O

Oil-‘8)
00°

7.6

0.9

0.7
7.0
3.0

2.0

3.0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mali: Mineral planning and geological napping 1.8
Mauritania: Study for building an electrical generating plant
in Nouakchott 0.8
Senegal: Participation in studying the iron deposit of Pale-e 7.1
Zaire: Subsidy to mining nission activities 1.5
Participation in the inventory of mineral resources 1.5

General interest operations:

Participation in the program of the Bureau of Geological

and Mineral Research 21.3
infrastructures
Benin: Modernization progran of the Benin-Niger Common Organization 4.0
Burundi: Equipment furnished to the Bujunbura airport 1.1

Cameroon: Realignment and Iodernization of the Douala-Edea link of

the trans-Cameroon railway 4.0

Subsidy to the Urbanism Cell 0.8
Central African Elpire:

Establish-ent of a light road naintenance unit in the Bos-

scmbele-Bossangoa region 3.5
Congo: Participation in the realignment work of the Congo-Ocean

railway 7.0
Djibouti: Establishment of an earth-bound satellite telecommunication

station 4.5
Upper Volta: Road materials supply 3.0
Madagascar: Supply of public works materials and workshop equipment

for the Malagasy engineering regiment 4.0
Mali: Participation in the railway modernization program 4.0

Participation in completing the Selingue dam 8.5
Mauritius: Road studies 1.5

Supply of an electrical power station on Rodriuue island 0.4
Mauritania: Participation in the construction of the Kiffa-Neaa road 6.0

Help for civil protection in Nouakchott 1.2

21
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

Niger: Dosso-Zinder wireless bean 7.2
Construction of two bridges on the Naggia river 5.2
Rwanda: Support for the urbanlsn and dwellings group 1.6
Construction of an airplane hangar 2.0
Chad: Houndou-Doba road project 2.0
Equipment for the Ndjanena telephone station 4.9
Togo: Tsevie water supply 3.0
Zaire: Studies for the Banana-Wanda port and urban industrial
coupler 1.5
Intergovernlental operations: Participation in the Asecna equip-ant
expenses 14.7
Social Development
Benin: Aid to public health 0.5
Burundi: Materiel for the Burundian Press Agency and the "Voice of the
Revolution" radio progral 1.1

Caneroon: Equip-ant for the Yaounde Superior Polytechnic School; construc-
tion of the Ngaoundere technological university; aid for profes-
sional and co-unal personnel training 10.2

Cape Verde: Participation in the Santa Catarina school coqlex 2.4

Central African Empire: Aid for the struggle against great ene-ies
and modernization of the Bengui hospital center 2.1

Congo: Radiological equip-ent for the Brazzaville hospital and equip-
lent for workshops and laboratories for tho Brazzaville techni-
cal lycee 2.8

Ivory Coast: Professional training for radio and television agents;
participation in the television education prograa; aid for
professional advancement and for the National Office of
Advance-out for Ivorian Business 12.0

njibouti: Aid for the anti-tuberculosis campaign; hospital technical
equipaent and a study for the construction of a teachers noml
school 2.5

Gabon: Subsidies for professional training 1.7

Upper Volta: Aid for rural health and participation in the construction
and equipping of the Superior Polytechnical Institute 5.5

Madagascar: Aid for professional training and supply of a translating
station for Malagasy Radio-Television 1.0
22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mali: Aid for public health (hospital at point 6 in Bamako and couple-
tion of the Minis ry of Finance building in Balaho) 2.5

Mauritius: ﬁquipnent for the Radio-Television Office; aicrofilling of
Mauritian archives; aodornitation of the Rosehill theater and
aid for public health 1.7

Mauritania: Participation in purchase of sanitation equipment for
Nouakchott; aid for training refrigeration technicians in
Nouadhibou and supply of asteriei for the Nouakchott profes-
sional center 3.5

Niger: Equipment for Niamey University and sports equip-ent for
Dosso stadium 3.8

Rwanda: Modernization of the Ruhengeri hospital, support for agricul-
tural and veterinary education in Butare and construction of
the theater at Kigali 0.7

Sao Tone and Principe: Equipment for the biological analysis labora-
tory of Sao Tone 0.9

Senegal: Participation in the construction of Saint-Louis University;
hotel personnel training; con-une personnel training; addition

to the official printing office 15.2
Seychelles: Aid to the Training Center; to the fishing trade; to the

Nahe cui'ure House; supply of radiophonic equip-eat 2.2
Chad: Aid for the struggle against great enemies and construction

of the Ndjanena School of Public lorks 3.2
Togo: Equip-en: for aodernizing the Sokode hospital 4.]

Zaire: Training of agents for the telecoa-unications network and
technical support for the Voice of Zaire complex 10.:

General interest operations: Subsidies to private works (Caeeroon. Congo.
Central African Empire, angon. Upper Volta. Mauritania. Mali.
Rwanda. Chad. Togo and Senegal) to the Pasteur Institutes of
nnkar, Bangui. and Antananarivo. contribution to the building
of an African Higher School for Railroading. supply of technical
and teaching equipment. provision for the education of French
children. credits for television broadcasts. etc. 26.9

23
ron omcm. use "my
FOR Oﬂ-‘lClM. USE ONLY

lntergovernnent al operations:
Contribution to the camaign against oncllocerosis in the Volta
basin; to medical efforts against widespread endeaic diseases;
aid for truck drivers' training and for training rural equip-out
engineers l0.l

In uddl'.on. n general allocation of 23.3 million francs is on the l978
program of the Aid and Cooperation Fund to supply and transport food to
recipient countries.

COPYRlGlT: Rene Moreux et Clo. Paris 1979

8782
(‘50: Mill)

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ONICIM. US! ONLY

CIIAD

NATIONS DiSiN’l‘ﬂGRATlCN CNSIDBRBD POSSIBILITY
I‘eris JEIIIB AFRIQIE in French 7 Mar 79 p 30
[Article by Abdelasis nah-ani: "Chad: Disintegration?"]

[Text] Chad has reached a point of no return. its short-tern orientation is
toward a change of rogiae and perhaps toward a drastic division between the
North and the South. The federal solution proposed on is February by the
Fund. president. Valery Giscard d'Bstaing at a press conference, already ap-
pears in the eyes of soao to be a lesser evil in relation to what is in danger
of happening. However. on is February it see-ed to depend on surgery that
would be too brutal.

The comtry is ungevernable today and it would take a showdown between bel-
ligerents or successful eediation to prevent explosion or disintegration.
liven Nd'jalena, is not being governed, and the rest of Chad is occupied by
rival araies, paniculariy by the part of FIOLINAT [Chadian National Libera-
tion Front] led by Goulouni Oueddei.

The collapse was accelerated by the aned confrontation between

President Felix Heller- and his prime ninister. Hissein Hebre. Per Halloua.
liubre has again becoae "head of the opposition" and for Habre "liaiioua's
tea- is node up of ulefactors. thieves and creeks."

The econoaic situation is one of the nest precarious. The ainistries and ad-
ainistrations have been practically abandoned by their incubonts; the banks
are closed. including the issuing bank; trade is only partially operating;
the national radio is silent; electricity and water are locking in several
quarters; pupils are on forced vacations; the planes of the regular airlines
are avoiding Nd'juena and ground co-unications are increasingly difficult.

Fear has cone to be added to this partial paralysis. The antagonisa between
North and South. heretofore liaited to a struggle for power. has degenerated
into increasingly aurdereus confrontations between the blacks of the South.

uhristians or aniaists. and the Nusiias of the North. Thus, 50 Mslias were
killed at “maiden. in the South. on 22 February. And intervention by French
troops was required to prevent a aere violent asssscre. This fury was a re-
action to extortions emitted in other regions.

25
mt ontcm. use own
ION OVFICIAL USE ONLY

Thousands of "Southists" have deserted Nd'jaaena. which is controlled in
large port by the soldiers of llissoin llabre.

France is especially elbarrassed. because the central govern-ent she supports
is disappearing. The territory over which she exercises her influence con-
tinuos to grow narrower. And despite an actual alliance between Paris and
Khartom (where President Valery Giscard d'Estaing is to go soon). rival in-
fluences are growing stronger--especielly those of Tripoli and Lagos.

Nigeria wants to check-ate the Sudanese aediation. On 25 February she pro-
posed her own "reconciliation conference" between the two aain Chadian fac-
tions. But are there not aore than two? Felix Halloual is already outfianked
by Abdelkader Kalougue. chief of the gender-orie. as well as by Col Djogo.
who thinks he is the exclusive representative of the people of the South.

For the North. there are Hissein Habre. Goukouni and Ahaed Acyl; each with
his groups and his alliances.

In any case. the present situation cannot go on any longer. President Malloua
is in control of only a snail part of his capital. All the rest of the coun-
try is getting away from hia.

COPYRIGIT: Jeune Afrique. GRUPJIA1979

8946
C50: “00

26
FOR orncm. use any
NR OPPICIAL ”8| ONLY

mmonm 0mm

NATIM OWEN!!!) BY TERROR. BCWOMIC STAGMTIG!
Paris JSUNB APRIQUE in French 7 Mar 79 p 40
[Article by Annick Denoist: "in the Kingdea of Terror")

[Text] "The only god", "the only liracle Equatorial Guinea has produced." he
is president for life and holds do official titles. He would have been crown-
ed king if those close to his had not dissuaded hia. Finally. as he loves to
repeat, his country would not exist without hin. One wonders if that would
not be better. Since Francisco Macias Ngueea. a for-er burgoaaster end civil
servant. becaae president in Septeaber 1960. Equatorial Guinea has experienced
terror and econoaic depression.

however. when independence was proclaiaed on 12 October l968 after 90 years
of Spanish colonization. this saall country of 28.000 square he. sandwiched
between Caneroon and Gabon. had good assets. lts econe-y, resting on the
world's best cocoa. coffee and wood, gave it a relatively high per capita
incone for black Africa. The infrastructure was solid. the level of educa-
tion of the population satisfactory. For the soae 280,000 inhabitants the
future see-ed proaising.

But the econoey very quickly becaae disjointed. Spain is growing tired of the
new president's incessant appeals for aid. Plantations are in jeopardy. ag-
rlcultural production is diainishing free year to year. Since l968 cocoa ex-
ports have gone free 30,000 tons to 3,500 tons. The flight of the scarce
capital and the expulsion of foreign technicians contribute to accelerating
the country's bankruptcy; the rate of inflation in 1974 was one of the world's
highest.

Finally. according to an Equatorial Guinean refugee, "Real independence lasted
only 145 days. free 12 October 1960 to 5 March 1969. Since then, Nacias has
abolished the law of association. forbidden political parties and created the
PUNT (Markers National Single Party). to which every citizen is forced to be-
long...sinee its birth. He has institutionalized a reign of terror by ia-
prisoning or elininating any real or ilaginary opponent."

For the low work by which he hinself is repelled the president has found
people to carry it out in the Youth on the March with Macias Moveaent. a

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ OVFlCIAL "8! ONLY

terrorist ailitla, basically composed of delinquents. Through their ntten-
tlons two villages. Mbe and ukohete. were entirely massacred in March 2977.

in the prisons, cannon law criainals were forced to torture political prison-
ers.

The repression being carried out with the vigilance of the basic committees
charged with national security is especially ained at intellectuals. it

has resulted in a flight of the elite to neighboring countries. In addition
to these political refugees. there are Iany who have had to leave the country
for econo-ic reasons. Today over i00.000 Euqatorial 6uineans--or at least

a third of the population--have fled. Sixty thousand are refugees in Gabon.
30.000 in Cameroon. 5.000 in Nigeria. 6,000 in Spain.

The socialist countries (Soviet Union. Cuba. China) that aaintain cooperation
.wlth Macias Ngueaa. the Western countries (France and Spain) that still have
interests on the spot, the Vatican, which is seeking to . oid definite rup-
ture with formerly very Catholic countries. scarcely seen worried about the

situation. Their silence perpetuates the terror.

COPYRlef: Jounc Afriquc. GRUPJIA 1979

8946
C50: 4400

28
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

GHANA

AUSTRIAN LIVES‘I'OCK COOPERATION-4n February Auntrie delivered neteriel end
oquipeent in the eeount of “.5 eillien cedin for the Preepoeo livestock pro.)-
ect in the Bm-Ahefo eree. lie I» recell thnt thie project. cerried out ee
A Joint venture by Auetrie end the nreng-Ahefe Regienel Developeent Corpore-
tien (RAW-:0). mmnentn e totel coat of About 10 eillion cedio end in ex-
pected to extend ever an area of neerly 1.000 hecteree (m: of 6 October 1973

p 265 Lager}; [I'm-u mamas morxcwx n mrmauesws in French 9 her 79
n ‘52

USSR-RHANA HESS COOI‘ERATIONnAn egreeeent wee ruched in hoecew in the eiddle
of February between the Ghenien prone egency celled GHANA ms AGENCY (CNA),
and the Soviet preoe onency. celled NOV/051‘! (am). The oimrs of the egrec-
nent were Mr K. 9. Brown. GNA mnorel eeneenr. end hr Keten Khecheturev. AFN
vice prenident. The two egencieo pled d nutuel eoeietence end exchemee of
intonation end phetogre o. erg [ﬁns "wears mpxcmx m mmmasus
in French 9 Her 79 p 6‘} n

NEH CI'RRBROY ISHRuThe Chenien hilitery Governeent hee Juet ieeued new currency
to col-bet the from perpetrated minet the lecel cumncyuthe cedi. The ber-
dern heve been cloeed end will reeein cleeed throughout the operetion of ex-
chenging the never eeney in the benk efficee. thet ie. free 13 to 26 Herch. end
ell dcper-ture er- entrence of per-eons or eoeete is forbidden during thet period.
new bills will he exchemd for old billo at e rete of 70 new cedie for 100 old
cedin for neounto not exceedinr. 5.000 cedio and et e rete of 50 new cedie for
100 old cedie for ouee exceedine 5.000 cedie. coins ere not involved in this
meeting ner- ere bent depenite. treenury hondn. ehuee end oecuritiee quoted
on the oteck exchange. In this wey. the eilitnry loverneent expecte to obtain
an npprccieble reduction in the eneunt of currency in circuletion. end it hee
icenod severe wer'ninr, to enyone who eixht infringe upon the eteye teluen. erg
[Fans mncuns: momma-x x-rr mrmmms in French 16 Her 79 p 6937 R5

'330: M500

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEF?»

MIC" DAN FEASIBILITY STUDY-4n acconianco with the tone of an Ignenent
whizh han Juet boon signed in Conakn by Guinean Price Hinietor Leneana
Boaronui and a representative of hunch Electric Conpany (80?). the French
conpnny will conduct studies rolntive to Xonkoure Dan. The contact is for
25 niilion francs. The project for a den on the Konhouro River in not new.
It uill he "called that the Konkouro filo had been cloned by the French in
199‘ at tho tine of Guinoan indopendonco. Subnoquent to thut tile eoveral
nttonptn vole nado by Guinea to reopen the project with the aid of other
countrieo. particularly the USSR and Italy. but to no avail. The financing
of tho ntudy vill be eneund in pert by e gift m. the bench Govern-Int:
the not will coae in equal parts from guaranteed comercial endite and a
loan free the Control Fund for Bconoaic Cooperation. The can in to he built
at a point on the river which in 150 In north of Conakry. not far fro- the
Primia aluninun plant uhone current capacity of 700.000 tone could be dou-
blod by new invoot-ento. oxt [hm NAMES TROPICMIX F.‘l' EDIWANENS
in anch 16 Mar 79 p 690 ﬂ

CSOI U500

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

LIBERIA

NLIERT'S VISIT 10 FRANCE EXPECTED TO STRENGDIEN 1‘-
Perl: MARQUIS TROPICAUX ET DEDITBWEENS in French 2 lit 79 pp 551-553

[Article by Jacques Latrenoliare: "Liberia: the Essential Link in a Euro-
African Policy")

[Text] Responding to the invitation of Olivier Stirn when he was in Monrovia
last Noveaber, lillia- Tolbert. president of the Republic of Liberia. will be
the guest of Prance late in March. This official visit will be his first
since he succeeded President Tub-an in l97l. it is expected to tighten the
bonds--rather loose bonds. to tell the trutho-which have united our two coun~
tries to this day and which lay be consolidated by a trip to Liberia by
Valery Giscard d'Bsteing before the end of 1979.

For reasons connected both with history and folklore. French diploaacy see-s
to have long believed that Liberia was an enclave of Alerican influence in
West Africa. where our contractors and exporters had of necessity to cone up
against positions previously taken and solidly defended. Inherited free co-
lonial protectionisn, these routine views had their day. Par fron being an
obstacle to the developeent of our econoeic relations with Liberia. the fect
that the Anerican dollar is still the country's legal currency is in its favor.
This aonetary coalonality in fact constitutes security for Liberia‘s suppliers.
explainingo-as auch as the country's nineral and agricultural wealth--why the
rather fire ratio resulting fro- the proportion ef servicing the foreign debt
($19,000,000) to its net coalercial incoee ($60,000,000 in 1977) does not at
all dininish the credit it finds in large institutions and banks of Anerica,
Europe and Arabia, the incoae free the balance of accounts reaaining "hard to
control" there, in the very words of the IMF experts. In assuning the func-
tions of e central bank since 1974, the National Bank of Liberia has not ex-
hausted these unofficial receipts, but has regularized and canalised then.

also regulating coapensation business with respect to other banks and playing
the role of econonic adviser to the gevernnent.

Generally speaking. one of Liberia's attractions as a partner is the gradual
unification of the two structures that have long coexisted there. one at bot-
ton a Iarhet econeny which is concerned only with the 40,000 Anerican~Liber-

ians. the other self-subsistance, affecting the reaainder of the population,
or l.450.000 inhabitants.

31
'0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conscious of the threat that in the long run would have weighed heavily on
the pioneers by the rapid deaographic growth of the aborigines (the birth-
rate, 3.36 percent. is one of the highest in West Africa), President Talbert.
on the sociological level. encouraged an assiailation policy that blurs the
ethnic contours of the upper class and associates the elite of the interior
with the governaent. For the first tile since Liberia was founded in 1847

a Liberian by blood, Methodist Bishop bonnie larner, is vice president of the
Republic. and he is the person President Toibert sent to Tanzania and Uganda
to atteept to reconcile their two chiefs of state.

However, this in-depth unification work leaves intact the eapirical and aer-
cantiie foundations of the Liberian state. which give it its originality in
relation to the other neighboring states--English or French speating--that
are basically Inch more legalistic. The Liberian state has thus been able to
avoid ailitary coups d'etat--not that the any is nonexistent there. but it
is not the support of any tradition enjoining it periodically to put the in-
stitutions back on their feet by discipline and financial severity. 0n the
other hand, public life there is eninated by veritable civilian coups d'etat,
characterised by resounding changes of eanagers reputed to be incapable or
corrupt. The last of these. which occurred last October. cost three ainisters
their posts. including David Moore. who was heading the ilportant departaent
of Commerce. industry and Transportation.

The Face of Liberian Dipioaacy

Marching toward its social and political aaturity, Liberia owes it to itself to
have a diploaacy that reflects that aaturity. indeed its diploaacy was es-
pecially active during the year 1918, during which the president and his di-
rect associates visited nest of the chiefs of state of lost or East Africa.

or received thee in Honrovia. Moreover. this kind of activity widely over-
flowed the continent. Mr Talbert having gone to Peking. Mr larner to Roaania.
and a delegation free the Supreae Soviet of the USSR having been received in
the Liberian capital.

Peace is the essential objective of this activity, whether it is addressed to
Marshal ldi Anin Dada, South Africa (Mr Vorster was Monrovia's guest in 1977).
Naaibia or the Western Sahara. in Monrovia they believe that a reconciliation,
even an iaperfect one, is always aore profitable than a fece-to-fece war.
Olivier Stirn. in a speech at the dinner given in his honor by the Foreign
Affairs Minister. Cecil Dennis. paid hoaage to that constant desire for aedia-
tion. recalling in particular that N! Tolbert's efforts were not unknown in
Franco-Guinean reconciliation, which was spectacularly aade concrete by
Giscerd d'Estaing's recent trip to Conakry.

Eclectic th0ugh it aay be. not rejecting a priori any partner in dialog. that
diplomacy nonetheless “bids its suit" with no couplexes. in 1977 the govern-
eent preaptiy tereinated the indiscreet activities of the AGENCE TASS corre-
spondent. whose departure was itself followed by a change of aabassadors.
Last June in Peking President Toibert was not afraid to invoke "always-power-
ful God and huaanitarian capitalise" in terns that a conservative chief of

32
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 655 ONLY

state night find it hard to use in Europe. in his own district, but which did
not seen to unduly shock the Chinese officials who were listening to then.

Finally. the third aspect of Liberian diplomacy: the desire to initiate and
seal political ententes by loans of specific econoaic agree-ants. This was
the case with Sierra Leone on the theme of developing the Nano River Valley;
by instituting. with Guinea, harmony in areas as diverse as fishing, justice
and cattle raising; by signing. with two lvorian state coapanies. SODEPALM
[Co-pany for the Developeent and Exploitation of Pain Oil] and SATNACI [Tech-
nlcnl Assistance Company for Hodernized Agriculture in the ivory Coast].

study contracts for creating pain oil. coffee and cocoa plantations. Taking
an ilportant part in African intergovernmental programs-~Pan African Highway.
Pan African Telecollunications. Postal and Air Coordination«-Liberia is known
to be participating finally in the CEDBAO (Nest African States 8conouy Coanun-
ity) and the African Develop-ent Bani. it is anilating the ADRAO (Association
for the Develop-eat of Rice Culture in West Africa). which headquarters in
Monrovia and whose last congress. bringing together so delegates representing
l4 African countries and the large international credit and technical coopera-
tion organizations, was held in the capital on 24 May l978.

In the civil tradition, tainted with Masonic Methodisn. mentioned above. this
desire for cooperation has not been aanifested to this day in the Iilitary
area. On the contrary. Liberia on several occasions has evidenced hostility
toward creating an inter-African araed force. through the voice of

EaIett Hermon. its albassador to the United Nations. and of liliiaa Tolbert
hiaself. who on the occasion when the credentials of the ivory Coast aabassa-
dor were handed over. shortly after the Kolwezi operation. indicated that in
his opinion Africa "did not need armed interventions. munitions and weaponry.
hut aedicine, food products and schools."

the coincidence of these state-ents being aade at the same tine as the events
in Shaba and the very choice of the person to when they were addressed could
not have been fortuitous. and caused the opportunity to aaterialize for
bringing harlony between the French and Liberian point of view concerning
Africa's political situation--their points of convergence being aany.

in deciding to send an observer to the neat Franco-African Conference at
Kigali, the Liberian govenuaent is still a long way froa giving its approval
to the French theses. but the rather favorable echoes of the Conference puh-
Iished in the offici'i Monrovia SUNDAY EXPRESS. like the sylpathetic judg-
aents for-ulated on certain aspects of French cooperation in coaparison with
the Aaerican for-ulas. light indicate that an evolution on the part of
uiliial Talbert is not iapossible. One or more direct contacts with

Giscard d'hstaing can only favor it.

In any case the evolution on the tactical level would be of greater interest.
as an approach in the other African English-speaking states that unfortunate-
ly are showing it toward France--this is especially apparent in Tanzania
and Nigeria--of a selewhat anachronistic distrust. There is still solidarity
of English-speaking people between these states and Liberia. but the latter
historically escapes this latent hostility. Perhaps through its agency

33
ton ontcm. use mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it might have been possible to reduce a fracture between English-speaking
nnd French-speaking states that has constituted-much IOI'O than the opposing
Bantu and Sudanian concepts dear to ethnologists--the principal difficulty
in African atte-pts at political or econonic unification over the last 20
years.

The Liberian bconeuic Pranework
The Action of France

0n the other hand. a political rapprochement night encourage French investors
and exporters to interest themselves in a geographic sector uhich unfortun-
ately is pointed out by a wide white spot on the sap of our African activities.
Solidiy i-planted in neighboring countries, having at its disposal because of
this a base for tooling and personnel facilitating subaissions of public bids,
France has hardly been able to us these advantages to penetrate the Liberian
market which on the other hand has served to introduce nulerous fires of

other European nations over the whole of lest Africa.

However. it has been demonstrated that this market was not a preserve kept by
the United States, since the countries of the European Econoaic Ce-inity,
foremost among which is the Federal Republic of Ger-any, today constitute in
their totality the priuary suppliers (81l0.000,000 or 30 percent) and the pri-
mary custoeers ($269,000,000 or 64.6 percent) of the country. in this gale
France does not play as high a role as it sight, ranking only sixth along the
suppliers, after the Netherlands, with a Iodest percentage of 3.3 percent.
However. the sixth place it also occupies anong purchasers. with a such lore
interesting percentage of 0 percent, gives it a good position fro: which to
pro-etc its activities.

in the area of lueber. for example, which seen: to prenise a handsoae future
for Liberia, since with a production of 600,000 cubic actors it is in fifth
position anong exports ($35,000,000) and gives rise to widespread reforesta-
tion operations, France has occupied first place along buyers of rough tiaber,
with 30,000 cubic aeters. however, no French naee appears on the list of
fins, chiefly Dutch and Geraan, which have taken advantage of tax exeqtions
custons reductions granted to foreign investors for installing a lunber indus-
try in Liberia.

The catalog of French activities in Liberia reaains very scanty. with the ex-
ception of the agencies of our large ilport-export cowanies. Contracts were
concluded in l976 and l977 with a French public works fin to build two
bridges, one ever the Mesurade River. the other over the St. Paul River.

That is not much ce-pared to the financial volume of these contracts--
“2,000,000 in all for invest-ents anticipated for the 197601980 Plan. or
84l5,000.000 including $287,000,000 from abroad. notably free the internation-
al credit organisations that France subscribes to or participates in. The
credits provided for road work have reached $140,000,000. in addition. our
fins eight be interested in credits for port developeent, rebuilding and
housing (850,000,000), without prejudice to the share reserved for building
by the health and education depart-ents. iihat finally appears especially

3’s
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regrettable is the absence of Prench firms and study bureaus in the large
regional ﬂano River Union development project, brirging together Liberia and
Sierra Leone, which includes in addition to constructing a zoo-aeter bridge,
done for a worthy purpose by 0 German fine, a vast hydraulic and hydro-elec-
tric extension.

The Pillars of the Liberian Economy: Iron and Rubber

The situation is even less favorable to France in the two sectors that are es-
sential to Liberia, iron and rubber.

Aaerican investments in the area of Para rubber go back to 1926, on which date
development began of the Firestone plantation; at Gatekarbe on the Cavalio
River and Harbel, 40 ha east of Monrovia, the latter reuining to this day,
with 36,400 hectares, the largest plantation in the world under single owner-
ship. Then six other foreign companies, notably Goodrich and the Saiaia Rub-
ber Company, were also established. In all, 56,200 hectares of concessions.
of which 50,000 are in production, representing about 49 percent. of the Para
rubber surface area. The reaaining 51 percent for-s the doaaine of the small
African planters, whose production, because of lower yields. represents just
a little less than a third of the total tonnage. Production decreased be-
tween 1974 and 1977 by about 20 percent. to be stabilized at around 60,000
tons. Selling prices themselves have constantly declined. They were $1,210
a ton in l9$l and went as low as $131 in 1976. However, a rapid new start

is anticipated for this crop because of the demand, which will increase by
80 percent before 1985. Firestone envisages bringing its own production in
Liberia to 100,000 tons; the local processing industry (Allen Grant and
Liberian Rubber Processing Corporation) will of course follow a siailar pro~
gression.

Although little possibility exists for the French rubber industry to insert
itself into a structure so well defended and enjoying such a considerable ad-
vance in paid-for installations and technology--the Ivory Coast seeas to be

a better place for French atteapts in those areas--, the situation night be
less closed where iron ore is concerned, whose average exports of 25,000,000
tons, valued at $335,000,000, with an average content of 68 percent and re-
serves valuated at nearly 2,000,000,000 tons, including l,000,000,000 just for
the helogosi deposit, put Liberia in the first rank of African producers and
in the third rank among world producers. in 1976 total ore exports represent-
ed 70 percent of the country's total exports.

The iaportance of iron ore reserves in Liberia aakes it the axis of European
supplv for the next 50 years, ahead of Mauritania, Guinea, Angola and Sierra
Leone. Two of the four principal deposits, those of the Liberia Mining Corpo-
ration, an affiliate of Republic Steel, and Lance [Liberian Aaerican Swedish
Minerals Comany], have declining production. But the National iron Ore
Corporation, which operates on the Mano River, and the Bong Mining and Con-
centrating Coapany are in full yield, while the deposits of hologosi,
Bieaamta- and Putu have barely begun. The first was conceded to a group whose
leader is Aaax (USA) in liaison with two other American ccsanies and a Jap-
anese consortia, which will also finance an ore tanker port at Robertsport,
northwest of Monrovia.

35
ran OFFICIAL use mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is significant that no French fin is participating in these various ex-
ploitations or projects. whereas the world price of steel will be conditioned
in the future by the tennages extracted froa Liberia. The acsc [European
Coal and Stool Coamunity] has contributed. however. through a loan to the
German flras Finsider. Estel. August Thyssen Hutte and Fried Krupp Hutten-
werko. to the extension of Bong lining. in terms of a contract reserving for
the Liberian governaent so percent of the shares and profits. to which is
added a royalty of 3 percent on the sales , the contracting firas pledging
theaselvos to purchase the entire production.

A French member of Parliament in 1976 was alarmed about the origin and methods
of financing. The Brussels Comission replied that "the Ce-mity was far
from filling the ore needs of the European actallurgic industry. the latter
having necessarily to expand and diVersify its sources of supply. not to men-
tion the broadening of the bases of co-on interest resulting from the Lone
Convention."

Although the argumentation is flawless. the affair puts a finger on the dif-

ficulty in industrial redeployment. The support given for years by the state
to our steel industry has not prevented its partial eliaination; but it

has contributed to excluding France froa exploiting these deposits. although
she did participate. through the CBCA. in financing that enabled German steel
firms to be assured of control.

France's Entry into the Liberian Economic Circuit

The inadequacy of the economic ties with Liberia are being felt increasingly
in our African strategy. It is a sign of the times that, to draw then tight-
er. the first steps lust be taken by France. Supported monetarily by the
United States. strong in natural riches. Liberia can in fact dispense with
our capital and our cooperation. The amount of the public loans contracted
for in 1978 on the foreign aarket (about 30.000.000.000 CPA francs) bear elo-
quent witness to this.

At least this situation will keep out of the gene. in Liberian ainds. any
suspicion of a desire on our part to exert unjustifiable "pressure". and will
perhaps make it possible to grapple in total freedom with certain thorny
problems. such as the flag of convenience. in the sense of a revision of the
conditions of registration of ships in its aaritiae role. Liberia's laxness
is no doubt as great as was soaetimes claiaed in the wake of the Amoco Cadiz
disaster. but the salaries paid on these ships are ten times lower than those
in the United States and lower still by 60 and 30 percent than these if Italy
and Greece. An official report by the Liberian governnent itself at the time
of the explosion of the oil tanker Argo Merchant at Nantucket Island on the
American coast, aentioned the inadequacy of controls and the need to stiffen
the sanctions in cases where the standards are not respected.

0n the other hand, the practice of the flag of convenience no longer assunes
vital inortance for Liberia. contributing only 10 percent of the state's

total resources. It seeas the question might be attacked in a spirit of re-
ciprocai understanding. Nillian Tolbert having shown. in other cine-stances.

._ 36
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Sh ONLY

his opon-mindodness and the importance he attaches to Liberia's image abroad.

That delicate parenthesis closed. the problem, for our capital and products.
of inserting ourselves into the Liberian economy remains untouched. if we
cannot or do not want to enter into partnerships of capital for exploitation
of iron ore. agriculture is at least one area in which we night be interested.

Liberia has not experienced the spectacular declines in production recorded
in other countries. such as Nigeria or Guinea. where mineral production has
upset the data of national production. But this is above all because that
agriculture, almost with the exception of Para rubber. has still only weakly
entered the market economy cycle. it is noteworthy that the official initia-
tives in favor of rice. whose production increased regularly from 1973 to
1978, going from 225.000 to 280,000 tons. had coincided with a parallel fall
in cassava production. which during the same period fell from 250.000 to
l0$.000 tons. so that the operation. no doubt for lack of a socio-ecenomic
substratum. resulted in a food shortage that forces Liberia to import increas-

ingly larger quantities of rice every year: Sl.000 tons in 1975. 00,000 tons
in 1977.

Actions conducted in collaboration with lvorian state-owned companies, with
sub-contracting intervention by the lFCC (French institute of Coffe. Cocoa
and Other Plant Stimulants). the lRHO (institute for Research on Edible Oils
and Oleaginous Products). and the BDPA ( Bureau for the Development of Agri-
cultural Production) in the areas of palm oil, coffee and cocoa. have been
heightened. Pain oil. in which to tell the truth the Liberian government has
been interested for l0 years, has raised some doubts. Between 1972 and [974
production increased appreciably. thanks chiefly to palmetto oil. 0n the
other hand it showed a declining net during the years following. going from
$8,000,000 to 33.000.000 in value.

'fhe intervention of our cooperation, better aimed than any other in the area
of selection of plant material, growing techniques and popularization in the
peasant milieu. would no doubt allow Liberia to avoid these saw-toothed per-
formances. in particular by the introduction of interlediary structures,
which have been successful in the ivory Coast and Cameroon, and of which
Liberia itself has had positive experience in the Para rubber area. in the
same way. more satisfactory results might be obtained in yield and tonnage of
cocoa, production of which steadily declined from 1974 to 1977. going from
7.200 to 2,000 tons.

President Tolbert's journey to Paris. although it should bring into relief
the objectives common to both diplomacies. will mitigate--we hope--the differ-
ences, which perhaps depend more on intellectual categories and emotional
tradition than on strictness of reasoning. in any case. it is not immaterial
that this meeting cones before the next Kigali Conference.

The very history of Liberia, whose resources have been developed by foreign
initiatives lending support in the beginning to a human nucleus which was
aggregate, interested. then in large part promoted to positions of responsi-
bility in an agro-industrial and mining economy. explains why its president's

31
ton orncuu. use 0va
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

meritorious efforts to give the whole population the benefit of the national
resources by associating then in production, had boon more willingly tenpted
by technoeratic ways than by training and profossionalizing the peasants.

This is a little like tho disease suffered. for other reasons, by an Angola
whose socialistic governaent. up until new. has shown action in the agricul-
tural area only by substituting large state structures for those of the co-
lonial companies. On this then an economic and political dialog could be
established with President Tolbert. outside of any laperialistic hidden
aotives. it would be a fruitful dialog, dedicated to improving the Burafrican
social and econoaic space.

COPYRle‘: Rene Moreux et Cie.. Paris, [979

8940
C50: “00

38
FOR OFFICIAL use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HALI

m POMS/TRY nevsxromm'r LOAN 1!) HELP suvmomem
ram mamas movrcmx m wsnrmmmcsm in French 16 Mar 79 p 689

[mg The International Development Association. branch of the Horld Bank.
which operates under preferential conditions. has Just approved a loan of
$10.5 aillion to aid a forestry project in the Republic of Mali. This is the
first forestry project financed by IDA in this country. It will help seat the
mquirenents for hoatim and construction wood in urban areas and. on an ex-
pnrinnntal basis. introduce aodern techniques of forestry develop-ant.

This project will create 1.1600 hectares of industrial plantation area under
normal rainy conditions near Basako and 70 hectares of experimental plantation
area partially irrinated near Hopti. Sixty additional hectares of plantation
area under noraal rainy conditions will be created on an experisental basis
near Senou. Three nurseries will also be planted. l‘lodern techniques of for-
entry developnent will be tried out and studies will be conducted to consider
the possibilities of rural forestry activities involving the participation of
local people.

The consequences of the project on the environ-em will be considerable. It
is expected that the production of heating. wood will be sufficient to avoid
the cuttinr. of about 10,000 hectares of brush at the beginning of production
and as such as 10,000 hectares in subsequent years. This project will prevent
soil erosion and will increase the fertility of the land by lewthenim the
period durim which the land will reaain unplowed.

The total cost of the project is $9.1; million. The Central Fund for Economic
Cooperation and the Aid and Cooperation Fund. two French organisations. will
furnish $1.10 nillion and $1.3 million respectively to finance the project.

The IDA loan is granted for a period of 50 years. includiw a 10-year period
of deferred anortieation. It does not bear any interest. but an annual con-
aisnior of 0.75 percent will be charmed to cover IDA's administrative expenses.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux ct Cie.. Paris. 1979
R568
080: M00

39
Fox orrrcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

CORRUPTION TRIAL ENDS. VERDICT!» mm
i'arie "ARMS ‘I'IIOPICAUX ET HRDI‘I‘BRRAWS in French 16 her 79 p 689

for}? The trial or tour eeebere ot the Hilitary National Liberation Couittee
and five other eilitary and civilian individuale. eccueed ot nieappropriating

public tunde. opened on 8 March and oloeed the next day. 9 "each. with eevere
sentences.

In fact. the Special State Security Court eentenced toner hinieter ot Detenee

Kieniea Doultara to death and ordered hie to pay. all euite coebined. eore than
3.89 billion helian trance (38.9 willion French hence). the aeount ot the
misappropriation with which he ie charged.

The court eentenced Joeeph Hare. toner einieter ot Juatice. toner layer of
Kati and toner chair-nan ot the oouittee ot inveetigation. to 20 yeare at
hard labor and ordered hie to pay acre than 19 eillion trance: Kali- Deebele.
former einieter of traneport. to lo yeareaot the eaee and a paynnt ot acre
than 9 eillion trance tor hie part in the eieapprowietion; and Tieroco Ba-
aayoko. torur director ot eecurity. to 5 yeare iewieonlent tor the eaee ot-
fenee. Beaayoko wee accueed of receiving tunde and ueins thee tor the opera-
tion of hie eervice without legal authorisation.

The court aleo eentenced two of the eccueed to 1 year of ieprieonnent and ac-
quittcd three othere in the trial of the nine tor-er otticiale and ecconplicee
charged with eanipulatinr, public tunde. eiaappropriation and corruption.

The eentencee pronounced minet Doukara. Bagayoko and Deehele are to run con-
currently with thoee handed down on 21 October 1% tor their attenpud coup
d'etet. At that tine. the tiret two had been com-led to death and the third
to 20 yearn at hard labor. .

COPYRIGHT: Rene "oxen: et Cie.. Perie. 1979

95m
0310: “1‘00 3ND

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY