FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10275
22 January 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 758

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION ssavuce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT
rouo No. 758

CONTENTS

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

ﬂanidou Kane on Economic. Cultural Change:
(Cheikh Hanidou Kane Interview; JFUNE AFRIQUE, 9 Dec 81) ..

GRAD
Rope. Pinned on OAU Peacekeeping Force 'Illuooty'
(Editorial, Simon Halley; APRIQUE-ASIE, 23 “av-6 Dec 81)...
GABON
Reciprocal Needs Seen Guiding Bongo-Hitterrand Relations
(siradiou Diallo; stun: Arnrqun. 25 Nov 81) ...............
GUINEA-3158A”
Briefs
Bauxite Contract With USSR
MAURITIUS
PH Rangoolan'a 'Readjuatnenta' Examined
(Jonathan H'ﬂaruia; APRIQUE-ASIR, 23 Nov-6 Dec 81).........
SENEGAL

PDS Secretary General Wade Diocuesea Internal, African Issues
(Abdoulaye Wade Interview; APRIQUE-ASIB, 7-20 Dec 81) .....

Activitiea. Programs of Opposition Pe"iea noted
(Ginette Cot; AFRIQUE—ASIE, 23 2-.‘ov-6 Dec 81)............---
HAMIDOU KANE ON ECONOMIC, CULTURAL CHANGES
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French No 1092, 9 Dec 81 pp 68-70

(Interview with Cheikh Hamidou Kane, minister of industrial develop-
ment and crafts, by Philippe Decraeng/

[Texg/ Minister of development and crafts in Habib Thiam's govern-
ment, Cheikh Hamidou Kane did not agree to come back on the Senegalese
political scene until after former president Mamadou Dia. imprisoned
for plotting in December 1962. was freed.

A close associate of the former Senegalese prime minister, he then
fell into disgrace and was sent as a diplomat to Monrovia, then to
Lagos. It was theis that he started a career as an international
civil servant by entering UNICEF. After a 13-year stay abroad. he
returned to his own country and in 1976 became chairman of the board
of Dakar-Marine. a huge industrial project. destined to make a major
naval repair and construction center of the Cap-Vert peninsula.

Descended from an aristocratic Toucouleur family from the Senegal
River valley and born in Matam in 1928. Cheikh Hamidou Kane had his
primary schooling at the School of the Sons of Chiefs in Saint-Louis
and his secondary schooling at the Lycea Van Vollenhoven in Dakar.
He received his diploma from the National School of France Overseas.
the former "Colo," With a degree in law and a degree in arts. he is.
along with the English-speaking Chinua Achebe, the best West African
novelist. Author of "L'Aventure Ambigue" [The Ambiguous Adventurg/
published by Julliard in 1961, he was one of the first to deal with
the tragedy of acculturation, a theme that has been developed many
times since then. and the only one to do so with such a talent for
expression and writing. His career and his work as a writer, unique
but powerful, have made him one of the prototypes of the African
intelligentsia of the independence generation. being at the same

time a political leader and a man of culture.
"We Are Accomplices of the Westerners"

JEUNB AFRIQUE: How did you discover the shite world?

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urriyini. "hr. \mm

Cheikh Hamidou Kane: 1 did it in several stages. I was still a baby
when it started. I was perhaps 2 or 3 when I remember having been

placed in a pagne on a woman's back. I still have a very precise
memory of a white woman dressed in a tropical helmet. strapped tightly
into riding breeches. This sight of a human being who was not black
seemed strange to me.

When I had learned to read, books permitted me to discover the
thoughts of the white man, me who belonged to an oral world where

the only known book was the Koran, a work of divine and not human
origin.

Then I discovered the colonizer through his administrators and
commanders--in the Vichy era. a time of danger and mobilization.

The last stage was the school, with my fellow students and teachers.
who were all French and very different from the officials in authority

J.A.: And your discovery of France?

C.H.K.: That took place in September 1952. when. wanting to become
a professor of philosophy. I went to metropolitan France. I then
discovered the'French. after having discovered white men. Western
thought was not unknown to me, but the potential for violence in the
world of the whites crushed me. Their history baffled me. I was
paralyzed by the contrast between their cultural humanism and the
political violence that they were capable of carrying out, either
toward themselves or against a third party. I was at the same time
distraught and fascinated. and it seemed to me that. even if a greater
mastery of techniques had permitted Africans to go overseas. they
would certainly never have acted in such a brutal fashion as the
Europeans did.

J.A.: Do you think that the West has culturally traumatized black
Africa?

C.H.K.: The inequality of the conditions of exchange between the

Nest and Africa is especially shocking on a cultural level. Only very
few specialists have really paid attention to the ways of Africans.
Educated in European universities. now placed in positions of command.
we transmit only the concepts of this Western civilization, of which
we are thus the accomplices.

The quarrel between Marxists and non-Marxists seems to me quite
secondary. for these categories are still unknown to us. Indeed.
what seems serious to me is the rude break for the child as seen as
he enters nursery school. from his traditional surroundings. Thus,
as far as I am concerned, what forms my being. my irreducible
substance, is my "Foulanity". the fact of being a Toucouleur and

of speaking the Pulaar language. But we are. my fellow countrymen
and I, constantly invaded by foreign cultural influences, transmitted

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by very powerful media. The different ethnic groups do not react to
these aggressions in a uniform way. The Wolof of Senegal and the
Yoruba of Nigeria, who are very plastic, very open, resist cleverly
by creating new cultural models.

J.A.: Are you worried about the social changes to which the African
continent is now rubjected?

C.H.K.: The massive urbanization is serious. The destructuralization
of the rural areas, due to the severity of peasant living conditions.
accounts for the difficulties in development outside the capitals.
Because of this, the political leaders ought to completely re-examine
their strategy for developing the continent.

J.A.: What do you think of Africa's religious development?

C.H.K.: Being a strictly observing Moslem, I know nothing of the
traditional religions. If they are threatened by destruction, I
would consider that a misfortune, even though I would not be
personally concerned by this fact On an emotional level. In any
event, I observe that Islam. which entered wast Africa along the
valley of the river where I was born, has continued to develop,
particularly in intensity, above all among the youthful elements of
the Afircan people. As for Christianity, even though it has
suffered from its colonial affiliation. it still has a considerable
impact, by reason of the amount of work achieved by the missions in
terms of education, health, and social assistance.

"Yes to Deep-Rooted Islam, No to Ayatollahs"
J.A.: Do you believe in a real thrust of militant Islam?

C.H.K.: This is a phenomenon that corresponds to a continuous
movement since the Hegira (622 A.D.)--which can be explained by the
fact that the vehicles of Islam were and are Africans. However.
unless they are guided from abroad via television, I do not think
that ayatollahs can truly assert themselves in black Africa. In
any event. if there were a test of strength between religious power
and political power, political power would prevail. There is an
instructive precedent in this regard, in Senegal itself, where
President Dia entered into and won the test of strength against
Cheikh Tidjane Sy, the ungle of the chief of the powerful Tidjane
brotherhood and his PSS [Senegalese Solidarity Party/, which was,
however, supported by Gamal Abdel Nasser.

J.A.: Are there certain economic changes that seem to you parti-
cularly important?

C.H.K.: I am primarily struck by the spectacular progress in the
development of infrastructures, whether it concerns transportation,
schools, hospitals. or dispensaries. In this area, the progress
achieved has been greater than during the previous century. How

3
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can we not admire the progress in the percentage of children
attending school. and in the number of hospital beds? How can we
not stress the benefic5.l consequences of introducing farming with
animals, fertilizers, fungicides?

We should not forget the rapid development of new crops, such as rice
or cotton, and of industries, very appreciable in Senegal. Nigeria.
Ivory Coast. and Cameroon.

J.A.: Do you believe in the inevitability of African dictatorships?

C.H.K.: Absolutely not. The further we get from the colonial era.
the less certain will become the danger of dictatorships being
established. We have seen more dictatorships on our continent than
we will see in the future. We had no political experience. and our
model of government was that of the British or French governors and
not that of the democracy of Westminster or of the Fifth Republic.
Curiously, we have lost the memory of the consensus that prevailed
in the governments of traditional African societies. Now we are
gradually rediscovering these African models and the "imported“
democratic models.

J.A.: what do you think of the decision made by President Senghor
to voluntarily relinquish power?

C.H.K.: It was good that an African chief of state gave such an
example to the world. but was it truly the right moment? were
those truly the best circumstances?

J.A.: Hhat judgment would you pass on the African military regimes?

C.H.K.: The invasion of soldiers in the African world has at times
been useful. It was not absolutely necessary. in spite of some
excessive civilian acts of irresponsibility. In any case. this
invasion could only be temporary. and the soldiers' duty in such
circumstances is always to withdraw. Alternance is possible and it
is such that it takes away any justification for intervention. even
temporarily. by the military.

J.A.: Do the political tensions seem to you to be more serious in
Africa than in the rest of the world?

C.H.K.: No, I think 0n the contrary they are more serious in Latin
America. But among the aftereffects of colonization is this myth
that Africans are incapable of governing their own affairs, a myth
that is even more deeply rooted in the fraternalism of the left
than in the paternalism of the right. ‘

J.A.: What do you think of Africa's place in the "concert of
nations"?

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C.H.K.: We no longer form the infantry in international forums.
neither for the communist countries nor for the former colonial
powers. We have achieved our autonomy, in relation to the nonaligned
nations. in relation to the "big brothers" like Fidel Castro. and

in relation to the Arabs. With regard to the Arabs, who, after
ignoring us, then discovered us because they needed our support for

Palestine, we have succeeded in persuading them that the inter-Arab
quarrels are of no concern to us.

J.A.: Do you believe in Panafricanism?

C.H.K.: I believe in Africa's dedication to continental unity and

I remain a supporter of the federal idea. Our small stakes are
scarcely viable and it is absolutely necessary to create larger
entities than those inherited from colonization. We shguld at least
have kept the_former AOP [French West Africa/ and AB? [french Equa-
torial Africg/ federations: perhaps the time has now come to
re-establish them, for we have now made evaluations, worked out the
expenses, measured our exact possibilities, while 20 years ago the

desire to be masters of our own destiny involved the continuation of
decolonization.

J.A.: But do you not then believe at all in the strength of
nationalism?

C.H.K.: The nationalist frontier seems to me to be above all marked
on either side of the Sahel between black Africans and Arab-Barbers.

J.A.: Do you, like Fanon. think that Africa will remain impervious
to any form of ideology?

C.H.K.: Panon was not African, but came from Antilles. and therefore
was devoted to western ideologies. It is unfortunate that our elite
remains faithful to imported political models. It would in fact be

logical for African political parties to preach specifically African
principles.

J.A.: Does black Africa seem to you to be "off to a bad start“?

C.H.K.: No. it is being constructed after passing without a major
shock from the colonial situation to independence. In spite of the
difficulties encountered, it does not look too bad, having succeeded-
in particular in obtaining a seat in the international community.

J.A.: What do you think of the general progress of the world?

C.H.K.: I am an optimist. After the domination of the world by the
West--since the era of the great discoveries--came the reign of the
two "major powers“. Now we are entering into a new phase, that of
the gradual disappearance of bipolarity and of the emergence of the
Third World. The blocs are Splitting apart and reforming. . . .

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 do not really think there is a real danger of a world conflict.
One does not enter into a war unless one thinks one can by force
change the course of events in one's favor.

COPYRIGRT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981

C50: 4719
11550

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HOPBS PINNED ON OAU PEACEKEBPING FORCE 'U-LUSORY'
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 253, 23 Nov-6 Dec 8|. pp 10,11
[Editorial by Simon Halley: "Chad, the Illusions of the OAU"]

[Text] "What could I say to you? That I am far from feeling reassured? That I
rennin skeptical, if not deeply disturbed, because 1 know the realities of my
country? That the immediate prospects seem rather cloudy to ne and the longer-
tern prospects are a cause of concern? The balance of forces in Chad is very
fragile, which dangerously complicates the situation. Why have we suddenly demanded
the withdrawal of Libyan troops when the inter-African force was not ready to come
to our country and our own army was not sufficiently educated, trained. and pro-
vided with officers? He should not lose sight of the crucial fact that all of the
Chadian people owe a great deal to Libya. Libya was the only country in Africa

to respond to our appeal in December, 1980. helping us, fighting at our side, to
defeat the traitor, Hissein Habre, who was supported militarily and financially
by Egypt, the Sudan, and many other countries. It was very much due to this dis-
interested aid from Libya, unanimously requested by our government (the GUN?)
[Transitional National Union Government], that is by agreaent of the 10 political
tendencies which are represented in it, that we have succeeded in re-establishing
calm. security, and stability in the country for the first tine in nearly a year.

"So why, under these conditions, ask me again to expedite this request for a with-
drawal of Libyan troops? Why do it without consultations, without prior dis-
cussions? First of all, this concerned a decision of the cabinet, which made the
request for the withdrawal of the Libyan troops. This was a political decision
which we had to transmit to the Libyan government and whose modalities we had to
negotiate. However. Libya surprised us by announcing the inediate withdrawal of

its troops. . ."

President Coukouni Oueddei halted his statement for a moment. He was apparently
calm and serene during this conference of chiefs of state of France and of Africa.
However, his face at this moment showed a certain concern. which he had diffi-
culty in hiding. His colleagues were trying to clear up what a West African chief
of state called a "deep mystery." Many questions were asked of him, to which he
was not yet able to provide an answer. He continued to press him. “let was he
afraid of? Did he act under domestic or external pressures? From where did they
come? Asking for the withdrawal of the Libyan troops in the form and with the
tone used in the comunique of the cabinet-vdidn't this create the risk that

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tripoli would interpret this demand as a kind of ultimatum which, it is difficult
to believe, could be sent to a country which sent its troops to fight and die to
help you to defend the territorial integrity of your country? Certain governments
allied with imperialism, of course, acted in this way toward once friendly coun-
tries, which they sought to humiliate or to discredit. That was the case of Egypt
under President al-Sadat with regard to the Soviet Union in 1972. However, a Chad
which had been torn up, looted, threatened with fragmentation by the mercenaries
under Hissein Habre, guided by the French government under President Giscard--
hadn't it received vital assistance from Libya at a decisive, crucial moment of
its history?

It is apparent that, whatever were the secret intentions of certain of his govern-
ment colleagues, President Goukouni Oueddei clearly did not seek to humiliate his
powerful neighbor to the North. It is also apparent that, whatever the amount of
the aid which he could hope for from France or from certain African countries, he
knew that too many interests bind Chad and Libya for him to be so naive as not to
understand that the geopolitical situation and the vital interests of Libya could
not be accommodated to the presence of a hostile country on its southern frontiers.
This is all the more so since it is notoriously well known that. under the in-
fluence of American leadership, Egypt and Sudan are trying to enclose the Libyan
regime in a vise aimed at choking it before overthrowing it.

That is why President Goukouni Oueddei was trying to justify the decision of his
government in order to show that his principal concern was to help what he con-
sidered were the common interests of the two, neighboring countries. Do you rea—
lize, he explained in substance to the chiefs of state and to close friends, have
you seen what an atmosphere this summit meeting is steeped in? Hhatever the
reasons, and we are all aware of them, everything was well arranged so that the
star of this summit meeting would be Chad.

In other words, make Libya the target. From the beginning, one might have said
that a password was spread around which brought together the interests and the
purposes of the majority of the leaders present: those who wanted to deflect the
attention of the summit meeting from the other, serious problems which are cur-
rently outstanding in Africa and those who had every interest in searching out,
attacking, denouncing, in order to isolate Qadhdhafi's Libya that much better.

An effort was made to distort ruality. to confuse public opinion, to invent
fantastic works of fiction. For "public opinion"--and that did not begin only
with the “summit“ meeting-Chad had lost its sovereignty, was under the Libyan
military yoke, no longer had any legal existence. According to such views,
Tripoli was threatening the independence of Niger, of Cameroon, of Mali, of Niger-
in, of Sudan, and I don't know what other countries! Public opinion said, have
you forgotten the cry of alarm that went up at the conference of the 12 countries
in Lone last January, against the alleged Libyan danger? And what can be said

of that Western superpower which is continuing its preparations with a view to
carrying out aggression against Libya, with the aid of Egyptian and Sudanese
forces? And wasn't it stated that the former French president, Ciscard d'Bstaing,

had given them his approval and his blessing?

8
FIMIGJFFHJAI.USE|DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rhis is to say that the request for the withdrawal of the Libyan troops, presented
an 28 October, in the mind of President Goukouni was reportedly dictated by one
:oncern-although it is insinuated that this was mixed with others-—and that was
to free Libya from a dangerous trap which a coalition of forces and of hostile
Hestern, Afric'n, and Arab interests reportedly wanted to drag it into. Perhaps
this was so...although we may be permitted to doubt it! For where are we now?
Where do we risk being tomorrow?

Hithout wishing to play the role of a prophet of doom, an analysis of the events
and the realities of the last few days shows clearly that by committing himself
happily to the creation of an inter-African force and the sending of its first,
Zairian elements to Ndjamens, the secretary general of the OAU, Eden Kodjo, con-
tinues faithfully, as head of the CAD, to follow a course of action which has never
served anything other than the protection of the interests of the African neo-
colonialist regimes. Should one be astonished at this? All of those who have ob-
served his diplomatic "initiatives" or their deliberate absence, at the moment
desired, know as we do what were the brains which really directed him and continue
to do so. We will content ourselves with asking these simple questions: what was
Edem Kodjo doing in Paris for the 2 weeks which preceded the meeting of the Franco-
African summit? who convinced the Zairian tyrant, Mobutu, to be the first chief of
state to propose sending his paratroops to Chad in an attempt to gild the escutch-
eon of his corrupt regime, rather considerably tarnished since his "cousin" in the
Elysee Palace in France was overturned by the French people? Who suggested to
Hissein Habre and to his Egyptian and Sudanese tutors the idea of a ceasefire

on the Sudanese frontier until Tripoli announced the departure of its troops. in
order to encourage subsequently the resumption of the fighting and to justify the
speeding up of the dispatch of 0A0 troops? Who, among the $0 chiefs of state who
are members of the OAU, was consulted before the Nairobi summit resolution was
interpreted in Kodjo's fashion and the principal candidates were seldcted, who,

by chance, turned out to be certain countries whose hostility to Libyan was no
secret to anyone? And by virtue of what divine right was he allowed to decide
arbitrarily--without previously consulting the members of the committee charged
with supervising the operations of the inter-African force~-the choice and the
date for sending the first Zairian contingent to Ndjamena? Finally, why propose
units from countries bordering on Chad when the Lagos resolution specifically
prohibited it--and for obvious reasons? Of course, it will always be possible for
Eden Kodjo to pretend that the Nairobi resolution, which did not specifically ex-
clude selecting such countries, made the earlier resolution null and void. How-
ever, since when does the secretary general of the OAU consider that a resolution
on the same subject makes null and void those which preceded it. particularly if
this is not specified? On what kind of jurisprudence is this based?

For the establishment of an inter-African force to have the slightest chance of
being effective, viable, and useful, it is important for it to meet an indispen-
sable criterion: it must be effectively neutral, impartial, and objective. Now,
is the force proposed for Chad and which Edem Kodjo has confirmed truly neutral?
Neutral regarding whom and regarding what? Just take the trouble to analyze,
even for a little bit, the policy of certain countries chosen for the inter-
Africnn force and the inevitable behavior of their armed contingents! Let us

be sure that the financing. the logistics. the organization,and the leadership of

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this force is really "non-aligned!" In other words, “neutral" and "non-aligned"
at the same time regarding the various political tendencies which make up the
CUNT and regarding Libya, which could not remain indifferent to what happens
in Chad, by virtue of the grave dangers which it faces as a result of the
threats from Washington, Cairo, and Khartoum. By .what aberration of mind, to take
only one example, could one pretend that these Zairian paratronps which have
arrived in Ndjamena remain "neutral," when we all know the scandalous support
which Mobutu has never stopped giving his de facto ally, Hissein Habre? Which
observer, then, could ignore the fact-which we have all observed at one time or
another in the history of Africa-«hat these paratroops are trained, organized,
and infiltrated by mercenaries of every stamp--inc1uding Horoccans-—and spend
their time drinking, taking drugs, and abusing young women?

Some people have tried hard to state that the most positive result of the Franco—
African sumit meeting will turn out to have been the beginning of the end of the
drama of the Chadian people. we didn't think so at the time and we think so even
less today. If the first meeting of Francois Mitterrand with Africa on 3 and 4
November is to be an historic occasion, it will certainly not be due to the
"success" of the Chadian affair. Rather, it will be remenibered because the
African peoples want to believe that the promises which the French president has
made to turn the page on neocolonialism, domination, and interference.in the in-
ternal affairs of other states will be applied in concrete terns.

Regarding Chad, the fire which smolders under the ashes is becoming evident, un-
fortunately, little by little. The suspicions, the antagonisms, the rivalries are
appearing again, and the fighting, although still limited at the time we write
these lines, is beginning along the Sudanese frontier, where the adventurer from
the SDECF. [Foreign intelligence and Counterintelligence Service] found refuge.
And why should one expect that Hissein Eabre should not raise his head? Hasn't
he seen achieved his principal demand: the withdrawal of the Libyan forces and
the fact that no other military force in a position to deal with him is able to
relieve the Libyans for a long time to come? Doesn't he hope to find within the
various contingents of the inter-African force the assistance which would pernit
him to make a comeback on the political scene?

What more can we say? The trap in which the French Right-—thanks to the formid-
able resources which it continues to have in the means which it manipulates
cleverly and even within the government, and particularly the intelligence ser-
vices, and thanks also to the friendships which it still has in the African
regimes which it has nurtured since 1960--seeks to enclose the African policy of
the Leftist government of France, this trap seems to be closing slowly but in-
exorably. This is the trap of a return to the vicious circle of military inter-
ventionism in Africa. Moreover, this is a kind of interventionism condemned
without further recourse both by the chief of state and by the French Socialist
Party. An interventionism which all the opponents of the overwhelming victory of
10 May 1981 desire. For have you ever asked yourself what the French government
would do if unforeseen obstacles were to prevent the inter-African force from
undertaking or continuing its mission? For the hope which many people try to
maintain on the subject of the success of the mission of the inter-African force,
as it has been conceived and created, is an illusion, a mirage in the moving sands
of the Chadian desert.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

5170
C80: 4719/1313 10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USU-I ONLY

GABON

RBCIPROCAL NEEDS SEEN GUEING BONGO-MITTERRAND RELATIONS
Paris Jams AFRIQUE in French No 1090, 25 Nov 81 pp 34-37 (excerpts)
[Article by Siradiou Diallo: "Does Mitterrand Need Bongo?"]

[Excerpts] If most African leaders were disoriented by the victory of Francois
Hitterrand last 10 Hay, Omar Bongo, Gabon's chief of state, was completely duabfound-
ed by it. Not that he was taken by surprise (highly placed sources in France had
confided such a prediction to him) but because of the privileged relationship that
he had with Valery Ciscard d'Estaing. Gabon's chief of state is convinced that the
interest of his country comands him to establish friendly relations with the whole
French ruling class, beginning at the top. "Comunist though he may be," says Omar
Bongo, his hand over his heart, "if Georges Harchais is elected president of the
republic tomorrow, not only will I try to maintain good relations with him. but I
will also make a friend out of him, unless he does not want anything'to do with me."

All the more reason why he does not see why he would not get along with Francois
Hitterrand. Without renouncing the solid friendships which link him to the leaders
of the emerging majority--because "I am not a weather vane"--Gabon's chief of state
is persuaded that he can get along with the French Socialist leader. "Especially
since we do not have," he says, "any divergence of an ideological nature. 0:: the
contrary."

This does not prevent Omar Bongo from being worried the day after Francois hitter-
rand's victory. Because a crowd of people had deliberately sought to stir up the
fear of Socialists in him. They are going to try to destabilize your regime, they
had told his: "These are dirty Reds...." Gabon's chief of state was even more
justified in believing them since the French press made the sunner particularly hot
for him.

a

Certain well-established French milieux in Gabon took advantage of this to sow dis-
cord, even to insinuate to President Bongo that this campaign was orchestrated

behind the scenes by French officials. They assured him that his Gabonese opponents
were from that point on warmly received at the Rue de Solferino (Parisian headquarters
of the Socialist Party). And that in agreement if not with the government itself

at least with the party leaders, the newspapers were getting ready to "pull the
children's massacre coup on him" (allusion to the bloody events of February 1979
which cost Bokassa his throne).

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The operation was all the more believable since it was mounted by well-placed people
in Gabon and since it mobilized a solid and vast network, going from security services
to the large local French companies, passing through business agents, patrons of bars
and well-known restaurants in Libreville.

Likewise, on the matter of nationalization of French companies, for which some of
the highest officials of the country are pushing, the president seems-to be in
favor of a more moderate solution. Hhile he is entirely in accord with the princi-
ple of the increase in state participation in the large companies that control the
key sectors of the economy, he seems to want to set aside, at least for the moment,
the idea of a true takeover of Elf-Gabon. The chief of state is aware of what it
would cost him to raise the current state part (26 percent) to 51 percent, from
the financial point of view as well as on the political plane. This does not take
into account the fact that Gabon does not presently have enough competent staff
personnel to take over the operations of an enterprise as complex as Elf-Gabon.

which is perhaps not true for other companies such as COHILOG (Mining Company of
Ogooue) which works the manganese deposits of Moanda, or COHUF (Uranium Mining
Company of Francevillc).

while awaiting the decision from Libreville, it is necessary to state that this
anxiousness to please has been costly.

As for the government in Paris, it is eager to foil the trap which its opponents in
Gabon had laid for it. In the midst of the crisis, President Francois Mitterrand
did not hesitate to pick up his telephone to talk with his counterpart. And to ex-
plain to him his sincere desire to clear away the clouds which had gathered, inde-
pendently of his will, over the skies of French-Gabonese relations.

To_continue to develop them in the well-understood interest of both countries.

Since then, not only has his adviser for African affairs, Guy Penne, called on

Bongo several times, with the mission of warming up relations between Paris and
Libreville, but the two chiefs of state consult by telephone frequently.

In spite of his bonds of friendship with tLe men of the former majority in France.
Bongo cannot fail to take into consideration the profound political change which
has come to pass in that country. France remains, by far, Gabon's main economic
and financial partner. Under these conditions, he will be forced, one way or
another, to separate himself from a crowd of collaborators who are suspect in the
eyes of the new French leadership.

in any case, a new ambassador from France, Robert Cantoni, replaced Maurice Robert,
considered too close to the former Giscard regime, on 14 October in Libreville.
Cnntoni was assigned a precise mission: to chase out of the Cabonese sheepfold
the black sheep who, not content to graze the rich grass of this petroleum-rich
province of France which Gabon is, devote themselves to stirring up trouble which
the new French authorities are unsure of preventing or controlling. Even if Paris
has "nothing to fear from us," in the opinion of the representative of the French
in Gabon, Morelli, s courteous and distinguished Corsican businessman who has lived
in Libreville for 30 years. Even if, he adds, to be used as may be fitting, "we
think that the Socialist team is going too fast in its will to reform and that it
should, according to us, moderate its appetite a little in this area."

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI-Z ONLV

As for Mittcrrand, he is perfectly aware of the role and the place of Gabon in the
structure of economic and political relations that France maintains with the outside
world. First of all because this country constitutes a precious milk cow which
nourishes 25.000 Frenchmen; in these times of unemployment in France, this is not a
negligible thing. Especially since having surmOunted the grave financial imbalance
brought about in 1977 by tc- heavy an investment program, the economy is starting
up again stronger than ever in Gabon.

Supporting his viewpoint by the immense natural resources of his country, President
Bongo does not hesitate to compare Gabon to a "very beautiful girl when all the

men want to court." It is ture that offers of Cooperation with his country are

not lacking. They come from the United States, which Bongo visited as early as

the day after the victory of the left in France, as well as from the Federal Republic
of Germany. Belgium or Italy where he spent some time several weeks ago: without
mentioning Brazil and Argentina who are forcing their attention in Libreville' s
direction..

But Hitterrand equally needs Bongo for reasons of a political nature. Gabon's chief
of state constitutes in fact an essential piece in the strategic disposition of
France in central Africa. If a spark should erupt in any country in the region,
Bongo would try to contain it. In case the brush fire shOuld threaten the interests
of France, Paris knows that it can count on his tact to help put it out. It is
no accident that Librcville recently hosted the initial contacts between Chadian

Coukouni Oueddei and Guy Penne, and between the latter and the new master of Bangui.
Gen Andre Kolingba.

Just like Giscard d'Estaing, who used Gabon as the turntable of his diplomacy in the
region (the turbulent Journiac-Bokassa meeting in Franceville in August 1979 is still
present in everyone's memory), Francois Hitterrand seems to have realized that he
has more to win than to lose by keeping close ties with Omar Bongo. This is why,
after the summer clouds, it has not taken long for the skies of French-Gabonese re-
lations to clear up since autumn.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1981.

9895
CSO: 4719/315

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-3185M]

BRIEFS

BAUXITE CONTRACT HIT“ USSR-An inportant agreenent concerning the lining of bauxite
in Guinea-Bissau has just been concluded between the governments of Guinea and Russia.
It is known, in fact, that Guinea-Bissau has, in the southeastern pert of the country,
some important deposits of this "aluminum ore" concentrated in the foothills of
Fouta-Djalon. The USSR has agreed to invest $200 million in a mining venture that
the Portuguese had neglected and which 9111 have to be repaid in 8 years by way of
deliveries of bauxite. [Text] [Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 253, 23 Nov - 6 Oct
81 p 19] [COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique Asie]

9895
030: 4719/2115

1b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MAURITIUS

PM RAMGOO'LAM'S 'READJUSTMENTS' WINE!)
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 253. 23 Nov-6' Dec'al pp' 38-39
[Article by special correspondent Jonathan M'Haruia]

[Text] Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of Mauritius, invited the
leaders of the Mauritian Militant Movement (rm), Paul Bersnger and Aneerood
Jugnauth, to a meeting on 8 Sept to discuss matters relating to peace and public
order after an unsuccessful demonstration staged the preceding day by the Mauritian
Social Democratic Party (PMSD), a party of the Right hat-zed by Gaetan Duval. A
maximum of 7,000 people—of the 100,000 expectedwattended the demonstration,
which almost degenerated. At the meeting Sir Sassoosegur Ramgoolam formally
submitted a proposal to the MMM for a general pre-election agreement and a
coalition government including all parties.

Obviously the Bamgoolam regime, its actions inspired by the panic engendered by
the unprecedented economic crisis afflicting Mauritius and unable to think of
anything else to do to mitigate the severity of this crisis, wanted, a few months
before the election, to get the In! to share the burden of its disastrous perfor-
mance on all levels. The ma expressed its willingness to "give the government
a hand" in maintaining peace and order in the country, but absolutely rejected
the Prime Minister's offer, thus confirming the fact that the MMM and the PSM
will go to the elections united, as previously agreed.

The reasOn for Sir Seewoosagur namgoolam's repeated and pressing invitation to the
no! to join the government became apparent less than three weeks later. The whole
country received a crushing blow on the evening of September 27: the Mauritian
rupee had been devalued by 20 percent with respect to the principal foreign
currencies for the second time in less than 2 years. The Special Drawing Right
(0T8), a unit of account of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which was worth
7.72 rupees before October 1979 and had risen to 10 rupees 2 years ago, at the
time of the last devaluation,. is now worth 12 rupees.

According to a government communique this decision should enable Mauritius to
increase its exports of sugar, tea. molasses, and industrial products. The
government also announced a price freeze for the next six moths. It is worth
noting that this decision was announced on television by a regular comentator»
not by n government officia1--in forbidding technical lingo; that the word
"devaluatiOn" vas not mentioned; and that the blow fell while the Prime Minister

'15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was travelling in his own country1 and the Minister of Finance--Sir Veerasamy
Ringadoo—-was travelling abroad, as were almost all the other ministers.

According to the present regime the rupee was not devalued, it was "adjusted"

to bring it into line with the major foreign currencies.2 But technically it was
a devaluation. even though this word was neVer used. There was no other way for
the government to try to camouflage the failure of the first devaluation and of
its whole economic policy, all the more so in that a month earlier the Minister of
Finance emphatically denied that he was considering the possibility of devaluing
the national Currency so as to cope with the growing deficit. At a meeting of
the National Economic Council (which is composed of representatives of the
government, tne private sector and trade unions) on 19 August 1981, he even gave
an absolute guarantee that there would not be another devaluation and that the
economic outlook did not make such a step necessary.

Despite the fact that the government lied about the economic situation before and
after the second 20 percent devaluation, this devaluation could be predicted from
the facts and figures. The first devaluation. in October 1979, was accompanied by
a program of economic adjustment which was supposed to lead to structural changes
enabling the country to cope successfully with the economic crisis. It is easy to
see that this structural adjustment existed only on paper. To cite only a few
figures, investments declined 12.k percent in the agricultural sector and 7.5
percent in the manufacturing sector in 1980. Today 60,000 people are officially
unemployed; in fact the figure is higher. about 20 percent of the active labor
force. He must add to these the 12,000 people who will leave school and enter

the labor market at the end of the year, and hundreds of Others receiving diplomas:
from January to June 1981 about 700 workers received their tickets to unemployment.
Jobs were created at a rate of 2.6 percent in 1975-1980 instead of the 4.7 percent

provided for in the plan.

Begging in HashingtOn

The enormous deficit in the balance of payments went from 635 million rupees in
1979 to 950 million rupees in 1980. The deficit in the balance of trade, which
has been more than a billion rupees for the last three years, grew by 1.h billion
rupees in the first 6 months of 1981. This deficit, which will reach about 2.1
billion rupees at the end of 1981, is the main reason for this second 20 percent
devaluation. Imports have grown in volume by 4 percent, while expenditures for
food imports went from 880 million rupees in 1979 to 1.3 billion in 1980.

Thus now that the surprise has worn off, trade union circles are all reacting
with anger, all the more so because this second devaluation is not accompanied by
an increase in salaries, as was the case in 1979; the price freeze is just an -
illusion; and artificial, intolerable shortages are created by tradesmen. Even
people who never got involved in politics before have now demanded "the resigna-
tion of the Ramgoolam government and the holding of general elections as soon as
possible, so that competent, capable people may take over and remedy the economic
situation." The anger these people, and wage earners in general, feel is
understandable if we realize that every wage earner's purchasing power will decline
33-35 percent due to this second devaluation, after having already declined
dramatically more than 30 percent after the first devaluation.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A week after the second 20 percent evaluation, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Agriculture, Sir Satcam Boolell, whose policy of agricultural diver-
sification has been a total failure--Mauritius imported more than a billion rupees
worth of food in l980--admitted that a price freeze was impossible to implement.
Everybody already knew that--except for Sir Satcam Boolell. who is said to be very
close to Duval--ever since this step was announced.

The Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance have spent a month travelling in
Europe and the United States in quest of foreign aid while the people waited for
them to provide explanations for the devaluation and for a chance to ask them for
salary increases. Their quest failed, so Sir Seewoosagur Rsmgoolam begged
President Reagan for a large handout on 16 October, offering him "the cooperation
of Mauritius to enable the United States to strengthen its strategic presence in
the Indian Ocean" and then. upon his return to Mauritius, offered the MMM an
enlarged coalition. As for the IMP, where Sir Ringadoo. Minister of Finance,
expected to open the credit tap after the second devaluation. whatever aid it may
give--which will be negligible--will be accompanied by "new conditions" and will
not be granted until February 1982. after the IMP-~which as Sir Ringadoo says
himself is keeping our country at arm's length-~has completely reviewed the state
of the economic situation. The only way out for the present regime is a large loan
in eurodollars at around 20 percent interest, which would drag the country even
deeper into the hole it is now in.

According to the MMM. whose leader Paul Bersnger would be Minister of Finance,
Planning and Labor in an MMM-PSM government, a third devaluation is inevitable

in the coming months if general elections are not held before the beginning of 1982
and if the country continues on its present course. It would be out of the
question for the MMM to join the present government, as that would be tantamount

to certain political suicide when it is only a step away from power.

The Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Rangoolam, who held a press conference on

24 October after returning home while the Minister of Finance, Sir Veerasamy
Ringadoo, was still negotiating with officials of the IMP, indicated that
legislative elections will not be held before February 1982, since he will-not
dissolve Parliament until next December. This is the only piece of information
the people were granted. For the rest he merely dispensed the eternal platitudes
abOut "happiness," which the people have yet to experience!

In sun. by devaluing the currency for the secOnd time in less than 2 years, the
present regime has already signed its own death warrant a few months before the
elections. The drama is that it wants to bring the whole country down with it.

FOOTNOTES

1. He left the country again on 28 October for Paris to attend a French-African
summit meeting, which took place in Paris on 3 and 4 November.

2. One French franc - 1.84 Mauritian rupees.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie

9855
050: 4719/312

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

PBS SECRETARY GENERAL HAD! DISCUSSES INTERNAL, AFRICAN ISSUSS
Paris AFRIQUﬂ-ASIE in French No 256. 7-20 Dec 81 pp 32-36

[Interview with Mr Abdoulsye Wade, PBS secretary general, by Augusta Conchiglia
and Simon Halley]

[Text] PDS Secretary General Abdouleye Wade believes that Senegal is at a cross-
roads. he says: For 1 years we have been working, particularly our party, to
establish the bases of a modern democracy. Despite the difficulties, we have
achieved a number of results: in particular. creation of a parliamentary opposi—
tion and realization of certain freedom, such as association, travel, and
expression. We also helped to achieve passage of the law on the press. All
these were gains for Senegalese democracy under construction. Unfortunately,
however. I believe that the manner of transfer of power as it was carried out

at the beginning of the year has fundamentally distorted the process. And then
there have been the practices of the government which. instead of depending on
the real strength of the people, has thought it could strengthen its position

by weakening the opposition. I believe that this policy has harmed Senegalese
democracy. The problem of the P138 is a good illustration. We were accused of
importing arms and of having planned to seize power by force. After Z'months

of investigation, everyone concluded that there was not a shadow of proff against
the PDS members. I believe it is worth drawing some lessons from this affair,
which I hope will end soon under conditions which will not harm the progress

of our democracy. I also believe that this is the viewpoint of President Abdou
Diouf; a viewpoint which is not at all shared by the “fascist" faction of his
party. I believe that the important thing for a country is to bring together
the energies of all who desire to build a democracy. in order to overcome all
the difficulties. I myself all therefore waiting to learn how the government

is going to solve this problem. It is up to the government alone to draw the
conclusions and to make the appropriate decisions, so that we can proceed on

new bases. It is not we who are in power, we are in the opposition, and we do
not control the levers of power. Thus it is not our role to direct the policy.
Anyway, our will is not weakened, because when we established the party we
expected many difficulties.

"I would add only that a multi-party setup which is not genuine would, in my
opinion, be more dangerous than a one-party system: the latter has its own
logic, based on a nusber of choices which reflect, certainly. the local and

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

historical conditions of each country. But to pretend to establish a multi-
party system while posing obstacles so that the opposition parties cannot progress
and so that there cannot be a democratic alternation, I believe that this is
extremely dangerous. 1his is why we await with some anxiety the next election
of 1983. which will be extremely important for Senegalese democracy. As you
know, we have made a number of proposals in this regard and I believe we will
receive satisfaction. But the problem does not lie only in reform of the elec-
toral code. It is also. and above all. a question of political Iorality and
honesty. That is why the Pns stated on 17 June at the conference of party
officials that the government of Abdou Diouf did not have the right, during this
transitional period, to organize the next elections. These elections must be
organized by a national commission composed of the various political parties,

or at least a commission in which they would be represented. I can assure that
what happened in 1978 will not be repeated this time. I have said it. and I
repeat, I want it to be clear and I think the government knows it; no election
rigging will be tolerated. Abdou Diouf on two occasions has told me that he
will do everything possible to have normal elections. If they are not normal,
Senegal will face difficulties such as it has never known in its history."

Although he is watching to see how the situation concerning the Pns develops

in Dakar, Abdoulaye Wade also considers as crucial the dominant current issues
in Africa and the Middle East: the development of the situation in Chad fol-
lowing the Libyan withdrawal. the Namibian issue, Western Sahara, and prospects
in the Middle East following the death of Sadat... First, what does the P06
secretary general think about the conclusions of the conference of heads of
state of France and Africa held in Paris 4-5 November?

“rhese conclusions were certainly important. but that was not the key element,"
Mr Wade said. "What was important was the spirit in which it all took place.
The conference was attended by representatives of French-, English-, Arabic-,
and Portuguese—speaking countries, which means that the language barrier has
been largely overcome. Moreover, many countries which were not present were
impressed by the conference, which suggests that they may participate in future
'summits' of this kind.

"The broadening of this institution was in a sense the reply of the African
countries in moving toward socialist France to discuss problems of Africa and
the Third World. The November meeting was certainly a success for the French
head of state. But having said that, what can socialist France do? I do not
think it is in a position to respond with increased aid. First of all, because
it docs not have sufficient means to provide financial resources to develop

all the African states which will attend the future summit conferences.

"But what I believe France can do is to help in transformation of the structures
of trade and international relations. As President Houphouet-Boigny said, it
could use its influence so that raw materials are paid for at a fair price,
products are developed, and middlemen eliminated. Certainly, France cannot do
everything. particularly since the United States under Reagan is following a
withdrawal policy in comparison with the Carter regime. But France can influence

other states, and its example might eventually be followed by some members of
the BBC.

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"At the same time, what Prance can do is to genuinely assist in proaoting trans-
formations in African countries, with the objective of creating the conditions
of democracy and freedom without which the people do not have faith in develop-
ment. France can help in this reformation in attitudes, which also assumes that
the political parties should reflect the interests of the masses. however,
French policy must also be directed at the masses through the governments.

The world must stop being merely an administrative council of preridents and
ministers. The discussions must take place at the level of the pcople. The
whole problem is to orient efforts directly toward the people. Can the French
Government achieve this transformation? There is no doubt that it is very
difficult. But there is nothing to prevent changing the objective of aid pro-
grams, and taking care throughout their preparation and through control in their
implementation to prevent future diversion of this assistance. If there is
agreement on the objective. all that remains is the problem of how to organize
the transition from the present system of dependence to a system of self-
generated development.

”In conclusion, I believe that the November conference had very profound sig-
nificance. However, it is up to the French Government to see that it does not
end up as a new disappointment for the African people."

[Question] What is Mr Wade's view of the Chad situation following the with-
drawal of Libyan troops?

[Answer] "I believe that Libya acted properly by withdrawing its troops from
Chad when asked to do so by the Transitional National Union Government (GUNT).

At the time. we approved of Libya's intervention in Chad, pointing out that in

a situation where the French troops had failed one could not protest against
Libya helping to restore peace. This view was ultimately_shared by the CAD

and all African countries, and on this point there can be no issue. A priori,
there is no objection to having an inter-African force replace the Libyan troops,
but will there be sufficient coordination among the various contingents to

assure order? That is another problem. and there we have some cause to be
skeptical..."

[Question] Under the terms of a draft treaty signed on 15 November at Kaour
(Gambia) by Presidents Abdou Diouf and Daouda Diawara, a confederation of Senegal
and Gambia is to be established. "hat is the position of the PDS on this process
which began a months ago with the Senegalese intervention in Banjul?

[Answer] "In a general way we are against all intervention, whether by an
African country or a state outside the continent. Except in certain cases. for
example genocide or massacres. 0r also aggression. It was on the basis of this
principle that we condemned the Senegalese Army's intervention in Gambia, par-
ticularly because the purpose of the move was to restore Diawara to power.

The situation then existing in Gambia can be compared to that in Zaire at the
time of the Sheba affair. There were two governments pursuing policies which
caused the people to reject them and a revolutionary situation developed.

"In both cases an appeal was made abroad on the excuse of subversion and foreign
interference. HoweVer. in both cases it was later concluded that there had

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been no foreign involvement. Thus the Senegalese intervention in Gambia was

not justified, particularly since the defense agreements between Banjul and
Dakar provided for possible military assistance only in the event of outside
aggression. If each time a governaent feels threatened and its unpopular policy
produces a revolutionary situation there is an appeal to outside forces to sup-
port it, then no change will ever be possible. He thus condemed the Senegalese
intervention and regret the consequences--nore than a thousand are known to have
been killed—consequences which are hard to forget. and are not the best basis
for establishing unity between the two countries. For I an convinced that both
the Canbians and Senegalese want this unity. on condition that it be achieved
democratically, that it result from the choice of the people. This is why we
have suggested the restoration of political freedoms in Gambia so the parties
can have the opportunity to state their views, and so that free legislative

and presidential elections can be organized. The new institutions resulting

f ron these elections could then decide their position on the question of unity
with Senegal. Instead of this, Diawara has been restored to power, the opposi-
tion leaders have been imprisoned, and the other parties no longer exist. And
official agree-eats are being signed by heads of state to achieve this unity.

We do not oppose the principle of this mity, but we do disagree with the pro-
cedure, with the methods for achieving it. According to the agreement signed
to establish a confederation, the two countries are to be consulted. But in
what way? What should be done now is to conduct a democratic canvassing of the
people who are qualified to speak on this issue. For example, the National
Assembly is not qualified to do so."

[Question] Does the secretary general of the PDS believe that Senegalese troops
must be withdrawn fro. Ganbia?

[Answer] "Absolutely. These forces are to some degree occupation troops, and
no referendum can be organized under such conditions."

[Question] Aside from regional border issues, there are two continuing inportant
problens, Western Sahara and Angola. It is known that the PBS and the other
Senegalese opposition parties back the Sahara people and favor normalization

of relations between Dakar and Luanda. It is also known that the PDS continues
to condemn puppet movements such as UNITA and the PNLA...

[Answer] "I think we can pass quickly over the first point. given that the PBS
was the second African political party, after the Algerian FLN, to give its
support to POLISARIO in 1975. Since then our position has not changed. we
favor independence for Hestern Sahara and we think it is in the long-term interest
of Morocco to end this war. In the beginning, Morocco thought that the "Green
March” followed by intervention of a small paramilitary force would be enough
to settle the problea. I believe that those who support liorocco's interests
should persuade Rabat to recognise the independence of the Saharan Democratic
Arab Republic (SDAR), especially since this independence would not exclude sub-
sequent cooperation between the two countries, for the two peoples have so lush
in connon.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dange rous Precedent

"It is regrettable that the OM! backed away from this problem at Nairobi. If
the SDAR had been recognized at the sunit conference in July it would now be
sitting in the OM! and the war would not have worsened in this way. Indeed.
hesitation to apply principles always has extremely dangerous consequences.

I hope that matters will be cleared up and that the African countries will once
again assume their responsibilities by recognizing the SDAR and admitting it
to the OAU.

"As for Angola, our position has not changed. Not only did we support the
W‘s liberation war. we also support its struggle, not agath UNITA as such,
but against the external forces which sustain that organization. We continue

to take this position. 0n the national level. since Senegal is the only African
state which has not recognized the Angolan Government and which has granted
diplomatic passports to UNITA staff to facilitate their travel, we have worked
in the National Assembly to cancel these concessions. We believe that an DA“
member state cannot shelter or grant facilities to a party which is illegal and
whose objective is to overthrow a government which officially represents the
people who chose it. Such practices constitute the most serious interference

in the affairs of another state and most serious action to destabilize another
government. "2 had hoped that after Senghor's departure things would change.

In any case, we will continue to apply pressure on the government to establish
normal relations with Luanda.* Giving more or less direct support to a movement
like UNI'IA, which has become a tool of South Africa and the United States to
destabilize a legitimate government, sets an extremely dangerous precedent for
Africa. Destabilisation attempts can start to occur everywhere. The same thing
happened recently when we condemned the attack on Libyan planes by the American
Sixth Fleet. On that occasion, I stated that whatever the differences between
Tripoli and African governments, the latter should condenn the American aggres-
sion. If at OAU summit conferences very clear and unequivocal stands were taken
on these issues, I believe that significant progress could be made on the road
to peace in southern Africa. There cannot be peace there as long as the situation
is endangered in Angola and Mozambique and the Namibian problem remains unre-
solved. . ."

[Question] 0n Namibia, the United States sets the departure of Cuban troops as
a condition for settlement of that issue. what is your opinion on this subject?

[Answer] "These questions are certainly related. But the presence of Cuban
troops in Angola is by choice of the Angola Government, just as, for example.
Oueddei's Coukouni CWT chose to appeal for Libyan troops. States are free in
this respect. Aside from this principle, however, I believe that the Cuban
presence is explained primarily by the South African incursions into Angola and
Pretoria's desire to destabilize the W government. But for the Cuban presence
in Angola, the South Africans would be much more daring. If the South African
threat was removed and the Namibian problem solved, I believe that the issue of
the Cuban presence in Angola w0uld be ipso facto resolved."

__———-—_..__—o——-

h
President Abdou Diouf met Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos in Cape
Verde at the end of Novenber.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Senegal is a Mosleli country, and the fact that the AFRIQUB—ASIE
issue on Sadat's death almost sold out in Dakar reflects the interest in every-
thing concerning the Middle East. In the afterrsth of Sadat'a death, do you
have any comments in regard to the prospects for this area, and does Maitre
Wade think that the plans which are being so widely discussed, the Fahd plan
and others, can provide a solution to the Middle East crisis?

[Answer] ”In regard to Egypt and Sadat'a assassination. I think that APRIQUB-
ASIE gave a very discerning analysis of. the events. While condemning the prin-
ciple of political assassination, we have to be sad at the conditions which
marked the burial of Sadat, for they showed that the Egyptian people tandem
Sadat's policy of rapprochement with Israel. It was then possible to judge how
far Sadat—who claiaed to have the support of the Egyptian and Arab people--
had strayed and taken the wrong road with the Camp David accords.

The Fahd Plan? Not Clear

"The presence of the Western heads of state at Sadat'a funeral provided a sig-
nificant further insight into the former Egyptian president's policy. It became
evident that it was a policy desigied acre for the West than for the Egyptian,
Arab. and Palestinian people. I therefore believe that the current Mubarak
government should draw the necessary conclusions. Unfortunately, he does not
seen to want to choose this course, although we should perhaps give hill sale
tine to reflect.

"As you say, we have always supported the PIJO. And as is known. our policy of
support to national liberation movements is based on the principle that if we

can give advice to our friends then those we support have the right to give

their view on the suggestions made to then. In our opinion, there are some

aspects of the Fahd plan which are not clear, concerning for era-pie the issue

of recognition of Israel. There have been various interpretations in this

regard. However, aside from problens of details, it appears that Saudi Arabia
aspires to play a dominant role in place of Egypt in the Israeli-Arab issue.

The essential element for us is that the rights of the Palestinian people to

regain their lands and to organize in a sovereign state be recognized and secured."

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique-Asie.

9920
C80: [0719/2377

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SBRKGAL

ACTIVITIES, PROGRAMS OF OPPOSITION PARTIES NOTED
Paris APRIQUE—ASIE in French No 253, 23 Nov-6 Dec 81 pp 45-47
[Article by Ginette Cot: "The Heirs of the PAI" [African Independence Party]]

[Text] The Senegalese political landscape has been changed
since the installation of Abdou Diouf as president and the
establishment of a nulti-party system. After reviewing the
political positions of the RN!) [Democratic National Rally]
of Shaykh Ante Diop and the People's Democratic Havenent of
Hanadou Dia,* Ginette Cot recalls here the "heirs of the PAI":
the PA]: of Hahj enout Diop; the PIT [Independence and Labor
Party] of Seydou Cisaokho and Math Danaokho; and the LD-m
[Democratic League-Labor Party Movement] of Babacar Sane.

The splitting up of the "Harxist family" in Senegal, as in many other countries,
is one of the facts of political physiognony. The clandestine or sash-clandestine
situation in which the bulk of the organizations of the Left found themselves
until early this year silenced the sometimes sharp debates between groups or
leaders claiming to be heirs of the African Independence Party (PAI). With the
advent of the nulti—party system this "breakup" is today clearly a reality which
cannot be hidden. Thus, alongside the PA! which Hajhenout Dipo leads, a party
which reenerged on the official political scene in July, 1976, under the system of
the "three currents of thought" established by Senghor—-two other comunist organ-
izations compete in the Senegalese political field. These are the old PAI-
Scncgal. which acquired legal status under the new name of the Independence and
Labor Party (PIT), led by Seydou Cissokho and Amath Dansokho, and the Democratic
League -Labor Party Movement (LD - MPT). which, created 7 years ago following a
split with the PM, identifies itself as an organization which now nust be taken
into account.

At a constituent congress meeting on 8-9 August at the El Mansour movie theater
in Dakar, attended by 500 delegates representing all classes of the population and
-he whole country, the PIT - Senegal marked its entry into legal political life.
For the party leaders the success of this meeting, prepared on very short notice.

'* se'e A'rxm'“ua~nsff‘umhers 249. 250, and :52.

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF1C1A1.USEGDNLY

w." a "scathing response" to those who "tried to deny the reality" of the former
PA] - Senegal. Regarding the work of the congress, they showed that the basic
theme, the day—to-day practice, and the objectives of the PIT were a continuation
of the past. Thus, while taking into account "the new facts of the situation."
created by the accession to power of Abdou Diouf and the reforms made since last
January concerning public and individual freedom, the action program which the
central committee of the PIT had approved in December, 1980, just before the de-
parture of Senghor from office, was to be re-adopted for the most part. "We are
not demanding everything. However, even if positive signs have been recorded,

we do not think that this is the time to lay down our arms." the PIT leaders said.
For them the splits and remodeling under way can already be foreseen, as well as
the waiting positions adopted here and there. The latter are evident signs of
growing class distinctions and struggle.

To fight for a real improvement in the living and working conditions of the farm-
ers-~an improvement which is a necessary preliminary to any policy of recovery
of the national economy; to associate the party with the claims of the workers in
the face of the series of closures of factories and reductions of personnel (a
process which had led to the dismissal of 25,000 people since 1979); to promote
measures in favor of the emergence of a national private sector able to contribute
to the elimination of foreign domination of the key sectors, such as, for example,
importing and exporting; to revise from top to bottom the foreign policy of the
country: these are some of the principal elements in the action program of the
PIT - Senegal. At the same time that its accession to legality opened favorable
prospects to it for an eventual deployment of its forces, the PIT realizes that the
new situation confronts it with greater responsibilities as well as problems of
adaptation. Thus, for example, the constituent congress raised the need for
reducing the existing contradiction between the present composition of the party,
where the petty bourgeoisie and the intelligentsia are the predominant elements,
and the "natural class basis" of a Marxist—Leninist organization. This implies
making greater efforts regarding the workers and the farmers. It is also true
that they have sought to find a solution making it possible to adapt the princi-
ples of organization and of membership in the party to the social and economic
realities of the country. At times the latter make it necessary that a request
for entry into a political organization, in the countryside, involve not a single
individual but a whole family or clan unit.

It is known that the PIT has long maintained friendly relations with the communist
parties of Eastern Europe, as well as with the French Communist Party. Further,
the PIT states that it undertakes its activity, “in the perspective of a rally of
popular forces in order to promote a democratic, national revolution." Thus, one
can understand that the problem of unity of action with the other opposition
organizations was at the center of the concerns expressed by the old PAI - Senegal.
As proof of the efforts made in this direction, the leaders of the PIT underline
their presence within the 0050 (Coordination Committee of the United Senegalese
Opposition), the exemplary, united effort made in cooperation with the former
group of non-party socialists led by Hamadou Dia. Today this group constitutes the
embryo of a new political party, the People's Democratic Hovement.* This coopera-
tion has led to the publication of the political monthly magazine, ARDE SOPI.

* See APRIQUE-ASIE Numbers 249, 250, and 252

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Frozen

The PIT leaders also report contacts made with other opposition groups, such as
the Senegalese Democratic Party under Dr Hide, with which close cooperation has
developed over the past year. While considering the objectives and certain posi‘
tions-ofthe Senegalese Democratic Party [PDS] ambiguous and contradictory, the PIT
considers that it must take into consideration the size of the farmer groups

which Dr Wade's party succeeded in organizing under the slogan of change ("Soppi")
during the last few years of the Senghor regime.

At the same time the PIT, which considers itself the only real communist party in
the country. is frozen in its positions when it is a matter of considering the
other organizations claiming to stand for Harrism—Leninism. It rejects as out

of the question and without foundation any idea of a debate aimed eventually at
permitting a rapprochement if not a fusion of the different groups which came out
of the "historic" PAI. The latter, established in 1957. played an important role
in the struggle for national independence. A goodly number of the present politi-
cal leaders "passed" through it some 20 years ago.

"We are aware of the obstacles which this dispersion has created on the path of the
political growth of the working class and its necessary unity. However, it is
necessary to analyze this situation in detail." the PIT leaders underline. They

do not see "the reasons for which it would now be necessary to discuss the unity

of Marxists." "0n the other hand," they add, "we are disposed--we are already
doing it--to undertake discussions or Joint action aimed at the search for con—
crete solutions to the crisis the country is going through, with all movements or
groups of the opposition without exception, in the framework of bilateral or multi-
lateral contacts."

Uniting under the same roof all of the Marxist family while contributing to the
unification of all patriotic forces in the cauntry--these are the two fundamental
tasks which the Democratic League - Labor Party (LD - HPT) has fixed for itself
since its creation in September, 1974. Babacar Sane is the first secretary of this
group, and Mbaba Guisse. Abdoulaye Bathily, Hamadou Ndoye, Hbaye Diack, Tidiane
Mane, and Famara Sarr are members of the "permanent executive secretariat." These
are the principal leaders of the party.

For the LD - MPT the true vanguard party capable "of organizing, leading, central-
izing, and directing to a successful conclusion the people's battles "remains to
be established." Proof of this they see in the turning into dead ends of the

mass explosions such as those which occurred in 1963, 1968. 1969, 1971, and 1978.
They also note that it was not only the heavy repression of which the African
Independence Party was the victim but also the "errors and grave political mis-
takes made by the organization itself" which explains the succession of crises in
which the PA! began to founder after 1965. And, in the view of the Democratic
League, all the activists of the PAI of the time bear their share of the responsi-
bility in this process. Also, in the view of the LD — MPT there is no doubt

"that here and there, in the groups and movements which claim descendance from
the historical PAI there are responsible Marxists whom the country needs to pro-
mote the revolution."

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"If we consider that the two fundamental tasks-—uniting the Marxists and rallying
the patriotic forces--must be accomplished at the same time, without one moving
forward more quickly than the other, the fact is that we have noted that any
progress recorded on one o" the two fronts has favorable repercussions on the
other," commented Babacar Sane, the first secretary of the LD - MPT. Thus, for
example, the meetings organized, either in the framework of the C080 or on the
occasion of previously arranged events on a larger scale, provided possibilities
for contact with the other Marxist organizations. without underestimating the
difficulties of the task which it has set for itself, the Democratic League is
optimistic. "The signs which we consider encouraging may seem negligible from the
outside. However, you should know that 3 years ago one could still not establish
contact with one of the two PAI organizations without the other taking offense
and objecting. Now, recently, in August, it was at the headquarters of the LD -
MPT--and without anyone objecting-—that the opposition parties met to prepare the
joint declaration condemning Senegalese intervention in Gambia. Among these
organizations there were, of course, the PA! under Majhemout Diop and the PIT -
Senegal. I think this is the first time for a long time that we have shaken
hands..."

Rigidity

"We are convinced," Bahacar Sane continued, "that once we will have decided to
meet around a table to discuss the internal problems of the revolution in Senegal,
we will reach a basic agreement." Moreover, according to the LD - MPT, the ob-
staclcs are far from being insurmountable. Thus, with the PAI led by Majhemout
Diop, the discussions looking toward a consolidation come to grief essentially on
the choice of the name of the future, unified Marxist-Leninist party. The
Democratic League advocates abandonment of the PAI name, which it considered too
much involved with negative elements. For his part, on the other hand, Majhemout
Diop continues to think that in spite of all the problems encountered by the PA!
the name of this party continues to have an important emotional and political im-
pact. Moreover, he says that he is ready, if necessary, to withdraw from office and
to go back to being an activist party member in the ranks, on the sole condition
thatthedebate on consolidation of the different groups is held democratically.
Finally, the LD - MPT considers that the differences which lie between it and the
PIT - Senegal are more of a subjective than political order. Whatever the case,
they are convinced at the Democratic League "that the unification of the Marxist
family will be accomplished one way or another, either by a consolidation freely
agreed to or by a process of natural absorption by one of the organizations of

the other groups..."

Meanwhile. the LD - HP? has just published, in the first issue of its central
publication, FAGARU, (which means "get ready" in the Holof language) a draft pro-
gram "for the building of a new‘independent, democratic, and prosperous
Senegalese society." a "society for the transition to socialism." If the length
of time required for the program is destined to remain open. this means that this
program, which is characterized on the other hand by the great care and depth

of the analysis, and which does not ignore any of the problems of the political,
economic, cultural, and social life of the country, can be further developed and
reorganized. Meanwhile, the LD - MPT does not intend to shut itself up in an
ivory tower but, on the contrary, wishes to keep in touch with the realities.

27
FOR¢Nﬂﬂ£1Al.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however, the strategic and tactical orientations remain unchanged. The editorial
in FAGARU states, "Once again it is a matter of uniting all communist forces to
build a powerful. working class party capable of drawing in its wake all Senegalese
who love liberty, justice, and peace, with a view to creating the conditions for
the establishment of a democratic alternative to the UPS - PS [Senegalese Progres-
sive Union - Socialist Party] regime." This alternative, which the LD - HPT de-
fines with precision in its draft program, "will involve passing through a
Democratic National Revolution (RND) which will require in particular: a break
with imperialism, the building of an independent, national economy which is strong
and prosperous, and the full enjoyment by Senegalese men and women of the fruits
of their labor."

The L0 - HPT is a very structured organization, which gives priority in its
recruitment policy to quality over quantity. At the time of its entry into legal
existence it had a few hundred activist members who, for the most part, are
teachers. The party had solid experience, particularly within mass movements.

IL benefited in the same way as the other recently recognized parties from a large
number of new recruits. The latter were so numerous in the party that it was
necessary to establish a special body to welcome the new members. After they
establish their credentials they are to be transferred to the active elements of
the party. Many people think that the Democratic League - Labor Party Movement,
which seems to have a strong attraction, in particular, for the youth of the
country, could become, in a few years, one of the largest Left opnxdrion parties
in Senegal.

COPYRIGHT: 1981 Afrique Allie

5170
CSO: 4719/313 END

28

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY