APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00050R000100020000-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020008-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI’IIS L/8263

2 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 621

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020008-0
.II’RS pubiicntium curtain infernmliun primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but ulna from news agenci-
trnnamissions and broadcasts. ﬂail-rials from foreign-lungum-,e
sources are translated; those from Englisll-lnngunpw sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in urnckets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [hat]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or sttitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS WERNING WWI? 0F
”TERM “PMDWED HEREIN mums 'i'IIAT DISSEHINATION
0F IRIS PUBLICATION EE RESTRICTED “OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I
7. Mullen.) U. Salaam-n; Dun-u- . "T”.
. n.

 

 

O. Pom-«emu. Qua-manna Name and Acute" I0. I’nnen. In; I -n \ n-I \... i
Joint Publication: Reaearch Service
1000 North Globe Road II. Com-u 'wam .\o.
Arlington, Virginia 2220].

I1 5'00.qu Ouamuuon None and Mdnu ll. Type oi Reps“ a I'm-u
Coveted

~J:

Aa above
14.

 

IS. Sank-emu, Note.

..—a.—

O. Ahuaen

The report contains infomtion (to: African and specialized West European
publications and radio on political. economic. and eociological developments.

I1. Key Verde and Donna: AaaIyeie. I70. Deacti'uou

   
  
  
  
  
  
    
 
     
 

Pol i t ical Se ience _x_lnter-Af ticen Af f . LGhana _Rvenda
Soc iology Lunch J_Gu inea ___Sao Tome and
Economics __leoin __Guinea-Biesau Print: ipe
Col cure (Social _Bouvana _Ivory Coast. _Senegel
Sc iencea) _Burund i _Kenya __Seycheilea
Technological _Caneroon __l.eaocho _s ierra Leone
_Cape Verde _Liberie _80nal ia
iCentral Aft ican Lﬁadaga ecer _Sou ch M r ice I
Bap ire ___I‘Ialovi _SHI¢ iland -
ichad __Iial i _‘ranzan ia
_Coloro lalande ___Hauritiue irogo
_x_Congo _Ho:anbique _x_Ugande
__Dj ibouci __Nuib la __Ilpper Vol ta
__zquatorial Guinea _N iger _Zeire
IIL Ileanlwnl‘bn-Edd Tea-e 45:33:,“ —:::::::I _leb 18
:Ganbia :Rhodesia

In. comm Fan/cue. 02.50.5C.SK
II- Auolebduy Stow-en

FDR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Nuabcr of
Copies Available I'm- JPIIS

_

'°"' "'”' "'"' ”" me you an e: unowceo ”“°“"‘°‘ "“""‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8263

2 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

POUO No. 621
Comeurs PAGE
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS
Briefs
Ghana-Ivory Coast Electricity Interconnection l
ANGOLA
Article Anslyxes Reasons Underlying Csbinet Changes
(RUN! AYRIQUE, 20 Dec 78).. 2
Briefs
Luanda Execution Site 6
CENTRAL AFRICAN WIRE
Slovenia-Rois Installations Opened
(macarsmrzcwxmmnmms. 29 Dec 78)........ 5
Briefs
"In? Aid to Agriculture 7
PRC Bridge Construction Agree-out 7
CHAD
Briefs
Petroleu Aefinery Financing 8
couoo
Briefs
french-Congolese Pinancins Agree-sets 9
Angolan Cultural Center in Breneville 9
ETHIOPIA
No Revolutionary Leaders Discuss Situetion in Eritrea
(leris Bani; AL-flA'rAl AL-‘AIAII. 14-20 Dec 78)......... 10
-e- [IIl-NE‘A-IZZPOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE GIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

GHANA
Briefs
ﬂydroclectric Project Cost Up
Bulgerisn Trade Delegation
Repleceaent of Diseased Trees
GUINEA

Conakry. Guineens Surveyed. Paradoxes Pointed Out
(Hahn-ed Selheni; JBUNB APRIQUB. 20 Dec 78).............

Possible Solutions Reviewed for Currency Recovery
(Sory Serinde Di 110; JBUNB APRIQUB. 20 Dec 78).........

MADAGASCAR

Report Indicates Improved Production. Trade in 1977
(MARCHES TROPICADX Er HEDITBRRANBBNS. 8. 15 Dec 78).....

Upward Trend Noted
1979 Budget

Briefs
Defense. Other Hinistries' Budgets Increased

INODZSIA

"keno Tells “by He Met with Snith
(Joshua Rho-o Interview; ADBIQDE-ASIB. 11-2‘ Dec 78)....

Briefs
Austerity Budget Adopted
trench Financing Agree-ent

Briefs
ADB Aid

.5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm (WHCIM. USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

GINA-IVORY COAST ELECTRICITY INTERCONNECTION--Dr E. B. Quartey. the
director of the Volta River Authority (m). and Mr Lambert Konan. the
managing director of Ivory Coast Electricity (BDCI). signed on 11 Decelber
in Accra a protocol agreenent for the interconnection of the electrical
networks of the two countries, a project the cost of which will astount
to 25.76 million units of account. that is the equivalent of 6.8 billion
CPA francs. which is to be financed jointly by the African Develop-ent
Bank (Ann) (10 Iillion DC). the European Invest-ant Bank (213) (11.03
aillion uc). Ghana (2.39 nillion) and the Ivory Coast (2.34 aillion) and
on which work will begin this year and will be finished in 1982. The
feasibility studies for this project. whose conception goes back to 1963.
although nothing precise was agreed upon until the first bilateral
agreeaent was concluded in 1975. were turned over in 1976 to the Belgian
research fire, Pernand Court. which nde its report to the interested
countries last February. The agree-ant which has just been signed in
Accra is one of the concrete results of the visit to the Ivory Coast by
the Chanian chief of state, Lieutenant General Akuffo (m 8 Dec p 3379).
[Text] [Paris meats TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French 22 Dec 78

p 3506] 8956 .

(:50: “00

1
roe OMCIAI. USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

ARTICLE ANALYZES REASONS UNDERLYING CABINET CHANCE§
Paris 1MB APRIQUE in French No 937. 20 Dec 78 p 33

[Text] At the end of an extraordinary session of the MPLA Central Cometee
on Saturday. 9 Decca-her. the following officials were fired: Angolan Prime
Minister Lope do Nascimento, Minister of Planning Carlos Rocha "Dilolwa," the
other two deputy prime ministers. Jose Eduardo dos Santoa and Pedro da Costa
van omen, and three ministers, Paulo Pinto Joao (domestic trade), Manuel de
Oliveira (housing and construction) and Maria Mambo Cafe (Deputy Minister for
Domestic Trade). This dis-issal is more than a simple palace revolution. It
shows how far Agostinho Neto intends to pursue his dual policy of diplomatic
overture abroad and pramtisn in internal affairs. begin: since the end of

The Angolan president hit the high and mighty. Thirty-eight years old. prime
ninister since the independence, a brillant and elegant intellectual, lope do
Nascilento was generally considered to be one of Agostinho Neto's trusted Ien

cautious by the inexperience of the technicians from Havana. he advocates
calling onxostern collaborators—especially Portuguese—in addition to

P08 .OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8y initiating such an important purge and. at the same time. abolishing the
post of prime ninister and deputy prime minister. Ageatimo Neto has undoubt-
edly strengthened his authority. will he he able to go further along this
path without causing a reaction on the part of his already fairly worried
allies in the socialist bloc?

comuom: Jeune M'rique WPJIA 1979

6857
080: 4400

3
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

LUANDA EXECUTION SITBuExecutiona are said to be taking place daily at a
football stadium in Luanda, the Angolan capital, according to statements
by Angolan: who fled their country on 30 December last on a raft and
sought refuge in Namibia (formerly Southwest Africa). [Text] [Paris
VALBURS ACTUELLBS in French 15 Jan 79 p 35]

080: “00

M OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

SLOVENIA-301$ INSTALLATIONS OPENED
Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3568

Liex£7 0n 8 Deceaber 1978. in the presence of the Yugoslav federal governnent
representative, Emperor Bokassa I opened the Slovenia—Bois lusber company's
new installations.

These installations include a cutting still. a wood-peeling mill and a stream
driven power station using wood chips. They have just been added to the saw
nill which began operating in 1975.

Slovenia-Bois is an SARI. iii-ind Liability Conpany/ with a capital of 250
nillion CPA francs. a subsidiary of_the Slovenijales cospany in Liubjana.

It was established in 1970 by ECA LEcononic Comission for Africa] at bayanga
in Ilaute-Sangha. that is to say, at the tip of land that separates Cameroon
free the Congo Republic. south of hole.

Slovenia-Bole received a per-it to explore 100,000 hectares and another for
300,000 hectares, kept in reserve for the Ionent. The exploration is in
particular producing sspelli and sipo. but also soae ayous, liaba and dibetou.
In 1977 Slovenia-Bois produced 49,436 cubic neters of rough tiaber and 2,000
cubic esters of sewn tinber. lt exported 33,269 cubic meters of which 70
percent went to Yugoslavia and 30 percent to other European countries. The
country therefore ranks fourth anong the luaber conpanies set up by BCA.

The new installations will sake it possible to process a large part of this
raw tiaber. as in 1980, Slovenia-Rois expects to produce 15,000 cubic meters
of sawn tinber. 2.000 cubic esters of wood-peeling and 1,200 cubic esters
of cut wood. _

half of the coapeny's total output can thus be exported by river on barges.

as 85 percent is nov being exported on rafts with countless consequent losses.
Thanks to Slovenia-301s. the little fishing village of Bayanga has become a
large iQortant village. In fact. the company is eqloying 15 exiled Yugoslavs
and 510 Central Africans. It therefore had to build 12 wooden houses for the
staffs, 10 dwellings for the personnel. a canteen-bar. schools, and a police
headquarters. Slovenia-Mia has brought about all this growth and Bayanga

now has 2,500 inhabitants.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂL‘l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Slovenia-3013' total BCA invest-eats are evaluated at 2.5 billion CPA francs.
Hr Franc Benovlc la the Slovenia-Bola manager.

COPYRIGHT: Reno Horaux e: Cle. Paris. 1978

8870
C50: 10600

6
'm onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPI RB

BRIEFS

UNDP AID 1'0 AGRICULTURE-The Central African Empire and the United Nations'
Program for Developsent (UNPD). on 9 December, signed an agreement relative
to agronomic research and the increase of food seeds which FAO LFood and
Agricultural Organizationg/ experts are pro-oting. This project. CAP/7N
003. is a continuation of CAP/72/003 (Increase of food seeds) and CAF/72/006
(Agrono-ic research on food, vegetable and fruit seeds). The Central
American minister of international planning. statistics and cooperation on
this occasion stated that this project "is in keeping with both the quant-
itative improve-eats in food production and with the prospect of establishing
a highly productive aodern agriculture." Project CAP/”[003 will extend
over ’0 years. Its estinated cost is $1.75 million which includes the sending
of experts (l9 nan/moth), the allocation of grants (24-month grants_+ group
training), equip-ant ($200,000) and various loans ($100,000). Texy LParis
HARCHBS TNPICAUX 31' MEDITERRANEBNS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3568 8870

PRC 311le CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENTnThe Central African minister of international
planning. statistics and cooperation and the aabassador of the People's

Republic of China at Bangui. on 8 Deceaber, signed an agreegent_acgording
to which China agrees to build a bridge over the bobaye. [text] LParis
mes TROPICAUX 81‘ mummus in French 29 Dec 78 p 35637 8870

(:80: “00

7
so: orrrcm. use ONLY
FOR "FPICIAL USE ONLY

CRAB

BRIEFS

PBTROLEUH REFINE” FINANCING-41m tolnic Bank of Develop-cat will furnish
Chad with 3 billion CPA franc. towards an oil. project which includes
the construction 0! I refinery and a pipeline tor-ling 15 billion CPA froncg.

any [fun mncnas raoncaux 31' mnzmnnans in French 29 Dec 78 935691
8870

C80: (.600

8
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

BRIEFS

I-‘RENCﬂ-CONGOLBSE FINANCING AGREMNTSuThree financing agreements to the
neount of FR (CPA) Mo nillion (Fr (French) 8.8 nillion) has just been signed
in Brazzaville between the Congo and France through the Aid and Cooperation
Fund (PAC). The first has in view FAC's participation in the reslignnent

of the Congo railroad (Cl-‘60); the second is concerned with scientific research
and the third deals with completing the equipnent intended for the Geographic
Institute of the Congo. _/_T_e_x_t_/ LParis MRCIIES TROPICAUX BI“ HEDI'I‘SRRANEENS

in French 29 Dec 78 p 3568/ 8810

moon»: CULTURAL CENTER IN BMZZAVILLE-d‘he Congolese minister of culture.

arts and sports has inaugurated a recently established cultural center in
Brazzaville. During the ceremony. the Congolese ninister stated. among

other things: ”long before colonisation. in Henikongo's tine. these tvo
peoples (Angolan and Congolese) were closely united in an economic and spiritual
but not cultural plan. Today the desire to construct a socialist society

has led these two peoples to enter into a fine alliance of brotherly friend-
ship end cooperation in all areas.“ This cultural center includes a conference
hall. a library. a lecture rooe. a loving-picture hall and sports installations.

ﬁns] ﬁnio mamas rmrxuux t1 mtnsmsns in trench 29 Dec 18 p 35637
0070

C80: 10600

9
M OHICIIJ. 08! 0"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ETHIOPIA

m nevownomnv mans nxscuss summon m mm
Perle AL-HA‘I'AN ALo’MI in Arabic “~20 Doc 78 pp 32. 33

[article by Paria_Beui: "Eritrea between the Sickle of Ethiopia and the
Banner of Rueeiaﬂ/

may Soviet nilitary eupport for the Ethiopian counterattach ageinot the
national liberation forcee in Eritrea hae naneged to dieturb the balance of
power in the African horn. It hee entailed the creation of a new inter
national etrategic political eituation whoee noral effecte have begun to be
reflected in circu-etancea which were not typicel of the Soviet Union. in
in cuato-ary rule as a natural ally of liberation forcea. The Soviet
Union hao preferred to enter the gene of a teat of etrength by relying on
Heetern criteria derived. fro. atteopta to develop inerialian by the part-

ly overt, partly covert oeene of indirect doninance and benevolent guard-
ienehip.

‘l'he leteet reporte coming out of Khartou- fron the battlefronte etate that
revolutionary brigedee have energed fro. a violent cleeh with an lthiopien
attack which they eucceeded in containing. The attack wee launched north
of Karen with the aetabliahnent of a new line of defenae etretching fro.
the hill area to the Red Sea a few hilonetera fro- the northern heighte
above the city of Aanare.

The Soviet fleet eet out to cash eone poaitione along the line of defenee
through a coqreheneive bo-bard-ent which on two aucceeeive occeaione hed
the objective of bringing arnored forcee up to the heighto above the port
of Gulhub. a call fiahing harbor. iaoleted ee a reeult of the coneequencee
of war. which ie 90 hilonetere north of Heaeawa.

Source in the Popular lront for the Liberation of Britrea eay that Soviet
loaeea in theae two atteqta were extrema. aince the Soviete were eurprioed
by a denaity of fire which they had not taken into account.

fterhepe it ie thia failure which led to a tacticel change aid at turning
the lthiopian invaaion into do-inence of the coaet region in order to iao-
late the revolutionariaa fro- the outar world. At tbie point the

10
PO)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY

Ethiopian-Soviet tendoncioe have aenumd an eepecially grave character,
naking the Soviet Union not a partner in a police action but an active
partner in a real war which in deatined to continue.

Hhile Arab obaorvere are keeping their eyua out hopefully for the reaulte
of the diecuaaion going on in Khartoum. on initiative of Preeident Ja'far
hunayri. among repreeentativea of the three detachmenta of the revolution.
the war of worda ia atill going on among than. Perhapa an expaneion of

the ecope of diacueaion by varioua bodiea on true reaponaibility for the
nilitary diaaater which haa befallen the revolution will be very beneficial
in giving the revolutionariea help from Arab entitiee in evaluating their
errora. proceeding from preniaee of apecific reeponaibility.

In thia framework. AL-HATAN AL-‘AMBI thia week ie coapleting the indirect
dialogue between Oanan Saleh Sabbe, preaident of the Central Bureau of the
Eritrean Liberation Pront. Popular Liberation Porcee, and ’Ali al~Sayyid
'Abdellah. neober of the Political Bureau of the Popular Pront for the
Liberation of Eritrea (reaponaible for aecurity). 'l'hie ia a dialogue which
haa taken place an followa through aeparate interviewa with both nan.

Oeaan Saleh Sabbe: Then "he Trafficked in Harxiet Slogane bear Reaponai-
bility for the Defeat

l§ueetion7 "hon would you hold reaponaible for the fall of the Eritrean
towna. in particular the Koren baee?

Ignewegl I hold thoee who trafficked in Harriet elogane reaponeibla, both
in the Revolutionary Council and in the Popular Pront. “they are wholly
reaponeible for enabling lthiopie to regain the liberated towne. If ‘.he
leader of the Popular Pront, leaiaa Afework. had accepted the unity agree-
nent which wee eigned in Khartou- in 1975, and if he had aleo accepted the
unity plan for the three detachmente in 1977, Eritrea would be an independo
ant atate today, becauee, during thia period. we enjoyed a nunber of poo.
ltive advantagea. including Bthiopia'e nilitary weakneee and the readineaa
of the Arab atetee and a number of African countriee to recognize Britree'e
independence and eupport it politically and nilitarily.

The Revolutionary Council alao beara the aane extent of reaponaibili'ty be-
ceuee in 1976 it abrogated the unity agreement aigned with the Popular
Liberation Porcea in 1975. Then it abrogated the military coordination
agree-ant.“ had alao eigned with the Popular Liberation Porcee in 1977,
without any national juetificetion. At that tine ite excuae wae that a
third party. the Popular Pront. wae atill outaide the framework of thia
unity and thua, through thia conduct it weakened.inatead of atrengthening,
the unificationiat tendency. It then entered into a proceea of eanewer-
ing with the Popular Pront by declaring a unity agree-ant between itaalf
and the Popular Pront in October l977unone of the atipulatione of which
were carried out-oend the leadera of both organisation bate-e the .priaon-
are of their peraonal eebitione with the objective of nonopoliring power
and alienating the other party.

11
FOR OFFICIAL l8! MIX
rUK Ul'l'lblnl- Uhl’. UNLY

'l'hie ie what helped the Ethiopian menouvere play a game of exploiting the
Eritrean rifte. Ethiopian sourcee, for instance, portray the council an

the progressive party with which one met reach an underotending. end sou-
tines they give this deecription to the Popular Front.

Some foreign countries supporting Ethiopia have helped neke this gene a
euccese, especially the Soviet Union and the countries revolving in its
orbit. The Soviet Union rained down appeale onto the lesdere of the de~
technente through its internediariee. calling for the attainment of a peace-
ful resolution through negotiation. East Berlin and Aden were two funds-
nentsl poets in this maneuver. lssias Afework. on hie own end through the
delegatione representing hie. nude frequent visits to Best Berlin, where

he net the head of the Political Committee in the Berg, Berhanu Bayeh. in
May 1978. He had net with him in Aden. prior to that, in September 1977,
and a third meeting with a delegation consisting of four neebers of the

Control Co—ittee of the Populer Pront, took place in Addie Absba, in
Pebruery of this yeer.

At the same tine. the Revolutionery Council is snaking an effort to seize
an illusory opportunity and has been vying with the Popular Pront in pro-
pounding ite Marxism. It eent its delegates to Beet Berlin three tines.
in November I977 and June 1978. and theee neetinge were crowned by Aheed

Nesir'e visit to Hoecow in June of this yeer, after being eccowpsnied by
the welloknown nedia clanor in Beirut.

Por our part, we hsve been observing events fron en Britrean netionaliet
point of view and have been diecovering whet is going on between Addie
Absba and Hoscow. It csee to our knowledge. through a fraternal Arab state.
sfter our delegstion returned free Beet Berlin in Novenber 1977, thet the
reel Soviet objective behind theee eppeals was to gsin tine for Hengietu's
regine under the veil of peaceful appeale, eo thet it would be in e nili-
tery poeition which would eneble it to pounce on the Britresn revolution.

Por the hietorical record, we have conveyed this infer-etion to officiele
of the two froete via certain fraternal Arab countriee. but without the
leset responee. The Soviet echoes continued so it bed been planned. By
s fortunete coincidence. we obtained the ninutee of neetinge between the
leeders oi the two orgsniratione in the Revolutionery Council and Popular
Pront end s Palestinisn leeder of Herxist tendencies. ‘i'hese ninutes con-
tained serious infornetion regarding the roles the Revolutionary Council
wee expected to pley in order to errive at s coqro-iee solution oi the
Britreen problee. such es s solution repreeented by s confederation.
which would oi necsesity include the liquidation of the Popular Liberetion
Porcee. the einutes concluded with an opinion by this leeder. who recen-
needed thet e eilitery blow be struck concurrent with dipleeetic activity.

considering thet to be the sole new for stteining e politicel rseolution
to the Britreen problen.

12
ran ontcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Theee minutce were dated Hey I978 end were prcecntcd to the Soviet Union.
They are lengthy mlnutee. coneieting of 180 legal-size pager. Not much
time elapaed before we eaw the reeulte of theae conspiracies appearing on
the atage. The Ethiopian invaeion, backed up by Soviet arma and Cuban

eoldiere. took place after they had guaranteed that the detachmente of the
Eritrean revolution would bn fragnented.

Prepared ‘l'o Reepond to Any invitation

lgueetiog/ You reeponded to the Beet Germane' invitation in May of last
year, juet er the loadera of the council and the Popular Front reeponded.
how do you explain your participation in negotiatione eimilar to thoae
which took place in Berlin?

Ignewegl we have no touchy foelinga toward any country which nakee efforta
on behalf of creating a peaceful eolution to the Britrean cauae. be that
hat Germany or Heat Germany. we are now ready to viait Baat Germany.
hoecow or any other country in the world, if thia will help in attainment
of our eepiratione to national independence and eatebliehment of a juat
peace in the region. when our delegation viaited Beat Berlin. it expreeeed

our organication'a viewpoint clearly and frankly and eaphaeieed there two
fundamental pointa:

1. We are in favor of negotiating with 8thiopia. without relinquiehing
our legitimate demand for independence.

2. Negotiation nuet take place after the attainment of unity anong the
three detach-enta. eo that the delegation. end not one group to the exclu-
eion of another. will repreaent Eritrea.

The Revolution Hill Renain Strong

lgueetiog/ umver. if agreement on formation of a united delegation to
the negotiatione ia reached anong the detach-ante of the revolution. will
you agree to negotiate during thia phaee, now that the Ethiopian regime
haa regained all the Eritrean towne which had been liberated?

Ignewegl fro- the tine it owned one rifle. in 1961, the Zritreen revolu-
tion haa been etrong. becauee it haa poaeeeeed total popular eupport. The
regaining of one town or 10 towne will not create a condition of weakneae
ea tar ae the lritrean revolution goee-othe Britrean countryeide will re-
main a mighty atronghold of the Britrean revolution. and the towne will
continue to he eurrounded by the countryeide.

Do not forget that the Eritrean revolution. in epite of ite nany probleme,

etill poeeeeeee weapone and men. I can eay. without revealing a eecret,
that in the peer 6 monthe of thia year we have received double the arme
we received the peat 2 yeare and we are confident that the Sudan. which

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL mm ONLY

conatitutee e atrategic heartland of the Eritrean revolution. will con-

linue to aupport the revolution for reaeona of principle. eocurity and
etretogy.

I§ueetiog7 Circleo in the Revolutionary Council say that they have fought
againat the Popular Liberation Porcea in order to prevent American influ-
ence tron infiltrating the region through the Eritrean revolution.

l_Anawe5l we are not on America's aide againet Ruaeia or on Ruaaia'a eido
egainet America. however. it ie ueeful that the world know that the two
countrioe' poeition on thia area ie governed by the policy of internation-
al detente and Anerica'e fixed view of preventing Sritroe'u independence
in order to proaervo what it calla the unity of tho Ethiopian enoiro. How-
ever, tho wearern etatee as a whole approve of tho oxteneion of Ethiopia
along the Red See, an a Chrietion country, in place of the eetabliehmnt
of an independent Eritrean atato linked of neceaeity to the Arab nation.

it there in a real reaeon cowolling the Revolutionary Council and tho Pop-
ular Pront to meet with tho Popular Liberation Porcee, that in fear of the
Popular Liberation Porcce' poeition. which hold! that Eritrea nuet be
linked to the Arab nation. Ae for ca we are concerned thia ia a natural
matter which ie nado inevitable by lritrea'e geographical. hietorical.
cultural, religioua and eecurity relationehip with the Arab nation.

Numyri 'e Poeition

[Queetiog/ lihat will be your poeition regarding anticipated negotiatione,
if you are coepolled to deal with the Ethiopian rogine and with Preeident
Ja'far Nmayri. in hie capacity ae praeident of the current eeeeion of the
Organization of African Unity. proceeding from the Charter on African Unity
which rejecte changee in the official African bounderiee inherited (roe the
colonial era?

IZnewegl Preeident Nueayri hae aeaerted to ue that he will not interfere
in the type of aolution. Rather. hie fundaaantal concern ie to bring both
eidee to the negotiating table. The type of eolution will depend on the
reeulte attained by the aritrean and Ethiopian partiee: Preeident Myri
hae aleo pointed out, more than once, that the Britreen ieeue in not an in-
ternal Bthiopian natter. Thie neane that the Eritrean problen doee not
fall within the ironwork of what are called iaauee of eeceeaion. tn the
event of negotiatione. we are ready to reach underetanding with Bthiopian
doeanda related to lritreen outlete to the eea. becauee Bthiopia. ee ia
well known, ia a landlocked country which done not poeeeae than. The
lritrean party not reach an underetanding on lthiopia'e need tor an outlet
to the eee but in a eanner which will not lead to the loee oi lritrean eov-
ereignty over the coeete of Eritrea.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interview with 'Ali el-Sayyid 'Abdallah

lgueetiog/ It has been observed that in the statemnt in whi 2h you an-
nounced the withdrawal from Karen, you used the expression "strategic with-
drawal," while you said that you had msde a tactical withdrawal fron the
Nassau-Asmara road.

lénswegl The new circumstances, which arose from the nature of the strug-
gle. caused us to make a strategic withdrawal from Koren because we do not
intend at the present time to attack the enemy's positions in the town of
Keren. while our withdrawal from the Haseawa-Asnara road was e tactical one
wherein we were still carrying out operations of surrounding enemy positions
on this road.

He are not at present facing the army of the berg. we are facing the Soviet
Union. which has put all its military resources into the battle. Soviet
experts are performing direct surveillance of the battles underway. Pro-
ceeding from this fact. it was necessary. in the face of this new reality,
to change our military positions and lines while the Ethiopian-Soviet in~
vasion was still going on. since its object is to reach the last positions
lying under the dominance of the Popular Front in the Coastal Directorate--
that is. to reach Qarursh, which lies alongside the Sudanese border. if
possible. The enemy is working seriously and is concentrating his human
and ndlitsry forces. for which he has nobilised no less than 120.000 soldiers
supported by hundreds of tanks.

Soviet participation in the Combat

I§usstiog7 what is your intonation about Soviet participation in the
combat?

Ignawsgl Soviet participation is on a wide scale and takes a form which
gives the ismrsssion that it is considering trying to exterminate the
lritrean people. Citizens who have fled from the fighting were pursued by
Mic aircraft flown by Soviet pilots.

Us Are Against Internecins warfare

l§uestion7 Wat is your opinion on the internecins fighting which started
up again between the forces of the council and the Popular Liberation forces

during your confrontation with the any of the berg?

[Zuni] we basically Coudc-l ell internecine fighting which light arise
between lritreans. we ere fir-1y convinced that secondary contredictions
cannot be solved by force of area.

(her ﬂeeting with the berg in berlin

lgusstiog'l' there are people who believe that the contacts you Iade previ-

ously with the berg in Ierlin. Aden and beirut have also had a negative
effect and have also shut you off from a vision of the future.

15
POI! omcm. USE ONLY
rim urn-1mm. USE ONLY

[Answer] when we responded to the request for negotietions, we did not go
to negotiets with the Derg. During our meeting with representstives of
Rest Ger-eny end the Durg in Berlin, we were ssked shout our view regerd-
ing s solution to the Eritreen question end we omphesized one thing:

l’irst. the Ethiopien regime oust recognize the leedership, which wes formed
by us end the Revolutionery Council es s result of the October egreenent.

es the sole legitinete reprosentetivs of the Britreen people. The berg

we then melting its first ettsck, et the very tine it wes reising the slogen
of e pesceful resolution to the issue. Through our insistence thet the
Derg's slogen wes e neneuver end nothing note, we went to Berlin to reveel
this fect. um we leerned iron the Ethiopien delegetion wes thet it wes
iqossible for it to eccept eny solution which wes not within the frenework
of the nine points it hed previously ennounced.

we no Not Recognise Sehbe's Group

l§ueetiog7 It is well known thet the Sudenese euthorities heve sent the
three pertiss sn invitetion to meet et one tehle in Khertoun. m: is
your position on nesting with Osnen Seleh Sehhe‘!

[Answegl He were not interned by the Sudensse suthorities of the principle
thet the nesting would he held between the three detechnsnts of the revolu-
tion. For our pert, so is well known to everyone, we do not recognise the
third perty. which consists of Sehhe's group. Our understending is thet

the Sudenec. euthorities' invitetion wes for e eeeting between the two or-

gsniutions. In spite of thet, we heve egreed thet the nesting should teke
piece et its scheduled tine.

He Will Never Negotiete fro- e Position of weekness

l§uestiog7 Intensive Africen end internetionel contects ere underwey to
stert the negotietion in order to errive st e peecefui resolution of the
lritrsen issue. "her is your position?

[Answes/ He ere not reedy to negotiete tron e position of weekmss. At
present we ere errenging our circunstences end once nore reorgeniring our
erey. we ere defining our nethods of ectioe. end whet is her-onions with
the new stege. Our struggle will be e long one end we ere enherhing on e
long-renge people's wer. Dimer. we ere fully conﬁdent of the inevite-
hility of our victory. no letter how the pressures on the revolution eight
increm. end no netter how it night be exposed to etteck by foreign forces.

comma: pm. AI-Vsten Al-Arehi 1973

l 1887
080: “02

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GHANA

BRIEFS

IIYDROELECTRIC PROJECT COST UP--The Kpong hydroelectric project. which
initially was to cost 230 million cedis (on the basis of the price of
materials in 1977) will. because of world inflation and the devaluation
of the local currency. finally amount to sens 570 nillion cedis. That
is what the director of the project, Mr. H. E. A. Hensah. announced at
the beginning of December, pointing out nevertheless. that work was
progessing normally. according to schedule. and that completion was
still planned for the south of May 1981. At present. between 10 and 15
percent of the work has been completed. [Excerpt] [Paris HARCIIES
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 22 Dec 78 p 3506] 8956

BULGARIA" TRADE DBLBOATIONo-‘l'he delegation consisting of two nenbers of

the Chasber of Camera: and Industry of Bulgaria. headed by its director.

hr 5. T. Staner. accompanied by Hadaae Maria Petrunova. who had cone to
tour Heat Africa (Giana. Togo. Ivory Coast. Nigeria and Benin) was in

Accra at the beginning of Deceaber and signed a trade agreement with

the Ghanian chamber. Hr Staner invited Ghana to participate in the

next Plodiv fair (3-10 September 1979) and hoped at least that the

Ghanian co-issioner of Genome and Industry would attend. [Text]

[Paris M80138 TROPICAUX E‘l‘ MEDITERRANEENS in French 22 Dec 78 p 3506] 8956

arm 0? 013mm TREES-4:1 official of the Chanian [Conisaion] for
cocoa affairs recently revealed that 37 nillion trees had been found to
be infected with swollen shoot and wouli have to be destroyed and replaced
by hybrid varieties having an early avd high yield. The official.

Mr S. H. K. Adu. stated that 90 percent of the diseased trees were located
in the Orientals region. lie pointed out. soreover. that since 1976.

27 nillion trees had already been destroyed and replaced. [Text] [Paris
males TROPICAUX 81' mtrsmnms in French 22 Dec 78 p 3506] 8956

080: “00

17
me OFFICIAL USE OILY
FUR "FHCIM. USE ONLY

the airport. we are flying low over Guinea on this sunny day. 30 .
y season has ended. Through the window we can gaze at the.variety of

The rain
the land
Here and

scape dominated by the greenish savanna. The ground is s
there, grayish patches appear. We are told they are led

bearing ores.

 

GUINEA
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Three to four fanil ies live in one house. Each pay a Ionthly rent of 1.000
silys. Thousands of children swarm the streets. barely clothed and bare-
footed. Some go to school but do not look like school children. Others. a
little older. go to the Polytechnical institute. but their knowledge leaves
much to be desired. Others still belong to the militia. Their rifle slung
over the shoulder. they cheerfully stroll through the town on the lookout for

anti-revolutionaries or a tourist trying to take pictures (it is forbidden to
take pictures in Conakry).

The soldiers' and policemen's good nature comes as a surprise. Seeing them
like that. they appear incapable of using their tremendous power. Yet they
do it so scnsnlously that they spread terror through the population. Army and
police are the undisputed masters of the country. They receive their orders
directly from the chief of state.

Aimed Sékou Touré is much esteencd by the Guineans. All those we questioned
about him showered him with praises.

The “Great sily“ is both revered and feared. His speeches appear in school

and university programs. his picture, spontaneously drawn by young volunteer
artists. can be found in every street corner.

The Guinea we visited from Conakry to Kankan is socially poor. to be sure. but
rich in heart. It is in a developing stage. though the Monrovia Smit of
March 1978 may have already begun the process. The Guineans are delighted.
Without rejecting their past policy. they talk about the future with. occa-

sionally. undue optimism. "We will get rich rapidly and we will be able to
deal with the rest of the world as equals."

Valery Giscard d'Estaing's visit to Conakry is impatiently expected. "We
prefer the French to the Soviets. The latter were not useful at all. You
see the state of our country and the ability of our cadres. herything leaves
to be desired. Their inﬂuence was useless. fortunately. even ideologically.

Paradoxically. those who were trained in Moscow fight Marxian the most
vehmntly and preach overture toward the West: "Maybe we will see a liberal-
ization of the regile in the near future." They believe in this very deeply.

Many are those who wish for the return of exiled opponents: “The brain drain
was very detrinental to us." Do these opponents not run the risk of encounter-

ing the sane fate as Diallo Telli and his companions? No answer. Everybody
knows what happened. but nobody talks about it. At this point in the conver-
sation. terror settles in. even uneng the favored.

Guinea is a country of paradoxes: abmdant wealth. but too evident a poverty;
professed freedom, but impossible to exercise; a simple, nodest and intelligent
chief of state. but his actions are often deplorable; Marxist oriented

theories. but an lslaa very much alive. With regard to religion. Conakry will

soon have a great nosque being built the noroccans and fines ed b
Ssoudi (25 sillion dollars). by c y the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the early days of December, Conakry has been preparing feverishly .o
greet the French president. Extensive work is being done to the Fidel Castro
Highway us well as the Avenue of the Independence which leads to the presi-
dential palace. Guineans are convinced that things will change in their

country. Their only four cones fro. the moodiness of Sékou Touré whose
reversals are famous.

One of the latest: after having been received wamly for 5 days, we wre
suddenly expelled by order of the president. The policemen's explanation
remains difficult to understand: "Unfortunately for us. you are Noroccans."
However. what little tine we spent in the country enabled us to revise many

of our ideas on Guinea. Despite the shocking nature of the official policy
in Guinea. there are the Guineans and that is what counts the most.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Mrique GRUPJIA 1979

6857
C80: 4400

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

P081313 SOLUTIONS REVEHED FOR CUWCY RECOVERY
Paris JNNE AFRIQUE in French No 937. 20 Dec 78 p 15

[Article by Sory Sarinde Diallo: "Hill Guinea Reenter the Franc Zone?
(Jm AFRIQUB answers question submitted by Jerone Kouacou)"]

[Text] In March 1960. Guinea withdrew from the franc zone. It created an
issuing institute, the Bank of the Republic of Guinea (BRG) to replace the
local mo (Central Bank of the West African States) agency. and a national
currency, the Guinean franc (PG) equal to a CM franc. but inconvertible.

The reform was followed up in June 1961 and January 1962 with the nationalisa-
tion of banks and insurances. In the mind of the Guinean leaders. this would
give them mastery over monetary policy and credit and. consequently. over
economic policy as well.

Due to both the officials' inexperience and political interferences. m
managanent soon brought on inflation and a lack of interest in the new cur-
rency. In March 1963. to avoid disaster. the goveruaent withdrew the bills
in circulation and replaced them with new ones. No economic measures having
been taken. the slump persisted and inflation worsened. The monetary mass
grew in proportions unrelated to the level of economic development.

Consequently. another reform was effected in October 1972. involving the cre-
ation of a new currency. the sily (l sily : 10 PG - 10 GM francs). It was
no more successful than the previous reforms.

Today, the sily is even being shunned by the goverraaent which has been collect-
ing taxes in products (rice, corn. fonio) since 1975. part of which goes to
pay govemaent enployees and public enterprises. In 1976. the govement
stopged issuing bills and withdrew a large number of them from circulation.

for urning.

The cure was worse than the sickness; it led to such a shortage of silys that.
now. Guineana buy with GPA francs which they acquire in neighborhood countries
(Ivory Coast. Senegal), a fairly easy matter since the opening of the borders.
Paradoxically. the authorities shut their eyes, with the result that. in March

1918. one on franc was being unchanged on the black market for 50 silya.

21
P0! OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

This in the situation which is supposed to be stabilized by the new reform
announced by President Sékou Toure last October. The called-for measures
have not yet been defined. but three schemes are possible. The first would
simply entail changing the currency while maintaining the automatons zone and
ineonvertihllity of the currency and. eventually. adopting a new parity. it
would he the reenactment of past reforms which seem to have been tensured by
experience. Second solution: a pure and simple. but progressive. reintegra-
tion into the franc zone. with adherance to iiiiOIi (west African Monetary Union)
and admission to mam. The siiy would be replaced by the GPA franc and um
would once again because a READ agency. in the present state of the Guinean
economy. menbers of the franc zone would be unlikely to accept this solution,
even if Conakry were to request it.

The third and. seemingly. more probable scheme is as follows: Guinea. like
Mali. would keep its currency and issuing institute. but it would nevertheless
reintegrate the franc zone. Its currency would then be convertible and guar-
anteed by the French Treasury where Guinea would have an operating account at
its disposal. (Operating account: an account opened by the French Treasury
in behalf of issuing institutes of states which are timbers of the franc zone.
for depositing funds (foreign currency) acquired outside their issuing zone.
In exchange. the French Treasury holds at the disposal of those institutes

the funds necessary to settle their accounts in francs and foreign currency.
in its role as banker. the Treasury is not without imposing certain conditions
auid restrictions.) however. Conakry would have to pay the price of such a
solution. Among other things. it would have to reorganize the unagencnt of
public enterprises showing a deficit. by reducing the author of employees and
even shutting some of than down. French representatives would have to sit on
the board of directors of no.

This would present a problem more political than technical: acne could see it
as a challenge to the attainments of the revolution and a revenge of neo-
colonialis- 20 years after the N0 of 28 Septuaber 1958. -

COPYRIGHT: Jame Afrique GRUPJIA 1919

6857
080: 400

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR UF?ICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

REPORT INDICATES IMPROVED PRODUCTION. TRADE IN 1977

Upward Trend Noted
Paris HARCIIES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERWEENS in French 8 Dec 78 pp 3389-90

[Text] in its report on the year 1977, the "Banky Feupandrosoans Ny Vsrotro
(BFV)" [translation and expansion unknown] takes a sweeping overview of the
Malagasy economy in 1977, and notes the following: inproveaent in agri-
cultural production. steadier industrial production in certain sectors; gen-
erslly speaking, a higher level of coauercial activity. particularly during
the second half of the year 1977. and sore particularly in the area of
foreign trade, and a continued slowdovn in the inflationary process.

Productions

Agricultural production--Pavorable weather conditions prevailed in 1977,

which alloved agricultural production [to show] a sore satisfactory level
than the previous year. That iaproveaent affected, aaong others. rice,

coffee. cloves. peanuts and "caps peas" [aiailsr to liaa beans].

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN OFFICIAL USE UNLY

Agricultural Production (in Tona)

Rice: 1976 1977 (1)
Production 2.042.500 2.200.000
Marketing 308.000 263.000

Coffee 50.000 70.000

Peanuts:

Production 37.400 60.000
Marketing 17.000 20.000

Cottonseed 36.723 37.000

Cloves 10.600 13.000

"Cape Peas" 11.220 13.155

Tobacco 6.030 3.326

Pepper 3.500 3.000

Vanilla 866 550

Sisal 18.552 18.778

Sugar cane 1.073.628 1.033.636

(1) Temporary figures

Rice--Rice production in 1977 was nore favorable than in 1976 (a 7.7 percent
increase). However. the volune of connercial rice definitely dropped and

only reached 86 percent of the perfornance attained in 1976. hence the need
for new inports.

Coffee--ln contrast to the 1976-1977 harvest. coffee production inproved
noticeably and reached a voluae of 70.000 tons in 1977 (a 60 percent in-
crease over 1976). However. because of insufficient production during the
previous year and because of a certain slowdown in sales. the volume of
coffee exports was only of 67,900 tons. which resulted in an increase in
inVentory anounting to 31.000 tons. Still that carryover was entirely sold
on foreign narkets during the first nonths of 1978.

Cloves-cthe 1977/78 crop gives reasons to hope for a clove production of up
to 13.000 tons. or a 22 percent increase over 1976. however. in 1977. ex-
ports registered a noticeable decrease. as they totaled only 3.500 tons.
Although there were najor shipnents during the nonths of Novenber and Decen-
ber. inventory by the end of the year was definitely inflated in conparison
to previous years. That situation was purposely created as a result of the
business leaders' policy to try and raise the export prices.

Vnnllla-1n the face of a continuing drop in produciton. as the 1977 output
reached only 63 percent of that of 1976. which was already lower. we find
a steady denand on the foreign nsrket. Exports totaled 1,800 tons in 1977.

as opposed to 1.200 tons in 1976. Also. prices have been rising steadily
and reached 823.- per kilo in 1977.

26
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Sutton-~1iu- riue noted in 1970 has continued. and 1977 production reached a
record figure of 37,000 tons (a 6 percent increase).

Sugar cane--Production has dropped further. However. the amount of sugar
obtained has increased. due to better processing and to a higher sugar con-
tent in the cane.

Pepper--Mo conclusive solution has been found to the damage caused by the
disease of the pepper tree in the North. That explains the continuous drop
in production. Production for the 1977-1978 year should not be higher than
3,000 tons (a 16.3 percent decline).

Peanuts--Production and uarketing of peanuts in 1977 have reached a more
satisfactory level than that recorded in previous years.

Tobacco--Tobacco production has dropped sharply and is only 82 percent of
the 1976 annual production. This was recorded particularly in the area of
family production.

industrial and mining production--0n the whole. industrial production shows
noticeable iaproveaent in relation to the previous year. which was char-
acterized by a certain stagnation. 0n the other hand. lining activities have
regressed sharply. particularly where chroaite is concerned. He note a 22
percent drop in production and 65 percent drop in Iarketing.

The following table brings out the varying evolution in a certain nuaher of
areas in 1976 and l977 (in tone unless otherwise indicated):

1976 1977

Cooking oil 5.800 6.300
Sugar 107,300 109,600
leer (in hl) 257.000 273.500
Cotton goods (in 1.000 I) 78.100 ’°.$¢0
Chrolite:

Production 211,626 166,789

Marketing 217.837 119.069
Graphite:

Production l7,b02 15,726

Marketing 16.673 16.072
Mica:

Production 81 l.‘98

Marketing 931 1,660

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm ”Fl-'liIlM. “5|. UNIX

Commercial Activity

Domestic Trade--Contrary to what was noted earlier, the level of trade activ-
ity has improved greatly. indeed, the first semester's seasonal slowdown

was less marked and recovery was more definite during the second half of
[977.

That situation is due. among other factors. to the rise in purchasing power
resulting from the increase in agricultural production and in the rise of
sale prices at the producer level. The prosperity of company treasuries.
already noted in previous years. was repeated in 1977 and contributed to

the trade inproveaent. At the sane tine we witnessed a decrease in problens
of payments.

Although the voluee of accounts receivable was in the sane range as in 1976

with respect to securities. it was definitely on the decline with respect to
checks.

Foreign Tradeo-That sector was lurked in 1977 by a record level in the volume

of import and export trade, with a 33 percent increase compared to the year
1976.

The following table shows the 1977 foreign trade situation conpared to 1976
(in sillions of Malagasy francs):

1976 1977
Exports (FOB) 65,368.7 85.976.S
leports 66,601.8 87,962.7
Balance + 766.9 ~1,986.2
Cover rate (percentage) 101.2 97.7

In 1977 imports show a 36.2 percent rise conpared to 1976. This is partly
due to a very large carryover of the 1976 isport progrss to 1977. having to
do. anong other factors. with transportation equip-eat and parts. Also,

at the beginning of the second sesester. a certain liberalization in granting
licenses was observed.

Exports show a noticeable increase, sore than 31.5 percent over 1976. That
increase in export revenue is due in part to the rise in export prices of
coffee and vanilla. although there was a period when the entire production
of cloves and coffee was not being exported. taking into account the above
Isntioned facts.

In short, we observe a slight ispsirsent in the trade balance. conpared to
1976: free a surplus of 766.9 aillion aalagssy francs. we drop to a deficit
of 1,906.2 Iillion. The cover ratio of ilports by exports was 97.7 percent
in 1977, cospsred to 101.2 percent in 1976.

26
!OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

PrIces--The tendency for the upward apIral to slow down. as noticed since
1975. has continued. Although the traditional-type consumer price index was
on the rise in 1976, In l977, on the contrary. It became steady during the
first quarter, then lagged until September. in spite of sharp rises towards
the end of the year. the eVerage Index only rose by 3.1 percent. as opposed
to 5 percent in 1976.

The oodern-type consuaer price Index steadily Increased throughout the year.
but at a lower rate than In 1976. The Increase was of 8 percent as opposed
to 9.1 percent In 1976.

1979 Budget
?aris NARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITSRRANBENS In French 15 Dec 78 p 3651

[Textl The finance bill of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar for the
1979 fiscal year hinges the "Invest-onto to the lieit" progrse advocated by
President Ratsireka. That proposed budget. adopted on 8 Decelber by the
People's National Asseehly. sets at 216.3 billion Malagasy francs the saount
of national assets and liabilities for 1979. whereas in 1978 there was an

Initial budget of 157.5 billion corrected to 179.7 billion during the course
of the year.

The 1979 budget appears as shown on the following table (in billions of
Malagasy francs):

Revenue Expenditures
'irat section (general budget,
plus additions):
1. General budget 119.1 163.7
a) Operation 119.1 106.9
b) Invest-eats - 56.8
2. Related budgets 9. 9.5
a) Operation 9.5 8.8
b) lnvestaents - 0.7
Total of First Section 128. 173.2
Section II (treasury operations):
Operations of special treasury
accounts 25.2 60.6
Section lll (capital operations of
the national debt)
a) DIVIsioa of foreign and dooestie
loans ' 36.3 2.5
b) liquid assets to be sobilised 26.2 -
Total of Section 111 62.5 2.5
Grand Total 216.3 216.3

27
FOR 07’101AL 083 ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NI.Y

One feature of this budget is the stabilization of operational expenses
(106.9 billion) and the investment effort to be made by the National Fund
for Economic Development (ME). for which 56.8 billion is allocated. The

purpose is insuring that the 1979/1980 Plan is launched under favorable con-
ditions.

In the matter of receipts. the operational budget (119.1 billion) is financed
by tax revenue in the amount of 109.1 billion and "other revenue" in the
amount of 10 billion.

According to the presentation report. this evaluation. based on the current
tax conditions. considers the following factors:

«modification of the import quota structure. while respecting the volume
required by the equipment as dictated by development imperatives. and also
filling the need for consumer goods due to the insufficiency resulting from
continations of circumstances. particularly last year's drought;

-a selective review of the customs duties (import tax) without affecting
those goods known as necessities of life;

«reconsideration of the duties levied on monopoly products (flour. beer.
tobacco. imported beverages). and

--effects of the economic expansion espected to result from the "investments
to the limit" program-ed within the framework of the Plan.

M to capital operations. they will be backed essentially by loans (38.3
billion projected) and by mobilizing liquid assets (26.2 billion).

COPYRmiI‘i': Ilene lioreux et Cia. Paris. 1978

11936
080: “00

28
P0! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FUN (ll-‘l’llZlM. "SSH ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

DEFENSE, 011188 lillliS'l'RIBs‘ BUDGETS INCREASEDuAntananarivo, 15 Jan (mu-ma)"
Military allocations in the Malagasy budget for 1979 have been increased by
6 billion CPA francs over 1978 to a total of almost 17 billion Malagasy
francs [m]. This increase in the allocations was widely expected follow-
ing the "threat of foreign invasion“ reported by the authorities in 1978.
Among the ministries whose budgets were also considerably increased are:

the Ministry of Secondary and Basic Education, whose allocation of mo
18,816,858,000--ss opposed to 17,001,199,000 in 1978--was the largest,
followed by the Ministry of National Defense; the Ministry of Public Health
with m 9.2 billion, as opposed to 8.192 billion in 1978; the Ministry of
Higher Education [as received] and Scientific Research with ma 7,010,500,000,
as opposed to 5,711,260,000 in 1978; the Ministry of Rural Development and
Agricultural Reform with me 7,500,500,000, as opposed to 7,108,000,000 in
1978; the Ministry of Finance and Planning with FMG 7,247,675,000, as
opposed to a previous 5.6 billion. The new finance law provides for another
increase in import duties on various t pes of merchandise. [Text] [London
arm in French 1658 GMT 15 Jan 79 PA

080

g

29
1'0! OFFICIAL 1188 ONLY
mu HFFHZIAI. mm ONLY

RHODES IA

NKWO TELLS "NY "8 NET WITH SMITH
Pnris APRIQUE-ASIB in French 11-24 Dec 78 pp 37-38

[Interview with Joshue Nkono. leader of mu and co-president of the Pe-
triotic Front. by June humeral. Date and place of interview not niven.|

'[T'cxt'l- [amnion-7 In the nonth of August 1978 you accepted an offer to net
secretely with Ian Smith. In view of what that person is and what y0u repre-
sent. that eight eppear surprising. what caused you to sake that gesture?

Ensweg7 I will tell you. After the Salisbury Agreenent, which set up the
would-be "eultirecial governnent," we resolved to etep up the erned struggle.
The Inn Seith regiee responded to that brutally. Snith knew the structures
of our organisation and my of its unborn. A large nuber of key eleeents
in our novesasnt (leaders of sector co-ittees. tone co-ittees. province con-
eittees and even soee nenbers of the Central Co-ittee) were killed. That
happened before the affair of the "Viscount” which we brought down and whose
civilian pessengers we were accused of killing. but the massacres becens even
worse after the nucleation of nertiel law.

In fact. Seith was acting that way not because he thought he could get away
with it but because he was certain that he would heve to leave.

when people understh that they began to cone to see as. All kinds of peo-
ple: African ferners. business-en (including a few whites). eisaionaries
(Cetholic and Protestant). peesants and workers. I net then in Lusaka - and
sons of then even in London. ‘l'hey told es: "Snith is carrying out those nas-
sscres because he knows he hes lost. he no longer hes a govern-mt. So it's

up to you to do scathing." Chirau and hdiweni also cans to tall as the ease
thing. but I don't know whether Seith knew it or not. '

It is hard for Is to give edvice to those people. It would first of all have
been necessary that they resign free that ao-called "eultirecial govern-ant."
I could not trust the. but I saw through then very easily: they were afraid;

. they felt that. they were surromded by our young oodatauts ad that they
were looking for a my to escepe their fate.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then our vice prouidcnt, Josiah Chinamono, who was still in
the interior of the country, let me know that Ian Smith Wanted
to see me. I asked why, and Josiah replied that among Smith's
followers the word was that he was finished and wanted to wind
things up.

To me Smith is a disgusting person, but I thought that it was
important for me to know Just what he wanted to see me about.
So I screed to meet him, but I took my precautions. I asked

the Nigerian head of state, General ObasanJe, to designate a

trustworthy person to be present at my meeting with Smith and
to bear witness to all that would transpire there.

OhasanJo chose Garbo, a former federal commissioner for Foreign
Affairs; and the meeting took place in Lagos.

Ian Smith is a wily politician. He told me that Muzorewa, Chi-
rau and Sithole were incompetent, and then said: “I want to

get out." Then he asked me what I could do. I replied that I
was not the only one to be consulted on that, that I wanted to
hear what he had to say; but that I could decide nothing with-
out Robert Mugabe.

"I thought that you wanted to talk to me about the movement for
which I alone am rcsponsible--ZAPU,' I told him. ”But what you
new reveal, about the possibility of your departure, concerns
the entire Patriotic Front and the people of Zimbabwe." Smith
insisted that we continue the discussion anyway, but he ulti-
mately accepted my proposal to meet with him a second time to-
gether with Robert Mugabe.

[Question] But why did you keep this meeting secret?

[Answer] What mattered was that Mugabe and I see Smith, after
all, and force him into full capitulation.

Even if he refused, we could come out of this interview ahead.
Vs could announce to the whole world that Smith had come to us
without even intonaing the "internal solution" advocates, and

this news would sow dissension among his followers.

I said to Mugabe: “we've got Smith where we want him. And even
if he refuses to yield, we will blew his 'multirscial govern-
ment' to smithereens.“

[Question] Vould a multipartite conference have the opposite
effect?

[Answer] Yes, I saw this danger. we would have moved toward a
Namibia-type solution. The western nations would push us to

31
m ontcw. us: out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accept solutions that might prove fatal to the revolution. Af-
ter that first meeting with Smith, I told Mugabe that if we both
met with Smith a second time, it would be still more advanta-
geous. If this meeting took place, we would make the “internal
solution" impossible, and neither Callaghan nor even Carter

could any longer call upon us to convene all the interested par-
ties. That would have been futile. We had fully understood

that Smith‘s overtures were simply an intrigue aimed at destroy-
inc the Patriotic Front and at dividing the front-line countries.
we had to do all in our power to avoid such a division.

The imperialists could not destroy us unless we destroyed our-
selves. At the front-line summit held in Lusaka, after every-
one had begun to discuss the opportunencss of a second meeting
with Smith, I stated that nothing remained of the Anglo-American
plan and that a multipartite meeting was impossible. I wanted
to do away with the "internal settlement" once and for all.

[Question] Yes, but nothing came of the Lusaka summit agreement,
and there was no second meeting.

[Answer] when Muzorewa and Sithole were informed about the first
meeting, they were furious. But when they realized that there
would be no second meeting, they said no more. We missed our
chance. Had we met once more with Smith, there would no longer
be any "multiracial government.”

[Question] And even today you still reJect the notion of a mul—
tipartite conference in which the Patriotic Front and the Govern-
ment of Ian Smith, with his puppets in London, would participate?

[Answer] All that would be accomplished would be like a raising
of the dead: those who defend the "internal solution“ concept.

They have their backs to the well now, and we should so help the
British save them? No, thank you! The real meeting will take
place in the forests and valleys of Zimbabwe. Ve have intensi-
fied the war and shall continue to do so.

[Question] aut Smith has o more difficult position today. no
has bombed your camps in Zambia and Mozambique. He has reas-
surances from Great Britain and the United States.

[Answer] He has always had those reassurancea. But today he
knows that they can no lancer save him.

"a has been receiving arms shipments, but in this Great Britain
and the United States knew that they can as only so far and no
farther. By his present course of action he wants to remake his
distinctive immco, to have people believe that he is stronger
both militarily and diplomatically than he actually is. he has

32
IO! OI?ICIAL 088 out!
mm (IFFICIAI. URI-1 ONLY

always roJectcd thiﬂ multipnrtite conference in principle. 50
if he accepts it today, it is because he is less sure of him-
self. So why should we accept it?

[Question] The reopening of the frontier between Rhodesia and
Zambia must have been a hard blow for you to take.

[Answer] President Kaunda did not reopen the frontier; he sim-
ply reopened the railroad line. Of course, that was very im-
portant, because the train can transport many things, and I
said so. he gave me his reasons, and I understood them.

Nevertheless, that was to present us with several serious prob-
lems. First of all, we were going to lose one of the most im-
portant targets in the armed struggle. Then the contacts be-
tween Rhodesian and Zambian railwaymen ran the risk of being
very dangerous politically. Finally, the Rhodesians could
bring men and arms into Zambia by camouflaging them under tar-
paulins, for example; and most certainly Smith will try this.
But it was essential for Kenneth Kaunda to be able to bring in
the commodities essential to the survival of his country. And
thus it was up to us to be vigilant.

Question] Zambia is complaining of all sorts of infiltration
Rhodesian, South African, etc.) Are these complaints founded
on facts?

[Answer] Yes, of course. And it is not only a matter of infil-
trators sent in to glean information. There have been actual
combat operations. Some people have been arrested with bazookas,
mortars or explosive devices in their possession. There was a
plan to destroy the key installations in Zambia, such, for exam-
ple, as the large mills and the railroads. This is a very com-
plicated affair, involving whites settled in Zambia, persons who
frequently occupy high posts, some of when even hold positions
of trust.

The idea was to carry out destructive missions in Zambia, then
leave at the site ZAPU leaflets claiming responsibility for them.

[Question] ZAPU has been aecused--and the Western press has
echoed these accusations--of having attacked white farmers in
20lb1. e

[Answer] Those are lies. A few whites have tried to penetrate
our camps. Our man reacted and delivered them over to the 2am-
bisn authorities. The condemnation of a white fanser by a Zan-
bian court did Justice to these accusations. The farmer admit-
ted that he had been stockpiling exam sent in from Rhodesia to

be used in attacking our camps in Zambia and sabotaging Zambian

33
IO! OIPICIAL 08! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

installations. But We believe today that the white farmers
have come to understand that there are among us some who are
helping the Smith Regime, and they want to manifest their op-

position to such people by collaborating with the Zambian
forces.

These infiltrations, like the bombing of our camps, are all
part of a Rhodesian plun aimed at alienating the Zambian peo-
ple from us. It was a question or creating friction between
them and ourselves, of frightening them into asking their Gov-
ernment to expel us. But the operation boomeranged: today

the Zambian people have shown us a solidarity that in stronger
and healthier than ever.

COPYRIGRT: 1978 Afrique-Asie

8117
cso: 6600

. . _- at
ma omcm ass out!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8R1 EI-‘S

AUSTBRITY BUDGET ADOPTED-~11": Council of Ministers of Togo adopted on

15 Deceulber the budget for 1979. which will be an austerity budget. It

is a balanced budget. with receipts and expenses amounting to 62.6 billion
CPA francs. which represents an increase of 3.3 percent over 1978. As
for receipts, the budget will be characterized by a certain stability

in taxes. with the assignment of certain licences and the creation of

a penalty tax of 1 percent for certain isported products and wholesale
purchases. Operating expenses. at 47 billion are increased by 3.85 percent.
investment expenses remain stable at 15.8 billion. Emphasis is being
placed on the- control of the cost of public services and on the
nintenance of state intervention, at the highest level, in the sector

of develop-ant projects. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS
in French 22 Dec 78 p 3505] 8956

MCI! FINANCING AGRBm-Prance and Togo signed on 14 December two
finance agreements anounting to 165 million CPA francs, relating to
projects for aquaducts and research on the diseases of the cocoa tree.
[Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET WHERRANBENS in French 22 Dec 78
p 3505] 8956

C80: 4600

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR (H-‘l-‘HZMI. [IS]: ONLY

UGANDA

8R! EFS

an“ Alon-0n 19 December 1978 the African Development Bank [ADB] granted
Uganda a 5 million uc loan to finance construction of a section of the
tranaafrican highway. Prior ADI! loans to Uganda totalled 18 million uc.

[Excerpt] [Paris HARCIIES TROPICMIX ET HEDITBWNBENS in French 29 Dec 78
p 3572]
C50: 6600
END
36

FOR CHIC!“ US! ONLY