APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007I02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ OOOSOOOO-O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050009-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JPRS L/8438
4 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 633

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

__

FOR USE '

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100060009-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items ue as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
ciea, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGlT MRS AND REGULH‘IONS GWBRNING mBﬂIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUC. HIRED! REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8438
4 May 1979
TRANSLATIONS 0N.SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
P000 No. 633
CONTENTS

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Nigeria'e Growing Influence in Chad Noted
(are Y.r°d: Jami APRIQ‘W. 28 “at 79) Cece-0000000000000...

Reaction to Increased Naval Preeence in Indian Ocean Reported
(AthUB‘AsIE’ 2-15 Apr 79) eaevera-eeooeoleeeeeoeo0000000..

A Fifth pleet by Elia Renato
Seychelles Protect
Clearing the Decks for the French Navy, by Elie Renato

CCCE Con-itnants to African. Indian Ocean Statea Reported
(HARCHES TROPIGAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS. 23 Feb 79) ......‘....

Efforts To Develop Eurafrican Mining Policy Diacuaeed
(Editorial; MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBENS, 23 Mar 79).

Petroleum Activities in Africa 1978-1979
(HARCRES TROPICAUX St MEDITERRANEBNS, 23 Feb 79) ...........

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

Briefs ,
Libyana Ousted. Islam Scored

CHAD

Xano Decisiona 'Dear Seeda of Further Conflicta'
(Han-Cue: JEUNE APRIQUB, 2-15 Apr 79) .....................

New Government's Main Problea: Reconcile Populations
(Joa-Dlaiae Ali-a; JEUNB AFRIQUB. 28 Her 79) ..............

PAGE

23

26

3b

37
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

comm (Continued)
couco ‘
PCT Congress Seen as Victory for Indicaliucion Movmnt
(ain'tt. Cot: AFRIQUB-ASIB, 2'15 Apr 79) o o I o a o I a o o o o I o o 0

Left Ring of PCT Said To “an Triumph“
(JOB-31.108 Mm; JBUNB mm. 11 AP: 79) oat-00.0.00.

Briefs
- Opanso Trial

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN APPAIRS'

NIGERIA'S GROWING INFLUENCE IN CHAD NOTED
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 28 Mar 79 P 15
[Article by Marc Yared]

[Text] The Kano conference, which ended on 16 March, marked
the emergence of a newco-er on the Chadian political scene:
Nigeria. Lagos currently holds sone high trunps if it wishes
to deploy its power on a regional scale.

For a little better than a year, new, Nigeria has been provid-
ing discreet but vital support to one of the cosponents of the
Chadian rebellion: the MLPT, headed by a former ar-y officer,
Mr Aboubakar Abderhasane.

Until just recently dismissed as negiligible, the MPLT neverthe-
less controls a zone which is very important, both econonically
and strategically: the approaches to Lake Chad and a slice of
Kanen Province. This is Vtere some major petroleun finds were
nade in the early Sixties, and where the Anerican-ovned Conoco
company had established its headquarters. This is also the re-
gion, lying on-the doorstep of the capital at NdJa-ena and very
close to Niger, Cameroon, and Nigeria, which constitutes the
heart of the Dark Continent. It lies equidistant fro. North
Africa and Equatorial Afvica, from the Atlantic Ocean and the
Red Sea.

At Kano, for the first time, the hitherto ignored MPLT was re-
cognized as a full~fledged party to the negotiations by all
delegations.

Svore one more for Nigeria: the fact that it was indirectly

involved, alongside the HPLT, in the conflict evoked no consent
whatever, even though the Chadian governsent and armed opposi-
tion forces have for years been lashing out at intervention on

1
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the part of France, Sudan, or Libya. What is a great deal more,
Nigeria emerged at Kano for the first timc as an unchallenged
-- and effective -- arbiter. The Chadian factions will soon
fall into the habit of calling on its good offices, and of put-
ting their negotiations under its aegis, whereas until now

such talks were held by preference in Khartoum or Tripoli, not
to mention Algiers or Libreville.

Lastly and most importantly, by approving the dispatch to Chad
of several hundred Nigerian troops to nonitor the cease-fire,
Lagos has acquired the means, if it should one day choose to
use them, to exercise a direct influence over the destinies of
its weak neighbor.

Some observers are already worried over the possible develop-
ments from this commitment, citing Syria's mediation followed
by intervention, in the Lebanese civil war (l975-l97é) to bring
both the conservative “Arab-hating" Christians and the progres-
sive "Arab-loving" Muslims to heel. Right now, though, there
is no visible grounds for harboring any such suspicions.

The commitment to Chad is, for Nigeria, primarily an internal
security operation. ”he giant of Africa, among whose citizens
are almost as many Mu.lims as non-Muslims (Christians and ani-
mists), may legitimately entertain fears as to the contagion
of fanaticism.

The presence of a Nigerian force in Chad perhaps also reflects
a regional ambition: to contain the "march to the south" of its
Libyan rival.

Nigeria, the biggest power on the Dark Continent economically
a; well as demouraphically, is determined henceforth to be on
the spot wherever the future of Africa is at stake. As far
back as 15 years ago, it sent troops into the former Belgian
Congo. And it still stands ready to do the same in Angola and
in Namibia.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

6182
cs0: 4400

2
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INIER'AFRICAN AFFAIRS

REACTION ‘I‘O INCMED NAVAL 92311809 IN INDIAN OCEAN REPORTED
A Fifth Floet
Perle APRIQUE-ASIE in French 2-15 Apr 79 pp 26-26

[Article by Elie lie-era]

[Text] The collepee of tho irenien regiee and the conclu-
elon of e eeperete peece between lereei end L‘gypt ere ec-
celereting the ieperieliet redoployeent.

After, the ”lrenien dieeeter,” the ﬂeet felt e need to review fm top to bot-
toe the queetion of the defenee of ite intereete egeinet the ”northern threet"
.. the Soviet Union -- end the "denger" of Areb progreeeiviem the conclueion
of e eeperete peace between Egypt end lereel beere the nerlz of thie neceeeity.

It hed elreedy been obvioue for eewerei nonthe thet lereel wee eotting iteelf
up in thie etomy region ee "e forwerd poeition of the Veet" in the Middle
ﬂeet, e piller of the "free world" end en "exietentiel" elly of the United
Stetee in the eree -- while the othere could be only circueetentiel elliee.

(0n theee grounde, lereel hee epecielieed in providing weepone for the reciet
regieee in Africe end the feeciet gowernnente in Letin Annex-ice. South Africe,
Ahodeeie, Argentine, Knile, end Gueteeele ere enong ite cliente, end ite erle
induetry hee never been no heelthy. The United Stetee, which le perfectly ewere
of theee deelinge, prefere to heve Iereel teke cherge of eupplying theee coun-
triee, which ere eepecielly coeproeielng.)

In feet, behind theee eo-celied "peece' negotietione, we heve been witneeeing
e coepetition eeong iereel, Egypt, end Seudi Arebie to eee who looke like
the beet cendidete to eueoeed iren es the regionel ”police-en.”

bourgeoie Proeperity

lereel reeolutely pleyed the cerd of e oo-unity of intereete with the ﬂeet.
et the edge of e "berberoue" world eubject to reeurgencee of 'feneticiee.“

Preeident Sedet, who ie reedy to pey very dee.iy for e return to cepiteliet
”pneperity,” which would benefit eeiniy the Egyptien bourgeoieie, offered to

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

guarantoo tho "oocurity" of Sudan, Saudi Arobia, Bohrain, Kuwait, tho Unitod
Arob Emiratoo. North Youn, and Non (whoro ho hao olroody oont oo-o troopo
to ropiaco tho Iranian unito).

At tho oooo tilo, tho Morican govornoont triod to oilonco tho “gnlbling'

of Saudi Arabia by pmiding it on ohort notico, in lid-Notch. with two

AIMS radar oboorvation oyotooo on aircroft, with tho 200 Morican tochltioiano
nocoooory to oako thou oporoto. Prooidont Gartor oloo otoppod up hio orIo
dolivorioo to North Yaon, rocosniting tho "oocondory right" of tho Saudi
laadoro againot Mon and thuo authorising tho- to uoo tho Anorican woapono in
thoir pooooooion to bring tho oocialiot rogioo in South Yooon to ito oonaoo.
(‘I‘ho Unitod Stotoo octod in tho oooo way with roopoct to Morocco, which ob-
toinod tho right to uoo Aurican woopono outoido ito own torritory.)

Moroovor, tho diroct orooonco of tho hot-icon floot hao boon oonoidorobly
otrongthonod in tho iaot fow wooizo. Tho aircraft corrior Conotollotion ~-

80 airplanoo. 6,000 non in tho crow .. woo dotachod from tho Sovonth Pacific
I'loot with four oocort ohipo to "ohow tho Unitod Statoo colon" in tho Indian
Ocoon. It wao aloo docidod to incroooo tho nu-bor of naval unito porlonontly
baood in tho Gulf. Tho lilitary agroooont oignod in Soptonbor [978 with tho
otato of bahrain givoo tho 1). S. Novy iiiddlo Boot I'orco tho porpotual right
to put into tho port of Juffayr. Focilitioo havo oloo boon offorod to tho
Astricon forcoo by tho oulton of Gun, who hoo ontruotod hio dofonoo to tho
Unitod Statoo -- now that ho can no longor count on tho ohah'o onion.

Several opy oatollitoo and ootnlo with tho Orion roconnaiooanoo oircraft
baood in Diogo Garcio conploto thio otrongthonod orrangonont,wbich hao lado
oono co-ontatoro oay that tho Unitod Stotoo io rotting roody to ootablioh
a pro-anont naval forco .. tho Fifth Ploot .. in tho Indian 0coan, in ordor
to dofond Uootorn intorooto thoro diroctly.

In this thoory, tho Diogo Garcia atoll would play tho full rolo of pivot and
otationory oircraft carrier, for which it woo initially dooimod. ‘I‘hio ioland,
which io locatod oxactiy in tho liddlo of tho Indian Ocoon, hao boon trano-
for-od into o Iodorn oilitory booo in tho laot fow yoaro, in opito of tho
protooto of any coaotal countrioo ond of all tho proguooivo forcoo in tho‘
aroa. It hoo a runwoy for hoovy aircroft, odvoncod oloctronic «Mount, and
oholtorod anchorogoo for ohipo ond oubaorinoo.

Moroovor, tho Pontagon rolioo on ito Fronch olly. which otill hoo tho lar-
goot poroonont war floot in tho Indian 0coan, and hao oolid buoo in Djibouti
ond Reunion. ‘I'ho public vioit Iado by Root Moirol Sa-uoI Poctor, co-orndor
of tho U. 8. Navy Niddlo Soot Forco, to hio countorpart in tho Ar-od Porcoo
of tho Southorn Indian 0coon (PAZSOI) loot Ausuot at Saint Donio, Rounion,
provoo that activo cooporation hao boon ootobliohod botwoon tho two noin io-
porioliot flooto in tho roxion. (Tho otratogic rolo of Rounion io ooro and

non opporont, aftor tho Organiootion of African Unity moo-mood ito rioo
to indoponoonco. it tho boginnins of March, tho Fronch govornlont aooooblod

thoro, for tho f irot tioo, on tho Fronch -boooadoro to tho comtrioo of

toot Africa and tho Indian Conn, and oncourosod the. to dofond Porio'o
officiol poaitiono concorning tho ioland'o ototuo with uoro conviction.)

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

Seychelles Protect
Paris AIRIQUE-Bli: in French 2-15 Apr 79 p 25

Plant] President Dldier Rateiralta had denounced the lleatorn plane, which
were of an aggressive nature, alter proposing the deailitariaatlon of the
Indian Ocean and the withdrawal or all naval forces from the region. In its
turn, the Seychelles govern-ant haa juet condemed the Aaerican decialon
vithout roeervation. Thue the Seychelles preaident, France Albert-keno, sent
Preaident Carter a aeaeago in which he cones out vigorously ageth the cre-
ation of a ailitary force whose result would be to intensity the struggle
(or inﬂuence in the Indian Ocean and hinder the ettorta to lake thia region
a "real peace cone." “To pureuo such a policy eould only endanger the good
relations that exist betveen the United States and the peaceful peoples in
this area of the rot-id."

For its part, tho Seychelles radio atatedl "ile are ready to grant our friend.
ship to all nations. however, as President France Albert-Ilene aaye, we do not
want the great powers to cone and uash their dirty linen in our waters. That
it why we are oppoeed to the preeance of any naval force in our region, ee-
pecially it it ie based in our vicinity.”

Clearing the Docks tor the Pronch Navy
Perla AFIIQULASIE in French 2-i5 Apr 79 p 25
[Article by Elie Ila-arc]

[Text] The French warships that are standing guard in the
Indian Ocean in the n-e o: Vestal-n interests are on tho
alert since the voreening o! the aituation in Southern
Africa, Eritrea, and Iran.

At the Ministry of the Navy on the Place de la Concorde in Paris, senior
officers tollou day and night, on large acreena, the progrese of the no mite
that nov wake up the French squadron in the Indian Ocean: in the chart Mil.
they make telephone calls and eend and receive telex aessages, and interro-
gate, on a television console, the coaputer that concentrates the technical
data and pertoros the calculations.

At any given tile, the central computer provides a choice of possible solu-
tions, based on the data stored in its aenory.

It also coaputea the navigation plans for couuercial veesels, especially the
giant oil tankers that travel fro- the cult to the Cape by passing of: South
Yemen and, through the Mozambique Canal, between Madagascar and the Ooaoro
Islands.

Siailar intonation is available in the operationa roo-e of the various French
naval cot-ands: CECLANT in treat (Atlantic aquadm), CECHD in ‘l’oulon (lied-
iterranean squadron), com in Djibouti (Northern Indian Ocean), "30] in

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Saint-Denis, Reunion (Southern Indian Ocean), end aboard the squadron coe-
eand ship Cher-ante, a l6,000-ton tanker and supply ship, which has been
outfitted to house the headquarters and comication services directed by

Rear Muirel Orosco. (Rear Admiral Omsco, who succeeded Rear Muiral Darrieus
in Noveeber 1978, was born in liaison Carree, Algeria, in 1926. lie is a
"politicsl" officer: fro: [976 to 1978, he was the head of the nilitary
cabth of the French prile ninister, who himself was s native of an Indian
Ocean country (Reunion).)

The French fleet -- which included as neny ea 23 vessels and a staff of 6,500
son at the end of I977, with the presence of the aircraft carrier Pooh and

its escort in the Indian Ocean -- now nuubers an average of id to 18 vessels
of all sizes, and crews of 2,300 men. The lost powerful ship in the squadron
is now the missile-launching frigate Duquesnei it has 375 officers and sailors;
Hesurce, brocet, and Malafon weapons system, which are especially shed at
subserines: and a listening systes based on 12 radars end sonars, whose results
are snslyred by on-board coeputers.

A Turn-Tabla

In nid-Januery, the port of Djibouti siuultaneously sheltered the aviso-escort
ships Couandant Bourdsis and Doudart de Legree, the squadron escort ship
Kersaint, the ultra-odern wort ship Jules Verne, and the supply ships Chaplain
and Saintonge, in addition to the flegship and several patrol bosts, like the
Btoile Poleira, which is permanently essigned to Isrine surveillance of the
strait of Dab el Hsndab, between Aden and the Eritrean cosst.

The ships of the fleet often visit the uany French possessions in the south-
west part of the ocean, especially the scettered islands around Madagascar
(Juan de Nova, Europa, fro-sun, Giorieusos) or the southern territories
(Auterdan, Croset, Kerguelen, Saint Paul) and, of course, Reunion and Heyotte.

but they slso seine nany cells at Moi-bass (Kenya) or in the ports of the Gulf
eniratos -- and souetines also in the South African ports.

Thus France with its squadron has what Ad-iral Lannucel, co-ander in chief
of the navy, hes celled "the largest fleet in the Indian Ocean.”

The adeirel, an acco-pl ished politician .. he travels a greet deal and, in
particuler, net with President Sadat on 16 Deco-her .. is not unewsre of the
fact that the tin of ”fixed bases” oversees is gone. He sees a chance of
preserving the West's world-wide influence by esteblishing ultra-odern, prac-
tically autonouous fleets, which heve a long range and are cspable of gusren-
taeing ”order” at the sea and air approaches to the countries that pro-
duce rew uteriais or are big consulers of industrial goods.

COPYRIGﬂ‘l'i I979 “flout-All.

81.29
60: M00

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

CCCE COMMITMENTS T0 AFRICAN, INDIAN OCEAN STATES REPORTED

Paris anncass TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French 23 Feb 79
pp #95-k98

éfex37 The new commitments of the CCC? entral Fund for
conomic Cooperation7 came close to 1.” illion French francs
in 1?78, an increase of 11.k percent over the previous fiscal
year . This variation is attributable to loans made on
favorable terms (operations called "first counter") which,
with a 19 percent increase in 1 year have risen to nearly 1
billion francs. The long term commitments at "second counter"
terms came to 521 million francs.

Since 197%, commitments have been as follows (listed in millions
of francs).

197k 1975 1976 1977 1973

First Counter 375 #85 659 819 972
Second Counter 170 613 521 521
Total 375 655 1,272 1,3uo 1,u93

Corrected for variations in French export prices, the quad-
rupling of assistance in the last h years is actually a real
doubling of "first counter" operations and a real tripling
of the total commitments.

Index of Real Growth of Commitments

197“ 1975 1976 1977 1978

First Counter 100 122 153 173 196

First and Second 100 165 29k 282 300
Counters

1. For the 1§77 fIscal year, see MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET

HEDITERRANEENS of 2% Feb 78 p 583.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This overall favorable trend corresponds to the intentions of
the government officials to give the 6068 a more important role
in the distribution of French aidéhby giving it the means to

increase all of its resources at e same time, including
those with good terms.

The growth in commitments has caused, with some slippage in

time, the growth of deposits, so that the CCCE's net assets

now form a larger portion of all French public assets in the
recipient countries.

Trends in Disbursements of the cccz :in millions of francs)
197“ 1975 1976 1977 1978

Deposits 299 359 582 793 991
Repayments 238 230 2M3 2H1 2212
Net Disbursements 61 129 339 552 7 02

Share of the Central

Fund in public assets 2.91 5.53 1k.2$ 18.u$ 22.012
in the area affected

The growth of net disbursements since 1976 has regularly
exceeded 200 million francs a year. This should continue. In
fact, the growth of operations starting in 1975 should only
affect the level of repayments after 1980, because of the
"postponements" granted to borrowers, which are generally for
5 years. Furthermore, a new increase in deposits is expected
in 1979 because of the increase in commitments remaining to

be executed.

"First and second counter" loans remaining to be paid at the
end of the year:

At the end of 197” 663 million

" 1975 652 million (including
122 for second counter)

" 1976 1.6k2 billion (includin
569 million for second counter

" 1977 2.196 billion (includi
765 million or second countegg

" 1978 2.686 billion (including)

855 million for second counter

2. Provisional figures; percentage is estimated.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Recipient Countries

In 1978 the Central Fund was authorized to resume its operations
in Guinea, where it still had some important commitments. Its
area of activity was also extended to Somalia. So it now in-
cludes a total of 27 countries in Africa, the Indian Ocean

and the Caribbean (Haiti). In 1979, these countries had 113
million inhabitants spread over a very vast land area. This

area has especially difficult dnv-iopueut problems.

The Central Fund has been able to participate fully in invest-
ment programs in countries whose development is most advanced.
But it is also trying to favor the poorer countries and since
1976, the share of credits allocated to them and in particular
to the Sahel countries, has been growing continuously.

Among the more advanced countries, the Ivory Coast in 1978
temporarily halted the expansion of its commitments. The same
was true of Gabon. But loans'to Senegal increased and some
important industrial programs came to maturity in 1978 in
Cameroon, considerably increasing the volume of loans to that
country.

Millions of francs) First Second Total From 1977
Counter Counter

Cameroon 137.9 272 ##9.9 191.8
Ivory Coast 1 7.2 8 195. #10.
Senegal 70. 38 160. 1“».
Gabon 33.k 73.h 160
Totals 1169.2 Me 879 .23 906.7
Share of these - has 79% 59$ 68%
countries in loan

commitments

The share of these countries was reduced from 68 percent in

1977 to 59 percent. The geographic diversity of the loans
has been increased.

In 1978, operations were resumed in Madagascar, with a
large volume (137.6 million francs).

 

3. This does not include the share of these countries in
the loan to ASECNA.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Central Fund has also continued its efforts in the Sahel,
which is still suffering a great deal from drought damage.
There it is working to finance high priority proJects re-
lated to the development of food resources, as vell as indus-
trial and infrastructure programs, without which the people's
standard of living can not be raised. With this in mind, the
Central Fund participated in a mining program designed to
maintain Mauritania's foreign resources, and it is also in-
volvsdiin several projects to diversify the Niger and Malian
econom es.

Aid to Countries of the Sahel’ (in millions of francs)

First Second Total
Counter Counter
197k 32 32
1975 78 78
1976 169 110 279
197 185 25 210
197 232 75 307
1978 includes:
Hauritania 83.9 75 158.9
"1361' 7 e9 7809
Mali “2 3 k2.3

* xcluding Senegal. Does not include loans made to ASECNA

Agency for Air Navigation Safety in Africa and Madagascag7
for the development of airports, which was 10 million "first

counter" francs in 1976.

Countries of the Sahel, Upper Volta, Mali, Niger, and Chad
are classified with Benin, Burundi, the Cape Verde islands,
The Central African Empire, the Camera Islands, Rwanda, and
Somalia in the UN's classification of least advanced coun-
tries. The funds allocated by the CCCE to these countries
have been increasing greatly over the past 3 years; they have
risen from an average of #3 million francs in 197h-75 to an
average of 252 million since 1976.

Sectors of Intervention

During the last 3 years, the CCCB has directed three-quarters
of its aid to directly productive operations. This proportion

even reached 82 percent of investments financed Jointly with
the assistance of other co-financing sources.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, the Central Fund has not neglected public equipment
of an economic nature, such as transportation and telecommu-
nications, which are vital in bringing remote areas out of
isolation and in promoting trade.

A) Rural Development

In 1978 a large amount of money was allocated to food grograms:
1976: M3 mill on francs; 1977: 103 million francs; 197 3 56
million francs.

While programs financed in the first 6 mnnths concerned pri-
marily pilot projects to cultivate vegetables, manioc, and
plantains in the Ivory Coast and Gabon, those in the second
half of the year were mainly for rice cultivation programs,
especially in the Sahel area and in Cameroon. The development
of irrigated fields on the Senegal river will hel thousands
of farmers and is part of an irrigation policy w ch is es-
sential in areas of low or irreg ar rainfall. These programs
should be based more than in the past on the participation of
the farmers themselves in all the work and on a light and
decentralized administrative structure. In Cameroon, in the
upper Noun valley, which is better irrigated and is heavily

po ulated, water control over 2,200 hectares will make it pos-
si le to establish 3,000 rice growers there, and will bring
rice production areas closer to the areas of consumption.

Distribution by sector of interventions of the Central Fund
during 1978 (millions of francs)

Second half 1978 Percentage

of year
Rural development 153.10 357.35 23.9
Mines ' 150.00 176.00 11.8
Industry - crafts 295.20 301.00 20.1
Electricity 152.k95 188.k95 12.6
Tourism 26.70 36.10 2.5
Total of productive sectors

777-595 1058.9d5 70.9
Railroads 7.50 127.50 8.5
Roads - ports - 20.31 126.21 8.5

airports
Telecommunications 121.00 121.00 8.1
Social infrastructure 3.00 0.2
11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

Total of public equipment

1k8.81 377.71 25.3

Total of financial operations
52.901 56.k87 3.8
Total 979.206 1h93.1k2 100

An integrated rural development operation in the east of
Upper Volta is another type of experiment based on bringing
underpopulated areas out of isolation.

In a general way, the rural operations selected in 1978 most
often had a promotional aspect. For example, in the second
half of the year there were the development of wheat culti-
vation in Madagascar associated with the establishment of
a grain mill a pilot agriculture and livestock program in
Mauritius, village plantations of rubber trees associated with
an industrial rubber tree plantation in the Ivory Coast, a
shee -breeding project in the Ivory Coast semi-artisansl
fish ng in Senegal. For all these projects it seems that the
possibility of enlarging the program in case of success
generally outweighed the risks inherent in this sort of
nnovat on.

In all 357 million francs were allocated to rural development
projects in 1978, in 29 operations.

3) Industrial Development

Four major projects were financed in the second half of the
year; these constitute the main aid given during the year.
These operations were covered half by the first and half by
the second counters as follows (listed in millions of francs).

First Second Total In-
cOunter Counter vestments

Guelb el Rhein iron mines in 75 75 1993
Mauritania
Petroleum refinery at
Victoria, Cameroon . 120 1316
Enlargement of ALUCAM plant in 50 80 527
Cameroon
Andekaleka hydroelectric power 80 558

lant in Madagascar

ther industrial, electrical, 1M6 76
and tourist investments
Total for 1978 351 351

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Mauritanian project will use the iron ore resrves of the
Ouelb mines. Despite their metal content (30 to #0 percent)
which is lower than the content of the deposits which have

been in production until now near Zouerate and the corresponding
need for enrichment, this program will enable Hauritania to

conserve its primary ex ort resource after the present mines
are exhausted towards 1 90.

The Victoria refinew in Cameroon, sim la in its design will
have a capacity of 11500, ,000 tons whic can be increasedto

2,000 000 tons; it w 11 process the new petroleum production
from the Role region.

The enlargement of the ALUCAH aluminum plant in Cameroon from
50, 000 tons to 80, 000 tons caggcity ywill use the surplus
electric power from the Son ulou dam, while improving
costs through the modernization of the existing facilities.

Production should gradually be absorbed primarily by the
African market.

The Andekaleka dam in Madagascar, in its first phase owill
be equipped with two turbines; this dam is designed
the nation’ 3 electricity needs, and could help with its indus-

trial development, especial.1y for the production of ferro-
chrome.

Among the other projects being financed, on a more modest
scale, we can mention two expansions of textile plants in the
Ivory Coast and in Niger, a paper bag and wrapping paper
plant in Zaire and the enlargement of paper mills in ﬁadagas-
car. In the field of electricity% the projects chosen are

i

aimed mainly at increasing produc on capacity in Cameroon,
Mali, Senegal, and Chad.

Finally, the Central Fund, which feels that the economic

spinoffs of good business hotels are important, has facilitated
an investment of this sort in. Niamey.

C) Public Investments

In 1978, these were oriented primarily towards railroads and
airports and toward telecommunications. In the second half of
the year, major programs were financed in Cameroon, the Ivory

Coast, Madagascar, and Niger, as follows (listed in millions
of francs)

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL 088 ONLY

Second half of year 1978
Railroads 7.5 127.5
Road transport 2h
Ports 18 1
Airports 2.3 8k.2
Telecommunications 121 121
Social infrastructure 3
Total 1M8.8 377.7
(of which these amounts were
from the "second counter" #5 80

For the first time, the C008 took an interest in a national
television network in Niger; this will enlarge the scope of
activity of educational television.

A loan was made to enlarge the port of Cotonou which is now
saturated. This port plays an essential role in the Beninois
economy and also n the economy of Niger, and more recently,
has become important for the Nigerian economy. Along with
the development of uranium mines, there is expected a sharp
upturn in traffic on the Cotonou-Niger axis operated by the
OCBN [ﬁenin-Niger Joint Railroad and Transport Organizatio .

Three programs for studies of airport development show the
CCCE's interest in the possibility of using air frei t trans-
port in order to bring hese countries out of isolat on.

D) Financial Operations

These included a loan of 50 million francs made with the
backing of the French government to the Senegal National
Development Bank for a government investment program.

Methods of Intervention

In 1976 the 0063 reinforced its promotional role in the pre-
paration of projects brought increased attention to bear on
management and train ng programs, and pursued a policy of co-
fingncing, which enabled it to multiply the effects of its
act ons. -

A) Promotion of Projects

After the establishment of a develo ment division in the
headquarters of the 0008, the estab ishment of PROPAROO

1‘
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR m-rxcw. USE ONLY

[expansion unknowﬁ7, an industrial development company which
shares in the capital investment of now anterprises,the pro-
ject promotion organization was completed by a mechanism
established to handle studies.

The procedure to finance studies of projects established in
1978, has a dual objective. First of all, it should help to
solve the problems faced by the developing countries in ob-
taining aid for preparing projects whose definition is not

yet complete or whose development is not fully ensured. The
aid of the CCCE is thus added to the aid traditionally granted
for the same purpose by the PAC [Kid and Cooperation Fund .
Also, the financing of studies is a uarantee for the CC E
that it will receive sufficiently we 1 prepared projects

and in articular, projects oriented from their start toward

P
meeting essential needs or toward the maximum utilization of
local abor and local resources.

Excluding general or sector studies, the procedure implemented
is aimed at identified projects which have been approved by

the government involved, and whose nature falls within the realm
of later financing by the 0008. It is significant that the
first loan made to Guinea was for the study of a dam, a sort

of pump-priming loan for larger amounts of financing.

B) Management and Training Aid

The quality of management and especially the quality of the
maintenance of the facilities financed is an essential con-
dition of their profitability. This problem arises particular-
1y with rural development organizations large national elec-
tricity production enterprises, railroad systems, and road
transport systems.

The CCCE is new financing the training of appropriate personnel
and specific actions to organize maintenance services. This
aid most often is one of the elements of the project receiving
establishment loans. Special funding may also be granted.
During the year just past, a special training program was set
up for SAED [ﬁelta Development and Operation Compan employ-
ees in Senegal. The Central Fund also helped with e crea-
tion, in liaison with professional groups, of specialized
institutes using a particular type of teaching methods. In
the Ivory Coast, the Bouake agricultural inst tute in 1978
received a second installment of funds; the CMMI [Industrial
Maintenance and Mechanics Centeg7 of Jacqueville will develop
teaching methods to be used in seven other vocational schools.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

C) Co-Financing

The Central Fund most often combines with its long-term loans
credits from suppliers and medium-term funding whose repay-
ment terms are cased by generous deferments. The extension

of establishment resources is indispensable when large projects
are involved for because of their volume and the risks in-
volved, these often exceed the capacities of the Central Fund

alone. The CCCB then intervenes jointly with other bilateral
and international aid organizations. The experience it has
acquired in 30 years of activity in Africa and its strong

local ties wiﬂlits network of agencies and technical assistance
have sometimes enabled it to interest other lenders in vast

programs, especially organizations that were established rela-
tively recently.

In 1978, the CCCE in this way participated in a total volume
of investments of 8 billion francs, an amount 5.5 times higher
than the loans that it made by itself since in 1978 its share
in these co-financed projects was 1.#§7 billion francs. While
the 0008 does appear to be the primary financing source (18
percent), the share of other bilateral aid (15 percent) and of
multilateral aid (15 percent) is also essential.

Loans Made by the 0003 in 1978 to the Nations of Africa and
the Indian Ocean (in thousands of French francs)

I Productive Sectors

1 ) Rural Development 357,350
a) Food crops 155,860
Cameroon: rice cultivation program in the
upper Noun valley 18,000
Ivory Coast: manioc cultivation expansion
project in the Toumodi region 20,500
Ivory Coast: vegetable cultivation expan-
sion project at Marabadiassa 2k,000
Gabon: creation of an industrial plantain
farm at N'Toum 2k,000
Upper Volta: integrated rural development
operation in the east ' 13,200
Upper Volta: project to develop farmers'
garden crops in the center west 1,000
16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
c)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Madagascar: experimental rogram to develop

wheat cultivation in the tsirabe region
Mali: rehabilitation or the agricultural
area of Baguineda for vegetable and fruit
crops

Mauritius: pilot projects in agriculture
and livestock

Senegal: development of the N'Dombo 1nd
Thiago basins

Senegal: created of irrigated village
areas at Matam and conducting of a study
or the possibilities of agricultural
development or the entire area

Export crops

Burundi: quinquina plantation project
Cameroon: tea plant ng program at Djuttitsa
prry Coast: establishment of the CEDAR
[Arabusta Coffee Research and Development
Centeﬁ7 plant at Soubra

Ivory Coast: rubber tree planting project
(second phase) at Grand Bereby (southwest)
Ivory Coast: establishment of village
rubber tree plantations in the southeast
Ivory Coast: rubber tree planting program
in the southwest ( APR [Irrican Rubber
Plantation Compan )

Mali: equipment for rural blacksmiths in
the cotton-growing area (CHDT)

Livestock

Ivory Coast: sheep-breeding project in the
Toumodi region

Agricultural industries

Cameroon: construction or a palm oil plant
by the SAFACAH

Madagascar: construction of a mill at
Antsirabe

Mali: rehabilitation or the Baguineda
cannery by the SOCAM

Senegal: construction of a new peanut
oil plant at Diourbel (second counter)

Chad: construction of a cotton gin at 301
by Cotontchad

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5,000
3,100

2,000
18,560

12,8»o
77,900

amoo
20,000
2,500
uo,ooo
1,000
3)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fishing

Ivory Coast: purchase of a tuna boat by
the SIPAR
Ivory Coast: purchase of a tuna boat by

the 8MBL
Senegal: feasibility studies

Training

Ivory Coast: second part of Bouake
cg ricultural institute funding
Senegal: SAED training program

Nines

Mauritania: start of production of a
new iron ore nine (Guelb el Rhein)

First counter

Second counter

Togo: establishment of a fifth phosphate

21:,000
13,000
10, 000
1,000
12,200
1, 700
73500
176,000

75,m
75,000

processing unit by the CTHB (second counter) 26,000

Crafts industries

Cameroon: establishment of a petroleum

refinery at Victoria by the SONORA (second

counter

Cameroon: enlargement of the ALUCAM plant's

aluminum production capacity at Edeap
First counter

Second counter

Cameroon: development program for small
and medium-scale businesses

Ivory Coast: enlargement of the African
Cycle Factory in Abidjan

Ivory Coast: enlar ement of the textile
complex of the SOC TAS

ggda ascar: expansion of paper mills of
Mali: expansion of the Mamadou Sada
Diallo plant at Bamako

Niger: modernization of the spinning and
weaving facilities of SONITEXTIL
Senegal: provision of backing funds for

small and medium-scale businesses and for

crafts workers

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

301,000

120,000
33’ ﬁ
79500
2,000
12,000
6,600
3:000
7,100

2,000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chad: modernization of spinning and weaving
shops

Zaire: development of a kraft paper

plant (second counter)

k) Electricity

Cameroon: installation of a fourth
generating system at the Son. Loilou dam
and a second very high voltage line
between Song Loulou and Edea (second
counter)

Ivory Coast: electrical power supply of
Korhogo and Dabou

_6abon: construction and equipment of
transformer station at Bissegue (second
counter)

Guinea: studies of rebuilding the Grandes
Chutes dam '
Madagascar: construction of Andelaleka
hydroelectric power plant

Mali: Energie du Mali investment

program

Senegal: increase in electricity produc-
tion of Electricite du Senegal

Chad: purchase of three generators for
NdJamena and Sahr power plants

Chad: technical study of new NdJamena
power plant

5) Tourism

Gabon: construction of a tourist-class
hotel at Port Centil

Niger: construction of an international
class hotel at Niamey

Togo: construction of a hostel at

Pazao

Total of productive sectors 1,05
Including:

First counter
Second counter

h\
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ,,

11 Public Equipment

1)

a)

d)

Transportation
Railroads

Benin: OGBN investment program
Cameroon: straightening of railway
between Douala and Edea and between
Minka and Maloume _

Cameroon: REGIFERCAM ameroonian
Railway Administratio investment
program

first counter

second counter

Congo: purchase of passenger cars by
ATC ans-Congolese Communications
Agenc

Congo: AIC investment program

Mali: modernization of tracks and equipment
or the RCFM

Roads
Niger: SNTN investment program
Ports

Benin: enlargement or the autonomous port
of Cotonou

Airports

ASECNA: investment program for several
airports

Gabon: Air Gabon equipment program (second
counter)

Madagascar: enlargement or airport

faci ities at Antananarivo

Mauritius: geotechnical site study of
area intended for construction of

Plains des Roches international airport
Mauritius: general study of the island's
aviation infrastructure

Mauritania: enlargement of Nouakchott
airport

20
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

253,710
127,500
20,000

1u,ooo

29,000
15,000

22,000
20,000

7,500

2k,ooo

18,000
8n,210

uo,000
20,000
13,000

1,000
110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rwanda: study of development of Kigali-
Kanombe international airport 1,200

2) Telecommunications 121,000

Cameroon: extension of telephone systems

of Yaounde Douala, and Garoua

First coun er 3
Second counter 3
Ivory Coast: development of the Ivory

Coast portion of the Abidjan-Lagos

underwater cable by INTELCI

5,000
7,000

First counter 8,000
Second counter 8,000
Madagascar: expansion and modernization of
telephone system at Antananarivo 13,000
Ni er: project to develop a national
te evision network 20,000
3) Social infrastructure 3,000
Seychelles: construction of housing for
French technical assistance 3,000
Total of public equipment 377,710
Including:
First counter 2 7,710
Second counter ,000
Total I and II 1,k36,655
Including:
First counter 965,655
Second counter k71,000
III Financial Operations
1) Capital participations 6,k87.
Burundi: increase in ca ital or the BNDE
[National Economic Deva opment Bang7 1,000
I ory Coast: increase in capital of the BIDI
é¥vorian Bank for Industrial Development7 1,500
rance: increase in capita1_or international
SCET [Eon ral Company for Territorial
Equipmen 3'75
21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France: participation in capital or

SOFININDEX 1,500
Morocco: addition to increase in capital

or the BN 3 [National Economic Develop-

ment B - 2

Niger: increase capital or BDN Jiger

Develo ment B 2,085.6

T o: crease capi al of the MD

[ﬁgo Development Bank 21+.8
2) Advances 50,000

Senegal: financing of overnment investment
program by the BNDS enegal National

Development Bang (second counter) 50,000
Total of financial operations 56,1o87.|+
Grand Total (I, II, III) 1,1+93,11+2.I+
Including:

First counter 972,1l+2.lo
Second counter 521,000

COPYRIGIIT: Rene Horeux ec cie Paris 1979

7679
C80: 6400

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm 'H-FICIAI, USI': ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN ”PM IS

EFFORTS 10 DBVBIDP SUMl-‘RICAN IIINING POLICY DISCUSSED
Paris MMCHES TMPICAUX 81' EDITERRANEBNS in French 2.! Mar 79 p 727
[Editorials ”For a Buratrican Mining Policy”)

[Text] In proposing to the goVernnents of sewer nations
of the European Economic Consnunity in Brussels on

15 March that they offer the coununity'r guarantee for
mining investaonts in Africa (see "Mail from Brussels“
heading). the comissioner for developsent, Hr Claude
Cheysson. suggested only one possible solution to a
well-known and often deplored problem for which truly
appropriate eeasures heVe nevertheless not been consid-
ered to date: the problem of the low quantity of Euro-
pean mining investments, dangerous for the future. in
Africa and more generally in developing countries.

With his usual candor. Hr cheysson accused the govern-ents of the ‘Nine'
of “a conspiracy of silence" in regard to proposals of the European co-is-
sion. No doubt the governments showed keen irritation at the mere idea
that the Brussels ConIIission could suggest a real policy for then in any
area. But if Mr Cheysson's accusation is well founded, the negative atti-
tude of the governments would be even more incouprehensible since Europe in
general depends toe large extent (about three-fourths) on foreign sources for
its supplies of essential ores for its industries. This is particularly
the case with France, which has to i-port about 55 percent of its conun-
tion of ores other than sulfur, potash and fluorine, and must rely on new
Caledonia for nickel, whereas its deposits of bauxite will be exhausted in
about l5 years.

The United Nations, Hr cheyssen recalls. has estimated the mining invest-
lent needs of developing countries at $4 to 5 billion per year. Almost

half of these investments, approxilsately $2.4 billion. should be invested
by Europe each year for lo years if it wants to be assured of a regular

supply of ores, according to estimates of the (other chair-en of the Asso-
ciation of Mining Industries of ﬂue United Kingdom Dir Seville Pain, in a
speech delivered in early 1978 at the time of his retire-ant. The mount

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OI’I’ICIM. USE ONLY

which should be devoted to Africa each year can be estisated at sons
8600 sillion and perhaps even sore.

Comedities Research Unit director Robert Perl-an warned in late 1977 that
due to lack of eassive invest-ants in the mining industry, i' .s possible
that prices of petals will rise considerably in the eighties. What has
Europe done to cope with this situation? In 1967, invest-ants of European
businesses in Africa (not including South Africa and Rhodesia and excluding
uraniun) represented 33 million. 'ihey were rare in 1976 and barely reached
$126 aillion in 1977. Mr Cheysscn described this lack as “disastrous.”

he tenured the policy of the United States, which depends on foreign
sources for only about is percent of its ore supplies, but whose mining in-
vastnents in the Third World are twice those of the European Economic Coer-
nunity. If the me does not quickly rectify this situation. its dependence
will continue to increase in the future, whether on ore-producing developed
countries such as Canada. the United States and Australia or on Iultina-
tional cospanies controlled by Anerican or Japanese capitol.

There are two reasons for the drop in lining invest-ents in recent years:
the low level of netal prices, which hes enabled investors to reap only
second-rate profits and, on the other hand. nonconercial risks. i.e.. po-
litical instability and the fear of excessive increases in taxes or roy-
alties, possibly even loading eventually to actual expropriation.

11:» European Co-iseion suggests that the governments of the "Nine” take
action in two areas.

With regard to prospecting, the rec could help to establish and finance in
AC? (African. Caribbean and Pacific countries] "national funds for lining
exploration” in which other financing agencies such as Arab funds. for ex-
awle, could participate. The BBC should also share in financing prospect-
ing by allocating venture capital for this purpose.

with regard to the promotion of production investments, needs are so huge
and invesuents require such a long period of amortization (about so years)
that Europeans should join forces to lake an effort cooperable to that of
the United States. The European Oo-Iission therefore suggests that public
financing agencies act as a catalyst for direct invest-ents of European con-
tractors in act, that the European Invesuent Bank increase its participa-
tion in lining (and energy) projects and that the we offer its own guaran-
tee. in addition to that of national agencies when this is the case, against
noncouercial risks.

According to Hr cheysson, the “Nine" are still not willing to really tackle
problem of mining cooperation with ACP. On the other hand, ACP have ap-
peared to be rather favorable to the European Co-ission's proposals while
still Iaintaining a certain degree of reservation concerning the real in-
tentions of the 'Nine“: it would therefore be appropriate to dispel their
doubts by clearly affirning that they have no intention of intervening in

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

the internal affairs of he? with respect to protecting their investments
in those countries.

In it possible that the prospect of an increase in ore prices in future
years will cause developing countries with ui thcr sizable deposits or min-
eral wealth to limit their sales or to reject or restrict development of
their reserves while waiting for world prices to rise?

Developing countries, and African nations in particular, would make a
serious error in judgment if they yielded to that tewtation. Their popu-
lations would not understand why their gover- cunts were turning away the
flow of mining investments while the number oi jobs needed was increasing
every day. Moreover, a certain price level may induce mining companies to
see): other sources of supply, as they have already done by channeling a
percentage of their investments to Canada and Australia, considered to be
politically stable countries. Consumers may find it more profitable to use
alternative products. Research on new recovery techniques can also be de-
veloped. France currently recycles about 30 percent of its iron and copper
consunption. Finally. an increase in prices may make it profitable to ex-
ploit ocean nodules such as those of manganese in the Pacific. The failure
of negotiations on tie Law of the Sea and the United States' threat to
grant development rights to their companies obviously show that. for the
time being. it is excessive cost prices which have held back the develop-
ment of ores deposited in the ocean floor. rather than respect for great
principles of international solidarity.

For lack of an agreement between Europe and Africa. the latter would con-
tinue to be deprived of the economic and social benefits which the exis-
tence of its mineral wealth should provide. Their some interest there-
fore suggests that they should promote, as far as possible. sultilateral
negotiations--but their successful conclusion does not depend only on them
--end encourage the development of new solutions such as partnerships of
public or private European and African capital and the conclusion of long-
tern ore supply contracts. This is also what the Brussels Commission is
proposing by setting dependency limits and by restricting Commity inter-
vention in countries whose mining monies are linked to European pur-
chasers by long-term contracts.‘

 

 

‘ Cf. HﬂRCﬂBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANEENS o! 16 Her. 9 678: reward the
establishment of a Stabex II for ores.

cosrnxcm: lune horses at cie Paris l979

11915
C50: 4400

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

PETROL!!!" ACTIVITIES IN AFRICA 1978-1979
Paris MARCIIES TROPICAIIX ET mammmmzs in French 2‘3 Feb 79 pp “91-93

ﬁery Data relative to petroleua activities in Africa during the past year
am far froa being totally available. However. temporary estiaates have teen
nude in regard to production and significant developsents have been ascertained
in noctorn “downetreae' with the result that it is possible to strike a balance
and point out the trends which the petroleun industry in Africa su‘st surely
follow in the aonths to come.

Africa: 9.1 Percent of world Production

Petrolcua production in Africa in 1978 (excluding that of Supt. as is gener-
ally the case) is said to have been about 277 nilliOn tons divided as follows
(teaporary figures. in millions of tone):

12"." M
Libya ........ -.----. ..... ...... 95.5 100.1
Algeria ....... - 59.0 53.5
hipcria .........n.--..--..-----»-------- 95.0 10MB
c.hn om-.--c---u-o------------------no-0--- 11.0 1102
M...“ ...... 9.5 8.1
Tunisia --.---.-. --------- -- --------- - ----- “.6 “-3
con” CDC-Do- -------------- "'--.-..--.-'-.. 109 I.”
2“” ooooooooooo no. ....... O ............. O- 1a2 100
mu m ..... ............... 277.7 2%.32

The tonnage extracted in 1978 ranks about the ease in world production as that
extracted the previous year-onesely. 9.1 percent. Nevertheless. despite the
recent entrance of new countries in the cycle of petroleua production. there

is reason to be astonished at this drop of 7 sillion tons from one year to the
next. The drop is due to a weakening in Nigeria's exports severely affected

by a slowdown in deaand during the first half of the year: thus. in a aellera'
aarket Nimrian crude set with strong coapetition seen; its usual buyers (United
States and countries of northwestern Europe) fros crude ceaing m. Alaska.
"cries and the North Sea. The situation righted itself. particularly fro- Sep-
teaher on. with the general reausption of precautionary purchases aade in view

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the exmcted price rise which UPI-2t: war. to decide at the end of Doeenber.
iihvn'n situation was noaewhat coeparahle. nlihough the Libyan Governsont has

nee-ed to be satisfied with stepped-up production in accordance with its pol-
icy of saintaininr, reserves.

0n the other hand. one will note the increase in Algeria‘s production (8 per-
con! mi mat of Anrn‘a (v.9 percent). which . ~.- in keeping with the require-
ments for financing the economies of them tw-. countries.

However. it is fitting to add Caneroon to the African countries already pro-
ducing: Caseroon produced about 600,000 tons fres- the Role offshore deposit
opened in February.' It is expected that 1.5 sillion tone will be obtained in
1979. aetika. a new deposit. has Just been put into production. Thus. Case-
roon will help saintsin the growth rate of petroleue production in Africa. and
a new producing country will be added-"Ghana. In fact. at the end of Decenber
the Aaorican countries which had discovered the Saltpond deposit 9 silos off
the shore of Ghana in 1970 transported s first load of that oil to Texas. But
the tonnages obtained will be low. and it is expected that it will be 'riureria
that will particularly add to the increase in African production.

As a setter of fact. except for that country (for the portion of the continent
located south of the Sahara). the developaent of production cones up against
technical difficulties experienced by nest of the recently discovered deposits:
whereas in Nigeria the average production cost per barrel is about 81. else-
where we oust count on $8. and even 310 as in the case of the Congolese off-

shore deposit where the reservoir is deep and releases a rather viscous oil
with some difficulty.

Nevertheless. the cospanies involved are not' sparing in their efforts. despite
the large sues they oust invest. For exesple. in Gabon. ELF [Eritrean Libera-
tion Prong. associated with hitsubishi. is developing a deposit discovered

in 197': in the sea at n distance of 75 ion south of Cape Lopes. its goal is to
start production in June 1980 at an annual rate of 1000.000 tons.

In Con ,o a third offshore deposit. Li Kouela (after those of Baerauds and
Loangog. will beeoae productive 2 years from now. The operating cospsny. ELF.
is hoping for an annual production of lJi sillion tons free 1980 on. which
would sales it possible alaost. to double Congo's production. In Zaire produc-
tion will decline until a secondary-recovery system is installed (which the
World Bank will partially finance . Ghana. a new producer in 1979. could be-
cone established as on isportant source if Phillips. Getty and A61? [ftalian
Petroleus Enterprisg consider couercially worthwhile their recent discovery
of on oil of good quality. 32 degrees. accospanied by gas. in a deposit known
as ”South 'fana." about 20 silos offshore.

 

' The operating company is ELF-SERENA [Eritrean Liberation Front-Petroleu-
Research and Exploitation Coapany of Caserooﬂ with 51 percent.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the whole. the deposits recently put into production. or which will be. will
compensate for any decrease in oil obtained free older deposits. Any increase

in production in Libya will depend on the policy of the authorities and also on
promos aade in oquipssnt projects. such as the laying or the use he pipeline

fros Al liaasds to Zawia (Tripoli).

It is especially thanks to Nigeria that Africa’s potential will be further de-
veloped in 1979. Discoveries follow one another rather regularly like the one
ends in Septeabsr by NIP-Phillipe in the Niger River delta not far free For-
cades where 13 productive deposits were found. llaving no cause for concern
over the state of their hydrocarbon reserves. the Nigerian authorities will be
able to talus advantage of the rather tense situation of the world aarhet in
light crude oils in increasing their annual production in 1979 to 120 sillion
tens or even sore.

Angola can also look forward to a good petroleua future. Its production has
regained the level it had before independence. but. sore isportant. the Luanda
governsent has drawn up new rules on the gees of cooperation with the private
ceapsnies on the basis of the sesifiscsl syetea of "production sharing.“ For-
eign research cospanios. obliged to work in association with the national coa-
pany. know that in case of discoveries they will be reimbursed for their er-
psnses as operator and that they will share in part of the production. The OPP
[French Petroleus Coapan group has Just concluded an agree-sat of this type
which will enable its an idiary. Total-CAP 5mm Petroleus ceepenﬂ. to use
the knowledge acquired previously through several drilling caspaigns and not
lose the benefit of its previous investsents.

In reference to the location of hydrocarbon reserves in Africa. esﬂrasis aust
be given to offshore deposits. In 1978. nearly 60 producing wells were located
in the sea. not to sention those of Nigeria all located in the southern part of
the country. This confine the analysis sade by geologists on the foreation of
oil in Africa south of the Sahara. The arrange-eat is obviously quite different
for North Africa. even though exploration in Gabcs Gulf has revealed several
reservoirs whose exploitation. in sose instances. is delayed by the probles of
the division of the continental plateau between Tunisia and Libya. For this
reason the Libyan Governsent has opposed the start-up of the offshore deposit.
Isis. discovered in 1971s by a subsidiary of the cry group. with an annual po-
tential of about 1.5 sillion tone (it was not possible to couplets the work es-
tablishing the boundary at the east).

It is probable that with the new progras of aid to developing countries for
their energy require-onto. decided at the end of January by the llorld Bank.‘
oil and gas production in Africa will progress in future years. The bank has
already preaised its assistance for production operations where the conercial

 

' See NAMES TROPIOMJX 81‘ teams of 2 Vebruary 1979. P 233

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

profitability in only nodnrato (snail dim-omrioe in Chad. for example) but
nufficient to decreane the ennrrty dependence of the countries in question.
This now orientation by the bank. which extends froa assistance in defining
enemy policies to the financing of production and cvon of certain exploratory
proJectn. will be worth following attentively: in fact. it night in tine el-
ter the petroleua trade. doninated up to now by the preponderance of Middle-
b‘ant production. and place mater enphaain on the function of ”industrial co-

operation" of oil conpanioo (which doen x -t always shit large international
mupc).

Natural Gas: Algeria in an Awkward Position

Algeria are the only reaaining comrcial producern of this kind of hydrocar-
bonn: Algeria has confiraed its position as leader. having increased its pro-
duction to acre than 1’: billiOn cubic esters. or 70 percent sore than in 1977.
It will develop its production still son: in the future. enpecially when
com-mac" ﬂational Company for the Transport and Marketing of Fuels? will have
arranmd export facilities (new liquefaction oquipeent and piping. In this

However. in the mat of Africa. and especially in Nigeria. the use of natural
gas is not yet organised. In this desain. the weaker the industrial risk the
sore probable the aid free the ﬂorid Bank. But it is taking a long ties for
the two interested parties to reach an understandi . and the closing of the
Aaerican narkets to iaporta of liquid natural gas City for price reasons is
delaying the carrying out of a project like that currently being discussed
aaong several Nigerian producers (err, Shell. 3? ﬁritish Petroleuj and new)

on oil as an energy source. each country adapting to the crisis in accordance
with its own particular situation. Generally speaking. this crisis situation

is serving only to strengthen the policy of the various govern-ante in broaden-
im: their control or direct intervention in the refining sector and in the sup-
plying of products.

Five new refineries were started up in Africa in 1979.: in Togo (Loss). in
tiauritania (ﬂouadhibou). in Sonalia (ilomdiscio). in Congo (Points-Moire) and
in Nigeria (Harri). They have the canon characteristic of being tuned by the

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPTICIAL USE ONLY

state and sanaged by a national conpany. an indication of the desire to exclude
private industry iron the refining sector.

Their construction. as elsewhere in Africa. was notivated by the desire to be
no longer dependent on foreign sources for the supply of anor petroleun prod-
ucto. Their capacity is not always based on the actual or foreseeable needs of
their respective doaostic sarlcet. This is the case with the ﬂouadhibou. Lens
and Pointe-Noire installations. each having an annual capacity of l aillion
tons: however. their localisation has given their proeoters reason to believe
that their production would be sufficient for expert. The hogadiscio refinery.
with an annual capacity of 500.000 tone. will also need to expert. On the
other hand. Harri's annual capacity of 5 sillion tone will not long suffice to
satist an expanding doasstic consumption. even with the aid of the country's
first refinery. located on the coast. in Port Harcourt. Ii new refinery is
being built in stuna.

Even when the refineries do not totally belong to the state. there is a tendency
to increase the public share of the capital. In Ivory Coast. moor [Ivorian
Petroleum Coapanﬂ. a state coapany. already holds 30 percent of the capital in
Ivorian Refining Company. In Senegal. the governnent is having a study sade on
its behalf of a new share arrangesent in Aﬁican Refining Cowpeny. and in Cans-
roon. the governsent has straightaway assured itself of a 66 percent share in
National Refining Cospany (son/m). which is undertaking the construction of a
refinery in Victoria with an annual capacity of 1.5 nillion tons.

These three countries are continuing to choose a systea involving a Joint ap-
propriation of refining resources: they are not alone. This Juridical status
facilitates industrial cooperation with foreign coapanies whose experience is
definitely established and correspondingly decreases the asolmt of invest-ente
required by the state. It is partially responsible for the success of an in-
dustrial enterprise like the Vridi refinery in Ivory Coast. which has already
doubled its refining capacity (currently 2 aillion tons) and. within a year.
will be equipped with an ultrasodern converting facility. a hydrocracking plant.
for which bids were solicited in December 1978. The sane procedure is being
followed in Caaeroon for the construction of the Victoria refinery (whose en-
ninceriny. was contracted to Procofrsnce) with French Petroleul Col-pew. chosen
as thc "operating company.” assuring the developecnt of the project. the con-
trol of the work and the like.

In the sector of product nanufacture this cooperative systes enabled PBTROCI.
in October 1978. to have no difficulty in starting up Multinational Asphalt
Cospsny's plant (280,000 tons per year) of which it is the principal share-
holder and operator.

Strengthening of State Control

The legitinate concern of the African governaents to assure the dependability
of oil supplies led then in 1978 to tales various steps to control the sequence

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

of operations involved in the manufacture of their products. An example of
this is the decision of the Cameroonian Govcrnmont. aade in September 1978. to
limit its imports of products coming from Gabon to 20 percent of its needs
(that in. from SOGARA @abonese Refining Companﬂ of Port-Gentil). This step.
which will make it necessary over the short term to resort to a greater variety
of forsirm sources. is undoubtedly viewed at Yaounde as a preliminary of the
autarchy which the Victoria refinery will bring it.

The efforts undertaken by various governments to standardize the administration
of their stocks or develop their capacity seen to be more rational. In Upper
Volta. the authorities arrange for a study to be node on the establishment of
a conaunity stocking company (Deceabor 197‘). Common went one step further
last year: following a decree issed on 23 December 197?. it signed an agree-
nent establishing the Goa-unity Petroleum Storage Company. a Joint company be-
tween the state. with 1&0 percent of the holdings. and six distribution comra-
nies represented on the market.

Even partial Africanization of the distribution companies is another indication
of the desire of various governments to develop national independence in the
petroleum sector; this was begun several years ago in a number of countries.
but the methods used differ. rangin from the nationalization of the networks
for the benefit of a state company for example. in Congo) to the creation of
a joint company (for exaaple. in Uganda). or else to an obligation node to
foreign companies to offer a part of their capital to private domestic inter-
ests. This is the direction taken by the Lagos government in 1978 which direct-
ed distribution companies operating in Nigeria to sell 1&0 percent of their cap-
ital to private interests. But elsewhere. when one wishes to follow this path.
one is apt to run into a lack of available private capital incurring delays as
in Upper Volta. where an attempt was made to implement a similar measure.

This policy of strengthening administrative control. directly or by eliminating
foreign companies. has its Justificatione. But it does not necessarily result
in an inprovement in the manageasnt of coapanioe and. as a result. in their
profitability. From this aspect. the year 1978 was marked by a few disappoint-
ments in various countries. For example. the Harri refinery. whose construction
was already taking longer than anticipated. was stopped in December. a few
months after its start-up. due to technical diff! culties. An older refinery.
that of Hombasa. in Kenya. experienced a number of stoppages. which forced the
government to nabs an appeal abroad for the import of products which the re-
finery could no longer furnish. In Sudan. serious disturbances in the forward-
ing of products from the Port Sudan refinery to the interior caused a shortage
of aircraft gasoline and kerosene. The pipeline connecting Zambia with Dar es
Salaam is operating badly.

Undoubtedly. the distances to be covered in Africa and its natural and climatic
conditions make the exploitation of refineries, fleets of trucks or pipeline
distribution were difficult than elsewhere. But the active presence of foreign

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coapanieno-without conprosising the noraal control of the authorities on the
supply problesuprovides for a better scheduling of operations and a strict
surveillance of the equipsent with insediate assistance through arrangements
node to have spare parts issediately available. usually iaported. Once sore.
we should stress the mutual interest of cooperation between the African coun-
tries and industrialized nations.

Franco and African Oil

In this appraisal of the African petroleus year. it is fitting to recall the
importance of African oil for the French petroleus industry. First of all.

out of a production of 2?? million tons nearly 19 ailiion tons went to the sub-
sidiaries of two French groups participating in the exploitation of African
deposits: this asounts to nearly one-fifth of the oil necessary to satisfy
France‘s consumption. Moreover. this tonnage represents about 2? percent of
tho crude oil reverting to French cospanies as a result of their production
activities in France and elsewhere in the world. Lastly. subject to precise
inforaation mich will be given later by official publications. petroleua of
African origin iaported into France. whether or not produced by French coupe-

niee, will have accounted for nearly 15 percent of the supply going to French
refineries.

These figures establish the iaportance of the African continent in the balance
and expansion of the French petrolsus industry. They also indicate a certain
diversification in the provisioning in coeparisor. with the Middle East. It is
to be hoped that 1979 will see a confirsation of these two trends.

South Africa is in a coapletely different position. 91th the political changes
which have occurred in Iran. it finds itself deprived of its principal source

of crude oil. but it cannot appeal to the African producing countries to re-
place that source. Nevertheless. its situation is not as precarious as it siamt
sees: first of all. oil accounts for only 20 percent of the country's enern
needs. while it is true that it accounts for 80 percent of its transportation
needs. However. very sizable strategic stocks have been accunulated. and this
will sake it possible for the country to await the start-up of the second plant
for the mnufacture of petroleul products on the basis of coal. Moreover. the
South African authorities would obtain crude oil (paying a surcharge) Pros other
suppliers who will not proclais such purchases free the housetops. The petro-
ieua asphyxiation of the South African Republic. through lack of petroleum prod-
ucts. will not take place tenor-row despite the vote taken in the UN General
Assenbly on 2h January 1979 on a resolution asking the Security Council to pre-
pare an obligatory saber-go on deliveries of crude oil and petroleus products to
South Africa. It is fitting to point out that. althth 105 countries voted on
the resolution. 6 countries'reJected it (aaong which were France. the United
sum. the United Kingdo- and mo). 16 abstained and 2a were "absent.“

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux st Oie.. Paris. 1979

3561‘
cso. moo
32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL A?RICAN EMPIRE

BRIEFS

LIBYANS OUSTBD. ISLAM SCORED--Charging Libya with having had a hand in
foaenting the de-onatrations that erupted in Bangui on 20 and 21 January.
Emperor Bokassa haa ordered a Libyan-owned corporation operating in
Central Africa to shut up shop. He has also denounced all agreements
signed with Libya. At the cane time. the emperor launched a violent
verbal attack on Islam. charging it with every known sin of subversion.
Further. to save any of his "subjects" tron following its "evil example,"
Boknaaa has banned any kind of news report concerning Iran from Bangui
Radio's airwaves. [Text] [Paris Jenn: AFRIQUE in French 28 Mar 79 p 13]
6182

33
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

KANO DECISIONS 'BBAR SEEDS OF FURTHER CONFLICTS'
Paris JBUNE AFRIQUE in French 2-15 Apr 79 Pp 22-23
[Article by Man-Gus]

[Text] With the Malloum-ﬂabré pair out of the way and
the establishment of an interim Council of
State headed by Goukouni Oueddei, the prevail-
ing mood in Ndjamena is still one of skepticism.

Now it seems that we have a Holy Alliance among the men back-
ing Gen Forest, the troops of the former "rebel Toubou' and
those of Goukouni Oueddei, formed to check the armed insurrec-
tion in the central and eastern portion of the country against
the rule of Hissein Habré, which the Elysee did its best to im-
pose.

And people are wondering about the likelihood of success for
the agreements signed at Kano on 16 March 1979.

For the time being, relative calm seems to have replaced the
bloody confrontations which had plunged the nation into a cli-
mate of all-out civil war. And bloody confrontation seems to
be gradually giving way to negotiated agreement. What has
happened is, by all indications, that the various possible com-
binations devised by L. Dallier, the French ambassador to Njan
mena, have at last shaken down into a kind of equilibrium among
the warring factions -- as the 16 March accords would seem to
indicate. These agreements, as we now know, call for a conti-
nued cease-fire throughout the entire territory; neutrality

on the part of the state radio and demilitarization of the ca~
pital; freedom of movement for civilians; establishment of a
control commission made up of two representatives from each of
the four neighboring countries and from Nigeria, as well as one
representative from each of the four Chad factions signing the
Kano accords (Felix Malloum, Hissein Habré, Goukouni Oueddei,
and Abderhaman Aboubakar).

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the terms of this agreement, the new government must im-
plement the decision on general amnesty (freeing all political
prisoners and prisoaers of war); organize the return of Chad-
ian exiles; determine the nation's political future; carry

out a sweeping reshuffle of all executive positions and disband
all standing armies prior to establishment of a national army.
The Kano accord affirms a "determination on the part of one and
all to preserve Chad's unity and integrity and their commitment
to the reestablishment of peace, security, and confidence at

all levels."

Even so, these new arrangements, which supersede the agreements
reached last August between Hisseine Habré and Felix Malloum,

and which involve the dissolution of the institutions set up at
that time (presidency, government, defense committee and national
union council) may or may not suffice as a basis for any real
hope for the future. Of course, even now, one point in the mea-
sures called for has Just made headlines. On 23 March, Pre-
sident Felix Malloum and his prime minister, ﬂissein Habré, re-
signed, and an interim Council of State made up of eight members
representing the four signatory factions to the 16 March accords,
and headed by Goukouni Oueddei, has been set up.

Similarly, we also know that at the close of the Kano conference
all parties to the conflict -- except for Dr Aba Siddick and Mr
Acyl Ahmat, who did not take part -- expressed satisfaction and
pledged to implement the measures adopted there to the letter.

It would, however, be premature and more than a little naive to
conclude from all this that we are on the way toward a just and
lasting peace in Ndjamena. What ensued upon the Malloum-Babré
accords last August is of itself grounds for pessimism. And
above all, beyond all appearances, we find that the various deals
stemming from the 16 March conference in no way challenge the
current neocolonial system in Chad. It is clear on the face of
the evidence that the primary if not the sole concern of the
leading actors on the stage in the Chadian capital is to carve
out the lion's share of power, to the detriment of all rival
factions. And so we see that the solution that has just been
adopted is itself gravid with the seeds of further conflict,
particularly in that, in all of this, the aspirations for which
the peoples of Chad have been fighting for 13 years, at the cost
of untold sacrifice, are completely overlooked.

We are being offered a truly pathetic performance by the men on
the political scene in Ndjamena right now. The people of Chad,
whom the politicians are trying to divide and set against one
another in the name of "badly led ideologies," are once again
the prime victims in this new scenario. That makes the problem
of organizing the people on just and equitable lines, to ensure
the protection of their most fundamental interests, more than
ever one of pressing urgency.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this same line of thought, still another observation must be
made. It has to do with the absence from Kano, on 16 March, of
political factions associated with the armed insurrection in the
central and eastern regions. In view of that absence, it is
hard to put much credence in the proclaimed determination of the
Party to lay the foundations for broad national reconciliation
at the same time it is doing its utmost, out in the field, to
complete the military liquidation of all combatants in that zone.

Given that, it is painfully clear that any ”ethnic balance" so-
lution For putting a government together which does not allow
room for political elements speaking for the central and eastern
regions is foredoomed to failure. This is why the announcement
of the withdrawal of the interventionist French troops can be
greeted only with a great many reservations. It is very clear
that, in this situation of endlessly elusive peace, where every-
thing may well explode again, Paris will surely not be so rash
as to give up the weapon of the Mirages and the Jaguars without
prior assurance that its interests will be protected.

COPYRIGHT Afrique-Asie, 1979

6182
650: 4400

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10R OYPICIAL US! ONbY

CHAD

NEW GOVERNMENT'S MAIN PROBLEM: RBCONCILB POPULATIONS
Paris JBUﬂB AFRIQUB in french 28 Mar 79 PD 14, 15, 16
[Article by Jes-Blaise Alina]

[Text] First prosulgated in 1978 at the close of prolonged hag-
gling between the arsed forces of the North under Mr Hissein
habre and the High Military Council which had taken over free
President Tonbalbaye, the 'fundaaental charter" see-s now to
belong to history. Only a few hours after the signing of that
"separate agree-ant,“ those of the protagonists who had refused
to have any part of the negotiations rejected the charter out-
right. In other words, the experiment that has Just ended was,
in the long run, doe-ed to failure. Bven as they shattered the
remnants of the fundasental charter, the clashes which, since 12
February, have set ﬂisaein ﬂabré's sen against those of Felix
Malloun have cast doubt on the viability of the existing insti-
tutions. One night even, in hindsight, call this a good thing

in that a broader gaaut of the forces involved has gathered
around a conference table. The fact that two of the principal
adversaries, Goukouni-Oueddei, cosaander of the largest faction
in PROLINAT, and Aboubakar Abderhaaane, leader of the People's
Hove-ent for the Liberation of Chad (HPLT), had decided to cast
in their lot with the Malloun-ﬂabré team in an effort to break
the deadlock was even then a najor step along the path of recon-
ciliation. Even though the tergiversations of the for-er hdjasena
leaders neant that the start of the meeting was delayed by 3 days,
thus creating a lowering clinate of doubt and uncertainty, the
Nigerian authorities, who had taken the initiative in calling the
conference, had reason for pride in having succeeded where the
can itself had failed. The non—stop negotiations that dragged on
for 5 days in the suburban town of Kano, in northern Nigeria,
however, were particularly trying for the participants, and the
agreesent reached between the belligerents seems, for the nesent,
to be a laborious cospronise whose soundness will be desonstra-

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unlike the fundamental charter, the Kano accord claims to be
global in scope. And so indeed it is, to a degree. It binds
not only the four signatories, but also two other FROLINAT fac-
tions who hung back on the outskirts of the conference, giving
the impression that they would like to go along with it. Dr
Abba Siddick sent an envoy to Kane, and Acyl Ahmat seems to be
in favor of the conclusions reached there. his one remaining
demand is the withdrawal of the French troops. That point, how-
ever, is already won, since France, whose role in the course of
the recent eVents here has been controversial to say the least,
has Finally bowed to the verdict of Kano, where it was conspi-
cuous by its absence after having vainly tried to set up a
round table at Ndjamena.

As a matter of fact, the greatest achievement of the Kano ac-
cord is the dissolution of the institutions born of the funda-
mental charter, clearly doomed to extinction after a mere 6
months of existence. The first thing on the agenda new is thus
to set up a governmental structure which allows for the new si-
tuation which has come into being. In place of two parties
making up this coalition government, there will be four, or even
six. Its formation will only be rendered more difficult by

the degree to which each of the parties will make demands on
the basis of the real estate it controls. While the Kano con-
ference succeeded in getting the principle of a cease-fire, the
accord ot put together says not a word about control of torri-
tory. The suggestion of disarmament of 50 percent of the for-
ces involved in the fighting was not adopted. In the agree-
ment, all armed forces are to withdraw to a distance of at
least 100 kilometers from the capital. This means that the go-
vernment will be able to set up its headquarters there in safety.
holding Ndjamena, however, does not necessarily mean holding
Chad. There is already a de facto partition. And it is to be
feared that the government, in the final analysis, will be no
more than a kind of federal executive in that, initially at
least, each party will be counting on the territorial position
it has won or on the region of its origin where the populations
support it. While it is true that texts are only as good as
the men who must apply them, the present delicate balance can
be shattered at any mement and the temptation to secession --
following the example of Bangladesh -- may one day prove too
strong for those who feel themselves short-changed in the new
state of affairs.‘ This, in turn, means that the formation of
the new government and the reshuffling the accord calls for in
the civil service and in the army would have to be very care-
fully weighed and measured. The man who heads the executive
must be strong enough and enough of a nationalist himself to
hold the nation together. It is in this sense that one can
truly say that Chad is looking for a heaven-sent man. General
Malloum appears already to have bowed out. But his comrades in
arms, most of them, like him, from this "good-for-something Chad“
which is the south, are standing by to defend their region.

38
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 03PICIAL 083 ONLY

General 03030 and Colonels Djimé and Kamougué are ready to look
arms so as not to be overwhelmed by the noisy arrival on the-
scene of opposition leaders (whoae men right now occupy more
than half the country) who might be tempted to demand control
of the government.

0n the eve of the formation of this new cabinet, there was a
lot of talk about Goukouni Ouoddci for prime minister. But
whether he or someone else taken over that Job, the governmtot
that takes office on 23 March will be, to put it bluntly, an
interim government. The real problems will begin when the time
comes to reconcile the populations, still traumatized by the
recent atrocities. Will they follow the political men along
the path of wisdom and virtue? That, in truth, is the question
that haunts most men's minds, and the question whose solution
must be, for the new government -- and above all for its head
-- the very top priority.

COPYRIGHT qune Afriquc GRUPJIA 1979

6182
080: 4400

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONGO

PCT CONGRESS SEEN AS VICTORY FOR RADICALIZATION MOVEMENT
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French 2-15 Apr 79 pp 21,22
[Article by Ginette Cotz'Tho Congress at Lastl"!

[Text] The forced resignation of President Yhonbt
Opango is the dawn of a tremendous hope.
The Congo Labour Party Congress will be a
new kickoff for the radicalisation movement
decided for at the end of 1975.

Indescribable relief, a renewal of hope and of fighting spirit:
these are the prevailing sentiments in the People's Republic

of Congo, in the wake of the events of 5 February 1979, and now
as, at long last, the 3rd Extraordinary Congress of the Congo
Labour Party (PCT), so long awaited, finally begins.

It is all happening as if the country had Just experienced a
new and genuine liberation, so increasingly intolerable had
grown the leaden yoke that weighed on the Congolese people in
the years since the assassination of President Narien N'Gouabi
on 18 March 1977: and the advent on 4 April of General Yhombt
Opange as hed of the Party‘s military committee. '

Today, all the whispered rumors which for months had been pusp-
ing increased alar- into the "sidewalk radio“ bulleting, all

the wrongs, the mistrust, the questions that had been piling

up throughout this dangerous period, are out in the open. And
the long list of charges filed against the man who claimed to

be the successor to Marien N'Gouabi, but when delusions of gran-
dour and a savage lust for power and wealth drove into a bot-
tomless pit of intrigue and demagoguery, is still growing.

here is how the voice of the Congolese Revolution and the daily
MWBTI confirmed a few of the more scandalously outrageous and
significant criminal acts committed by ex-president rho-bi

50
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Opango: the purchase in Libreville of a bad costing l7 sillion
CPA francs; the agreesent to buy, out of the national budget,
a total of 500 million CPA francs' worth of vehicles! 33 "Pas-
sat" autosobiles, 45 Jeeps, 50 sotorcycles, and ten Land Rovers
equipped with broadcasting facilities; the esbesslenent, for
the purpose of corrupting potential allies, of a ADO-sillion-
CPA loan granted by Algeria to build a water supply systes in
the Plateau: region, the start of which project has yet to cose
about after 8 months -- and for good reason; the construction
of several villas for his fasily's use; the saintenance on his
estate in Mpila (a section of Brazzaville free which General
Yhesbi Opango drove the inhabitants so he could expand his re-
sidence) of a zoo whose daily operating costs case to 200,000
CPA francs.

The ousted president is also charged with outright plunder of
the treasury funds for his personal use. Whereas the appropri-
ation for political funds was 400 sillion CPA francs, Gen Yhesbi
Opangc spent 1,500 million for his prestige travels in 1978
alone. In that ease year, 200 million CPA francs had already
been withdrawn from the coffers of the State even before the
budget had been approved.

Fed Up

while he was striving to achieve the standing of a Mobutu, a
Bongo, or a Bokassa, Gen Yhonbi Opango was leading the nation
over the brink of the abyss. The capital of the land of the
Three Days of Glory was in danger of turning into a Kinshasa

or a Libreville. Corruption was spreading like wildfire, to the
point where people today talk of the “senile envelope virus'
that infected every level of the ruling circles.

While all this was going on, "far from tapping private capital,
as presised, it was the product of the people's toil that was
being squandered," as MHBTI puts it, official rhetoric had
sounted to the heights of paroxysn, and speeches and slogans
flaw like leaves on the wind.

And at last the people, keenly aware of the flagrant contradic-
tion between words and deeds, and of the deception practiced on
then in this travesty of the work and the spirit of President
Marion N'chabi, were fed up to the teeth. For each one of
then life was growing harder with each passing day. To the
anarchy that prevailed in prices and the uncertainty of supply
deliveries was added galloping inflation.

On 24 January, the Congolese daily reported the dizzying nose-
dive of purchasing power and the astounding rise in prices.
The price of a Prisus beer had risen fro. 100 to 120 CPA francs;

61
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

the price of a liter of gasoline from 83 to 12$ CPA: of a

kilo of sugar from 175 to 300 CPA; the price of a taxi ride or
aenloc flour had doubled, while some rents had gone up by 2,000
CFA francs in the course of a single year.

Looking at the figures, one can understand why discontent and
anger, increasingly in evidence over recent months, both erupted
into unbridled rage in the wake of the events of 5 February, as
evidenced in the people's attempt to mount an attack on Gen
Yhomhl Opango's residence.

The process that began on 5 April, when the PCT took over full
power free the hands of the Party Military Committee (CM?) to
which it had originally entrusted them, and when Col Sassou
Nguesso succeeded Con Yhonbi Opango, is also the issue of a long
drawn-out struggle, at once sell-Clandestine and overt, mounted
by the Congolese revolutionary forces, and in which the mass
organizations played a crucial rBle. Apparently the leftists
on the CMP and the Central Committee of the PCT succeeded Very
cleverly, without shedding a drop of blood, in outflanking the
Yhonbe clan's nanouvors, all the while relying on the naasos of
the people.

Today the people of the Three Days of Glory have once again come
out winners in this severe test. They have begun to speak out,
and the regional and town congresses, as well as in the ease or-
ganization congresses which preceded the Party congress, gave
rise to sosetioes noisy debates over the thorniest of issues.

In addition to the reopening of the trial in connection with the
assassination of President Marion N'Gouabi (we know that practi-
cally nobody in Brazzaville was ever completely convinced by the
official view of N'Guabi's surder. There are still too many
points left unclear and contradictory; Ed.), the nest dynamic
groups -- such as the People's National Army and the youth --
are demanding that Gen Yhonbl Opango be brought to trial.

Great TurninghPoint

They are also calling for unity among all the forces of the left
and for "reintegration of the 22 February and 24 March cosradee,’
and, on the other side, rehabilitation for the PCT and labor
union nesbers who were dropped free the rolls in the wake of the
March 1976 novesent.

In the revolutionary situation which has Just developed and in
which the trial of strength is taking place in broad daylight,
the 3rd Extraordinary Congress -- whose original convocation was
prevented by the assassination of President Marian N'Gouabi ~-
night well mark a great rutning—point and, in so doing, put an
end to the policy of hesitancy and conpronise which for too

long has prevailed in Brazzaville; that is a policy which has

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unfortunstely led a great ssny progressive Africans into a sis-
understsnding of the realities of ex-Presidonb Opango's poli-

oies, in which anti-imperialist positions and ”revolutionary“

stands were sorely cloaks for real political and econo-ic de-
signs and choices.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asio

6182
C80: 4400

63
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LEFT RING or PC? SAID TO HAVE WWI!”
Paris Jews ”Rigor: in French ll Apr 79 p is

[Article by Jos-Blaise alima: ”Left Wing Triumphs in Congo. But the more
extremist left-wing has not been admitted in political bureau'l

[Text] The triumirate which took the power after Gen Joachim Yhombi Opengo
was evicted last February. has now consolidated its position. In this respect.
the third extraordinary congress of the Congolese Labor Party (set) which

took place in Brazzaville on 26-31 harch did not bring any surprise. Denis
Sassou Nguesso, Jean-Pierre ‘mystere-‘l‘chicaya and Sylvain Coma continue in

the functions they already had: the tirst one was elected president of the
party and thus automatically becomes head of the state. The second. the
actual number two or the regime. is in charge of educatiom the third

retains the post of prime minister which he has occupied since 1976.

This sanctions the triumph of the left-wing or the PCP. However. the situation
should be viewed in perspective. while the party "hard-liners” are the main
beneficiaries of the operation, the extremists of this tendency have not been
admitted into the ”sanctuary” of the revolution, the political bureau. for

the time being. the road to pover is still not open to the ultras. Thus.

Pierre Nze. who had been excluded trom the political bureau in 1976 at the

tine when the caspaign for radicalization was launched, is aaking a strong
comeback. The regime's ideological theorist since its formation, the former
head of the party school is emerging site: a three years' eclipse. “The Congo.”

Mo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

he proclaimed in 1974. "is not yet a socialist country. It is preparing for
socialism." This is evidence that Pierre Nee has always shown realism.

His lucidity contrasted strongly with the uncompromising and dogmatic attitude
of revolutionary theorists and intellectuals such as claude Ernest Ndalla,
Ange Diaware or even Ambroise Noumazalaye. liis comeback illustrates the
desire of the oongolese leaders not to get ahead of schedule in their attempt
to return to an orthodox marxiet line. This would explain why the road has
not been opened for extreme left-wing representatives.

During the past few weeks. Brazzaville has been flooded with hundreds of

- leaflets which are supposed to reflect the principal demands of the population.
while the masses were demanding a return to civilian power, the third congress of
the PCT has not been able to solve this problem, and civilians and military
men find themselves in equal number in the new political bureau. Such an
apportioning is probably necessary at the present stage: the minds are still
overheated and the wounds inflicted during the bloody events which followed

the murder of Marian Ngouabi have not yet healed. By pushing Yhombi W
aside, popular demands have. in a way. been half satisfied. The former
president, in fact. has been accused of "high treason through his wastefulness,
his lifestyle, his disregard for marriem.’ This is not the first time. however,
that the former head of state is accused of having had a lifestyle incompatible
with socialist austerity. In fact, while left-wing representatives have

often proclaimed that in revolutionary Congo the only possible coup d'etat
would be a reactionary one, everybody agrees that "only the manner in which
certain citizens practice socialism may be questioned. not socialism itself.“
mt charges will former president Yhombi Opango have to answer when he

appears in court ?

The lack of precision of the accusation ruains evident. Nevertheless. some
ambiguities should be removed. For instance, the people have demanded a

new trial for the murderers of Harien Ngouabi. The conclusions of the congress
make no mention of this. however. the admission of Mr Yangon-s nokamba in

the political bureau is noted: he is general secretary of the Congolese

b5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll‘rade-Union Contederation, the militant members of which are said to have
accelerated the fall of Yhoabi Opango by their maniteatations. Is he going

to take advantage of his present position to demand that Justice follow its
course for the former president?

The coming weeks will no doubt constitute a veritable test for the future of
the Congolese experiment. Since the death of Harien Ngouabi in March 1977,
blood has not stopped flowing on the banks of the Congo River. Many have
taken the law into their own hands after his murder. although the former
president had himself never been a warm proponent of political executions.

In March 1972. Major Ngouabi had pardoned a number of individuals accused

of having been the initiators of the failed putsch of 22 February. among whom
was Ambroise Noumaulaye, former prime minister. 'no explain his decision.
Marion Ngouabi had than merely declared: "rho initiators of the putsch will
not be physically eliminated, they must live through their mistakes.”

will the new team in power, who say they intend to “continue Ngouabi's work,“
follow the same reasoning? It will have to keep in memory the following
statement of the Congolese Intonation Agency (AC1), written in 1971 after

a conspiracy had almost brought down the regime: "Greater difficulties are

awaiting us, and only when confronting them shall we see who is revolutionary
and who is not."

COPYRIGHT: Jeur-O. Afrique. GWPJIA 1979

9294
C30: 4400

(06
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL US! Ohio?

CONGO

BRIEFS

0PM!» TRIAL-4n e resolution eddreued on 15 Merch to their new preeident.
Col Denis Seeeou Nsueeeo, the Congreee of the Amy and the delegate. of the
Brazzaville eection of the Congo Labour Party denended that the for-er heed
of etate. Gen Yhoebi Openso. be erreeted end tried for "the nine of high
treeeon." They eleo teen-ended confiscation of all hie property and rein-
tegration into the PCT of all tubers ousted or suspended by the for-er
prceident. If Gen Openeo goes to trial. it will mark e victory for the
herdcore fection led by the preeent heed of etete. It night coincide with
the reopening of yet enother ceee: the triel of the eeeeeeine of Preeident

Herien R'Gouehi. [Text] [Perie JBUNB AFRIQUB in French 28 Her 79 p 13]
6182

(:80: “00

47

NR ORIGIN. 038 0513