APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00050R000100010030-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010038-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

JPRS L/8231

18 January 19 79

TRANSIATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 620

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (XILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010038—8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterisls from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been auppliedrsappropriete in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT IAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIHATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOh’ BE RESTRICTED “OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
O-

. Veda-on. Ouaaissuoa Nana and um“
Joint Publication lasearch Service
1000 North Globe load
Arlington. Virginia 22201

suing One-issua- use. «a Mouse

l3. Sunk-eon" News

The report contains intonation (roe Mrican and specialized Heat zuropesn
publication and radio on political. cconosic. and sociological develop-eats.

'7. Key 'srds aaa Dots-sat Aaalysls. lie. Dssctisiess
Political Science JInter-Africsn Aft . _XGhana _Rvanda

Sociology :1 Guinea _Sao Tone and
Bcono-ics _ _Guinsa-liseau Principe
Culture (Social _ Ivory Coast _Senegal
Sciences) _ Kenya _Ssychelles
Technological _ Lesotho _8ierra Lconc
__XCape Verde Liberia __Soaa1ia
___Central African Hadagascar LSouth Africa
hpire Halavi _Svariland
_Chad Mali _‘i'an:ania
_coooro Islands Hauritius L‘i’ogo
_Congo 8 Mozambique _Uganda
_ojibouti _Ilaaibia _Upper Volta
_zquatorial Guinea _x_ﬂiger _Zsire
m. annular-om Tens —:t:::P“ 133:: AM“
_6a-bia ‘ _lhodesia

In. court ram/an 02.50.56.“
I Avsilabélisy Scan-eat

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Lilitcd Huber of
Copies Avsilsble Pro- JPRS

 

'°"" "'”’ "'"‘ ”" runs roan nut at straooocro ”"°““°‘ """m
FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY

spas 3/8231
18 January

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
2000 No. 620

Court-ms

IRE-AFRICA! AFFAIRS

Pan-Airman Development Institute Activities Reported
(mucus mat-mum a: mm, 28 Dec 78)

Arab Add to African Countries Reported
(m momma): m mammals, 15 Dec 78)

Club de Dakar Proposals Reviewed
games-1n; m. moncmx in mm,

“C 78) Ooooooooaoloootaoo000.000.000.000.0000000000

sac-memo“ Reported
(mas momma: E: W, 8 Dec 76)

Briefs
Tripartite heting on Cooperation

W Grants

sac hergency Aid

Alleged lulu-country breweries
trans-African Road Project

MOM

Anhasaador Remtea Published Allegations on Detente
(mom TROPICAUX a: mm, 8 Dec 78)

Briefs
MA Aircraft Dovning Denied

Angolan Refugees )Iove-ent
Alleged om hoop maenoe
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm (Continued)

CAPE m
Briers
ADP Agricultural, waterworks Loon
GABON
Brief-
Increneed Budget. Adopted
First when We Delegation
om
Briefs
llev Fishing Veneele
Difficulties in (‘ocon Sector:
GUINEA
Pm eel nominee-sheet , Nev Politbnreeu unborn Lint
mIQW'Asn, nmc 78) .OOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOODOOOOO
mm):

'Pregntio' Spirit my Be surfacing Ayicultml Field
(Mcoio swan; m Alumna, 13 nae 78)

Briers
Planned nungprien Militery Cooperation
Cotton Crop Satisfactory
New Pinning Veeule
ﬁlming for Belt Factorie-

Brier-
Sandi Aid

mean
Briefs
Soviet Military Air Truninz

Oil landing liar-inn Contract
Mom Bank Loan

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

commas (Continued)
scum mum

Briers
Uranium for Belgium

'roao

Briefs
m noopital Construction Loan
madam on Canon Defence
Conant Cal-puny Investments

ZAMBIA

Political, harmonic Situation Ravi-wed on are of Elections
(mom momwx m- mnmnms, 8 Dec 78)

-c-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICMI. IISE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

PAN-MGM mm INSTI'NTE ACTIVITIES REPORTED
Paris WEISS TNPICAUX 3T MEDITERRANWS in French 28 Dec 78 p 33610
(Article: "Activities of the Pan-African Institute for Development"]

[Text] The Pan-African Institute for Development (In, General Secretariat
in Geneva] is particularly interested in rural develoment, which it promotes
through the training of students in its three regional institutes: in Douala,
Buea and Ouagadougou. A fourth center is planned for east Africa.

In the course of the acadedc vear 1977-78 the Douala center enrolled 108
students, coming from Benin, Burundi, Cameroon, Gabon, Upper Volta,
Madagascar, Niger, Rwanda and Togo.

The Buea center was attended by 61 students, coming from Botswana, Cameroon,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia, mlavi, Nigeria, Uganda, Sierra
Ieone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Mania and Zambia.

Under a contract with the government of Upper Volta, the Ouagadougou center
has organised the training of 25 potential members of the higher staff in

matters of rural development.

In these three African centers the Institute employs 53 experts: economists,
sociologists, engineers, etc., of all nationalities, European and African.

Estimated expenses for the current fiscal year (1978-79) mount to 720 million
CPA, and the budget is guaranteed by contributions of donating organizations
and industrialized countries, and b subsidies from various African states
(Nigeria, Ivory Coast and Cameroon}

At the regional meeting for Africa of the United nations conference on science
and technology for development, the IPD presented a working paper dealing with
the effective utilization of science and technology for development. Further-
morc, the IF!) published, in September 1978, an important selected bibliography
on integrated rural development.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie., Paris 1978

93"?

cm: M000 1

son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MO“ mm

mmmmwmm
MIWWIWETIEDImmMOhﬁMWpMﬂ

girl-nu] During tho sooond qusrtor of 1978, tho Mti m to: tho
lopnont of tho mo Cantu” and tho Sondi Dovolopnsnt Md pontod

14 dovolopin‘ oomtrios in Buoys, Asis and Ari-ion loono totolins tho
oquivdont of 8575.94 nillion to rinsnoo projooto oonoomod with olootrio
povor, tolooo-Iniostiono, nilroods, ports, rood oonounotion, irrigstion
and unto: mu, industry, odnootion and othor masons or sooiol intoxost.
Ho publish holov tho dotnilo on cunts involving Africa (for tho first
qogtog, MWEOHMXMIIW “”WWH.

P 73 s

linritonin

Construction and oqnipnont or o notions]. polioo sosdw ot Wt and
10 outbgildinu for oondoqy sdniniotutivo pmonnol (totnl ooots ll 12
nillion .

construing o: o la and court oonploa at lonokohott(toto1 cost: ll 20
nillion .

Construction of n hoapitol in Bl-uonn and rootoution of tho clinics in
Boudi, Bontilisit and Mann (totnl oost: In 10 union).

Dovolopnont or louskohott Mo Wasting Stotion mm (totol cost:
31 a nillion).

automation of volls and construction or 64 nov volls (totol cost: ll 30
nillion).

Construction of n printing house to: tutbooh and soodonio voluoo And of
schools in soot tons (totnl out: Ill 20 nillion).

Sondi Dovolopnont Panda :1 100 nillion (tons not pnhliohod) for thou
various wojooto.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Benin

nestoution of the Godmybnohicon- ihoney Him: repsir of asphalt and

lsterite roads; purohue of necessary equipnents s study for the isprovensnt
of the Ouidnh-lllm Him (totsl cost: In 6.01 million).

muniti hand for the Develop-mt of the Arch cmmtries: D 2.25 million.
lots of interests 22‘: ten: 25 you-s; deferred: 5 years.

Guinea-Bissau

Extension of Biesnlsnoa Airport runway fro: 2,400 to 3,200 n, drdnsge and
fencing. Rsinforcensnt of the runway and access rosds. Provision of
ligating and mum aids in conformity vith IGAO Intonation“

Civil Avintion Oraniution standasds. Construction 0 11 power plsnt with
connecting network and civi engineering projects. Construction of an
1,800-equars-neter teninsl and n fire-fighting ststion (total cost:
n 3.78 sdllion).

Kuwaiti Fund for the Develop-Int cf the Arch Countries: n) 2 million.
lists of interest: 8‘: ten: 25 pure; deferred: 5 yesre.

Installation of an industrinl couple: in the where not for the processing
of loonl products (peanuts, rice), for the production of crude and refined
oil, of proteins, oil coke, cettle feed, polished rice and soap (totnl
cost: £1 210 million).

Saudi DevelopOent mud.

Liberis

Constanctioncfsﬁ-hrondbetveenﬂb-nnridguendnonilillsannn
concrete bridge across the Saint Psnl River (total cost: 31 80.8 nillion).

Saudi Develop-ant Fund: Bl 31.8 Dillion (terns not published).
Extension of the Bishroud Power Stntion throng: the installstion of tvo
13-h! diesel generators designed to supply 5,000 Iodernte-incone Win

families and meet the country's energy needs until 1982 (totnl cost:
31 ‘08 million).

Saudi Develops-at m: m 38.8 million (tens not published).
Gabon

Constmotion of the 'l'rsns-Gsbonese Railroad; provision of locomotives, the

signaling cysts: and tolecomnicnticns (total cost estdnted st 31 4.657
billion .

Seudi Develop-exit Fund: n1 70.6 million (terns not published).

3
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kenn
Oouvsrsion of tho 8mm Don into s now-cont”). on. construction 0:

than distribution roux-vows, tvo pulsing ststions and 200 h o: oonvsyor
conduits to “991! Nairobi with water totsi oost: m 30.8 union).

Sandi stslopnsnt hand: 31 31.8 nillion (to:- not published).

Mason:

Construction or s oononsts diversion (Inn, 1: tunnel and an underground mm-
sloou-io paws: punt st Andoloslsh. Installation of M 28-h! “rhinos and
two ssnsrstors. commotion of s 15040-14113 138-27 pm line to
Antananarivo sncl than. stations (tots). oost sstintsd st R1 408.65 mum).
mi Dovslopnont Fund: in 42.4 million (tons not publishsd).

is ot1July1978: 1 Saudi rid. . 8.29.1mvsiti din:- 83.63.

WEIGHT: Eons moo: ot 01s, Paris, 1978

11,466
coo: 4400

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

CLUB DE DAKAR PROPOSALS 3mm
Paris W8 TROPICAUX ET MEWS in French 8 Dec 78 p 1

(Editorial: ."Proposals of the Club de mm- for the Renewal of Iome"]

[Text] Negotiations for the renewal of the Lome Convention formed the main
background of the work of the fifth general assembly of the Club de Dakar,
analysed below by Jacques Perrandi, for-er director of the mropean Develop-
ment Fund, and a member of the club.

Faced with sudden changes in international economic affairs which the pres-
ident of the club Mr Mohamed T. Diswara authorised, the industrialized
countries and the WD [underdeveloped countries] tried to define a new con-
tractual framework for their trade which would be applicable simultaneously
on a world-wide level through the international institutions (UNCTAD [United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development], UNIDO [United Nations Indus-
trial Development Organisation] etc.), and on the regional level. Negotia-
tions on the world-wide level are progressing only slowly and by fits and
starts because of the excessively diverse motivation of the different partners,
as became evident in the recent failure of the Geneva Convention on the comma
assets of raw materials. 0n the other hand, the nine countries of the Euro-
pean Comnity and the 55 countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific
(ACP) have succeeded in organising their trade within the framework of the
tome Convention.

In both cases the obJective of the underdeveloped countries is the same: To
secure their growth by promoting their general industrialization, which is
considered a necessary condition for their agricultural development. This
objective is likely to be fulfilled only under three conditions. The under-
developed countries must find outlets for their manufactured products not
only in their own urkets but, on a substantial scale and for a long time,
on the markets of the industrialized countries. They must be able to raise,
under acceptable conditions, the private capital which is essential to their
industrialization, and which they cannot collect totally from their domestic
savings. Finally they must be assured of a certain stability in their income
earned from exports, that is to say, from the market price of the rut mater-
ials which, to this day, still constitute the main bulk of their trade with

industrialised countries at profitable rates, particularly in the case of
sub-Saharan Africa.

5
son 017mm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The [one Convention, with its different funds for financing and with. the
STABEX [Export Income Stabilisation System], fulfills these requirements
fairly well on a world-wide scale.

However, if a prolongation of the economic crisis beyond the prognostieations
of experts should coincide with the first successes of the policy of indus-
trialization pursued by underdeveloped countries, notably Southeast Asia and
Latin America, this might pose a threat to the results already obtained. The
underdeveloped countries have observed among their industrialized partners a
temptation to resort to protectionism in order to defend domestic industries
and to safeguard domestic employment, as well as a decline in long-term
private investments.

Some forms of "mo-protectionism" practiced by the United States and Europe
were denounced in a conmunication by Prof Bela Balatta, consultant of the
Horld Bank and a member of the faculty of Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, who would prefer to see the industrialized countries frankly
resort to tariffs, which, it seems to him, are more in keeping with the law
of supply and demand than are various insidious non-tariff measures such as
quota systems, government subsidies within the framework of a "rationaliza-
tion of industry" and policies aimed at setting up an apportioment of the
market.

Is it then necessary to rely on the law of supply and demand alone to bring
about the structural adjustments in industrialized countries which would

lead to the new international division of labor? Mr Claude Cheysson, who

is in charge of development in the Brussels European Omission, but who was
expressing his personal views as a member of the Club de Dakar, categorically
rejected the very idea of protectionism, which would be "suicidal" for Europe.
0n the other hand, he advocated a "signal planning", accompanied by a system
of "advance alert" which would allow European countries to take, in time, the
measures required to bear the economic and social cost of the adjustments
imposed by the industrialization of the Third World.

Third World industrialization should furthermore be included--as, paradoxi-
cally, it is not--among the criteria to be taken into account in plans for
industrial restructuring in Europe, for which the EEC spends from 1+ to 5 bil-
lion dollars every year.

Such planning should be worked out with the cooperation not only of the state,
but also of the economic "operators," industrial and commercial bankers repre-
senting the private sector-whose place in the development of the underdevel-
oped countries would thus be recognizeduas well as of representatives of
labor.

Moreover, the underdeveloped countries, and particularly the African states,
must be prepared to define their priorities and their own projects. These
criteria would be met by the project of the Club de Dakar which consists in

6
FOR orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

determining "master plans" of development by gee-economic regions. The
Club has already prepared a preliminary sketch of such a lan for west
Africa in the broadest sense (from Nouakchott to Kinshasa , for the reali-
zation of which it is seeking funds.

As for the financing of investments by the private sector, everyone seems to
acknowledge that there is available capital for all proJects which are seri-
ously studied and which present the prospect of earning a profit. (The dis-
cussion stimulated by Mr Ernest H. Pleaser's report on the occasion of the
fourth session of the Club in Luxembourg showed that the responsibility of
financing non-profit-making proJects, in the banking sense of the term, cannot
be assumed by the private sector.) 11‘ private investors have been hesitating
for several yearn to become nore involved in Africa, or, for that matter, in
any part of the Third World, it is because they consider the non-comerical
risks too heavy. Africans, to whom these fears seem ill-founded, expressed
astonishnent, in the discussions of the Club, at the requirements of private
Investors, which they deemed excessive. To relieve their qualms, Mr Claude
Cheysson expressed the wish that the next convention of the EEC/AC? should
set up a collective guarantee which would supplement the mechanisms of
national guarantees, considered inadequate by private investors.

Up to that point the Club newer-s present were, but for a few minor questions,
in overall agreement with the positions of Mr Cheysson, or with those of the
Brussels Omission, such as they are known. On the other hand, the improve»
ments on the lame Convention suggested by the Club's president, Mr Diawara,

in his opening remarks--suggestions which were not all reiterated in his
closing speech-oare in opposition to the hampean Omission. The latter
does not regard with favor the creation of new funds to be added to those
already existing, a process which often contravenes the objective striven

for, and further accentuates the dependence of the beneficiary countries.
Within the sluggish economic climate of Eta-ope, a doubling of the amount of
the fifth EDP [Economic Development hand] is not likely to be accepted.
Finally, and perhaps particularly, the Brussels Convention is opposed to a
"globalization" of STABZX, that is to say, to its extension to all products
exported by the ACP (their number is around 1,700) to all destinations, begin-
ning at a threshold of dependence equal to or close to zero, without even
mentioning the compensation of the effects of inﬂation. One might as well
guarantee the balance or trade of the totality of the AC? and entrust the
responsibility for it to the International Monetary Fund.

COPYRIGHT: Rene More-ax et Cie., Paris 1978

a

931.7
680: MOO

7
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

INTI-iii-WCAN AFFAIRS

m-ACP MAR TALKS REPORTED
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MIWS in French 8 Dec 78 pp 3363-65

[Article by Brussels special correspondent: “Sugar: Col-son Front Against
Incoherence”!

[Text] In a cosmunication which it recently transmitted to the m: Council,
the European Omission draws attention to the incoherence of the Conunity
and the neeber states in the sector of sugar. The situation can be suned
up as follows: Hhile the world market registers important surpluses, some
European enterprises, benefiting from public guarantees, continue to keep
up sugar investments in the countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the '
Pacific, and thus promote overproduction.

In its docunent, the Conission calls for a couch front on prodecte of
sugar refinement in the AC? states which have the backing of m: states.
The incoherence which it has observed has led the Omission to take a
closer look at the evolution of investments in process or projected in
the sugar sector in ACP countries. They have found that:

«The sugar production of AC? states necessarily earnrhed for export will
reach 2.9 million tons in l981, as against 2 million at present '(To these

should be added, of course, surpluses from other underdeveloped countries.
for which only partial intonation is available.)

oolwo-thirdn of-the projects in progress or planned in the AC? states
receive financial backing and technical assistance from Couunity operators,
who generally benefit from government guarantees or interest discounts. The
actions of the Conunity operators are in the fields of promotion, engineer-
ing, the management of enterprises, the supply of equipment on credit, as
well as in some particular cases, the guarantee of assuring the marketing of
sugar for a certain contractual period. In most cases these actions are
carried out Jointly by one or more Dsropean firms.

Situation of the world Market

In the course of the last three campaigns, the sugar market has evolved as
follows on a world-wide level (in 1,000 t of raw sneer; Sender-August
balance sheet):

8
to: ORIGIN. USE OIL! '
POR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78
(est.)
Original stock 17,305 20,11140 23,330
Production (2,780 86,080 %,500
Quantities on hand 100,085 1%,520 115,830
Consumption (1) 79,650 83,190 35,500
Final stock 20,9100 23,330 30,300
Percentage of consumption 26 28 35
Price in free world market, in 003
European Account Units] tons (2) 273.90 169 130.63

(1 Calculated by the difference between the quantity on hand and the final
stock.
(2) Annual average July/June (London "spot" price).

At the some time, the availability for export from the Conunity tends to
increase on account of the "preferential" importation of sugar resulting
from the increased production.

Situation on the Cosmos Varket

Such a situation poses for the (lo-unity and for its member states a very
grave problem of coherence between the different policies, internal and
external. This incoherence comes to light in the matter of sugar and of
the corresponding shipments of production and processing equipment. It
also exists in other fields. The Comission has selected the sugar dossier
only as an example, in order to provide the data necessary to the apprecia-
tion of a significant file, and in order to propose to the Council and to
the member states the reflections which it urgently calls for.

The data which the Commission has collected from official sources concern

all sugar projects in progress or envisaged in ADP states, whatever may be
their source of financing.

From these data it appears that by 1981, after all the projects that were
planned have been completed, the production of MP states will reach k8
million tons, as against the present 3.5 million tons. The predicted bal-
ance of imports and exports, taxitu into account the projected developent
of oonsunption in the AC? countries, shows a large surplus of sugar produc-
tion, which the ACP will inevitably earmark for export; available supplies
will thus increase to 900,000 t compared to the present situetion (current
exports of 22 million tons, of which 1.22 million benefit non the guaran-
teed Cosmos Ibrket price on the basis of the lame protocol), that is to say
an increase of '45 percent.

9
ran onxcuu. use out!
FOR ONIOIAL USE ONLY

Sugar Balance-Sheet of the rec
(in 1,000 t equivalent white sugar)

1976-77 1977-78

(00%.)

1) Production within the framework
of the quotas A+B 9,820 10,7100
2) Imports:
--i‘ron A0? and PM [expansion unknown]

states and India 1,313.2 1,305.2 (1)
"from the Third World

éa in original torn 2? 27

b processed 131 l28
3) Experts:
--in original fora 1.2%; 3:359
--processed 259
h) Consunption 8,997 9,212
5) Stocks at intervention _. 9M (2) 1.587 (3)
:1; period of delivery July-June
2 on 31/12 1976

(3) on 30/9 1977

This increase in global production will arise from 66 identified projects of
varying sizes, among which some are still imprecise with regard to anticipated
volune of production. Forty-four of these projects are carried out or planned
with the helpuonly exceptionally lininal, but generally considerable-cot

European operators, who are thueelves supported by an arsenal of goverusnt
aid to experts.

One justiﬁcation sometimes given for the size of certain projects is that
one should guarantee profits by attaining a minimal size. we does not
justiiy the projects destined entirely for export, and it cannot conceal the
fact that the only motive for orienting projects in this direction has fre-
quently been the exclusive concern for investing capital goods. In this
aatter five countries occupy a significant place:

Tons of raw swar available for export Actual Estilated lwl
Cameroon 12,000 100,000
Ivory Coast 0 160,000 (1)
Kenya 0 105,000
Sudan 0 187,000
mime 216,000 359,000

10

’Ol ORIGIN. 088 OIL!
NR OFFICIAL 088 091.?

That is to say 683,000 I. for only fiVe comutrieo (which could have been
883,000 1.).

(1) his figure would have been 360,000 t if the president of the Ivory
Coast had not had the courage to cancel operations of 50,000 t each, initially
planned for and already almost undertaken.

Some European operators are involved in all the projects concerning the fol-
lowing countries:

Cameroon: France, United Kingdom

Ivory Coast: Belgian, Denaark, France, Netherlands, United Kingdom
Keny: France, United Kingdom

Sudan: Belgium, United Kingdom

Swaziland: Denmark, United Kingdom

The Comission observes that the estimtes of sugar production increase in
no? states must be made with a certain prudence. Indeed, along the projects
recorded, some are in the process of being carried out,_ that is, are sure.
Others are at the stage of being studied from the technical aspect, or are
under financial negotiations. Still others are as yet only under considera-
tion on the part of governments and promoters, and there is still hope that
they may be adjourned sine die.

0n the other hand, the Cosnission points out that estimates of the progres-
sion of future local consumption are those of the authorities in charge, who
coumunicated the information on this subject. These estimates are not a
priori unreasonable, but there is a good chance that they may not be attained.
They must therefore be considered with caution, all the more so as the private
consumption of sugar, being affected by food habits, tends to lag behind the
standard of living.

This estinate of the prospects of the evolution of sugar consusption takes
into account only the evolution of its consumption as a food; a new element
may be introduced through the utilisation of sugar cane and derived products
for the manufacture of alcohol to be used as a source of energy. The Connie-
sion emphasized that this development would only take on importance in the
long run.

The Comission also made clear that the AC? sugar protocol has been set for an
indeterminate period, and that codification: can only be expected to take
effect by 1 April 1981. One must nevertheless anticipate that the ACP states
will try to open up discussions on the outlet for sugar in the Cannon Met,
in light of the situation described above. It is clear that, in the present
state of the Canon and world markets the sac cannot consider the slightest
increase of the quotas specified in the protocol.

11
m ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The Commission believes that the some concern must apply in the matter of
the sale of equipment for the production and the processing of sugar that
the member states can facilitate in other undercheloped countries.

This reasoning can and must be extended to other domains (such as oil refining

or the petrochemicals industry which are or might be subject to the some inco-
herence. The Omission therefore wishes that a debate would take place in

the Council, so that certain principles might be defined the application of
which should then be clearly delineated in each sector.

Taking the field of sugar as an example, the Omission proposes that all
actions carried out or envisaged by SEC enterprises with the active support
or nember states should be organised according to a carefully thought out
u-ombined effort. This combined effort would be prepared through an exchange
01‘ detailed information on all sugar proJects which the member states (or
else, the Comunity, through the EDF [Economic Development Fund] or the 331
[European Investment nankl) would support or plan to support, either directly
or indirectly, by the mobilization of loans or through the intermediary of
eredIt-suppliers. 0n the basis of this intonation:

«The HBO and its members states would endeavor to adopt more appropriate
attitudes;

«The Omission would call the state of the market and its characteristics
to the attention of the World Bank, the African Bank of Development and other
investors;

«The AC? states and other underdeveloped countries would be informed about
the concerns of the ass; they would be supplied with all data which would
give them a better understanding of the context (both world-wide and
Oomunity-wide) in which their investment policies in sugar may be fitted.

According to the Omission, the same type of coma front should be organised,
in forms yet to be defined, in all sectors where an appreciable increase in
exports from underdeveloped countries, and notably from AOP states, risks
creating serious disturbances in the world and Cohen lurkets with regard to
profits or other matters.

COPYRIGHT: Rene brew: et Cie., Paris 1978

93"?
cm: M00

12
m OHIO!“ US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

TRIPAR‘I’I‘I‘B merino OI! CNI’mrlON-ehesidents Lusitana of Upper Volta and
Kountche of Niger case to Lens-Kara (northern Togo) on 7 and 8 December to
take part in a tripartite suanit nesting whose essential objective use to
strengthen the cooperation among the three countries , especially in the area
of transport. According to a joint cosuunique asde public at the end of the
aeeting, the three chiefs of state expressed their desire to take all nasa-
ures to carry out the projects termed "vital" for the states of west Africa
as a whole. The three countries should shortly set up a permanent eolnittee
charged with promoting and coordinating the projects relative to creation
of transport infrastructure. These involve in pa; 'ieular the rail and road
connections linked with the project to enlarge the port of Leno. Experts
iron the industrialized countries could aid the penanent cos-ittee in pre-
paring an overall study of these projects. Purthernore. the eel-unique
states, the three chiefs of state expressed their satisfaction with their
"perfect identity of view" on all the problems raised. [Text] [Paris
hams norteaux 81' maximums in French l5 Dec 78 p 3640] “267

—_

STAN-X GRANTS-Jim BBC has just assigned 15.25 million mi: European Ace
gnito] to {our signatories oi‘ the lone ConVention, under th£ Import Incogeum
utabillzation System (Ml. These four countries are: ‘nanzania, vhich
received 8.1 million for the decrease of its into-e from expert or sisal in
1977; lhuritania, 3.6 million for iron ore; avasiland, 3.37 million, also
for iron ore; and Western Samoa, 88,000 008 for bananas. Uganda, for cotton
:‘fumm, for peanuts, and Cape Verde, for bananas, have also asked to benefit ’
Iron cram for the financial year 1977. Their requests are still under I

consideration. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TmPICAUX ET MED!
3 Dec 7:} P 13", 93"? ms in French

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we mm AID—Ir. order to ooebet invesione of migrant locusts our the
next 6 eonths in Daibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Soeelie end am, the £00 hee
decided to partioipete in the finenoing or a United nation- Food and Agri-
oulturel Organisation (P10) emergency progn- in the amount or 1.3 million
EEC unite or eooount (00). the totel cost of the no prom, enounting to
1,665,000 00's hes also been assured by 301510! (75.000 00's), Dena-rt
(69,000 00's), the Netherlands (136,000 00's), the United tingle. (135 000
00's), Seudi mun (392,000 00's end the Arab m for Boonoeio nmiomt
in Africa (38,000 00's). Mthernore, et the request or the United Nations
Hiya 00-ieeioner's Office (or Remgees, the m: is going to pertioipete

in the inleeentetion of e prone. or repatriation end reeettlemt o!
Zeirien nihgees. 300 eid will ooee to 4 Iillion 00's. his prom on-
siete of the tunsportetion or 60,000 people free ingole, 8min, U

and mm and the resettlement or 110,000 people in hire. Mt [Perle
mm EOHWRMIWMMQI 15300789 1166

_-......

ALLEGED ert-coumv HERCENARIES--chorta from British journalists indi-
cating that Moroccan mercenaries had joined forces with Jones Savinhi are
incomplete. Diploutic sources in Mhat conftin that not only Morocco is
sending mercenaries to UNITA but that mercenaries of several other nation-
alities are represented: Guinean. Mozambican. Cape Vardian. Beninese.
Malagasy. etc. [Text] [Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 176, 11 Dec 78

p 39] 9387

TRANS-AFRICAN ROAD PROJBC‘ruNigeria will soon cowlete the last 60 Its: of
the Trans-Africen axis highway which crosses its territory to Ceneroon.
This was'announced on 18 Dace-her by the Nigerian News Agency. The Nigeria
portion is 833 he long out of the total 6,300 kn. It passes from the ex-
treme southwest at "fun village to the southeast border with Caneroon.

[733:3] [Paris MRCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French 22 Doc 78
P

030: M00

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

AMBASSAM Rm PUBLISEIED AWATIONS ON WE
Psrls NARCHPB TROPICAUX ET mun-mums in French 8 Dec 78 p 3360

[Peri] Pureusnt to the srticle “Prsnce‘s Chsnces in A ole.“ which sppesred
in our issue of 2b Novesber [issue not received by F318 . we received the fol-
lowing infonstien fros hr Luis J. de Alneids. ssbsses or of the People's Re-
public of Angols my in Brussels. who is soon to be sccredited in Psris:

"In regsrd to the vsrious itese of the sbove srticle. I hsve the following
clsrificstione to sshen

s) The 'no' to can. ‘l'hst type of vslue Judgssnt em in its hsste. To be
sure. we hsve not yet Joined can. Just se we hsve not Joined the Lose Gon-
vention. However. we sttend sll caws seetinge es en observer. Just ss we
now do in regsrd to u» sac/sop [EEO/Africa. Ceribbssn. Pscific cos-on her-
he_t] conversstions. where we hsve sequined the ststus of observer. But to
ensure m. thst thst we ere going to Join the A0? would be ssking s hssty
Jude-slit. One does not conclude sn set of ssrrisge without beim well-sc-
qusinted with tho fisncee with when one expects to live in the nature.

honovsr. our relstions with can sre excellent to the extent thst (IBM's
principles ere cospstible with our interests end becsuse can is ssde up of
countries which ere our sost privileged friends. those which hsve slwsys sided
us. wheress those which cospose the EEO. with s few exceptions. ere wore in.
clined to support the enesies of our people. However, thst does not prevent
us Pros cooporstinr. with the EEC slso while respecting univereslly sccepted
lsws end the independence snd sovereignty of Angols.

For your inforsstion snd thst of your resdere. I suet tell you thst I do not
hsve the honor of being s nesber of the Politburo of the W-stor Petty. ss
your correspondent wrote. However. I es s long-standing silitsnt of the mm.
which I hsve served for s lom tine.

b) m Shsdow of the Swiss Bsnloers. It is slso fslee to sea um I ha akin;
sn effort to set up cossercisl representstion in Switcerlsnd.’ As Switserlsnd
does not belong to sy 'sres of Jurisdiction.’ it is not up to se to sske such

sn effort. The opening of s cossercisl representation in Switserlsnd by the

15
70a orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annolen Cover-hunt is in response to the need to esteblish s center for docu-

nontetion end infornetion on the ”Me econonic end cos-ereiel reelity in the
eiddle of Europe.

As for the etstenent eccordinr, to which Angels in enecedly. end I quote.
'diseppointed et the seen enount of eid it hes received fro- the eocieliet
cenp.‘ thet is sisply e tehricetion involving only its euthor. The support
given the RPA by eocielist countries end friends is considereble end tends to

becoemecstill meter es e wetter of eutuel interest. The use holds true for
the .

c) The Belgien-Angolen Plirtetion. There is not end there cennot he eny ﬂir-
tetion with enyone. In politics end econoey there ere no flirtetione. On the
other hend. whet does exist is the roughing out of e Belgien-Angolen ooopere-
tion which will he profitehle to both perties. The RPA hes no preference for
this or thet Heetern country end is not et e11 trying to heve. end I quote.

'e Hester-n fiencee.‘ es Cleude Jedoul wrote.

'wsstern fiencee?‘ For whet purpose? In business. cos-on sense diotetee not
heving exclusive eseocietions. um our leeders ere seeking is the econoeic
end sociel developesnt of our country in es ehort e tine es possible: to et-
tein thet objective. they ere trying to diversify the ”Me econoeic end coe-
serciel reletione with every country in the world while reepsctin; our polit-

ice.'i options end our independence. which we went to he not only politicel but
slso econoeic.

As for technology. we ere seeking thet which is the nest edveneed end beet
corresponds to our developeent goels. regrdless of the origin of thet tech-
nology.” -

COPYRIGHT: Ilene horeux et Gie.. Perle. 1978

9568
080: I#000

16
roe omcm. us: out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

moon

BRIEFS

UNI‘I‘A AIRCRAH‘ WING DBNIBDnThe UNITA opposition novenent, led by Jonas
Savinbi. has declared. in a cemnique published in Brussels, that it downed
a Boeing 727 carrying 50 Cuban soldiers. Jose Luis de Alneide, Angola's
ambassador to Belgium, denied this report... specifying that_neither the Angolan
arny nor the civil aviation company no [expansion unknong has this type of
airplane. "The army." he indicated. "uses mainly French troop transports of
the Transnll t pa. and TAG uses Boeing 737 planes." The latter is a member
of the IATA International Air Trans or; Associating. whose rules forbid it
to transport eilitary personnel. _'rert/ [Paris W38 TROPICAUX er
mnmms in French 15 Dec 70 p 33’ng 11267

ANCOLAN RBWGEBS lumen-«nan Miranda. Angolan charge d'affaires in Zanbia.
has indicated that out of a total of 13,000 Angolan refugees in hebia, 3,000
have gone back to Angels in recent months. The repatriation operations have

bcen tenporarily halted: because of the rainy season. the roads are unusable.
Return to the reesining 10.000 refugees vill be carried out next year. [text/
[Paris names TROPICAUX B‘l‘ mun-mutants in French 15 Dec 78 p 34537 11237

AME!) cm moor match-A total of 5,000 Best Ger-an soldiers. parachut-
iste and elite troops are presently in Angola. eccordine to a stateeent ends
in Hunich by Frans Josef Strauss. head of the Bavarian Christian Social Party
(csu [Emmi-n Social 0.1.37. opposition) and sinister-president of u» Land
of Bavaria. In a press conference given after his return tron Lisbon. where

he had participated in NATO's perlianentery conference. Kr Strauss stated

that. according to his lnforaetion. 2.000 of these soldiers had recently Joined

the ranks at 10.000 Cubans to crush the 1mm novensnt. ext [Paris mamas
moncwx er mm in French 22 Dec 78 p 35297. .

080: M00

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPE WM

BRIEFS

ADP AGRICUL'NRAL, HARMRKS Wham loana totaling 960 nillion CPA francs
have juet been granted to the Republic of Cape Verde by the African Develop-
ment Fund (ADP) to finance the agricultural development project of Aeouada
and the weter-aupply project for the tovn of Hindelo. 1w previoua loans
from the Airican Develowent Bank and the African Development hand had al-
ready been granted to Cape Verde for financing two development projecte
(teleco-mnicatione and agriculture). The new loans granted were the aubjcct
of agreementa eigned for Cape Verde by Corentino Santoe. governor of. the

Banco de CaboVordo. [Text] [Paria Hams TROPICAUX 31' momentum
in French 8 Dec 78 p 3376] 11267

cso: M00

18
roe onxcm. us: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

mm

INCREASED DUMB? ADOPI'ED--heetirng on 16 Deco-her under the chairmanship of
Dear Bongo. head of state. the Gabonese Council of Hinisters exaained and,
adopted the proposed budget for 1979. It calls for receipts and expenditures
in the amount of 282.92 billion GFA [Kfricen Financial Commitﬂ trance. .not
including an "optimal progran” of 11.1 billion. which will hecoae' a part of
the budget only if the corresponding foreign resources can be arranged. Ac-
cording to a con-unique issued at the conclusion of the council's ”$113..
the 1979 budget has the double objective of continuing the country's efforts
toward financial recovery and aaintaining a level of activity sufficient for
its eoonoay. .The Wt gives special enphaeie to the infrastructure. which
will account for 53 percent of the expenditures: 32 percent of this anount
is to he allocated to the Tmmbomce Railway alone. Agriculture's share
will increase fro- 15 to 8 percent. Greater effort is also to be expended on
roads and aeronautics. The 1979 budget is an increase over that of 1978.

which was originally 2163 billion on francs but which was reevaluated during
the year by the Gaboneee Governaent. ext [Paris HABCHES TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRAWS in French 22 Dec 78 p 3 z. 8568

FIRST CUBA" IMO: DELEGATION-Jot the first due a Cuban tr d
lug nut“ Mbuville, at the beginning of 0°“;er a e delegation

hsuna, “"c‘" °f Cube-Export. it offered to the 3.50
neee fo
sdninietretion, es well as to various igortcrs, a “n reign trade

foodstuffs to agricultural aachinery. /i'ext7 [Forte
mmmmns in French 15 Doc 78 p 34297 ‘11237 *

C80: 6609

19
ran orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GHANA

BRI BPS

NEH PISBING VESSBLS--Pishing: first delivery of boats ordered from Italy-
He said in our 21 June issue that the State Fishing Corporation of Ghana

had entered into two contracts with the Italian shipbuilder Bsercizio Cantieri
for construction and delivery of four trawlers and two tuna boats. The first
of the crawlers, the 1.500-ton ”Sheketeh," has been delivered, end the other
three are to be delivered at the rate of one every 4 months. As for the tuna
boats, they will be built and delivered subsequently. In its Decenber issue.
the magazine FIShINC saws INTERNATIONAL gives the characteristics of these
units, which have the most modern equipment, but does not specify their costs.
Hg recell_that the contract for the tune boats cane to 20 million dollars.
[text] 13am means 'rkoucwx rt DEDITBRRANEBNS in French 15 Dec 78 p my
11267

DIPPICUL‘I‘IES IN COCOA SECTOR-Cocoa: important insecticide-dusting operation
impeded by lack of equipnent--An important insecticide-dusting operation in
the Tepa district of the Ashanti region, for which more than 2,000 persons
had been mobilized, has practically failed for lack of sufficient equipment;
that which was to be delivered did not arrive. On the other hand, in order
to colbat better the cocoa smuggling which is rife particularly in the region
of the Volta River. the Cocoa Marketing Board and its subsidiary, the Produce
Buying Division, have launched in that region an information campaign called
"Meet the Farmers." and has urged the farmer; to conduct entismuggling patrols
themselves all along the Togolese border. Text? LParis HARCHBS TROPICAUX
81‘ MEDITERRANBENS in French 15 Dec 78 p 346; 11267

680: #‘50

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL US! ONLY

WIN“

P00 CONGRESS DANCE-SHEET. NEH POLITBUREAU mm [.131
Paris ARMOUR-AS!!! in French No 176. ll Dec 78 pp 35.36

[Excerpts] with the participation of 1056 national delegates reunited free
17 to Zl lloweeber at the Palace of the People in Conakry. the llth congress
of the Denocratic Party of Guinea (P06) will not turn out to be a sisple
formality. For 6 months these participants have been intensively prepared
nation-wide. even in the nest renote haulers. Eighty-five thousand copies
of the voluminous report of the central conittee were printed in French
(as well as in Arabic. English. Spanish and Portuguese) and 300.000 in the
six national languages (Heninlta. Soso. Pular. Kisie. erlewo. Leghona): the
report was broadcast for 175 hours on radio and television. It was the
subject of deep studies and discussions in the 2500 local revolutionary
powers (PRL. that is village cos-mes or city districts). in the 300
couittees heading up sections. in the 3‘ federal bureaus. in the nilitary
garrisons and in the three ease organizations of youth. wonen and workers.
as well as along personnel in Guinean enbaeeies and co-Iunities in foreign
countries.

Remarks. criticism. and suggestions had then been entertained in the
sssenblies of the Pill. section conferences and Iaetings of regional councils
of the revolution. Finally. a nearing of the National Comcil of the Revo-
lntion (cue) at Kankan tree 21 to 25 August had draun up a preli-inary
sunnry account of all these discussions.

First of all. the congr’ess eade official the phase of the state party. of
which this congress constitutes the first neeting.

It was also. of course. the tine to draw up the exhaustive reports on pro-
gress ends in all fields and in all regions since independence.

am when the hour arrives to consolidate past achieve-ante. to peri’ect
eaterial and hunn resources already accumulated. one is at that accent
particularly obliged to take a critical look at the realities.

Between decisions and their application. between theory and practice. there
is lnvariablya rather large nsrgin. And it is on these weak spots and

21
P0! OHICIAI. I18! ONLY
FOR ONE!“ USE ONLY

failurea. on deficiencies and errors. that the accent has been placed.
Thus. for exasple. there are those who have cited the difficulties sene-
tines encountered by the notorized production brigades (M). installed in
the Pill. because of the lack of detached room or of repair shops. 0r further-
more. disagreeaentn enorging between peasanta and certain professionals
fresh out of agriculture school but insufficiently experienced. In sisilar
fashion. people have asked that the Pria law be brought up-to-date' the
legislation concerns scans to be used in the fight against drought. which
has becose a national preoccupation; also. the law of the charter of
February 1975 on popular cosserce. which upholds the sonopoly on the sale
of imported products and on staple goods deliVered by producers. This
probles. soreover. has received unanlsous attention.

if congress has decided to safeguard these attainsents of the people. it
Me also declared itself in favor of saintaining its coexistence with the
private couercial sector. "Gonauners are not sasochists.” enhsaised one
of the speakers. while the others all insisted on the isperative necessity
of putting adequate infrastructures and policies in places (warehouses.
means of transporting serchandiae. sore accurate and comlete forecasts.
aufficient stocks. greatly increased nusbers of shops. selection of those

responsible for inleasntation) in order to assure the proper functioning
of the people's coalerce.

out the central preoccupation of the congress has without a doubt been the
choice of responsible personnel at all levels and in all spheres. it is
significant that those parts of the opening speech that received the nest
applause were those in which the Suprene Goaltender of the Guinean Revolu-
tion warned once more against infiltration of responsible positions by
profit songerers. tired elessnts. flatterers and coqlacent persons "who
want to please anyone at the ass tine."

At an earlier rise. the utter before the congress was one of renewal of
the national leadership of the party.

Voting tooit place in the presence of the only people to vote. under the
direction of Madeira Keita. founding sesber of the P06 and first secretary
general of the party. and of other senior officials who participated as
well in the creation of the P00. Richard Bagnsn and Doudou Pall. And it
is under these denocratic conditions that the following were reelected to
the national political bureau (BNP): Lsnesna heavogui. first sinister:
Hosadi Knits. sinister of education and cultural affairs; Houses Diakite.
minister of the interior. security and justice; lsssel Toure. sinister of
finance and economics; N'Passra Keita. sinister of rural advancement.

Next July

m the other hand. the following officials have entered the m: Dassntang
(xi-arc. per-anent secretary of the UP and president of the legislative
nuuesbly; Saifoulaye Diallo. sinister of social adninistrstion; Jeanne
Martin Cisse. sinister of social affairs; Tousany Sangare. sinister of

22
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY '
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

tranlportationi Abdoulaye Tours. ninieter {or aduinietratlon oi exchangea:
Seton Cherif. linieter of rural developnont of the Lobe region: Lanaane
Diane. Iinieter of justice; Abdouleye Diawo Ialde, liniater of rural de-
velop-ant of the N'Zerekoro region.

But thie in only the beginning of a proceoe of reinforcement and renewal
which ehould reach throughout the whole atate party. atattin; iron the
ground up. It in in thio Ianner that electione for new leadera at the

PRL level and at the level of dietrict and regional revolutionery powers
will take place next July. It ia then that the National Council of the
Revolution. where the federal authority reaidee. will elect the new central
collittee of the etate party of Guinea.

comment: me Afrique-Aaie

9387
(:80: “00

23
you ontcw. use on!
POI OPPICIM. US! ONLY

mmmqm

'Pllm‘l'lc‘ SPIRIT HAY l3 SWMING AGRICULTURAL le
Pario Jame mmus in Pronch No 936. 13 Doc 78 p 85

[Articlo by Francoio Soudan: “Agriculture: tho curood uiniotry. Rotroat
following tho failuroo of oocialiution of tho countryoido. Propatioa ia
tho ordor of tho day"l

[Text] ”Tho iiiniotry of Agriculturo it tho oiniotry of fanino." Ono hardly
trouhloa onooolf with nuancoa in Maputo vhon it conoa to pauin; judpont
on tho failuroa and tho i‘altorinu of aocialial. liouﬂiquo'ojoublo rovo-
lution-v-hoth notional ana oocialo-hoo in fact oncountorod ito firot ooriouo
criolo oinco indooondonca. It ia a criaia with o opocific cauoo: agricul-
turo. Thu. tho aoho who :athor daily in tho otroota of Maputo in front of
wall ooatoro tron tho Jam no row count with a Iixturo of humor and
bittornooo on tho dioilluoionoooto of tho rural rmlution.

In fact. Nouohiquo hao not rocovorod fro. tho aoao omduo in 1913 of tho
6000 Portusuooo landovnoro who occupiod tho but piocu of land in tho
country. taking with tho- oacka of oood and light agricultural oquip-ont,
oohotaging vhat thoy could not ronovo, tho coloniato loft tho liocaobican
countryoido in coqloto diaarray. ‘l'ho only aroao oparod voro tho northorn
oroviocoo of ‘l'oto, Coho boloado and Moon. oolidly hold by m «ring
tho tight (or llboratioo.

Poiluro of Colloctivioo

Thoao vill to tho only provincoa. aoroovor. vhich will accopt without rooor-
vntioo tho policy of colloctiviutioo. Shortly aitor iodooondooco. tho
authoritioo in Hoputo. in conoultation with Soviot worto. lauchod a
policy of ”hoavy” rural aocialioatioo. Mt on tho nodal of Stalinist
colloctlviutioo (too 1930 to 1935: croatioo of largo atata far- and
cooperatim, rash purchoaoa of agricultural Inchinory altar: ill-auitod,
(to. tho countrioo of Baton luropo. oyotolotic rocouroo to Bottom
tochnology.

Turning to tho Chinoao Nodal

1ho rooult vao cotaotrophic: paaoivo roaiotaoco of tho population. par-
ticularly ovidaot in tho aouth: diaturhin; fall in tho production o!

2'.
POI omcw. US! MY
roe OFFICIAL "9|! ONLY

egriuultursl coneditiue end products for export. On 17 August 1978
Joechil de Carvalho. Iinieter of agriculture accused of having "systole-
ticelly given priority to technical matters to the detrinent oi populur
initistivu.” had to rcnign (mm AFRIQUE No 921.). lie wee subsequently
arrested along with four other eceburu of the Central Genittee of
PRELIHO and eevnral of his Portugueee edvisors.

Since thet ties. under the influence of Senora Hachel.who hinsdli heeded
this “cursed ninistry” for lore than two months. lisputo seesa to have

drewn a few lessons from this first experience. A rural policy along
”Chinese” linee is beginning to be put into operation. with the creation

of light etructures of production and especially with the developeent of
villegee of the "ujaese" vsristy. fashioned on the Tantsnian eodel. At

the ease tine. a portion of the rural sector hes been denetioneliecd and
uteriel incentives introduced (plots of land. livestock. etc.). lbreover.
the very newly appointed einister of agriculture. Mario de Grace Mechungo.
does not hide his desire for "rstionaliution." llis tern with the Ministry
of Industry had been worked by s distinct openness towards western investore
with who- he had established close ties while directing the hoes-bican credit
orgsnitetions.

Agriculture end Socialism

The evolution of rursl policy in Hoesnbique it quite representative of
rclatione between socislise and agriculture in “rice. Angels, another
for-er colony of Portugal. also seen to be nving in the ease direction.
“to be sure. Haputo's foreign policy reesins pro-Soviet. as dose thet of
Lusnde. But its current rural experience is a patchwork of Chinese.
Guinean (Bisseu) end 'i‘aneanisn nodels. It to probebly what one would call
prepstise.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique WJIA 1978

9387
(:80: “00

25
roe omcm. use our
VON. OWICIAI. 088 ONLY

WINS

BRIEFS

mm MARIAN mum! COOWﬂOﬂo-ﬂumorion hiniotor of Dofonoo loJoo
Ooihoqo ototod owor amnion notlonol tolowioion thot hio county will old
hon-Mam in tho oilitory oootor. ‘l‘ho old will to in tho ton of ooolotonoo
in tho tuinina of tho Koooohicon Any'o oodiul pommol and in tho troin-
lng of hon-him oilitory codroo in Hungalon Illiury ochoolo; thio io in
occotuonco with o moon oodo by ﬂoouhlquo om “motion oopohilitioo. ‘l‘ho
inurwiow of tho hungorion oiniotor woo hold ouhooquoht to o topaz-t on tho
vioit of o ”Witt!!! dolosotlon to lloooooiquo in old-honour. Lojoo cum.
hod oomd oo tho hood of thot doloution. on orio M30138 TROPICAUX

ST WINNERS in touch 22 Doc 78 p 1529

COTTON CROP sonsvmnruno hoooobicon provihco of Noopulo homotod ooro
thon 20.000 tono of cotton during tho 1977-1970 ooooon. Thio pooitivo rooult
woo ochiowod doopito difficultioo of voriouo kindo: lock of inoocticidoo.
osticultun ipoont oud troctor potto. ond ohoonco oi osticultutol toch-
niciooo. Tex; - ﬁorio mums rooncmx or minimum in Punch

15 Doc 70 p 3659/ ll267 .

NEH FISHING VESSIBu‘l‘ho ototo coupony 910ch Lowoaoioh aw hoo
putchoocd oi: now (iohin; hooto—prooontly undotgoiu topoir oud oodificotion
in tho Hoputo Ihipylrdr-vhlch will go into oorwico ot loin ot tho boginnin;
of noxt yoor. ottor hoin; tittod with oodom howuotion oquipooat. Thooo

now woooolo. which howo chotoctorlctico diiforont (too thooo hot-olly out!

in )iozoohicon.wotoro. will ho uood for ohriq iiohing. [foxt7 ﬁotio mos
macaw: B‘l' marrow in Punch 15 Doc 78 p 36527 11287

Pumas mo SALT PACNRIIS—houohiquo intoado to crooto ooworol plonto for
propototion of oolt. Propooolo oto undo: otudy for ouch on ihotollotion ot
Nocolo. Author projoct to to: ooro odvohcod: tho ono rolotins to tho
Hoobono ploht. in Inhoohono provinco, cmtructioa of which io to bogin 1-in-
ently ond which will otort opototiooo in 1980. Ito aim copocity. 7.500
tono per year. will ho roiud lotor to 20.000 tono pot yoor. In )Iounbiquo
thou io o oolt-proporotiou plant. ot ﬂotolo, which io ptooontly porolyud
hccouoo of tochuicol difficulties. Tho l7 ooltwotko of Hotolo proviuco oto
capable of producing up to 20.000-23.000 touo of ctudo oolt t 't: thoy
on: ptoooutly working ot tho roto of 10.000-12.000 tono. £1,357, 2%otio
means 110le ST mtmmms in Roach 1: Doc 70 p 652 11267

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGER

8R1 BPS

SAUDI Atn-8audi Arabia haa agraad to finance aavaral projacta in Riga:
totalling 55 niilion CPA franca. Tho projacta includa a augar rafinary
and a tharnal aiactric plant. Tha aid uaa obtainad during Praaidan: Sayni
Kountche'a racant viait to Saudi Arabia. [London nauaar in Pranch 2066
GMT 8 Jan 79 PA]

cso: 6600

27
M OHIO!“ US! MY
I'Oll OPPICML 088 ONLY

NIGERIA

mm

SOVIET MILITARY AIR TRAINING-4 Soviat nilitory aviotion official Po
Kutokhov. vioitod Nisoria in Novonbor and won roceivod by tho chiof oz“ 8.
ntoff of tho Nigerian nilitory aviation. Vico Mural John Yioa Doha. who
himlf had vioitod tho 0381! in l977. During hia 6-day vioit, Kutnhhov
proniood that his comtry would holp dovolop tho nilitary aviation of

Nisorin. whooo min conbot plano in tho rue-21. [Toxtl (Pntio means
TROPUCAUX 31' mumms in Prcnch 22 Doc 78 p 3507]

on. whom: "MIMI. CONTRACT-81”! (Bntropooo-G‘l'u pour loo trnvoux
potroliora nnritinoo) [Dopot-G'm for noritino potroloun oporationo] which
had concluded a firot contract with Hobil Producing (Nipria) for $10
nillion in Octohor 1977 for dovolopnont of tho kao oilfiold. hon juot
concluded with tho onno conpany n now controct for $7.5 million to construct
on offohorc loading toninnl for 280,000 ton tanlarn. Tho toninal in

ochodulod to so into oporation in Jmo. [Text] [Porio meats TROPICAUX
81' Hummus in Pronch 15 Doc 78 p’JMol]

EUROPEAN WK now—m European Invootnont Bonk on 15 Docuhor grontod a
loan of 25 nillion uc (l uc - 0.86 noirn - 31.32 Aurican) to tho Nigerian
Industrial Dovolopnont Bonk. Ltd. (KID!) to holp finonco voriouo nodiun-
inortnnco induotrial projocto. This loon, tho not important srontod by
the bank in tho Ironwork of tho bout Convontion. in nloo tho hank'o firat
venture in Nigorio, ‘l‘ho Icon in for ll yuro at 5.75 porcont otter anon-p-
tion of 3 porccnt of the intoroot by the Buropoan nowolopnont Pund.

[Encorptl Pnrio mums TROPICAUX BI momma in Pronch 22 Doc 78
p 3507]

CSO: “00

28
FOR ORIGIN. 033 OILY
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

$001!! AFRICA

BRIEFS

URANIUM FOR Salmon-ﬁnder the terns of en egreeesnt signed lest Spring but
which have only now been reveeled. South Africe will supply Belgiue 1.600
tone of ursniue for e totel price of shout 720 million frencs. This con-
tract. between the Belgian SYMTOH (Syndicate for purchese of neturel
urneiue. which includes the Belgien electricity producing comenies) end
the South Atricen llereony Gold Mining Co. Ltd. provides that South Africa
will deliver ennuelly 86 tone in the yeere 1980-1983 and 168 tone ennuelly
in the period 1985-1991. This will cover 18.5 percent of Belgium's needs.
[Excerpt] [Peris means TROPICAUX tr norms in French 8 Dec 78

p 3392 -

680: “00

29
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL mm ONLY

raters '

AD! “,8le coumumou MAN-moo agrocnento for loane totaling 1,857.64
nillion CPA franca. granted to Togo, were oigned in Ahidien on 30 hove-her,
at tho headquartere of the AD! [African Developent hank . Theae loane.
intended for financing the conetruction and equipeent of the Faculty of
liodicine of the Univereity Hoepital Center of Lone. have been granted by
tho ADD and by the Nigeria ‘rruet Fund (m). which the bank ie charged to
adeinietor. ‘l‘hie ie the firot tine that the m hee acted in Top, whoroee
it io the Aura eighth operation in Togo. [Text] [Perie means TROPICAIIX

B'l‘ momnmms in french 8 Dec 78 p 3378] ll“?

mm Oil comm Dentist-4n a talk which. according to the APP. ie to
appear in Parie next January. in tho firot iaeuo of tho 33W! mutants
AFRICAN! I! STRATEGIE, the 'i‘ogolceo chief of otato doclaroa hineoli in
favor of creating a joint nilitery force within the fruowork of a regional
dofonac pact grouping the otatoe of Heat Africa. Ae it known, thio pact,
propoeed hy Nigeria and Togo within the framework of the 63m!) (Heat Afri-
can Statea Economic Col-unity. which groupe 16 countrioe), io to he on the
egonde of thio organization's nut ail-it mating, in Dakar in May 1979,
and would conplonont the nonameeeion treaty eignod by the ne-her countrioo
in Lego: leot April. General Byadene declaroa hinaolf in favor of a die-
trihution of the nilitary teake at the euhrogional level. and a joint do-
feneo arrangoevent in which each would epocialite “in function of hie otra-
togic epocielty." ”It eeeee to no that ouch an arrange-ant," he etroeaoe,
”would he of a nature to deter the advoroariee who, for the proeent, are
plunging our continent into fratricidal were." But he coneidere ”unrealia-
tic" for the nonont the propoeal to create an African nilitory high con-end
within the franoworlt of the 0A0, which would group nearly 50 etetea. he

would prefer a euhregionol ironwork. Ila doclareo further that an inter-
African force ouch ea the one conceived within the “ml: of the “m0

could take action in other rogione, aouthorn Africa in particular. [Text]
[Pittt W8 MGM“ B? Kbmms in Prench 15 D“: 78 p 3M0]

11267

cmnrr comm nmsnmsum billion CPA france for expanding cnmoo
('l'ogo Cenont Coup-ﬂy)--cnﬂ000. with which the Preach group mart ie
aeeocintod. ie. going to invcot 2 billion CPA france to enlarge ita bone plant.

30
m omcm. us: our
POI OPPICIN. USS ONLY

Thin invent-ant ehould enable the company to double its ciinker-cruehing
capacity. which ehould tine iro- 320.000 to 700.000 tone per year. This
wee indicated by Cleudn Label-t, preeidcnt of the Lambert Group. who we
received on 6 December by the Togolcee chief of etete. Generel [ix-dean.
cut-moon production in intended for eupplyins Upper Volte, Niger. Nigeria
end eleo “rose. 'lhe trench group in nice to invent in conetruction of e
plent for akin; cmnt nclte. [Text [Perle mama TROPICAUX 31‘ MIDI-
amass in Pcnnch ls Dec 78 p 3360 11267

(:80: “00

31
'0' OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

POLITICAL. BCONOHIC SITUATION MIMI) 0“ M 01’ 81.301“st
Peria nineties TROPICAUX 81' lam-traumas in French 8 Dec 78 pp 3386-3387

[Text] The tine ie approeching when l’reeident Kenneth Kaunde of Zanhia will
heve to fete electione end win at leeet half of the votee in order to renain
in office legally. ‘l‘heae alectiona are toning at a tine when the country ia
experiencing the noat eerioua econonic crieie ainca it echieved independence

and when the regine'a political credibility hea fallen to ita loweet level.

For Preeident Keunda. the electiona could not tone at e woree tile. ﬂeet-1y
all political end econonic indicatora ere unfevoreble to hie. The raida of
the Rhodaeian any on the guerrilla cape of Joauah likono lore than 320 kilo-
netera inaide Za-bian territory have tragically unveiled the powerleeaneea

of the Zanbian Arled torcea and heightened the growing feeling of ineecurity.
while the acercity of foreign exchange reveala even further the chronic weak-
neaa of the econony. to the point that Preaident launda waa forced to reatore
the rail link with Ihodaaia. thereby turning hia back on one of hie deareat
political principlee.

the reopening of the border with llhodeaia cen be fully juatified by econoeic

conaideretione. lt hae nade it poaaible to inort fertiliter indiapeneable
for cropa next year and ahould looaen reetrainta on the copper exporte which
repreeent 90 percent of the country'a export receipta.

But et the cane tine. thie reverael ia profoundly hunilieting on the politi-
cal level. It goea in the direction of en ebrupt change in orientation of
Zenbian policy. race-ended by Preaident bunda’e Iain rivel. Simon lapwepwe.
for-or vice preaident and fornar niniater of foreign affaira. who wan pre-

vented fro: conpeting in the preeidentiel election againat lenneth Kennde
by e dubioue nodificetion of the conatitution by the party in power. the
united National independence Party (UMP). a naneuver which. both in Zenbia
and abroad. wua viewed an a cynical atteqt to disqualify his.

Whether or not Preaident Kaunda obtaina a nejority in the caning electiona.
few obaervara think that he will be willing to take e beck aeat. 0n the
contrery. everything indicatea that he in resorting to an increeeingly arbi-
trary forn of WOMC. thereby following the exenple of the ujority of

32
roe omcm. not our
FOR ()FF’ICIM. USE ONLY

the African chiefs of state when they see their popularity and the people's
trust in than diminish.

At the same time as the presidential election on 12 December. the National

Assembly elections are to take place. The primary elections preceding elec-
tions for the parliamentary body have already been held.

According to the lesbian Constitution. the first three winners of the pri-
nary elections compete in the Assembly elections. ﬁavertheless. the Central
Omittee of the UM? can even rule out the winners of the primary elections
if it deems them to be "undesirable." This year. the UNI? eliminated 30 can-
didates who had won in the primaries. including former minister of finance
Arthur Nina. member of the last National Assembly and one of the most virulent
critics of the government. Elias Chipimo. general director of the Standard
Bank (Zambia) and one of the most representative members of business circles.

and Valentina Kayopa. who won a reputation in the former Assembly as a critic
of the government.

The» eliminationa definitely seam to indicate that the Zambian establishment
wants to have a mere "rubber stamp" Assembly emerge from the elections.

From Prodigality to Austerity

One of Zombie's main problems is that during the years following independence.
the country became accustomed to the idea that it was rich. The high prices
of copper on world markets then ensured the government of the receipts it
needed to cover its domestic expenditures and finance even the most sumptuous
imports.

The fall in the price of copper and the increase in prices of oil and other
imported products resulted in a sharp deficit in the balance of payments of
a country which had never felt the need to be thrifty or steadfastly seal:
out other possible sources of foreign exchange receipts.

This point is perfectly demonstrated by the operation of the governmental
machine. which is generally fairly inefficient and is even moreso in the
area of the planning of well-thought-out projects that might attract foreign
aid. Officials of the principal international aid agencies and ambassadors
from countries which grant bilateral aid almost all privately recognise that
if a project financed by aid should come to pass in Zambia, the Zambian
authorities genera) 1v expect the donor to furnish not only the financing
and the experts, but that it ntudy and plan the project, which all grantera
of aid. whether national or international. are increasingly hesitant to do.

Aside from the inefficiency of the governmental machine. essentially due to
an impracticable system in which the Central Con-ittee of the UNI? is supposed
to define policy and the Cabinet put it into practice (when in practice, both
are generally involved in a futile and morally devastating war). Zambia's
difficulties stem from its land-locked nature and its excessive dependency on

copper.

33
Iron orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

China's building of the Tarars railroad was to respond to a double objective:
improving Zambie's connections with the see and reduce its dependence on the
southern road network. It was a politically motivated project which it was
hoped would be beneficial in both areas.

The Lusaka and bar ea-Salaam governments thought that the railroad would give
Zambia means of political pressure to bring Rhodesia to repentance. while
strengthening political and economic ties between the two countries and open

wide the door to the economic development of the northern region of Zambia
and the southern region of Tanzania.

But things turned out differently. Practically none of these objectives was
attained. "hat is worse, by a twist of fate. the railroad (and the situa-
tion of the bar ee-Salsam'port) helped worsen relations between Lusaka and

bar es-Saiasm. with authorities froe the two countries blaming one another
for the poor performance.

At the time when President Kaunda made the decision to reopen the railroad
with Rhodesia. Zanbia's situation was desperate. The most crucial point was
foreign trade. No recent or certain figure is available. but according to
reasonable anti-ates. the country's foreign exchange reserves show a deficit
of about 150 to 170 million lovschss (1 liwacha - about 5.20 French francs).
The situation would be even worse if the foreign suppliers of recent imports-
hed been paid.

Actually, there is now a blockage of councrcial settlements going to foreign
countries on the order of 500 million kwachss. In other words. foreign sup-
pliers will have to wait 16 to 17 months before being paid.

but even if copper prices should experience a sudden increase (which a few
experts believe possible in short-range terms), Zaebia's foreign exchange
problese would not be resolved. Zambia's long-term indebtedness is esti-

mated to total some 1.2 billion kwaches. which represents the highest per
capita debt on the African continent. including Zaire and Egypt.

Horst Problem: Skilled Labor

In order to face the crisis, the RCH (Roan Consolidated Mines) and "OCH
(Nchsngs Consolidated Copper Mines) mining firms. both controlled by the
goverment. have made iepressive progress in reducing production costs and
have learned. more rapidly than the government itself, to live in the new
environment of austerity. The R04 announced modest profits for the first
two quarters and both the firms. the ecu and the N001, are resolutely seizing

the opportunity offered to the: by the sudden and fantastic increase in the
world price of cobalt. which is mined at the same time as copper.

The price rose as high as 33,000 kwschas per ton, making exports by air pro-
fitable. Plans are now well' underway for a considerable increase in the
production of that ore next year.

315
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR GYFICIAL “SB ONLY

however. :f one asks the officials of the mining firms in Lusaka or the
Copperbelt. they reply that the most crurlul problem they must solVe is not
the currently low price of copper or transport(lhelntter seems possible to
solve. not only by the opening up of the border with hhodeeia. but also by
the reopening of the denguela railroad which runs through Angola). Their
main concern is the steady drain of white skilled labor in industry.

Due to the rigorous policy of "Zambianlsation." the proportion of white
expatriates. which was 16 percent of the total labor force at the time of
independence in 1966. has now fallen to 7 percent. They still number some
6,000. The proportion of Zambians replacing the white expatriates has dropped
every year. reflecting the need for increasingly lengthy training so that
workers may occupy posts involving higher and higher levels of technology.

At the same time. this bears witness to the development of industry. which

has created new technical jobs that initially could be filled only by ex-
patriate technicians.

in the course of recent months. mining management has not been able to recruit

enough personnel to compensate for the departures of expatriates. which is
due to a number of reasons. particularly the poor financial situation of the
mines. This affects wages and the working conditions that they can offer.

But other factors present a negative image of Zambia. including the scarcity

of consumer goods in stores. caused by the lack of foreign exchange and the
lack of security. as wall as the spreading anarchy in the country. This
anarchy takes the form of armed robberies. whose number is constantly growing.

In addition. the recent antiwhits demonstrations caused by the Rhodesian
raids within Zambian territory can only heighten these problems.

Actually. a large part of Zombie's economy does not depend on the white
skilled labor; this is true only in the mining sector. A feeling of malaise
is therefore developing in the community of white farmers. The letter are
not very numerous. but they produce a substantial portion of the country's

food crops. Their massive departure would pose serious political and eco-
nomic problems.

For all of these reasons (not the least of which is President Kaunda's desire

to see a stable white conmunity remain. in keeping with his ideal of creating
a multiracial society). no country wants a settlement of the hhodeaisn ques-

tion and the pacification it would bring to the region more than Zambia.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux at Cie.. Paris. 1978

11.66‘
C50: 6400 END

35
roe omcm. use ONLY