APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100010002-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010002-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE 'GILY

JPRS L/8195
3 annuity 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
F000 No. 618

 

U. S. JOINT MTIONS mm SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL [BE (“LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010002-7
NOTE

JPIS publicationa contain information primarily fron foreign
newapapera. periodicala and booka. but alao from newa agency
trana-iaaiona and broadcaata. Hateriala from foreign-language
aourcea are tranalated; thoae from Engliah-language sources
are tranacribed or reprinted, with the original phraaing and
other characteriatica retained.

lieadlinea. editorial reporta, and material encloaed in brackets
l] are aupplied by JPBS. Proceaaing indicatora auch on [Text]
or [luci’pt] in the fire: line of each itea. or following the
laat line of a brief, indicate how the original infomtion waa
proceaaed. Hhere no proceaaing indicator ia given. the infor-
mation waa ail-arited or extracted.

Unfa-iliar nanea rendered phonetically or tranaliterated are
encloaed in parentheaea. Horde or nanoa preceded by a quea-
tion Iarlr and encloaed in parentheaea were not clear in the
original but have been aupplied aa appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notea within the body of an
iteI originate with the aource. Tinea within item are at
given by aource.

The contenta of thia publication in no way repreaent the poli-
ciea, viewa or attitudea of the 0.8. Govern-ent.

OOPYIIQT uws m muons manna: wmsntr OP
MRIIMS EPIDDWED all!!! 3mm M1“ 018821111“le
01’ THIS WEICATION ll mam MMICIAL I182 ONLY.
I. Palermo; OnamuIn-n liege
No.

     
   
  
 

   
  

l0. Puma/landed: Una No.

I; Sooner... Oc‘aaueuen Nalo aed We“ is. Type ol Report a Fund
Coveted

O. Pam-ma Oman-lance Sun and Addteee
Joint Publication Reaearch Service
lOOO North Globe load

Arlington. Vininia 22201

 
  
 
 

A. above

 

I}. Wanna Hence

a INC“

the report containo intonation from African and apecialized Heat European
publicatione and radio on political, econonic. and aociological developments.

I). In Verde and 0. met Analyeie. We. Deuvi'aese

  
    
   
    
    
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
   
   
  

Political Science Liner-African A“. __Ghana _Rvanda
Sociology __Ansola _Cuinea ___Sa1 Tone and
lconoeics Ben in _cuinea-Biuau P zinc ipe
Culture (Social Esotevena _lvoty Coaet X_5ener.el
Sciences) __Burundi _Kenya _Seycnellee
Technological x_Caleroon _l.eeotho ___Sierra Leone
_Cape Verde __Liberia _Sonalie
L Central African __Hade;aecar ___South Africa
aspire _Halavi _Sveziland
_Chad _Hali _Tan:ania
_Conoro lalande _Hauritiua _'l'ogo
_X_Congo _Houabique __Uganda
_Djibout1 __X_llalibia __Upper Volta
____Bquetorial Guinea _Niger _2aire
m. Hen-luve/O'tvthded Tet-e :332'“. :3::::: —M1.
___Gaabia _lhodeeia

"c cosn: held/Ceca. 02,SD,SC.SK
33. doubt-lily Sumo!

50R UFFHJMI. USE ONLY. Limited Nunbcr ol
Cantos Available From .II’RS

 
  
   

  
   
   

2|. .\'o. 9! Pan

runs to»: In a: nnoouceo "‘°"“'°‘ ""“"'

 

'0.- cute u -l(e. a 'l'
POR OFFICIAL 088 (Nb!

J'Pas L/8195
3 January 197

TRMSLATIMS (II SUB-WARM AFRICA
9000 No. 618

Canaan's

MIR-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Developent of Electric Power in Africa Described
(18111511125 81' mvm mount-m. Nov 78)..............

Description of urn». by Lnbert Konen

Inter-African Electrical Staff School. by locery 5y.
1!. noutonnet

liydroelectricity in Attics, by Jacques Prsncou

Aid to Preach-Spams Countries. by Antoine be Clerc

Europesn Invest-eat Isak been.

mum

AME!) been To Fight Against Foot-end Mouth Disease
(mucus 11(0le 51' murmurs, 15 Dec 78).........
M OFFICIAL 08! M!

m (cont-nu)

It”.

In m w
la Luna. Inn
8““. out (or Wm

Minn of but Port
m norm 3': mm. 1 Doc 78).........

_ b ..
m OFFICIAL US! “1.!

61
61
‘1

b2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN APPAIIIS

“WM 0? ELECTRIC ma IN ”RICA MSCRIBBD

Description of arm
Paris mwsrmzs 21‘ 1'!“va D‘OO'ﬂlE-HBR in French Nov 78 pp 807-808

[Article by Lestert Konan, general director of the Ivory Coast Electrical
Energy Cowany and honorary UPDBA president] '

[Text] It was as a tilid auditor that I attended, in the wake of the
Ivorian delegation, the seventh world energy Conference held in Moscow in
August 1968. The brilliant technological debate in which the qualified
representatives of the great industrial powers engaged in that place left
very lilited room for the energy problen in the Third ﬂorid. It is true
that we had been granted. outside the official conference, the opportunity
for about 30 auditors to nest in a snail classrooe of hount Lenin Univer-
sity in Moscow. The talks were to cone to an abrupt end, however, because
we were nrt on the priority list of current concerns. And yet our needs
were glaring; one-fourth of the world's population, that of the rich coun-
tries, shared three-fourths of our planet‘s energy resources. for examle.
electrical consumtion per resident and per year was more than 1000 tines
greater in Norway than in the Ivory Coast, but that was too far outside the
scope of the debates.

I had spoken in Budapest in 1971 following the u.s. delegate and I had
noted, as I was to repeat in Detroit in 1974. that the problem of our coo-
panfos, in developing tropical countries. are very far removed from the
swjects debated in the industrialized countries cosposing WIRE! [Union
of European Producers and Distributors], CIGRB [International Conference of

Large Electrical Systems]. the World Bnergy Conference, etc.

First of all. most of our installations are not as large as those of Rest-
ern industrialised countries, which does not reduce the problems to be
solved, however.

Considering the low consumption density of the areas served and the still
very low purchasing power of the people and their specific needs. as well
as our leagre financial possibilities, we lust strive for unim- equip-ant
and operating costs as such as possible. Accentuated by rapid growth in

I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USB MIX

this initial stage, problens of financing are such, in our countries in
unich everything has priority, that we are not always in a position to
adopt the scat scone-ital long-tern solution.

Equip-eat is operated under extra-sly difficult conditions, due to the
lac): of skilled labor, the lore than limited assistance of builders .‘o-
cated far frol our comtries. the harshness of the clilste and con-mica-
tiens coqlicated by distances and by a lack of appropriate leans.

The electrification of villages, which took place in Bumps in m al-ost
forgotten past age. is still totally lacking in our comtries and its
necessity is essential for our governaents in order to curb a rural exodus.
accelerated in our countries by the lack of industrial decentralization.
Jobs in the secondary and tertiary sectors are also concentrated in our
capitals. in which the populatial growth rate is such that it is difficult
for the develop-eat of our urban syst-s to keep pace.

One of the Iain difficulties which we encounter in our develop-ant is the
lack of skilled personnel. Although lost of our coq>anies have been prac-
ticing accelerated vocational training for asny years, needs largely exceed
available neam. Technical and scientific orientation is not yet very
widespread along our African youth. characterised fron an early age by a
traditional environ-ant. unlike due young lesterner who cons into contact
with technology from his birth and grows to in this environ-ant. The rapid
appearance of nev technologies, due to the high growth rate of energy needs.
thus requires frequent retraining and reeducation of our staff sewers.

The difficulties encountered at the level of workers and swervisors are
just as acute in the training of young African engineers. currently pro-
vided in ilestern universities or schools because of a lack of local scene.
mrearefevcandidatesinooaparisontothei-emmedsandtheprofuu
training. if it is of a very high level. does not always result in Meta
efficiency in taste currently assigned to than when they been. staff nea-
bers of our comanies.

This is why we organised technical day sessions in Abidjan in 1969. with
the help of ly French friends, and they had great response. This involved
the seating of officials of electricity coqanies and their engineers. our
advisorc, instructors and finally builders of electrical equip-ant for
the predation. transportation and distribution of electricity in our ne-
tions. This great nesting. which brought together English- and French-
speaking African countries as well as high-level specialists, was to give
rise to the idea of a technical mien of the sane nature, bound by for-a1
ties and capable of facing, as a result of its seriousness and scope. all
Mlic hearings related to our activities.

On 21 May 1910. representatives cf the electricity miss of ll African
nations est in Abidjan to establish this union and to stipulate as its
purpose the study of technical. ecomnic and social problem of the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production. transportation and distribution of electrical energy. in order
to proeots an effective development of amber countries in the interest of
the peoples involved.

It was entitled the “Union of Producers. Transporters and Distributors of
Electrical Energy of African Countries. Madagascar and Nauritius.” or 091m.
The Ivory Coast Electrical Energy Comany was then put in charge of draft-
ing proposed bylaws and internal regulations for the Union. I an especially
happy to quote here the words of uinister Diawara: "I see in your Union a
progressive instruent in the service of Africa, capable of asking its own
voice heard from now on in great international debates on questions of elec-
trical energy.“

Actually, I had to wait two sore years in order to be able to realise this
great hope of -y African brothers. i.e.. from the speaker's platform of the
eighth world Energy Conference in Budapest. But I must also say that I
never lacked encouragement and solid friendships down this long road. I an
thinking particularly of the support and advice provided by the Union of
European Producere and Dist: ibutors (UNIPBDE). Hr Decslle. the honorary
president of this Union. also made it a point to attend the 09m congress
held in May 1971 in Abidjan. And it is also in keeping with this line of
thinking that we were able to be present. in Septedaer of the seas year.

at the 15th congress of that very important association.

he of today. the Union includes representatives of the electricity companies
of the following countries: Congo, Ivory Coast. Caaeroon. Benin. Central
African wire. Gabon. Giana. Upper Volta. Mauritius. Liberia. Mali. Niger.
Senegal. Chad. Mo. Zaire and Rwanda.

The Union includes active masters. those of the aforenenticned ceqaenies.
but also affiliate asters who. without being official operators of our in-
dustry, perforn a job of technical and economic research and study for the
benefit of the electrical energy industry in the respective comtrias. As
nonrestrictive exasples. I will asntion: nanufacturers of diesel engines.
nanufacturers of electrical cables. network builders. etc. In order to
achieve its pump” UPDBA has: a supervisory board. a per-anent general
secretariat. study co-ittees and finally. its congresses and its general
assesblies. Union answers nest in a congress every two years. Since the
last congress in Dakar. they have net in a congress every three years and
in a general asseably every year. The Union's official languages are
french and English. The Union's headquarters are located in Abidjan. As
of this year. Mr Issa Diop. general director of the Senegalese Electrical
Snergy Distribution CoQany. has taken over me new presidency and has
thus replaced us in this position. which I have occupied since the estab-
lishaent of our Union. There are currently five study cos-ittees: their
nuber. authority and comesition are decided by the supervisory board.

In certain 68:50., the latter lay cell on specialists who say be selected
fr: non-Union assbers. he of 1918. official agencies were represented by:
a study ccauittee for standardization and basic research. a study co-ittee

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for inter-African cooperation. a study cos-ittce for rural electrification.
a study co-ittee for vocational training and finally. a study cosmittee
for bylaws and internal regulations.

it is not Iy intention to present here a detailed analysis of the work of
each of these co-ittees: however, I believe it is appropriate to give the
reader a few general ideas of the lost significant studies.

The simdy oo-ittee for inter-African cooperation is primarily devoted to
analysing the laws applying to each of the respective coapanies. It has
swseguently given consideration to interconnection possibilities at the
level of govern-ant and border regions. Placing itself on the Mann level.
finally. it has moo-ended mat Union aubers einultaneously pursue a
policy of perlenent contacts and bilingual training for nanagerial per-
sonnel.

The study co—ittae for rural electrification has had a particularly deli-
cats tad. In fact. with the official purpose of describing the bemfits
contributed by electricity to ell citizens of the seas country. problems of
priority. cost price. even equalisetion among the rate schedules of large
eagle-crates and those which can be applied to isolated rural areas neces-
sarily and quickly arise. The Ivory Coast's esperimce has been applied
in these areas.

Hy old friends know the enthusiasa with which i have always approached
probleaa of vocational training, whether it is a question of the establish-
Iant of .1 electrical trades center for workers and supervisors or the
training of engineers and ehinistrative staffs in Western comtrias. par-
ticularly in francs. That is, 1 have followed with very special attention
the eetabliahnent of a group of experts assignud to help us develop a upon
project ained at establishing a school for engineers in Africa. This ques-
tion, of vital iQortance for our countries and now on the way to beoowing
a reality. is also the subject of a special report and i will leave it up
to its authors to develop this latter.

Having said this, I could not silently overlook the isportant ties uniting
mm with any international organisations. notably WIPE“: it was in
1972 that a Winn-mosh coordinating oo-ittee was set up in order to
avoid diplication in the store of knowledge and to pro-ate its disseninetion.

Our UniOn enjoys advisory status with the United Nations Mutational. Scien-
tific and Cultural Organisation UNESCO) as well as with the United Nations
industrial Develop-ant Organisation (mum). 1t naintains solid relations
with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Developaent (tom). the
African Usvelopent Bank (M) and the United Nations econonic Oo-ission
for Africa (may. for the purpose of widening its audience. it reporu on
the develop-ht of its activities with other government institutions, such
as the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). the West African Bconouc Con-
ounity (and). the Inter-African Oo-ission on hydraulic Studies (ems).

the Senegal River Develop-ant Organisation (ems). the Niger River

6
M ONION USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cosuission, the Haghrebian Electricity Comission (COMELEC) , the Benin Elec-
trical Connnmity (C88) and the Econosic Community of Great Lake Countries
(CEPGL).

Tho UPIEA is also in constant touch with the International Comission for
Large Dans (CIGB), the International Conference of Large Electrical Systems
(CIGIIE), the Edison Electric Institute (EBI), the International Electrotech-
nical Coasnission (car), the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
finally, the World Energy Conference.

Similarly, the Union has maintained a continuous dialog with the British
Electrical and Allied manufacturers' Association (BEAM) and the Trade
Union Group of French Electrical Equipment Industries (GIHEE). The main
purpose of such a dialog is the adaptation of equipment nanufacturing to
predominant operating conditions in Africa.

since the establishaent of UPDzA, six congresses and general asseablies
have been held in the Ivory Coast (1970 and 1971), Mauritius (1972),
Liberia (1973), Zaire (1976) and Senegal (1978). The supervisory board
has met ll tiles: in Liberia, Niger, Senegal, Madagascar, Zaire, Ivory
Coast, 'nogo and Gabon.

As is apparent from this slightly tedious but necessary list, the UPDEA
has now been accpeted by the highest international authorities conceer
with our profession.

Howaver, in conclusion, it must be pointed out that the UPDEA is not a
political organization: it is essentially a union of engineers, technicians
and teenagers searching together for the best ways to develop electrical
energy on the African continent by reconciling the profitability require-
ments of our comanies with the general interest requirements of our various
countries.

Inter-African Electrical Staff School
Paris INDUSTRIES t'i' TRAVAUX D'OUI'RE-HER in French Nov 78 pp 862-86‘

[Article by aocary 5y, general secretary of the Union of Producers, Trans-
porters and Distributors of Electrical Energy of African Countries,
Madagascar and neuritius (UPDEA), and n. Bouronnet, expert with the Ivory
Coast Electric Power Coopany (EECIH

[Excerpt] The Union of Producers, Transporters and Distributors of
Electrical Energy of African Countries, Madagascar and Mauritius (UPDEA)

considers husan training a priority among eeny problaae. Significant
efforts have already been sade in Africa by coapanies producing and

distributing electricity to train their workers and supervisory staff
embers. In easy countries, all or alsost all needs are being set by staff

5
708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lelsbers who have recein training in schools established in Africa, but
the problen of Ianagonent remains.

at the present tins, young people who have chosen the profession of elec-
trical engineer lust take their higher studies abroad. host of then are
holders of scholarships granted either by govern-ants or by electricity
coepanies. but despite this, sons of then no longer wish to return to their
comtries. preferring to seek work abroad for ve"ious reasons. Others are
inclined to prolong their studies excessively end to pressturely take coe-
pluentary higher instruction in semantics. mug-sent, humanities, etc.

In addition, knowledge acquired in Europe or “rice is not always well
suited or i-ediately useful to young engineers for the basic tasks which
they will have to assume in their own countries.

This is why the UPM hes decided to establish in Africa a school to train
engineers for nesber coepanies. according to criteria sore in keeping with
heir needs. Beginning in 1974, UPDBA's supervisory board therefore coer-
sissioned its pernamnt comittee on vocational training to study the lain

lines of the project and to conduct a preliminary inquiry long newer
comanies concerning their needs for engineers. In 1975. the worn also
asked the International Union of Electric Power Producers and Distributors
(WIPBIB) to appoint an expert mission to conduct a feasibility study on
the school and to define the require-ants for its coepletion.

After examining the reports of the experts and consulting all UPDBA neabers.
the UPDEh's supervisory board decided the following:

The school will be established in the Ivory Coast. next to an electrical
trades center near Abidjan; it will offer preparatory instruction (1 year)
and the courses required for training electrical engineers (4 years).

Courses will be given in French or English equally.

Preparatory sectioas as well as sections of applied courses for graduate
engineers say be opened in other Union countries. It was decided that a
section of applied courses will be opened in Zaire, where specialised train-
ing in the area of hydroelectricity will be offered.

other sectims of applied courses may be opened later in various countries:
application of nuclear engineering, data processing, solar energy. etc.

The school will be open not only to engine-its of UPIBA sesaber comnies.
but also. according to procedures to be defined, to future engineers in-
tending to work in all occupational areas of electricity.

The school will keep possibilities open for providing continued training
of working technical staff eenbers and graduate engineers.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Heans Utilized for Preject Impleeentation

At the suggestion of UNIPBIE experts and in order to successfully carry out
the completion of its project. UPDEA set up a sponsorship cosnittee com-

posed of apnea members, representatives of najor European schools or insti-
tutions and international universities and organizations (UNESCO. UNIPBDE).

Hr Decelle, former UNIPBDB president, has been appointed chairman of this
counittee.

This canittee plays an advisory role for the UPDn's supervisory board
and the teen in charge of the project.

A work group derived from the sponsorship committee and particularly in-
cluding professors from the Lausanne Federal Polytechnic School, the Paris
Graduate School of Electricity and the Thales and Central London Polytech-
nic, has therefore been operating for several nonths in coordination with
officials of the project team.

The sponsorship couittee has therefore taken a very large part in working
out instruction sethods, the schedule of studies and progress, in defining
technical and teaching equipment and in the design of the buildings. In
addition, the sponsorship comittee will provide assistance in recruiting
and training teachers.

Project Consistency
Acceptance Capacity

The annual needs expressed by the member companies consulted by 0PM for
the 1978-1980 period vary from 44 to 68 engineers annually. It has been
decided that longer-tern studies in this area will be pursued in coordina-
tion with the educational eysteus in each respective country. But consid-
ering the rapid growth of electric power consmnption in African countries,
entailing a very considerable expansion of company staffs, it is conceiv-
able that the nulber of engineers needed for future years, beginning in

1984 (probable date of the first graduating class), will be higher than that
anticipated as of 1980.

aased on these considerations, the UPIBA has therefore decided to set the
nuber of students in each graduating class at 48, with 60 students in the
preparatory year. Since the length of studies is 5 years, including the
preparatory year, the school will have to accept 252 students on a contin-
uous basis. In addition, 32 places will be reserved for further training
of experienced engineers. Thus the planned acceptance capacity will amount
to 284 students.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9‘0“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Deecrlption of inetruction

The generel inetruntion offered er. the echool will be at e univereity level.
ee etipuleted by the verioue UPIEA euthoritiee. with etudiee being ninly
oriented towerd electricel engineering fro- the beginning. The echool will
eleo provide (or ell epecielieed end epplied technioel inetruction. ‘nu
echool will be originel in thet it will trein young engineere to be ine-
dietely "operetionel" within min. m totel couree of theoreticel

end precticel treining will be oli'icielly recognieed by en engineering
degree ieeued by the echool.

Enginoere will heve to be eble to epocieliee end technicelly edept in the
(ol'owing lein ereee:

Energy production: hydreuliceo thorIel (fuel oil. ooel. nucleer): dieeel
end gee turbine: end to follow the development of ell (one of new energy.

Blectric power treneportetionx interconnection etetione. dietribution
etetione: treneportetion linen: power treneeieeion.

Electric power dietribution: high-voluge. nediun-voltege end low-voltege
dietribution eyetene; eupply of privete reeidencee: public dietribution
etetionez eubecriber dietribution etetione: induetriel inetelletionei eub-
ecriber inetelletione.

Applicetion end uec of electricity: verioue electricel eechinee develop-
ing horeepower: lighting of buildinge: theml epplicetione: refrigeretion
end cold production: eir conditioning: electrocheeietry.

nenegeeent: thie treining will be eubject to very epeciel ettention.
Orgeniretion of Studiee

Linguietic 'i'reining

In view of the bilingual cherecter which the were wente to give to the
inetruction. it in eeeentiel thet the student he eble to teke ooureee end
expreee hieeelf in French end Englieh fro- the beginning of hie echooling.
'i‘hue there in good reeeon to errenge beforehend. in the preperetory ac-
tion, en inteneive period of linguietic treining for leerning the lenguege
to which he ie uneccuetoeed.

Courec of studiee
The generel 5-yeer plan of etudiee is euneriud in the teble on the pre-

ceding pege. The yeer'e vork ie errenged in three cyclee. within which
there ere three vecetion periode.

8
NR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Distribution of Cycles

We study cycles will be held in the esteblishnent. each lasting 11 weeks.

An ll-week work cycle will take place in a coapany. during which an engi-
neering student will perfor- an actual jobs at the end of the training
period. he oust write a report.

Teaching Methods
instruction has been classified into groups:

Social sciences. no defined because by being concerned with everything re-
garding nan in society in generel and in the oospany's organitation. they

group together linguistic training. seane of expression. econoeics. organi-
sation and hunsnities.

hauleestics. oriented according to their use in scientific end technical
areas. represent the basic instruction: of the engineer's first years of
treining.

The categories of “electricity“ end 'sechanics. thereodynasuics and chenis-
ury' (me) constitute the engineer's group of scientific disciplines.

Professional projects. whose purpose is to prepare the young staff seeder
for industrial life. oomrise three levels of concern:

1) An introduction to operations by way of perforling practical projects.
in the workshop or at the jobsite:

2) An introduction to supervisory operations. by way of exercises on or-
ganization, work preparation and taking charge of tens of workers.
will enable the student to becone aware of the difficulties encomtered
in this professional cateqory. which is the natural eidpoint between
workers and unageusnt personnel:

3) A preparation for design engineer functions, covering the technical
areas of electric power production. transportation and distribution
cowanies and developnent engimer.

The general and scientific instruction will be ministered as prescribed
in the for- of lecture-duonrtrations provided to the entire class.- super-
vised and professional practical projects will be carried out by sasll

groups of 2e. 16 or 8 students. Grow projects will alone represent lore
than helf of the time devoted to these disciplines.

The adjacent table shows the distribution of instruction.

9
708 OYPICML USE ONLY
70R onxcm. US! OILY

It is inportant to point out that professional projecu represent 45 percent
of use nwer of hours of instruction, with 50 weeke of training in the
ooqanies as well.

Project lsplenentstion
financing

Financing of investments, which will mount to spprorinately 3.5 billion

cu francs. will he provided by subsidies or lung-tern loans of interna-
tional organizations 0: own “are.

in addition, national or international cooperative organisations will sake
student fellowships availahls or will provido for we cost of certain
teaching positions, in order to offset operating expenses.

School Ter-

The opening of the school is scheduled for 15 Septder 1979 for a prepara-
tory year. Buildings will he coqleted in several stages and will he put
into service in accordance with the school's needs, as the first class ad-
wences. Instruction in the sane activity group will he administer“ in
the sue building: general instruction, aschanics, themdynnics, ch-ie-
try: electricity, technical studies; etc.

‘i‘he school will haw. a boarding systu, with students being housed in
roo- of four, two or one persons, depending on the year of their school-
ing. The school's students will enjoy the use of the grow installations
(swi-ing pool, all-sport sudiu) of the neigmoring trades catch

Operation of School

Instruction in each discipline will he provided by the Iejor European
sdaools or organizations whid: have concluded an agree-snt with the can:
[expansion unknown]: these are the “nuns rederal Polytechnic School,
the Paris Graduate Sdtool of Electricity, inndon Central Polytechnic and
Uhlnlz. Under this agre-ant, the contributing organisations will provide
for the for-ulation of courses, choice of equip-ant for laboratories. the
supervision and outfitting of the latter, the instruction no training of
African teachers in this discipline and possibly the ecceptmcs of gradanto
engineers for specialization.

The am is a specialiud institution of the um; it will tho be ad-
Iinistered by the W's supervisory board and a supervisory hoard which
will he weed of m roprvesentatives, individuals selected for their
constence in the area of electric power or scientific reeearch and repro-
eentatiwes of Eur. pean schools and organizations which havo signed instruc-
tion ogre-ants with the cam.

10
POI omcuu. US! on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The representatlvee of European schools and organlzatlons wlll thus be
able to rest assured that the objectlvos deflned ln the (renewal: of the
project are properly kept and wlll be able to take the requlred steps to
eohleve then.

The ﬁrst class wlll graduate tron the school ln 5 years and at least 5
years wlll be needed to deter-lne the value of the englneere tralned and
thu to establlsh the lnstltutlon's reputatlon.

Thus thls la a long-tar- task whlch has been undertaken. as always when lt
la a questlon of huan tralnlng, as recalled by thls old chlnese proverb:
'Plant wheat l! you are plannlng l year ahead, plant a tree l! you are
plannlng 10 years ahead. lnstruct the people ll’ you are plannlng 100 years
ahead.‘

Nydroelectrlclty ln Afrlca
Parls INDUSTRIES t'l‘ mvmx D'W‘ﬂlﬁ-HBR ln French Nov 18 pp Old-817

lhrtlcle by Jacques 'rancou, assletant chlel ol the as? [French Electrlc
Power Many! l‘orelgn Englneerlng Center (Departmnt of Porelgn Mlalrs
and Cooperatlonn

[text] Thls vast subject. whose analysls would greatly
exceed the scope of thls artlcle. has already been the
suaject of very lnterestlng approaches ln the speclal
lssue (Decesber 1974) whlch thls journal devoted to
electrlclty ln Afrlca. On the technlcal level. a lore
oomlete study should oonslder the character tralts whlch
glve hydroelectrlclty ln Afrlca a I'pattern" of lts own:
demand ls Iost ol’ten orlented toward 'baslc" energy.
whereas “peak“ sltes are belng sought lore and more ln
hlghly lndustrlallzed oountrles: ln addltlon. the geology,
hydrologlcal syste-s and avallable natarlals have a char-
acter that nest be reoognloed and thoroughly studled.

But lt ls especlally at the level of worker skllls that the
context ls fundamentally dlfferent from the European con-
text. For examle: labor-«generally not very skllledu
ls abundant. wheras 'aanagers' are extranely rare. The
upshot of all thls ls t..at technologles, patlently devel-
oped under other skles. are not dlrectly translerrable

and can even lead to serlom errors: the search for nec-
essaryuor ecom-lcally attractlve-adaptatlons wlll lead
the planner toward an 'Afrlcan style" of hydroelectrlc
develop-ant. whlch wlll beoose obvlous and be oonflrued
as experlenoe ls acqulred. ‘l'hls ls a matter for speclal-
lsts who wlll establlsh the project or take charge of lte
lqlenentatlon once the declslon to lnvest has been lade.
But what are the bases of a declslon? Hhat ls the Mrlcan

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OMCIAL 093 MY

'white coal“? And what econoeic advenuge can the com-
tries involved hope to derive? Thou are queaticns for
which a synthetic essay. inevitably very inerfect, can
provide eoee partial answers.

l. the African hydraulic Potential

no cleete inventory has been taken, but the econuically obtainable

African potential can be aetleeted at 1000 M [rerewatt-hourl in romd
aware. This approximticn is probably not too far off, since half of

this potential is concentrated on the lower course of the zaire River:

300 M for the Grand lnge project and 200 M for a develop-ant i-sdiately
upetrees. with the r-ainder being obtained froe the rapids aftcr Kinshasa
and Brazzaville. l000 ﬂh ie a considerable figure if we consider that

60 or 70 M are currently being obtained, already including several devel-
cpeente of. respectable siae.

this is eleo a considerable figure if we try to ccepere it to the hydroelec-
tric possibilities of the entire world: they are even lees well known than
thoee of Africa. but it is believed that they could be on an order of

3000 to £000 m for still mused ad ecomeically obtainable resourcee.

And yet the )000 African 1": will be relatively ineigniricant in rulation
to the «true energy-coneuing hmger which hee gripped are world: epeah-
ing only of electricity ccnsqtion. serious eetimtes piece it or approxi-
Iaately 25,000 m by the year 2000.

African hydraulics thus contribute approximately 4 percent to world elec-
tricity production, an initially dieappointm proportion. but which has
as its corollary the conviction that ﬂiese reeonrcee should be utilized
within the near future.

'l'hie ie in en 'ideel' world, it ie true. unfortunately core hypothetical
than obtaining 1000 M in Africa. . . .

Still. in 61. world such as 'it ie. the develop-ant of thie storehouse of
energy is currently eaking vigorous strides. which will probably continu
to accelerate.

2. Distribution of Resources

One part of the African mm: is coQoeed of deeertas another part is
feced with the dietreesing probl- of water reeourcea which are inadogute
for satisfying eseentiel M and hydroelectricity will find no applica-
tion there.

if mace are thus distributed very unequally. they neverthelese enjoy
an iqaortant geographic advantage: lost high-output and worthwhile sites
are looted a short distance fro. the ooaet: unhoure, Saundra.

12
m OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ahosoebo. Senega. Ogooue. Xouilou md lnge, just to mention a few enemies.
This energy can be transmitted at relatively low expense to the vicinity
of a port end can be considered ”super-table.”

3. Energy-Need. Energy-Resource

Certein Mricen nations eust therefore censure oil in order to meet their
needs; others will find en inportent contribution to these needs in hydro-
electricity: finelly, others possess e very abundant store. which eey be-
cone one of the driving forces of their economies: this is whet we will
call the. energy-resource.

The table at the end of this article is coepiled on the basis of world
statistics end classifies the various comtries in decreasing order of
their electrical consuwtion in relation to their gross netionel product
[GNP].

1‘hese statistics have several gaps end the figures, difficult to comile.
are provided without any guerentee of their eccurecy: somtines they vary
appreciably fron one source of informatics: to another end undeserved eccu-
racy nus: not be attributed to the values listed. rather the entire list
lust be considered sore quelitetively as furnishing orders of engnitude.

‘X‘he countries heve been arrenged in four groups: sure then 300 m
[kilowatt-hour] per r 1000 GNP: between 300 end 150 him: between 150 end
75 Why end less then 75 huh per r 1000 am.

An initiel observation d-ends recognition: there is no correlation (in
the erithletic sense of the tern) between e comtry's econoeic level end
its electricel conswtion. Saudi Arabia end Norwey. with coQarable
eccnoeic levels. consuee lo huh per 3’ 1000 on one hand end Dore then
500 kﬂh on the other, end the reasons for this ere obvious. It may also
be noted thet Prance, among highly industrialised netions, turns out to

be perticulerly thrifty with electric power: in this letter each politicel
entity hes its own orientetion.

If electricity conswtion cannot therefore be considered e berteemr of
prosperity. it is nevertheless apperent that developed countries utilize
their hydroelectric possibilities until their energy needs are setisfied
or until national resources ere exhausted.

Developing countries are at the dawn of utilizing this natural weelth end
it is interesting to note the piece of African netions in the clessifice-
tion shown: rare at the top of the teble, they are the Iejority in the

lest group.

It is obvious that “is end Rhodesia owe their position in the first
group to the recent ooepletion of a single sizable hydraulic develop-mt:
and if zeirewereoo have eccess toeorrow to the energy free the lnga 2 de-
velop-ent (9.6 11th), it would love to the heed of the group.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I183 MY

Not surprisingly. along the countries with very low consmtions ere:
Chem Upper Volta. Mauritania and Libya: but also countries considerably
better endowed by nature: Madagascar. Congo and Guinea. in which connec-
tion it say be wondered if they are not thm neglecting an inortant
privilege.

4. Cost of Develop-eats

If we divide the cost of a develop-ant by its ennual potential productivity.
we obtain a “per th-yeer' price, the cost i-sdiete criterion of the in-
trinsic value of the sites, at least insofar as the production of “basic“
energy is concerned.

This criterion can very brosdly between P 0.20 and P 2.60 (l978 W). the
range within which it is situated.

It is also a current practice to comers the hydraulic develop-ant with an
equivalent thernal plant: the coweriscn shows (with very rare esceptions)
a higher invent-ant in the hydraulic develop-ant then in the therlsl plant.

If we divide this higher investnent by the annual fuel savings. we obtain
an approximate picture of the developoent‘s rate of profitability, which
only a ccquete ecomeic study can furnish with accuracy.

The npproxiaste picture is sufficient to comers various hydraulic develop-
cents and this is the purpose of the table at the end of this article.

In the first part of the table. about 15 French river develop-emu (Rhine
and alone) have been considered. whose respective costs have been 'updated'
as of 1 January 1979. If they had not elresdy been coqleted. these devel-
op-nts would no doubt still be plamed (even concurrently with nuclear
develop-ants) and thus they represent a valid Buropean reference. A slight
variation in the figures say be noted. with averages being established at

P L20 for the 'kIm-year' and at 12 percent for the approxiaate rate of
profitability.

Sons African develop-antswhich have been planned. are underway or recently
put into service. have been classified in the second part of the table.

The reader will probably regret not seeing so. Wt develop-ants
there (lariba, Seed el hall, Ahosubo. Kafus. Gabon-Bases). those demonic

data we were unable to find.

even incleete, the classification is particularly significant: exceeding
or nearly exceeding the luropeen reference are devour-ante with generous
hydrology and falling below this seas reference are developente with Issgre
hydrology. This is basically only a massrical espressicn of a truth of

be Palice: hydroelectricity is. above all. a question of now. (The fig-
ures regarding due equivalent ther-al plant and fuel savings are those of
unearticlebyﬂrmgerﬂillotandkasquesnpertetinwis 1m.)

1‘
roe OFFICIAL use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. the third part concerns development-resources, i.e.. those whose
capacities exceed the media-tern needs of their indicts environment and
which are justified only by exportation or the simultaneous establishment
of a consuer industry. whether domestic or foreign.

In this case, there is no longer any equivalent thereal plant. since the
hydraulic developeent does not meet a need: and it nay be considered that
the savings is of ”ex Europe“ fuel, whose price is generally much less
than diet of “ex Africa' fuel.

'Do the extent that these simlifying hypotheses are accepted, the energy-
resource is thus heavily penalised in relation to the energy-need and will
rennin the attribute of very high-value sites.

Experience proves that such sites actually exist in Africa and we have
listed the figures for the Grand Inga project next to Inga 2 and Song-
boulou: although completion cannot be considered i-Iinent. we could not
speak of an energy-resource without sentioning this exceptional potential.

It is possible to install at Inga, in a single plant, 40.000 an [expansion
unknown], which would produce 300 ‘rﬂh annually. absolutely guaranteed.
Ilpluentation is anticipated in a gradual fashion, in 13 identical in-
stall-ants, each producing 23 M. In oil savings, figured at 9.7 oentioes
(l978) per huh, the first install-em; would be paid off in 4.5 years.
whereas each of the following 12 installments would pay for itself again
every 10 mnthsl . . .

S. nigh-Voltage Power Transmission-~8nergy Carriers

One of the recognised advantages of electric power is in the apparent
ease with which it can be transeitted; and actually. in European countries
where networks are very dense and distances short. this appearance is not
Iisleading.

But the case is cospletely different when lines have sore modest capacities
and especially when distances are on the African scale. . . .

If we wish to go free the site of production to a distant point of consulp-
tion (let us say 1000 kiloneters) without axing it necessary to provide
inter-ediate breaking stations. the technical and sconoaic solution con-
sists of rectifying the current in order to trans-it it 'continuously."

It is still necessary to lake sure that the final result [hydraulic in-
stallation 9 conversion stations 0 line! remains favorable. In such a
representative case. the ecomelc studies on the installation and line
should be conducted at the sue tile and. in order to avoid any surprise.
the respective business transactions should also be concluded at the seas
tile.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The final result may reveal that the cost of the line is by far the largest,
which leads to the conclusiono-in the African context and contrary to ac-
cepted ideae--that electricity is poorly transnitteda in any case it can-
not be exported in this for: to other continents. which leads to e consid-
eration of using other energy carriers.

Uraniue enrich-ent by gee diffusion would probably be the ideal carrier:
this technique, wnich consues a crest arount of electricity. has been per-
footed: but the motion. posed are of a nature other then technical.

Electrolytic hydrogen could be another possibility, currently the subject
of nueroue otudiu. But the manner of consideration differs notably fro-
one cantinent to the other.

Europe. which could use and transport hydrogen in the gaseous state. has
available only expensive km and questions of yield are therefore of price
inortence.

liftcla in the vicinity of the nost attractive hydraulic sites. could
produce ’enportable' hydrogen beginning today: but how would it be trans-
ported? Liquid hydrogen? hydrides? The question reeains open.

without ruling out any solution. it is obvioue that the met elegent one
would be to undertake a redistribution of the cards internationally. which
would lead to the establish-ant of large energy-conﬁning industries in
the inediate vicinity of the best energy sources.. . . end Africa would
then receive excellent cards in the gun.

6. The “Snell hydraulic” Installation

He have seen that the nost econo-ical end nost powerful sites are fortu-
nately located within a relatively short distusce fro. the coastline
(energy-resource). but also that transmission of this energy to the in-
terior is very expensive.

Horeower, it is generally agreed that the interior of the veet continent
has attractive end sizable sites. the most obvious or which are already
being developed (energy-need). But still because of the cost of trans-is-
sinn. their “effective radius' will be ell the core li-ited as their in-
trinsic value is lees exceptional.

Does this ween that the rest of the continent is dooeed to burn diesel oil

in order to satisfy a generally Iodeet and very scattered demand? nothing
is less certain end snail hydraulic installations (fro. loo hi! to l or 2 30')
should provide an attractive solution when water resources are adequate.

A paradoxical end el-ost vexing observation lay actually be made: in
Vrence (where penetration of the m syste- ie coqlete), about a thouund
hydraulic installations of less than 1 is! are operating to the satisfaction
of their users. who would otherwiee abandon the- in favor of the car

16
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
POR OPﬂClAL USE ONLY

supply: in Africa-where thermal energy in ntlll such mm expensivnusnall
hydraulic installations are extremely rare.

This gap, eurprising at firet. has its reasons:

In France, because of the predoainance of theml power and thanks to a
very cteete transaisnion ayetas. hydraulic energy is always "aarketable"
and adapting to the irregularity of hydrological systesn is easy. In
Africa. on the contrary. where guaranteed energy is sought. it sust be pos-
sible to have available a constant flow of water or to provide an aaeo-
ciated thersal installation.

ncomaically. the studies to be conducted for prospecting a site and set-
ting up a project are not proportional to the power of the develop-ant:
in the case of asall installations, their expense nay becosa prohibitive.

It is not less a fact that the eaall hydraulic installation is currently
experiencing a very justified renewal of interest and that it say likely
offer attractive solutions in Africa: in this journal, H. P. Genin'e
article discusses some of then.

But the path is comletaly virgin and hfrica is huge. . . . Site-by-site
prospecting is out of the question. The problea deaerves-oin ay opinion--
to be approached by an “in abstracto“ study as coeplete as possible before
eﬂarking on practical solutions.

1. lqortance of hydrological Heasuramnts

He had the opportunity to observe earlier that the value of a developaent
(snail or large) was directly related to the flow of the river or strea-
in question. his is an obvious fact, but who is clearly aware of it?

It happens very often that once the structure has been put into operation,
the hydrology turns out to be different fros the “planned“ hydrology. The
planner. who can do nothing about this. will too readily be held respon-
sible, since surprises in this case are always bad surprises: if there is
less water than anticipated. the operation'e econosic outcooa asy be
jeopardized: on the other hand. if there is store. there will be regrete
over underdevelop-ant and of thus losinq particularly attractive earginal
production.

‘I'here nay be even sore serious fears: insufficient disensioning of the
spillway gate. which is often a difficult and always expensive structure.

For exasple. the Kariba site was faced with the 'aillenial' flood beginning
the first year, and the 'deca-sillenial' flood the second year . . . which
leans. to put it are alsply. that the hydrology of the uteri was defi-
nitely not well known at the tiso. It was necessary to repair the desage.
9° ova: calculations. plans and specifications in the aiddle of a disaster
and redisension the gate on a lamer scale. All this is now just an

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

anecdotal sundry. but what would it have been if the 'decacnillenial“
flood had not occurred until 4 years later. after the da- wes coapleted
and filled? . . .

better knowledge of hydrological systaes is baric for productive water use.
an essential resource of a nation: and data collection is a long-tern proj-
ect to which all of its deserved imrtance is rarely granted: this re-
quires a responsible person in charge. a little attention. Iuoh knowledge
and even such sore perseverance, but very little eoney.

8. Transfer of mhnical Capital

historically, hydraulic energy is the only technology to have widely pre-
ceded industrial civilisation: it eainly requires intuitive but practical
concepts: pressures. heights. flows, all visible quantities whose leaning
is insdiats. Pros: this standpoint, it is the opposite of classical

thermal energy. which is accessible only at the price of high-perforeance

equipeent, the result of all types of studies which are far fro- being
intuitive.

The transitional process leading to nuclear thereal energ$ is even sore
accentuated: the phenoesna which take it poasible to harness nuclear
energy can be discovered, understood and essieilaud only as a result of
long and difficult studies and the reactor itself is filled with sophis-
ticeted equipment eeasuring quantities which are very nysterious at first
sight.

Thus besides purely econoeic aspects. hydraulic energy is the only type
(along with the wind-ill . . . ) to hold the notable trap card of sin-
plicity. ‘l‘husuand this is even truer of the “shall-hydraulic installa-
tion'--it offers to international cooperation one of the surest ways of
tackling its eain problem the transfer of technical capital fro- indus-
trailieed nations to developing nations.

Yes: hydroelectricity is an encellent card in the one of Africa.

18
roe omcuu. 052 MY
uocnw .8:-
caaoo unavo-
9:.

new

939.:

can: .338-
9.0.5393:-

3.559
093’»-
p

p
o 80-!
0009 tau
0. 0.8

a
w
0 0
«5000090095

p
U

0

O

nauo\o (>43 c>‘o c>35ao¢ntn «’09:: U‘th)

POI-POOH
uqbouulouwtnorlonyownu

0|

H‘
.00...

9&5
o.
0.00

33.0
13.8
19.3
6.7
17.3
6.2
11.5
0.5
31.0
28.0
11.0
76.0
8.0
5.7

[table menu“ on following page]

20

2

57.0
39.0
500.0
192.0
501.0
70.0
105.0
64.5
450.0

17.3
144.0
2146.0
58.0
74.0
349.0
421.0
321.0
8.0
275.
1675.0
2.4
179.0
4.5
188.0
12.0
37.0
2.0

60‘
20.0
22.0

218.0
13.8
11.2
20.0
60.5
18.0
13.0

6.0
15.0
12.0
69.0
36.0

6.4

2.3

’0! OFFICIAL 088 081!

D

g.-

which.”
oomoyo—ouoo

0‘

w
‘U‘H H”
UFO-‘UQOQNHN
000.0 .000

U

33
.
wououonBOOOOOAuooa oooaooouo

O

~|

N

.-

OOHUPOHUIHr‘O OUPOOOO

p

O O

o o o a
OU~IO~IUDO~IGM§

0

175
167
166
161
156
154
152
152
151

150
146
145
143
140
131
131
128
125
120
117
112
112
111

93
81

75
75
73
72
72
71
65
61

53
53

49
39
37
35
Electric Favor. continued

'Nigoria
0mm
'Contral African alpira
Indonesia
'Nigar
'chad
'Uppox Volta
*Hauritania
'Guinoa
‘Libya
Saudi Arabia
2812 2.5.6228 8 2.8.3.28 .29.:

 

82 2.22 3.2 «a 22. 322 22 22 A222 6.28 5282 2.6..
can 022 3.22 3.9.2 .2. 38 82 2.8.2 2.8.2 :38 «53:92 238
82 $2 8.2 23 o..- 88 2.2 2.5 So 238 .032 8.2.2.
28 32 8.2 8.2 2.. 88 82 82. 3o 8-8 >292 25-
one 3 3.2 2. 2.2 2.2 2. 222 82 .25... «n2... 8 9.2.6.
.3 32 8.22 32 So 822 no... In 82.2 238 as.» 9.88
2222 2.8 8.22 on... 282 982 8. 222.2 82.2 823 2 5322
v82 32.5 .6222
22 8.2 32.2 33. 222.2 82.22 28:88:: 232.
8 2.2 . un 2 2.3 32 3a 2 .||.||82 2 18.2 9.262322
82 2o .. moo $2 82 32.2 03 822 28.0222
82 no .. 2.8 92 «2 32.2 80 22.. 238.286
222 S . 2.8 2.3 32 82.2 .8 1.252 2:!
.22 co .. «3 man 82 82.2 93 2225. 22225.3:
.22 2.2. . v.3 2.2 32 a8 32. 2262 229.8228
222 S2 .. 22a 8. 2.22 22.2 82.2 .85. 8.552.986.2282
22 3 .. 2.2.... $2 32 23 82. 2.92.2 $22.8
222 m2 . 08 2.9 on" 32.2 82.2 282 23.7208
o2 22 . 8o 3. 22 22 .2 22 . 2 28.2.. 22.8503».
62 8 .. 8n 2... $2 28 82 825. 258383
:2 «a . c8 28 82 .23. 2 03 825. 2.5.2....
3.2 8 .. 8o can 82 80 2 2o. 2 2252 2282.88!
32 $2 .. 8a 2.8 M20” 2 3». 2 2.2. 58522.26
52 no 2. a 8... 22 225. 228.2668
a two: 235» 2.2 cod 2.. we: :22}: E 3. 2.22126.
.33 2.3.8 is... .2 .98 3.223 8.55.25. 23.3.23
«25.

22:22 hmuta 822222322 822222322
22.53... 286 2.52:. 28232262 323225
"union: 1‘!»
1: Instant“
POI OIHCXAI. III! MY

Aid to Punch-spouting Countrioo
'orio tumours I? mvwx o'wm-m in Punch liov 70 pp Gal-883

(Artioio by Mtoiho Lo clorc. oooiotaut airoctor of tho Control fund for
loan-i: cooporationl

[Nut] At tho m of world war n, 'ronco docidod to inlooont an activo
policy or oocial ond oomooic dovolopoont in ouroaharan African oomtrioo.
1'hio policy on haood on tho law of 30 April 1946. which providoa for tho
ootahlioh-ut o! opocilic otmcwroo for financing dovolopnt invoot-onto.
1'huo tho lnvoouont ma (or male and Social Dovolopout mum no
ootohliohod. Vhich no (clique by tho Aid and Cooporation tuna (PAC) ond
tho Control fund for Music Oooporation (coco).

Tho purouit of thio policy outailod a opocial oftort in tho oroa o! oloc-
trio povor. rho avoilahility of oloctrical rooourooo in outriciont quon-
titioo ond at roooonahlo prieoo io actually ono of duo audition for
omic dovoiopoont. In tho yoaro following tho vor, tho avoilahlo oloc-
tric povor o! mtrioo voo lav. Only a tow largo citioo onioyod panic
diotrihutioo. Thoro no proctically no diotrihutioo in Iinor citioo and
thio voo om truor in rural ca-nitioo.

franco°o otfort in pro-otinq tho dovolop-ont of oloctricity took tho tor-
of pmjocto which introduood: tho our in tho tochnical aroa: noon and
thou MC in tho oroa of financing, by ooono or ouaoidioo and loan vith
opocial condition: on! tho Control PM (or We Oooporatim and tho
l'roach banking not. in tho aroa of timing, by mono or loono.

Aloo oddod to an. ortort vao that of alroody ootohliohod privoto cor
panioo: loot African ﬂour and Bloctricity Ooqauy in oohor ond tho Bloc-
tric Favor one itotor many of Mopocor. (or mlo.

rho otrort undoruhon by Ironch Mlle authoritioo involvod tho ootoblioh-
noat of inotitutiono noodod for tho dovolopoont or oloctricity. tho financ-
ing or otudioo m invoot-ooto out! tho Anaheim or tochnicol aooiounco
in tho oporation of who. 1'ho rooulto obtoiood ooro oigniriooot.

for oxoqalo, ‘l'ahlo l providoo a gonoral viov of tho growth of ooorgy pro-
duction in o oortoin ni-hor of contaro during tho loot 20 yooro (in (III).

(or o hottor idoo of tho oizo o! thooo min. oo- choractoriotic
dato (Tohlo 2) for who at tho- io providod in of 31 nocoohor 1916. o:-
copt (or othor indicotiono liotoa in poroathoooo).

26
M OFFICIAL 038 on!
NI OPHCIM. 088 MY

fab1o 1.

1955 1960 1965 1970 1976
Abtojan. tuturconhootod ayatoa 70 200 440 900
Dakar and Lntorconnootod contoro 72 145 232 330 469
sdaa (Comoroon). Donna-scoo-

Yaouhoo 1ntoroonnoctod ayatoa 4.9 0970 1065 1100 1241
uhrovnlo -.. 5 19 47 250
u'ojo-ana -.. 1.7 18 30 39
Many 1.7 6 15 33 52
Ouagadougou 0.6 5 14 10 31

O rho high incroaoo notoo 1o oxp1o1noo by tho fact that tho Aluca- punt
won out into oporatlon.

 

 

 

Tab1o 2.
Inatallod Enorqy

Favor htttod SubocrLboro Turnovor'

(no!) (can)
tvory Coast 512 1115 166,300 20,900
Upper Vo1to 20.000 59 11.705 2.204
mu 40.305 80 25.725 4,090
"19o: 22.104 7‘.’ 16.624 2,941“
some“ 138 469 136.587 9.157
'nogo 13.700 (77) 116 (77) 18.303 (71) 2,000 (71)
m (Juno 1917) 380 1320 78,837 11,784
Congo 42.500 113 23.256 3.190
Gabon 205 (17) 320 21.115 (77) 9,100 (77)
Chad 21.4 55 5.614 2,066“

——_—————-——-———

O In annou- or am tranco; tho an franc 1o uorth 0.20 n and 0.00 50.8.
”apt for mu. 1n 31111ono of 3mm francs: tho Hanan franc to
word: 0.10 P? and 0.002 50.5.

0' zloctr1c1ty turnovor on1y.

I. actuator-ant o! 1mt1tut1ono Nocouary (or Dovolonnt of B1octr1c1ty
notoro ”so-hung the varLouo aopocto o! Pronch £1nanc1a1 aid. 1: 1o uaofu1
to brtony roca11 tho coMlttono under vh1ch organ1ut1¢na 1n chargo of
products“) and dtotubutmq o1octrtc1ty voro ootabuahod and dovolopod.

In tho yoaro Manly £o11ov1ng tho var, than won only a tow doctri-
ca1 dtotrtbutlon coqanioo 1n Atr1ca. ntnly to tho 1am coaau1 c1t1oo.

25
'0'! OFFICIAL US! MY
POI OHICIAL I18! 0!!“

in their ebeence. the production end dietribution o! electricity were pro-
vided by me governeent.

The effort underteken by Prench public euthoritiee wee prieerily intended
w eeteblieh electricity comeniee where there were none. Theee coqeniee
were eetebliehed on the mdel or uni-public oorporetione. They hed terri-
toriel euthority or federel euthority when the eeteblieheent of e terri-
toriel etreoture wee not werrented. Ihue (or emle. the Ivory coeet
Plectric Pour Coqeny. the Guinee electricl Power W. the Blectric
Power Cogeny of MP (Prench aquetoriel Mrice) end the Blectrio Power
coupeny of nor [Prench Meet Atricel were eetehliehed, juet to untion e
Pew. The etrocturee of theee ooweniee hed been designed to bring together
ell pertiee concerned with the develop-mt of electric power:

Ueere firet of ell. eeinly locel intereete: the Pederetion or the ear or.
APP. territoriee. co-unitiee end privete etochholdere:

A technicel orgenieetion: the Prench electric Power Coqeny:

Pinenciel orgenieetione: Pins end the Centrei Pund for commie Coopere-
tion.

The independence of the conntriee wee ecooqenied by e duel developent.
On one hend. federel miee geve wey to netionel coqeniee. Thue be-
giming with serum: leepeneion ml. the Heuritenien Electricity
coweny. the electric Power May of Heli. W (Volten Plectric
Power Coqenyl end nxczmc [Niger Plectric Power WM] were eetebliehed.
sieilerly. the zlectric Power Coqew of m wee repleoed by the Chedien
Blectric Power Coqeny. the Centrei Mricen Plectric Power Ooqeny end the
hetionel Plectric Coqeeny of me w.

an the other hend, there m e greduel netionelieetion or theee coqeniee.
with the govern-mt elone, or eleoet elone. toting control of thee. Thie
policy wee e reeult of the govern-ente' concern to entruet thie inortent
eector of the econoey to netionel otticiele. ‘lhie wee done in verioue
weye, either by repurdteeing the stock held by the non-netionel public
etockholdere air-PAC end the Centrel Pmd for mic cooperetion. or by
recovering comeeeione. ei‘ter negotietione. in the ceee o! privete on-

peniee.

The finenciei efﬁort mderteken by Prench ”lie euthoritiee to help eet‘b-
lieh theee coweniee wee eigniticent. ‘i‘hne the inweet-ente node in theee
meniee by PAC (or PIQS) end the Cmtrel Pond for manic Cooperetion
Iey be eetileted ee followe:

with regerd to nus. ebont P 20,300 fro- ite origin until 1960, when PAC
wee eetebliehed.

with regerd to PAC. P 1.25 million eince the eeteblielnent of thie and
in 1960 to 31 Decoder 1911.

26
'0! OMCIAL US! MY
'0'. OIIICIAL US! ONLY

with regard to the CCCB. about I “.277 oillion of its own funds fros its
origin to 31 Detedier 1977.

The amnt of these investments eey appear rather modest. uowmr. it
should not be forgotten that they were chiefly sade in the first years of
operation of these «monies. at s tine when the value of the franc was
higher.

n. financial Aid

french aid in this area has had two esin orientations: the financing of
studies and the financing of invest—nu.

Financing of Studies

This action is fundanental. It detenines the develop-ant of electricity
in a nation by asking it possible to develop invesuent projects. The fi-
nancing provided involved invesuent studies and general studies.

As their me indicates. investsent studies are intended to develop in-
vest-eat projects. They say even include opening a file for a call for
bids. Aid to finance these studies takes on even greater importance as
projects. eepecially in the production sector. beooeo larger and the cor-
responding studies beco— lore expensive. The develop-ant of hydroelectric
energy. with the very high invesuente required. explains this trend. .ong
others.

In the area of hydroelectricity. research studies on sites have sade it
possible for monies to acquire inventories of their potential resources.
in addition to invest-ant studies. we lust also mention the financing of
general studies. which enable a producer of electricity to orient his
policy. These consist of studies on conswtion. business transactions.
rate scheduling and invest-ent progress. The inortanos of these studies
sust not be underesti-sted. They detenine the validity of policies fol-

lowed by mics.

Coneidering their indirectly profitable nsture. these studies were lost
often financed by noes or PAC. for lack of financing by oospanies and the
Central fund for Econonic Cooperation. a lending organisation which was
practically not involved in this area. As of 31 necener 191$. financing
granted since 1960 by PAC amounted to P 4.80 nillion for general studies
and to r 1140 sillion for project studies. It would also be appropriate

to add to these figures the subsidies. endowuents end advances granted by
noes. which have wanted to approxieately r 51 sillion.

financing of Invesusnts
1) This is quite obviously the area in which french financial aid has

played the sost ivortant role. In this regard. it say be observed that
mtil recently foreign financing of electricity comanies was alnost

27
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OHICIAI. 038 MY

exclusively provided by french resources alone. This aid was oainly in
the forts of loans fron the Central Fund for acute-it Cooperation. In fact.
to the current that investsents in the electricity sector are profitable.
it uses justified to allocate reidmrsable resources for their financing.

in addition to loans froe the Central fund for Boom-it: Cooperation. how-
ever. in certain cases there were also subsidies fron uses or advances
with favorable conditions from rac. when a project’s nore reeote profit-
ability involved a reduction of financing charges. Thus the first hydro-
electric projects of Djoue in the Congo. tdea in Caeeroon and Great falls
in Guinea were originally financed by "(is and the Central Fund for too-
noaic Cooperation. even eore recently. PAC and the Central fund jointly
participated in financing the first installments of the Vridi thereal
power station in the ivory coast and in financing the Selingue Dan in Fall.

In addition to this financing by PAC and the Central fund. for several
years there have also been private credits guaranteed by CGACB [expansion
unknown] in the fora of purchaser or supplier credits. The provision of
guarantees by CNAC: is decidod in cooperation with PAC and the Central
fund in order to assure consistent financing granted to electricity
coapanies. In addition. Premh aid very often takes the for- of joint
financing-~purchaser or supplier credits and credits fro- the Central
?“ or 'ACe

The increase in the cost invest-ant has nade this type of financing very
frequent. since the Central fund and PAC clone could not provide financing
of larger and larger investments.

Joint financing operations with bilateral or Iultilateral aid organiza-
tions have also lultiplied recently for this reason. Thus french financ-
ing has been coﬁined with that of organizations such as the European In-
vesuent Bank [BIB]. the world ﬂank. the African Develop-ant Bank. the
m lllecmstruction Credit Bank] and Arab funds.

for eagle. it was under these cusditions that the largest hydroelectric
installations were financed in recent years: Selingue in Mali. Song-
iculou in Cameroon. ‘i‘aabo in the Ivory Coast, Sonichar in Niger. On the
other hand. the H’Bei develop-ante in Gabon and the Buyo hydroelectric
plant were eleost entirely financed by resources of french origin. in ad-
dition to local resources.

In joint financing operations. the Central fund tries to facilitate the
provisicn of various types of financing every ti- that this became nec-
essary. Several omrations were thus able to be set \p as a result of its
interventicn. Thus in the case of the financing for the Song-Mimi dal.
at the request of the Cueroonian Covert-mt the Central Pond served as
liaison for a certain nuber of financial organizations such as the 818
and Arab Funds. Thus it facilitated the establishant of a round-table
conference which lads it possible to provide financing for that installa-
tion. estieated at sore than so billion GA francs.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’OR OFIICIAI. USE ONLY

we would have a false picture of the financing set up in the electricity
sector. however. if we did not point out that electricity production cou-
panies hays participated in financing their own sizable invesuents by

way of self-financing. in its capacity as amnistrator of these con-
panies. the Central Fund has always endeavored to pro-eta a managessnt
policy which would nalze it possible to obtain this type of fmds. In
particular, the Central Fund gives special attention to problem of pric»
ing and unagaent of the "client“ portfolio. which deternined the cow-
pany's capacity to finance a significant portion of its investments. in
this connection. we oust bear in nind the difficult nature of the financial
prohiess which these coepanies will have to face. The very rapid growth
rate of consumption forces the- to sake larger and larger invesu-ents.
Freqmnt recourse to hydraulic energy involVes very high interest costs at
the sale tilse. Their financial needs are thus increasing at an extrenely
fast rate. Only strict financial Ianagensnt. cowbined with significant
foreign aid. will wake it possible for coepenies to seat their obligations
in the future.

2) Over the years, the orientation of French financial aid has undergone
changes which are interesting to recall here.

Apart free the few hydroelectric installations of Djoue. Bdea. Great Falls,
Sotubs in Mali and Ayane in the ivory Coast. the French financial effort
originally involved thermal installations more particularly and notably
diesel installations. It seened at that ties that hydroelectric installa-
tions offered production capacities which were too large in relation to
existing local needs and did not bake it possible to produce a cheap kWh.
The installation of diesel plants was pore advantageous at that tins and
provided greater flexibility of use for their owners. Hith the oil crisis
and the rapid developoent of consulption, the use of hydraulic energy be-
case very attractive to the nations. This is why French aid is now striv-
ing to facilitate financing of these installations. In keeping with the
developoent of this type of investmnt, the Central Fund is endsavoring to
promte the interconnection of nations and, within the sale nation, the
developoent of transnission systems in order to connect speller co-unities
to the largest power stations. This corresponds to the concern of provid-
ing the greatest possible use of hydroelectric installations, which are
costly investments. and snaking it possible to shut down stall therual power
plants whose operating costs have bacon. too high for the clientele served.
sainly because of the price of petroleus products.

besides traditional beans of production. French aid is also concerned with
the develop-ant of new types of energy. such as solar and wind energy.
Applying the experience acquired in using solar pups. largely financed

by the PAC, the Senegal electricity cemeny will experilsenoslly undertake
the installation of solar electric power plants for supplying nail rural
centers. That is an experiunt which may be very intrresting and in order
to facilitate this experiment, the Central Fund is offering to finance the
installation of an initial plant in Diakheo.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R ONICIAL 083 00“.?

3) The figures listed below will provide an idea of the asount of financ-
ing granted by the various French sources. The ems granted by the PAC,
since its eetablishsnent to ll neceaber 1975. for financing installations
of electricity cospenies, anount to nearly F 86 million. loans granted by
the Central Fund from 1950 to Jl Deceaber 1977 in turn anunt to approxi-
Isetely F 1.65? Iillion, distributed as follows: Benin, 1: Canteen, e07,
comro islands, ll; Congo, es, Ivory Coast, 386: Djibouti, 56; see (Cen-
tral African aspire], ll; Gabon, 293, Guinea, 2: Upper Volta, 36; Mada-
gescar, 59: Mali, 68: Mauritius, 52; Mauritania. 20: Niger, 90: Senegal,
99: Chad, 6 and 1bgo, 8.

here again. it must not be forgotten that eany advances were granted at
times when the value cf the franc was not what it is today. As for pur-
chaser or supplier credits granted vith the guarantee of coma. in this
regard it will be noted that the proportion of financing by conercial
credits guaranteed against the repatriable portions of the contracts con-
eluded end confirmed to corner in 1976-1977 and the first quarter of l978,
in the area of electrical installations, anounted to approxi-ately

F 652 million, distributed as follows: Caneroon, 172: ivory Coast, 176:
Gabon, l26: Upper Volta, lo; Niger, lld; Mali, ll; neuritius, 16: logo,
22: Mauritania, 2 and Congo, 1.

This description would not be colplets if we did not recall that private
electricity companies, particularly the 880A (expansion unknown] and an
[Electric Power and Water Cospany of nadagascar), have also taken an ac-
tive pert in financing investeents in this sector of ecomnic activity.

111. Technical Assistance to Comanies

French financial aid is nOt limited to financing projects or studies.
It is also concerned with providing to coopanies the assistance which they
consider necessary for eanaging their affairs.

This aid takes the fore of financing for technical assistance personnel
and training progress. It actually appears that financing such operations,
which sake it possible to inrove the mags-ant of comenies. sould be,
in a sense. as isportant as financing inVestIsnts ﬂue-selves.

1) Technical assistance includes eaking skilled personnel available to
conpanies. Such personnel is chiefly lent by the 81!. no date, the nu-
ber of these staff Isdaers say be estimated at nearly 400 for French-
speaking Africa. Iir Fecoux's article on the m progru, also published
in this iSsue. provides detailed infomtion on this abject. Financing
for these staff sewers is provided by the comenies tbs-selves or by PAC.
mints thus allocated by this fund in 1918 nay be estimated at F 1.60 lil-

lion.

2) Training aid is also technically provided by the 81!. The latter sakes
cowetent personnel available to coqanies for the establisluent and

30
Ml OFFICIAL US! can
I’OR OFPICML US! ONLY

operation of vocational training centers. These centers play a very im-
portant role in the training of skilled technical personnel. Practically
all coapanies have such centers today. The necessary financing has been
provided by the coapanies or by MC.

A ﬁual developnent is taking shape in this area. On one hand. training
programs are no longer lieited to just technical training. They tend to
encomss all aspects of a company‘s life and particularly edsinistrative
and financial aspects. An effort. particularly in the area of eanagensnt.
will be undertaken jointly by the ED? and the Central Fund. The very
rapid growth of coapanies actually poses sore and nore couples eanageaent
problems for their boards of directors.

0n the other hand. the Central Fund has also decided to take part in fi-
nancing training prograes when these programs are directly related to job
preparation. It may probably seen unusual that a landing organisation
would become involved in this area. which seems to be the domain of sin)-
sidies. however, it seeeed that to the extent that the prograas thus fi-
nanced Iade possible the training of skilled administrative and technical
personnel. it was the investment's profitability which was thus rein-
forced. Programs of this type, financed by the Central Fund. are still
few in number. The total amount of credits granted to coepanies mounts
to approximately P 30 million to date. but the Central Fund intends to de-
velop its activities in this area in order to better satisfy the needs of

coapanies.

If French financial aid in the electricity sector has placed inportant
value on financing inwstments, it should be pointed out that this aid is
not United solely to this area. but strives to satist all needs of co.-
panies. in the area of investment as well as in the areas cf studies. man-
agement and training. the objectives of French aid are ccaprehensive and
not limited only to the investment sector. The important. of energy in
ecmic developuent warrants the continuation of French aid for the de-
velopment of organizatians producing and distributing electricity in '
French-speaking Africa.

European lnvestmnt Bank loans

Paris INDUSTRIES ET TRAVAUX D'OU‘I‘RE-HBR in [’1'th NOV 78 pp 878-880

[Excerpts] An EEC banking institution specializing in financing invest-
ments contributing to specific econoaic objectives, the European Invest-
ment Bank‘s (£18) slain area of activity is the territory of usher coun-

tries of the Commiry, in which it granted 09.2 percent of its loans in
1977, or 1401 million units of account' [u.c.l out of a total of l.S7l

million.

' Conversion rate of 25 September 1978 - 1 me. - F 5.60 - $1.2i.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPHCML 083 01".?

However. aince the tiret Yaounde Agree-ant signed in 1963. the ills hae be-
can an inportant aource of financing for project: contributing to econonic
developllante in aignatory African nationa. The bone hgreeaent. which took
effect on i April 1976 and to which 51 African. Caribbean and Pacific na-
tiona currently adhere. has given new vigor to this mission. ‘I'hia agree-
rent. and the decieion of the Coraunitiee‘ council for Overaeae Terri-
toriee and countriee. provider for the Buropean Bank to grant loana mount-
ing to 400 aillion u.c. froe ite own reeourcea. repreeented by ita capital.
its reeervea and eepecially the proceeda fron ita loane in national and
international aoney lerkete.

Under the bone Agreenent. the hank'n loane generally include an intereet
reduction of three pointer loo nilliou u.c. have been aet aeide for thie
purl-non fro. the reaourcee of the Buropean Develop-ent rund. of which

lOl aillion u.c. are alao edainiatered by the are for aid in the fore of
venture capi tal.‘

in view of the varioue typea of financing offered by the bone Agreennt
and the eize of aubeidiee and loana with very favorable atipulated condi-
tiona. aaounting to some 2.6 billion u.c. adninlatered by the European
Conuniticn' mission. the Bank's loan-“which are added to thin total
“are reaerved for projects contributing directly or indirectly to the
groath of econoeic productivity in general: in the procuction eector.‘ the
results of the financed projecta' operatione euet be adequate to provide
interest servicing and aeortiration of the loane.

The European banh'e area of activity hae aleo been extended to include
varioue countrioa in the .‘Iediterranean Darin. firet Greece. then Turkey
and eore recently. Portugal. Yugoalavia and bebanon. Cooperative agree-
ments have been concluded between the Conunity and nine other oountriea
in this area and will beco- effective ahortly. They provide for the
tire operation. up to atipulated liaita. in the fore of loane for inveet-
oenta contributing to the mnoeic develop—ant of theee comtriee.

Priority Invert-ante
0n )0 Septenber 1970, the 813‘: prograa for inveetnente in the electricity

sector outside the Coo-unity waa giVon concrete shape in the for- o! 22
loans. or more than 100 Iillion u.c.. wntributing the actualiaation or

 

‘ 1heee venture-capital onerationa eay take the (or. of ainority etockhold-
inge in the capital of a carpany on behalf of the Co-unity. aid to an in-
atitution or nation no that they lay ehare in the capital the-elvee. ew-
ordinate loans whore repay-Int becoeaa due only after pay-ant of priority

loans. or even conditional loana whoee repay-ant beoo-ee due only after
certain oonditiona are aatiafied. indicating that the project haa overco-
the inherent difficultiee of the initial period or that it hae reached a
given etage of profitability.

32
'Ol OFFICIAL 03! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sore than 3.3 billion u.c. in investments in i2 countries (including 7
signatories or the Yaounde It and Lena Agrees-ants). The total installed
power, as a result of these loans. represents more than Jaoo In. These
lonns hays also contributed to the construction of high-voltage lines.
making possible the devolopcsent of regional or national systems needed for
admiuete use of production capacities and supply of users.

In every case. the investments to be financed are neintained in accordance
with the government of the respective nation and are along the priority
objectiVes oi‘ the country‘s development plans. The direction of projects

and granting of financing by the are are carried out in accordance with
the tem and procedures stipulated by its bylaws, which are similar in

practice to the regulations observed by other long-term international Ii-

nancing institutions. since they nust rely on the money market in order to
obtain the resources needed to finance their loans.

The continued econoaic and industrial development or the countries in ques-
tion depends on the construction or these installations. They also con-
tribute to inproving the standard of living of peoples. both directly by
serving households and indirectly by effects. in terms of jobs and inoooe,
of the eetabl ishlnent of new businesses made possible as a result. Those
projects which develop national energy resources. particularly hydroelec-
tric instellations and their conpleeentary trans-lesion lines. have also
had a positive enact on the respective countries' balance or payments by
curbing their energy ilports. particularly hydrocarbons. In this way.
they comly with the objectives or developing the energy resources or de-
veloping countires. whose need has been pointed out in various interna-
tional circles and for which the Coununity has recently reanirlsd its
will to contribute its active support.

It rant be pointed out that in setting up its financing, the are cooper-
ates with the European Commities' Co-sission with the specialised bi-
lateral agencies of neuter countries, such as me Central fund (or Boone-lo
cooperation (CCCE), the Collsonwealth Develop-snt Corporation (CDC) and the
heconstruction Credit Bank 00'") , with oultilaterial institutions such as
the World Bank. the African Development Bank and, sore recently, with
various bi lateral and multilateral banks and funds o! the Arab world.

Africa. the Car lbbean and Pacific

As of lo Septeaber 1918. the aln's operations for electrical investments
in Africa and in the Pacific involved a total or 72.2 aillion u.c. in
seven comtries. Pour loans were granted in the transworh of the second
Yaounde Agreeaont totaling 18.) aillion u.c.. and six loans. all with the
three-point interest reduction. under the lace hgreeosnt. (or a total or
53.9 million u.c. These loans have contributed to the actualization of
invest-ants estimated at sous 600 nillion u.c. and include an increase in
production capacities of are than 600 m. in addition to several expan-
sions or interconnections of system.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Cameroon. the Bank granted two loans in 1967 and 1971 to BNBLCAM
(Ca-eroon Electric Power). The first loan. for 4 million u.c., involved
the construction of a storage dam on the Sanege River and the installa-
tion of two plants of 20 NH oath in the Sdea hydroelectric complex: these
installations were mainly intended to satisfy the demand of the cities of
Eden, Douala and Yaounde end their industries. The second loan (3.5 mil-
1ion u.c.) financed the construction of a dam on a tributary of the Sanaga
River and the installation of three additional plants of 20.8 lﬁ each in
this same coupler. In 1976. new financing of 13.5 million u.c. to the
Cameroon National Electricity Comany, which had absorbed mm in 1974,
involved the construction of a den and a hydroelectric power plant equipped
with three ae-uw units. or an installed power of 144 m, at Song-Mulou on
the Sanaga River. upstream from the Edea comlex, as well as transmission
lines and interconnection stations, iuproving distribution in the south
and west of the country.

In the Ivory Coast. the European Bank contributed, with a loan of 11 mil-
lion u.c. to the Ivory Coast Electric Power Company (BBC!) in 1977, to
the construction of a control and mdulation center. This center will
make possible efficient use of the capacities of the power stations of
the interconnected system by facilitating energy transmission to all
points of the system as needed: these investments also included the in-
stallation of 29 kilometers of 225-kilovolt lines for supplying the
Abidjan area. derived mainly from hydraulic energy.

In Ghana, 10 million u.c. were lent to the Volta River Authority in 1976
for the construction of the Mosoﬁo Dam on Lake Volta. the construction
of a new power station equipped with four turbogenerators with a total
capacity of some 140 m and for expanding the distribution system, par
ticulerly to cope with the growth of industrial demand.

In Liberia, 4.2 million u.c. were granted to the Liberia Electricity
Corporation in 1978 for expanding a thermal power station at Bushrod, on
the outskirts of Monrovia, the capital. The investments consisted mainly
of adding two diesel generators with a unit power of 14 aw to an existing
power station. to handle the growth of household dnand and of various
industrial and small-scale projects.

an Hauritius. the European Bank has also granted two loans to the Central
electricity Board (one) in 1975 and 1976. The first loan (1.75 million
u.c.) involved the expansion of production capacities of the Port Victoria
thermal power station through the addition of six diesel units with a
total capacity of 36 nw: the second loan (2 million u.c.) financed the in-
stallation of two other units of 6.6 at each.

In Zaire. a loan of 9 million u.c. with special terms was granted to the
government in 1970 from the resources of the Zuropean Development and
supported by the budget of meter nations. This loan was granted for the
construction of ante-originating from the Inga hydroelectric power

3’0
FOR OWICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plant and serving the capital, Kinshasa, and suburban areas as well no
other cities in the province of Ban Zaire, notably Hetadi and some.

Finally, it must be noted that in addition to formal financial agreements
concluded between the Community and countries in the Mediterranean Basin
under the bone Agreement and which are expected to take effect within the
near future, other loans have already been ordered and could give new
breadth within the next few months to the European Bank's operations in
the electrical energy sector.

COPYRIGRT: Rene Moreux et Cie., Paris. 1918

11915
C501 4400

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOTSWANA

ARMED LOAN TO FIGHT AGAINST FOOT-AND-HOUTH DISIASE
Paris HARCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERMNEBNS in French 15 Dec 78 p 3655

[last] The Arab bank for African Economic Development has just granted a
$2.2 million loan to lotswans. The loan is reimbursable in 7 years after

a deferred amortization psr.od of 3 years. it has an annual 2 percent
interest rate and it is Intended for use in the fight against foot-and-mouth
disease in the context of a project in the amount of $6.25 million to which
the European Development Fund an“ the government of aotswana will contribute
$1.92 million and $2.11 million respectively. The foot-and-mouth disease
epidemic which affected Botswana in November 1971 caused stochyards to close
for two months and entailed considerable loss of revenue. The project will
be implemented in two phases:

«The urgent uhipment (foot-and-stouth being an extremely contagious disease)
to Botswana of a laboratory on wheels to allow for the inediate talus-off
of a campaign for veterinary analyses in vivo which must be conducted by
specialized consultants and must be followed by the manufacture and experi-
mentation of the vaccines needed to immunize cattle and thus stamp out the
disease. Once the virus has been isolated and the vaccine prepared. it is
planned to consolidate the rhythm of manufacture in order to reach produc-
tion of 2 million doses of vaccine per year to an initial two-year period.

"The eutablishaent in Gaborone of a unaf 1cturing laboratory and related
Installations which will boost manufacturing to 15 million doses of vaccine
per year in order to satisfy needs on a larger scale and provide authori-
ties with the means to strengthen prophylactic sanitary measures (the vaccine
provides durable protection) and to efficiently face any recurring epideaics.

Botswana has already been the beneficiary of a $5.6 million long-tern loan
granted by the Arab Fund for Special Assistance to Africa and regards this
project as prioritsrian. since it is intended to protect the health of the
national cattle wealth and to promote production and export of related
products; ioot-snd-mouth disease is actually considered one of the worst
scourges in this field.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie., Paris 1978

36
cso: «00 Fox «wrzcut cs: (my
FOR OVPICIAI. USE ONLY

cannons

sum

COOPBM'i‘lou um USSR-Jim new asbsssedor of the Soviet Union in Cannon,
'I‘ikhonov Vedin. presented his letters of credence to President Ahnedou
Ahidjo. on 5 Hove-her. 'Ihst audience was en opportunity for menus
TRIBUNE to review the relations Iaintained between the two comtries.

In :965, the visit to Noscow by the Cauroon chief of state was an is-
portent step on the basis 0! which exchanges have developed incessantly.
Cooperation between both comtries effects isportant sectors. In the
field of education, thanks to assistance froe the 0883, Caaeroon has been
provided with two professional technical schools: the Dschang college of
Agriculture and the lbeluyo School of waterways and forests. ‘l‘his lest-
mentioned establishment was ineuguretedby President Ahidjo last year. Both
schools are provided with instruction and laboratory equipnent nede in the
USSR. Soviet instructors are numbers of the teaching staff. This co-
operation is also carried out in the field of trade. The turnover of
trade between the USSR end Cameroon enounted to close to '2 billion CIA
[African financial Con-unity] francs, in l916. The 0888 buys cocoa. pee-
nuts and wood primarily. Establish-ant of e lined coporetion. arson
(Cameroon Auto-obile. Technology end ‘i‘reding Corporation). has played a
large pert in increasing the volune of Soviet-Custom trade. This cor-
poration specializes in the sale and maintenance of Soviet auto-obiles.
cenco hes good prospects. At present, this corporetion sells not only
soviet cers end trucks. but also tractors. cranes and various equip-Int
for food and processing industrial enterprises. [Text] [Paris hams
valceux at mulﬁmms in French 17 Nov 78 p 3036] 10042

enhiulsriwrlvs meow-~50" isportent decrees pertaining to a refore of

Caseroon‘s ed-inistretlon were signed by President Ahidjo. on 9 Iovesber.
These decrees pertain especially to the establish-cut of a Central llerltet
Bureau and to the powers of the heads of edninistretive districts and of
the organizations and persoan assisting thee. mm mm, which
devotes its editorial to these decrees, stresses the 'greeter ooncentre-
tion of the central governeent" that is going to steel fro. then. mus.

it adds. the decree specifying the powers of the hem of edninistrative
districts extends their jurisdiction. The governor, in particular. as
the editorial writer points out. handles the general direction of the civil

37
FOR Ol’VZCIAl. USE ONLY
70R ontcm. 08! MY

eetvtoee 1n the provtnoe, with the exception of juttce. under the authority
of the cognizant nlnletere. tn the opinion of that nevepapet. the ana-
buehnent of the Central Public Herket Bureau. under the preetdent of the
repubuo. 1e 'hponent.” became. toner”. thou larkete. 'etxadduno un-
der eeveral dntetrlee. requttea ouch the to be audited.“ the dauy aleo

emhaetud the (act that delegation. of budgetary oredlte have been mu-
«um and procedutee for granting penelono. “to annutueo and death
beneute have been “minted. Went) (Porto mm mxcwx 81' ISO!-

‘I'BW in fund! 17 Nov 70 p 3036] 10042

(:80: £400

38
'OR MCI”. 088 am
FOR Ol’l'lClM. USE! ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN WI RE

BRIEFS

PREMIER‘S DIMDG Hm! BUSlhmm-Ji‘he prim ninister or the Central Afri-
can Enpire. uenri Maidou, presided over a nesting, held on to Novesber, with
the leading businessmen and nerchants of the CAB [Central hirican Empire).
on well as with representatives of chamers of consrce. heidou, who wants
maintain a ”dynastic, enriching, productive' dialog with the leaders of Cen-
tral African economy, drew a rather gloouy picture or the eoononic situa-
tion and asked the participants in the meeting toassist his in readying
it. lie especially censured the following: Delays in paynent or taxes ob-
served in many enterprises (at present one-third of the taxes due for tie-
cal year 1978 have not been paid and investigating coauittees are striving
to needy this situation). An alanine} decrease in nerchants' inventories.
leading to a nuﬂter of interruptions in supply for essential products like
flour, sugar, cenent, spare parts. Failure to respect price regulations.

A decline in investmentsmrobably due to the uneasiness or potential in-
vestors. In this respect, the prine minister pointed out that his govern-
ment was devoted to the principles or liberal econon and tree ooapetition
and that. consequently. the investors' lack o! confidence see-ed groundless.
In conclusion. Haidou invited the banks to denonetrats dame-is- in granting
credits and he owhasiud the tact that his government was going to under-
take large-scale highway maintenance jobs for the purpose or promoting
trade. he also insinuated that certain otate-nanaged eoononic sectors
might be opened up to private initiative. [Text] [Paris W MICAUX
KT HBDITBRRANEZNS in French 1 Dec 78 p 3325] 10042

amass: All) To homeowner-om aﬂasuador of Grins in the CAB presented
a gift of agricultural equipment, worth 57 nillion CPA [African financial
Commit/l francs. i‘orthe iqerial (arts. to meror aokassa. in the in-
periai court of aerengo, on 16 Novewer. It should be noted that Chinese
agricultural technicians have been working on the lyerial (arts for a year

now. [Text] [Paris WES MICRO! 81' EDITEW in French 1 Dec
78 p 3325) 10042

C80: 4000

39
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BR! 81’s

MONEY LENDEIG' CONFERENCE-4 conference of comtries and developua-nt aid
agencies concerned with the work of realinement of the Congo-Ocean Railroad
(Ck'co) was held from 24 to 26 November in Pointe Noire. the economic ca-
pital of Congo, under the chairmanship of the Congolese minister of Public
works and Transportation. Camille wello. In his speech, the minister
pointed out that ”Congo has had the pleasure of seeing a partial imple-
mentation of promises for supplentary aid during the last year“ and he
thanked the representatives of the agencies supplying that assistance.
Ten agencies participated in that conference. 'Ihey are the European De-
velopment fund (ED?) , the Central Fund for Economic Cooperation (CCCE).
the Congolese Amortization Fund (CCA). the Canadian Develop-ant Agency,
The Canadian Survey Bureau for Realinenent. the Central African Countries
Bank (BEAC) the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) .
the world Bank group and the Saudi Development ﬁnd. The participants
decnded to hold a a coordination meeting. in the earning 6 months, for the
purpose of determining the status of progress in the realinenent job.
cost of the project underway and experience acquired during execution of
the job. [lextl [Paris muss TROPICAUX E‘l‘ HEDITBRRANZENS in French

| Dec 78 p 33271 10942

AmnIISMﬂOh 0P REFINBRY--aodolphe Mada. Congolese minister of Mines.
stated recently that the Military Counittee of the Party (CH?) was of the
opinion, at the tine of its last meeting, that it was advisable for Congo
to have an "experienced" partner in the oil industry, in order to support
it in managing the Polnte Noire refinery. Adada went on to say that that
is why the Ministry of Hines and Energy has been made responsible for ne-
gotiation with a view to the establishment of a nixed cospany. with cer-
tain partners, for the purpose of managing the national refinery. But the
ainister pointed out that the nixed coepany. which will assuse all the
financial burdens and all the rights pertaining to exploitation, will.
nevertheless, have to pay rent to the Congolese State. owner of the re-
finery. [Text] [Paris moors TROPICAUX ET MBCITERMNBENS in french

1 Dec 78 p 3327] 10042

C50: 4400

1.0

FOR iii'I-‘ICI-‘u. 3:55 031.?
FOR Ol’FICIAL USE ONLY

NAMIBIA

BRIBPS

New UNESCO mam-0n 30 October, Naoibia bocass tho NSth mnbor country
of UNESCO by docision of tho Gonsral Conforonco of tho organization. Na-
mibia's admission was acquirod by a sajority (or in oxcoos of tho two-
thirds roquirod by rogulationo. mirtoon comtrios. including the fivo
Hootern countrios in tho ”contact group". abstainod. As tho legal author-
ity adainistoring that torritory until ito indopondonco. tho Council of
tho Unitod Nations had roguootod this admission for Namibia, so that it
could participato in tho work of mm as s tull-flodgod mnbsr. Since
Navorbar 1977. Namibia hao alroady boon a asabsr of. no and sinos Jmo
1978 or no. Until today, it was roprosontod in UNESCO by tho prosonco
of a 5W0 obsorvsr. Now tho rats of this obsorvor risks giving riso to
a legal controvorsy. l‘i‘oxtl [Paris was TWICAUX 31' MIRRRANEENS
in rronch 10 Nov 18 p 2985] 10042

NEH AIRLINE NAME-“nae South-Hoot Airways company announcod on 30 Octobor
that it was changing its nous and was dasignstod trot. than on ao Na-ib
Air. in anticipation of tho transtornation of tho SouthVost African torri-
tory into Naoibis. Tho first aircraft boating tho coopany's now nan node
its inaugural flight on tho oano day. l'hoxtl [Dario NARCNES TIOPICAUX
ET HEDITBRRANEENS in Pronch 10 Nov 78 p 2985] 10042

SAUDI Gil-‘1‘ FOR amazes-4am Arabia has aado a gift or $1 sillion for
Namibian rofugooo. This girt was prosontod by tho awassador of Saudi
Arabia in Dakar to Dr Otto Nagonbuchlo. rooidont-roprosonzativo in Dakar
o! the Unitod Nations liigh Coonissionor for astugoss. [Toxtl (Paris
NAMES WICAUX B‘l' "EDITBWS in trench ‘0 Nov 78 p 2995] 10042

C50: «“00

61
FOR CF‘TCHL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BXPMSIGJ 0? mm PORT
Paris Hams WICAUX ET BOI‘I‘BW in French 1 Doc 78 p 3315

[Text] The delegates to the Ministerial Conference of an: and central
African Countries on Sea Transportation. held in Dakar on 15 and 16 No-
veder. visited the port of the Senegalese capital.

At the ties of that visit, Ndao. an official of the autono-ous port of
Dakar, stated to LB scum that the situation of ports in the region was
'mdergoing full oxpanr‘on.“

This growth is probably due not only to the aunt of see traffic (for
Senegal. for exasplo. 95 percent of its trade passes through the port).
but also to the develop-ant of port infrastructures asking it possible
to service ships better. ‘l'his expansion fina expression in speed of
operations. a speed that decrease the ships' waiting tile.

The port of Dakar. containing 220 hectares of water area. includes 45 hec-
tares of earthworks and 57,000 square esters of sheds. Altogether. its

docks have an extent of 9 kilo-stars and are covered by 25 kiloaeters of
railroad.

The port turns into the Public Tressury an annual sun of between 500 mil-
lion and I billion CPA [African financial Calamity) francs.

Along the soot recent inprovenents, lention should be bade of the con-
struction of a 1,200-ton boat lift. equipped with four boat sheds. This
lift. now in operation, cost sons 860 million. This device contributes

to seeting the dessnd for repair of the fishing fleet, a fleet that is
increasing every year.

But the project (underway at present) presented by the port authorities
as the cost isportant operation at the present tins invole construc-
tion of the huge fishing jetty, 1.500 sisters long. 7 and 10 meters deep.

 

" Statistics for the port of Dakar. in W 110le 81' Minimums
for 6 October 1978, p 2650.

62
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

covering 8 hectares. Other conetruction job. are in progress: supports for
the wharf of Hole 2. increase in storage facilities and noderniration of the

electrical installations in the entire port.

Another project involves the container terninal. It will consist of a
roll-on roll-on platform end sole with 1.000 netere of wharf. 10 meters
deep, tor offloading containers. Barthvorks required for storing con-
tainers will be reached primarily fro- eea. aarthfill work is already

in progress.

COPYRIGHT: kne Morena st Cie.. Paris , 1978

10,0«2
cs0: «on . m .

63
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE OSLY