APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R000100040030-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040036-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

Jms L/e4oo
16 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOU0 No. 630

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040036-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information prinarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was amariaed or extracted.

Unfamiliar nales rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parenthascs. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion snark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

me contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Govern-ent.

COPYRIGi‘l' HHS AND REGULATIONS WERNING M3331“? 0P
HATEIIALS REPRODWED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINM’ION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION 38 RBSTRICTSD MOFPICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/84
16 April

“I

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

FOUO No. 630

Conreurs

DEE-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

median Aid To, Interest in Africa Reported
(JEWB ARRIQUE, 1‘: m 79)..

Discreet and Effective Aid

Swedish indus try Interested I
Famous Research Institutions

Briefs
Dianna Activities Reviewed

CAMEROON

Decree Establishes Foreign Trade Center
(means TROPICAUX 3'1- mum, 1h 1hr 7'9) ....

Briere
lieu Ships mdered

GENERAL AFRICAN EHPmB

Romeo Secure for Moment With French Aid
(Abdeloziz Dahmni; mm: APRIQUB, 1h Mn- 79)

Need for Political, Administrative Reform Accepted by All
(Joe-muse mm JEUIE APRIQUB, 1!: Mn- 79)
l’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)
anon

Announcement of Referendum Brings Mixed Reaction
(sory Serinds Dinllo; mm APRIQUB, 1h Mar 79)...

Council of Miniatero Approves Proposed Constitutional
Reforms
(moans momcwx Er mm, 16 m 79)..

Port hcilities, Estimated Coats Reviewed
(Jams APRIQUB, 1!; m- 79)

GUINEA

Administrative, Financial Refer-s Streamline Economy
(moans 13¢an in- mm, 16 hr 79)..

WNW

Mozambi ue Paces Recrudeeeence of Armed Resistance
Francois Soudan; mm; mucus, 7 Mar 79)........

Briefs
National Sugar Institute Established

um VOIlI'A

Economic Developed: Delays Reported
(hancoiae lubscher; Jam man, 28 Feb 79)....

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lNTIER-APRICAN AFFAIRS

SIEDISII All) 1‘0. INTEREST 1N AFRICA REPORTED

Discreet and Effective Aid
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 14 Mar 79 pp 54-56
[Article by 8.3.]

[Text] "To aid in the liberation of peoples and the struggle against pover-
ty--these are the two great principles of Swedish devolopnent assistance,"
Ernest Michanek, director of the Swedish Office for International Development
Aid (SIDA). told us in January. This ailitant fornula nay cone as a surprise.
in any case, it bears witness to Sweden's ceuitaent to the side of the Third
World. The figures are equally telling: devoting 1 percent of its gross nat-
ional product to develop-ant aid. Sweden is in the first rank of countries
rated by the Develop-eat Aid Co-ittec of the 0860. It should -be recalled
that this is one of the few countries that exceed the .7 percent considered

a ainiuul by the UN.

in contrast to the large donor countries. Sweden has neither a colonial past
nor strategic interests or vital econoaic interests in the Third World. Hour-
ever, for 20 years development aid has been one of the najor focuses of its
foreign policy. The Swedish Social Deaocrat Party very early cane out for
independence for the colonized countries and showed it by raising its voice
in international arenas or contributing diploaatic and financial support to
the liberation novcaents. From the war in Algeria to the war in Vietnali,
Swedish leaders did not alss an opportunity to support the nationalists, risk-
ing in the second case a profound crisis with the United States. Free then
on it became logical, once the countries were independent, for Sweden to cone
to their aid in their develop-cut effort. That was all the lore easy because
public opinion was already sensitized by the nulerous ailitant secular and re-
ligious organizations toward decolonization and a solidarity extended to all
the countries of the globe. Thus. the aid granted over my years to the
PAIGC [African Independent Party of Guinea and Cape Verde]. the ”15le
[Mozaabique Liberation Front] and the WM [Popular Move-eat for the Libera-
tion of Angola] was transformed into cooperation in the developent of the
new states. And the assistance--strictly hunanitarian (food aid, nedicines,

clothing for refugees, training of cadres. financing of the defense of certain

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accused persons, ctc.)--to the liberation noveaonts of Ziababwe, to the

ANC [African Natlonal Congress] in South Africa and to the SIAPO [South-Nest
African People's Organization] in Naalbin reaains iaportant; it went up free
as.ooo.ooo kronor in budgetary year 1978-1979 to 120,000,000 for 1979-1930.

As for bilateral development aid under the jurisdiction of SIDA, which was
created in 1965 to respond to the new needs of the Third world countries, it
is supported by several basic principles intended to increase its effective-
nose. The first consists of not spreading financial assistance over all the
countries considered the poorest, but concentrating it on a snail nunber for
which it has real ilpact. Swedish leaders attach great iaportance to the use
which is aade of this assistance; it involves not only proacting growth, but
also seeing to it that the fruits of develop-ant are better distributed. For
this reason the Swedes are especially interested in the sectors of health,
education and rural development.

Assistance to industry, however, continues to have priority in financing
(over 30 percent). Next cone agriculture and water and energy supply

(12 percent each), education (8 percent). transportation (6 percent), health
and food (5 percent).

With constant concern for effectiveness, the bilateral assistance prograas
are studied for the long tern in cooperation with the authorities of the as-
slsted country. Geographic concentration and long-tern planning seen to thee
to be two conditions essential for attracting the best part of an aid that

is still relatively modest in absolute value.

Public development aid will increase this year (budgetary fiscal year
l979-l980) to 4,370,000 kronor, as co-pared with 3,800,000 in 1977-1978. Of
this aaount 1,416,000, or nearly a third of the total, will be devoted to
nultilateral aid, which reaains iaportant, despite a relative decline during
the last decade. "After the war," Mr Michanek explains, "we supported the
United Nations and their technical and financial assistance prograas; in that
way gave aultilateral assistance a large place. Gradually we felt the need
to set up bilateral cooperation."

Bilateral aid represents two thirds of total aid, and the 2,863,000 kronor
affected by this expedient will be distrlouted to the 20 "continuous coopera-
tion" countries in which SIDA is financing long-tern prograas. Ninety-seven
percent of this aid is granted in the for: of gifts. Also, in 1978 Sweden
canceled the debts of the poorest countries. Only a few countries that are
considered less deprived--Cuba, Tunisia and Zaabia--are receiving part of the
aid in the for: of loans. Finally, another advantage: less than 15 percent
of Swedish aid is binding and that percentage is decreasing (650,000,000
kronor in 1979-1980, as coapared with 675,000,000 in 1978-1979).

Asia heads the list of recipients of this bounty. Vietnam is far in the fore-
front with 400,000,000 kronor this year, followed by lndia (290,000,000).
Bangladesh and Sri Lanka are also in the roster of Asiatic beneficiaries.

2
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extremely well placed. Some countries are assuming increasing iaportance
in Sweden‘s general cooperation policy. Several exceptions aside--Tunisia
and Guinea-Bissau in particular--the totality of the beneficiary countries
is located in Eastern and Southern Africa. Sweden is concretely expressing
its condoanation of South Africa's ainority regiaes by giving priority to
the five Front Line countries (Mora-bique, Zambia, Tanzania, Botswana and
Angola) which together expect to be granted this 720,000,000 kronor, or al-
most 25 percent of the total bilateral aid. As for East Africa, its ties
with Sweden are facilitated by their con-on use of English and a certain
"Anglo-Saxon familiarity.“ This is not the ease for French-speaking western
and central Africa, where Swedes are conspicuous for their absence. But
aside froa the language obstacle, which is not really an obstacle (the ox-
aaple of Tunisia proves that). the deputy director of SlDA told us that the
French presence was too solidly iapianted in that part of the continent for
Sweden to find any valid reason to send part of its public finances there.

But this is a region in which Swedish business can are beginning to be very
luch interested.

Tanzania, with 310,000,000 kronor in 1978-1979 and 345,000,000 in 1979-1980,
is receiving about 12 percent of the Swedish bilateral development aid. It
is the first African beneficiary of Swedish assistance. A new agree-eat is
to be signed this year between the two countries which will furnish aid at
over 1,000,000,000 kronor for the next three years. A single figure will
suffice to aeasure its importance for Tanzania: in 1979 Swedish financing
represents 10 percent of its total development budget. So the Tanzanians
have nothing to coaplain about in the change of govern-ental teen in Stock-
hola. However, they are saying that, learning of the defeat of his friend
Olof Paine in 1976, President Nyerere immediately asked him. "lhat can i do
to help you?" The aajor part of the financing is concentrated in the indus-
trial sector and Swedish PME [Snail and Mediua-Sized Businesses] are strongly
encouraged to invest in the country and to develop "joint ventures" with
Tanzanian partners. Sweden is also participating in the financing of several
large projects. such as setting up a pulp industry in which it is associated
with the ﬂorid Bank and the Kuwaiti Fund. Therefore, the Swedish private
sector can only be pleased with a policy that benefits the whole economy as
well. Swedish exports increased to 170,000,000 kronor in 1978, or twice the
1977 figure. and the trade balance shows an extreme deficit for Tanzania,
which scarcely sells anything other than coffee to Sweden.

For Tunisia, this is the end of aid and the beginning of cooperation. The
kickoff of Swedish assistance to Tunisia dates froa the trip to Stockhol-

of President Bourguiba in 1962. Since that date Tunisia has received
400,000,000 French francs (20.000.000.000 CPA francs) from Sweden, two thirds
of it in the fora of gifts and one third in the form of loans, intended in
large part for agriculture and professional training. The voluae of this aid
has recently declined, going to 30,000,000 kronor in 1978-1979, as coapared
with 40,000,000 per year in the preceding years. This is because Tunisia is
no longer a part of the poorest countries, according to the United Nations
criteria. After 1981 Swedish financial assistance will stop completely.
However, that does not loan the end of bilateral relations, quite the contrary.

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Like Cuba, which is in a similar situation. Tunisia is going to serve as
an experimental field for what the 510A calls "expanded cooperation“, rul-
ing out traditional aid.

After having benevolently aided certain countries in eacrging from poverty
and putting in place an infrastructure favorable to a development speedup.
the Swedes believe it legitimate to transform assistance into trade to the
profit of both parties. Thus, for example, a seminar is to be given

in March 1979 in Tunis, with the participation of Swedish and Tunisian firms.
to encourage the forming of "joint ventures" in all fields. The

LN Erikssen Company is already interested in the Tunisian market, as well as
other Swedish firms. Swedish investments and the cooperation between the
private sectors of both countries have therefore been called upon to develop,
especially after 1901. But Tunisia's trade deficit with Sweden (60,000,000
kronor) is in danger of being an obstacle to the development of this kind of
relations. The some 40,000 Swedish tourists who spend their vacations in
Tunisia every year are not enough to restore the balance.

Finally. the third example--Mozalbique. Swedish aid ranks at the top:
115,000,000 kronor in 1978-1979, 140,000,000 anticipated for 1979-1980, over
20,000,000 destined for refugees from Rhodesia and for the victims of the
floods that ravaged several regions of the country. Moreover, Sweden is par-
ticipating in Mozambique's agricultural development within the fraaework of
a common program of the Nordic countries, with Denmark, Norway and Iceland.
The total amount of this program, spread out over 13 years, is $0,000,000

kronor; at the present time about 30 projects are in the process of being car-
ried out.

Within the framework of its assistance Sweden is furnishing aid for food in-
ports (on which Mozambique is very dependent) as well as importation of so-

cial equipment (trucks, sanitary equipment, school equipment. etc.). Simul-
taneously with SiDA's activity, young Swedish volunteers belonging to groups
having solidarity with the PRELIMD, which were formed at the time of the war

of liberation, are continuing to contribute support in the sectors of health
and education.

important by virtue of its volume, the principles that sustain it and a dis-
cretion to which the Third World countries are not very much accustomed, Swed-
ish aid is appreciated by its African partners. Having reached a level that
is already remarkable, it will probably not be able to increase much over the
next few years. The critical phase the Swedish economy is going through is
forcing the leaders to worry lore about denestic problems. since the troubles
seen to be provoking in one part of public opinion a certain tendency to
'tartierism." (See the interview with Mr Blix, minister of Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation, p 43). According to Mr Nichanek, Swedish aid has not reached
its maximum, but it has arrived at a plateau: “The totality of our aid is at
present made up of gifts, or in some cases of credits, given under conditions
set by the 10A [international Development Association] (a world Bank group
that lends to the poorest countries). we can envisage other forms of coopera-
tion based on the idea of reciprocal interest, following the one-way flow.

h
FOﬂ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another idea that is thriving is the creation of internauionai funds to aid
the were deprived countries. in which Sweden night actively participate
within a framework that would be different from traditional assistance."

Realise seems to be the order of the day. No one in interested circles is
unaware that the Third World countries are potential aarkets for Swedish pro-
ducts. invostaents and technology. Encouragement to invest in Africa. pro-
motion of articles "made in Sweden," trucks going to newly-occupied factories
show that spirit. The leaders make no secret of it, eaphasizing that a
healthy cooperation should benefit all the partners and that the poverty in
the Third World does not pay off over the long term. When we asked what was
Sweden's interest in aiding the developing countries, the SIDA director an-
swered, "Our main motivation has been and is the principle of solidarity.
Sweden has hn interest in having solidarity proven. Our high standard of
living is in large part due to the importance of our experts; that means our
trade relations are vital to us. So we must nake every effort to develop our
international relations in all areas. Moreover, it is not in the interest of
any nation to maintain the gap that currently exists between rich and poor.
Our objective can be summed up like this: peace and development for all.
which requires a radical change in the present situation of the least develop-
ed countries. independence must precede interdependence, and both parties

can only gain in these new relations. You can call this attitude whatever you
like, but it is quite simply "realpolitik."

it is not always easy to reconcile the imperatives of "realpolitik" and the
ideals of justice and humanism. The question of Swedish invest-eats in South
Africa has long been an example of this. Although declining, the trade is
not negligible: Swedish exports to South Africa increased to $56,000,000
kronor in l977 (-15 percent in relation to 1976). Numerous Swedish companies
also have interests and some of them have subsidiaries in South Africa. Such
contradictions to the government's stubbornly anti-apartheid policy are in
danger of raising problems in time. So Sweden has had to choose. and the
choice was made in favor of its African partners. Although not all trade re-
lations have been abolished, a law has been adopted by Parliament (by a large
majority) forbidding Swedish fires to carry out new investments in South
Africa, either directly or through their foreign subsidiaries.

Reactions in nanngeaent circles to the filing of the draft law have not been
unanimous; sole industrialists deplore the decision, affirming that Sweden

can do nothing but surrender its position to less scrupulous lestarn competi-
tors. Others. on the other hand, are satisfied with a measure that puts all
the Swedish firms on the same level and they realize that the choice was inev-
itable. Sweden is the first Western country to make such a decision.

however, in another sector Sweden's trade imperatives do not always coincide
with her foreign policy. Although she condemns with finality the authoritar-
ian regimes of South America. a country like Chile absorbed 9 percent of her
total armament sales in 1978. After all, no one is perfect. as is well known
to the Swedish leaders who do not pose as models, but who are trying to make
the nest likely of soaetimes contradictory necessities coincide.

5
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
u sometime discordant voice to be heard in the OBCD. in defense of the prin'
ciple of an evolution tow-rd lose unequal relations with the Third World.

  
    

uﬁde au developpement
eocordbo par le SIDA aux pays do
cooperation continue
Attribution: pour 1977/1978
on millions de courennes suedotsee.

Key:

- 1. Development aid granted by SIDA 8. Cape Verde 20
to Cooperation Countries Continues. 9. Tunisia 40
1977/1978 allocations in millions 10. Ethiopia 70
of Swedish kronor ll. Zambia 80

2. Construction 73 12. India 240
3. lluunitarian aid :00 13. Tanzania 13
4. Trade and financial activities 13
5. 1 c Ian selent and other services 16
6 Aid to inorts in no special sector 109
7 Various 83

6

1’01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suedlah Inductrylnterested
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 14 Mar 79 pp 58, 60
[Article by 8.3.]

[Text] Although the Swedish economy is wide open to the outside, 80 percent
of its trade is conducted with industrial capitalist countries and only 13
percent with non-eil-preduclng Third World countries. A little over 6 per-
cent of its total imports come directly from OPEC countries. As for Africa,
it absorbs less than 5 percent of the Swedish exports and competes for 2.5
percent of its imports. Six African countries (Liberia, Nigeria, Algeria,
Egypt, Morocco and Angola) are pert of the top so export markets for Sweden,

and four (Nigeria, A1geria, Libya and Kenya) are among its 50 principal sup-
pliers.

However, the modesty of this trade flow should not hide the dynamism of the

Swedish firms, some of which have already long occupied a choice place among
the many Third World countries. The administration encourages industrialists
and business men to actively prospect these "markets of the future;" The de-
velopment aid policy makes things easier for them, insofar as the quality of

this assistance gives Sweden an extremely useful image in the eyes of aspiring
investors.

Thus, Swedish exports to Africa more than tripled between 1970 and 1977, rising
from 1,201,000 to 3,852,000 kronor, while in 1977 the imports from African
countries did not exceed 2,037,000 kronor. Moreover, many Swedish firms have
been established in Africa for a more or less long time. They are participat-
ing increasingly frequently in the development of industrial projects, such
as the exploitation of iron ore in Liberia through the Lance Company. in the
paper and pulp sector, in which Sweden naturally occupies a top position,
Swedish firms are the payees for several African firms. in particular the
Cabonese Cellulose Company and Cellulose of Morocco. They are also participat-
ing in the development of the paper pulp plant at Edea in Cameroon and a pro-
ject of the same type is soon to see the light of day in Tanzania.

\
ln the automobile industry, Volvo several years installed an assembly line
in Morocco, and Scania recently concluded an agreement with a Moroccan firm
for local assembling of the bodies of trucks and cars; a new plant is to begin
production in Casablanca during the second half of 1979. Volvo also has a
truck assembly line in Kenya and is in negotiations with Mozambique for a sim-

ilar development. Moreover, the top Swedish firm conducts a very active trade
policy toward Africa.

The products of Swedish engineering and project development are also present
on the continent. in the agro-food sector, the Alfa Laval group, through
the agency of the mother company and several of its powerful subsidiaries
(including Alfa Laval France) has carved out a choice place in Africa by in-
stalling a number of dainscattle-raising complexes. Seven dairy farms and
cheese farms were established in Algeria between 1972 and 1977; developments

7
roe orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are also under way in Nigeria and Mozambique; and the group recont extended
its activities to other sections, building brewery in Tunis and fruit juice
plants in the ivory Coast. Atlas Copce is selling drilling equipment in a
number of countries. Algeria and Nigeria being among its principal export
markets.

Apart from the Swedish Export Office. whose promotional role is important,
several paragovernmentai organizations have been created in recent years to
reinforce economic relations with the African countries. The most recently
established is the Swedfund. which has been operating since early this year.
Entirely financed by the state. its task is to encourage small and medium-
sized Swedish firms in the processing industry to invest in the Third World,
particularly in Africa, where 80 percent of the projects under discussion are
located. Closely connected with the SiDA, in whose shadow it operates. it
seems to want to concentrate its activities in countries favored with state
assistance; thus, thus. a plant for assembling vans will soon see the light
of day in Tanzania. Another state-financed organization. Impod. is propos-
ing to open the Swedish market to Third ﬂorid products and has undertaken
promotional activities with that in mind.

Swedish liberalism with respect to the Third world. however, has limits. and
imports of textile products from the Far East are already under a quota sys-
tem. Unions, in the name of protecting employment, are waging a campaign
against creating industrial free zones in a number of developing countries
that are in danger. they affirm, of competing with Swedish products on the
domestic market. For the mementSweden is showing plenty of surplus in its
trade with the Third World, except for hydrocarbohs. Despite several good
will gestures, its offensive policy is in danger of maintaining this imbal-
ance for some time to come.

Famous Research Institutions
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 14 Mar 79 p 58

[Text] Uppsaia, which is one of Sweden's oldest cities, has sheltered a uni-
versity of renown since the Middle Ages. The seat of many missions, it has
an Africanist tradition two centuries old. it is in this setting of rather
outmoded charm that several organizations for research on Africa and the prob-
lems of development have been established.

The Scandinavian institute for African Studies, created in 1962, is one of the
best known. Financed conjointly by Sweden. Denmark and Norway, it special-
izes in research in the social sciences and employs in those most diversified
subjects multidisciplinary teams of specialists. Its task is also to inform
a public that is often not very well informed about what is happening on the
continent. Its library on Africa is one of the best in Europe. '

Southern Africa and the French-speaking countries are at present the regions
that arouse the most interest among researchers. Arranging many seminars and
publishing works, studies or reports of colloquies of Scandinavian, African or
other kinds of specialists have bestowed upon the Institute incontestable
authority in many fields.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POM Iil'VllilM. [INK ONLY

Not for from the institute another organization bears the nape of one of

the Swedes best known in Africa: it is the [lag lie-arksjold Foundation,
which was founded in 1962 to honor the aonory of the secretary general of the
United Nntions. Arranging soninnrs and publications on all problems having
reference to development are the tasks set for it. A bienninl journal in
ilnglish, DBVIinl’lENT M0 DIALOG, completes its activities. The Foundation

is chiefly distinguished by the publication of nunerous works on the new in-
ternational econonic order and the North-South dialog. Questions connected
with transfer of technology are claiaing its attention today.

These organizations, whose independence of spirit is renorkabie, illustrate
the wealth and the openness of Swedish research for the developing world.

as does SAREC [expansion unknown] for its part in Stockholm in a way it is
an extension of SIDA's level of thought. Today it seeas to be herd to under-

take a serious study on Africa without finding out what is going on in Sweden.
however far away it any be.

COPYRle‘: Jeane hfriquo. GRUPJIA 1979

8946
C50: 4400

9
m OFFICIAL us: 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

OIAHANC ACTIVITIES REVIRHBD-Tha report of the General Coepany of Belgium
for 1978 includes. in the chapter devoted to its diamond subsidiaries. the
activities of the Diamond Caspany of Angola (DIAHANG) in which the pre-
viously aaaed Belgian company holds 200.300 shares worth 500 kvansas each.

or ll.§7 percent of the capital. The Angola Diamond Cospany mines dissonds
on concessions having an area of 50.000 square kileaeters in the northeastern
region of the country. The nassive exodus of Portuguese workers and tech-
nicians employed in the conpany's vines and adsinistratlve departments and
the dosage suffered by the fleet of vehicles and aining equipeant were the
sale causes of a very considerable drop in production in 1976 and 1977.

Aid from the Angolan authorities and efforts made by foreign technicians
node available to the company by its principle private shareholders did

make it possible to bring about a degree of rectification of the situation
in l978. Over 700.000 carats of diamonds for jewelry vars mined. Private
English and Belgian shareholders also provided financial aid in the form of
a loan for the resumption of DIAHANG‘s activities. No progress has been
made in the establishment of terns of indemnification of shareholders who
lost their holdings by the Angolan decree of 26 August 1977. Nevertheless,
by virtue of Portuguese legal provisions. the distribution to shareholders
of assets belonging to the conpany and sequestered in Portugal is anticipated.
lText] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 16 Mar 79 p 711]
ll.46&

(ISO: 101000

10

em ADDVP'A' "(‘9 “HIV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMEROON

DEGREE BSTADLISNES FOREIGN TRADE CENTER
Paris HARCNES TROPICAUX RT MEDITERRANEBNS in French 16 Her 79 p 697

[Textl 0n 8 March. President ahidjo signed an order concerning the estab-
lishment and organisation of a National Foreign Trade Center (ONCE) vith
its main off e in Douala. it will open offices inside the country and
abroad depen ing on need.

it will he the task of the organization to: systematically seek out for-
eign markets; join with the proper public administrations and professional
organizations involved in studying ways of using these markets; and propose

measures tending to promote commercial trade between Cameroon and other
countries.

in addition. the CNCE will be in charge of providing economic. commercial
and technical information and regulation requirements in the field of for-
eign trade for producers. merchants and national or foreign professional
organizations. it is to gather opinions of professionals on foreign trade
and transmit them to the government. reco-ending that the government make
the necessary adaptations in regulations in order to meet requirements for
the exporting of national products. Finally. it is to do everything possi-
ble in order to improve imports and exports with respect to the various
related departments of foreign trade operations.

The CNCB's board of directors is made up of a chairman and eleven members:
a representative from the departments of the prime minister; a repre-
sentative of the sinister of economy and planning; a representative of the
sinister of finance: a representative of the minister of agriculture: a
representative of the general delegate for tourism: the general director of
the National Office for the Marketing of Basic Products or his representa-
tive: the president of the Chamber of Commerce. industry and Mining of
Cameroon: the president of the chamber of Agriculture. Livestock Raising
and Forests: the president or the National Union of numbering Operators:
the president of the National Union of Manufacturers; and the president of
the National Union of importers and Exporters.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie.. Paris. 1979

[1.666
C80: 6600

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

CAMEROON

BRIEFS

:nzw SHIPS ORDERED-d bul|etin publiehed in Yaounde on 8 Hatch by the Cenetoon
Shipping Linee (CMSRIPLINES) hee juet announced that thet chipping cenpeny

hne ordered two new Iultipurpoee ehipe. eech hevin; e deed-weight capacity
of 16.000 tone. The two veneeln will be delivered to the conpeny et the

end of the yeer. [Excerpt] [Vane HARCHBS TROPICAUX 81' HEDITBRMNEBNS in
French 16 bin 79 p 697] 11.664

680: 5‘00

12
IO! OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

BOKASSA SECURE FOR mm llTli FRENCH All)
Paris JBUNB ATRIQUE in French 14 Mar 79 pp 71, 72
[Article by Abdelaziz Dahaani: "'God, Money and 1, Your Papa'")

[Text] To relieve the torper of the 200 passengers aboard the Air Afrique
DC~8, a hostess announces the approach to Bangui with this warning: "he
urgently recon-end that you do not take with you on debarking the enchaincd
newspapers JEUNE AFRICA, AFRICASIA (sic) and L8 CANARD."

At the airport of the Central African capital, the search is each aore aeticu-
lous on arrival-~for those attsapting to bring in the newspapers--than on de-
parture-~for those hiding soae diaaonds in their luggage.

This obsession is explained by the fact that these passengers are arriving at
Bangui several weeks after the serious outbreaks that roughly shook the Central
African Eapire on 20 and 21 January. leaving a balance sheet of about 400 dead.

Contrary to what has been said or written. Bokassa is still solidly tuned into
a land that he knows well, that he controls better than is believed. and he
still has the benefit of significant foreign support. principally fro. France.
But the incidents of January have left traces, beginning with the road leading
fro. the airport to the capital. A large billboard, "Bangui the Stylish, the
City of Betting", partially destroyed. sets the tone. Yet, for all that,
Bangui remains a really pretty city. clean, neat and welcoming. an agreeable
place to live in peaceti-e. This is not yet the case. Soldiers, subaachine-
guns in hand, lount guard in front of the linistries, certain administrations,
the radio, and even in front of the three statues of Bokassa (a fourth. iaper-
ial one is being finished). But the strictest vigilance is shown in front of
the store, "Le Pacific," owned by the Elpress Catherine, the official wife of
Bokassa I. if one believes the taxi-drivers' stories, nearly the whole city
belongs to "Papa the Esperor." There is truth and legend in it. In recent
weeks bokassavhas even taken measures to relax the ataosphere by "denational-
izlng" some fir-s. That iaplies that he has released soae ballast on sole of
his own coapanies. "is aagnaniaity has gone so far as to restore the "union
freedon" with the creation of wage emissions to study the denands after lost
of the active population went on strike. To protest. both the repression that

13
ron orrtcm. use out)!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cane down on the high-school students and the decline in the purchasing
power of wage-earners--when the salaries are paid, which is not always the
case. The discontent was such that even a part of the cotton harvest belong-
ing to the UCCA (Central African Cotton Union) was burned by the peasants.
The anger extended to the women, who went out into the streets n a silent
march.

Sono throw away their medals. rewarding wives who have given birth to four

or more children. This deterioration in the situation worries the 4,000 Euro-
peans who live in Bangui but who have the utmost difficulty in uprooting then-
solves fro. their way of life, the privileges, their advantages.

What is left of the incidents of 20 and 21 January? The numerous slogans writ-
ten on the walls by students, denouncing the corruption and demanding the re-
turn of the Republic are covered by posters of the "Renewed banana [Movement

for the Social Development of Black Africa]". the single party, singing the
glory of Bokassa I and "his fierce fight to open up the country." Traces of
pillage can still be seen in several dozen stores, especially those of the
Lebanese. 0n the other hand, the large "Peasant" store belonging to Bokassa
was quickly put back into operating condition.

Bokassa, having felt the rise of discontent, quickly had it channeled in the
direction of the "pillars of the Central African economy. the Lebanese, the
Yeaenites and the haoussa Caneroonians or Nigerians." However, everyone knows
these are just the small fry. But even those who did not escape the hunt and
the looting were called in on Si January to pay immediately all taxes and
assessments owing to the state, with advance payments to the end of 1980.

In fact. the nest serious probiea being raised in the Empire is the state's
capty coffers, all the note so since Bokassa has Iade noney one of the sacro-
sanct mainstays of the state by stating in 1976. "What counts for the lost in
life are God, money and 1, your papa." it is money that has dried up the fast-
est because of the large acts of folly (8,000,000,000 CPA francs) connected
with the coronation in December 1977, and the lifestyle of the emperor's court,

with its enoraous complex at Berenge, and that of the Empress Catherine at
Bangui .

in the hottest hours of the January outbreaks, Bokassa was really afraid and
had evacuated in hermetically sealed caskets all the coronation "gifts", worth

several hundred million CPA francs. gifts received fro: foreign govern-ants or
companies that operate in the country.

Since then, aokassa, who was living a rather isolated life in Berengo, has been
trying to take latters into his own hands again and every day has been making
the Berenge-Bangui run (so km) in a small plane, a Corvette, piloted by French
youth, his children traveling in other snail planes. His chief preoccupation
is finding the necessary Ioney to get the tension lowered; even in the country,
one does not get over the "bonds" that the banks are refusing to honor. A
puff of oxygen cane fron France in February with a new loan for 1,000,000,000
CFA francs, and also from Kuwait with a credit of about $3,000,000. This money

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

served to fill in the gaps and take care of first things first by paying,

in order: l)the military. 2)policemen and gendarmes. 3)custons officers,
nether civil servants such as teachers, hospital workers. etc. But some-
thing snapped. when demonstrations by students. policemen and soldiers hosi-
tated for a long time before firing on their sons or their cousins’ sons. not
to mention the sons of the leaders. One of the demonstrations by these stu-
dents was even led by the son of Henri Maiden, the prime alnlster. Bokassa
did not fail to hold the parents responsible. According to some witnesses,
Zairean soldiers were then put in charge of most of the repression while
crossing the Oubangui. The river also became the crossing place for a very
large traffic in objects stolen from Bangui villas. These especially well-

organised thefts are worrying the cooperators who see them as hostil demonstra-
tions against the imperial regime.

Despite all the difficulties. Bokassa still seems to be solid. even if only
because he has the benefit of Paris' protection. A French diplomat who knows
Bangui well gave us this confidence: "There is no easy alternative formula.
For sentimental and humanitarian reasons, we do not want to follow the Ameri-
can methods used when they wanted to rid themselves of Ngo Dinh Diem in
Vietnam. You see what happened then. Closer to home. there is the shah."

Iran played the role of catalyst in this remarkable bloody agitation in
Bangui. Students, in the manner of the partisans of Khomeyni, walked for
two days. shouting this slogan: "After the shah-~Bokassal" Never did a dis-
pute go so far. For the moment the "fox" Bokassa has broken the force of the
coup and he still aspires to be the world's last emperor. It is true that he

is sitting on a poor country. But can one speak of poverty when one has
uranium and diamonds under his feet?

COPYRIGlT: Jenna Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

8946
C80: 4400

15
Fox orncw. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N880 FOR POLITICAL, ADMINISTRATIVE REFORM ACCEPTED BY ALL
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 14 Mar 79 pp 67-69
[Article by Jos-Blaise Ali-a: "Nhat Future for Chad?"]

[Text] lnterainabie lines of refugees stretch out over several kilometers
along the dusty paths. furrewing the region of swanps and bogs south of
Nd'Jaaena that constitutes Chad's granary, with its plantations of cotton,

peanuts. aillet. dry legumes. sweet potatoes and rice, when irrigation is
possible.

But these thousands of Nd'jaaenese who according to their means have chosen
the autoaobile, the bicycle. the donkey or even walking on foot, have not sud-
denly discovered the benefits of agriculture. They have quite siaply decided
to withdraw to the land of their origin. leaving alaost deserted the capital
which has been living in slow action for several weeks, and in which their
security is no longer assured.

Thus. the Nd'jaaena region is no longer the buffer zone that served as a junc-
tion between the noaad and lslaaired populations of the North and the Chris-

tian and sedentarized populations of the South. Practically cut in half, tho
Chadian capital is conpletely paralyzed.

Each of the two parties has stayed put while while the bargaining goes on for
a possible agree-ant between the different groups. But hostilities have not
ceased and the tension reaains. "any believe the wisest solution is to pack

one's bags and flee. But can the snail southern cities support this sudden
migratory flow?

it is true that Chad itself is the result of population aoveaents and invas-
ions that enabled non-negroid peoples. chiefly Arabs and Fulahs, to aix with

black populations. The result is cross-breeding which is nevertheless rather
superficial.

The varying religious currents that per-eate the country are responsible in
large part for this situation. They have caused Chad to be divided into two
human groups of aaterially equal iaportance. The islaaized populations on the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one hand and. on the other. the aniaist ethnic groups. nest of which have
eabraced the Christian religion transmitted by colonization.

The resistance of the populations of the North to colonial penetration con-
tributeu Iuch to the imbalance existing in the country today. It is true
that for a long tine the people of the North showed a certain repugnance with
respect to school. It was in the South, more open to education, that most
of the political elite was recruited at the tine ef Chad's accession to in-
dependence on ll January 1960. General de Gaulle's personal representative,
Andre Malraux. could then declare. "Chad's destiny is privileged in eoapari-
son with so many African countries, in that it is starting with the new civili-
zation. Here it is not a question of liquidating the past, but of ensuring
the future.“ He wager that the French minister-writer was far froa suspect-
ing the difficulties that awaited the new state. it took just a few years

to realize that the existence of several communities living in the interior
of a geographic territory is not enough to transform that entity into a na-
tion. When in May 1978 JEUNB AFRIQUB used the title "Chad State Being Born"
(No 905), the country had been in ruins for a long time. Already. throughout
the land, actual division was a reality (see nap).

Although the nultiplicity and diversity of the players today lakes the gala
especially complex, no one could forget that the causes of the evil proceed
precisely from the ilbaiance existing between the two groups that people Chad.
That began in June 1965 at Mangalme, with a banal tax collection affair. The
inhabitants of the locality, believing they were being subjected to extortion
by civil servants who were natives of the South. refused to discharge their
civic duty. What was in the beginning just a Jacquerie [peasant uprising]
soon looked like a rebellion. extending to several localities in the region.
The opponents of President Toabalbaye's regime were waiting for just that, in
order to organize the discontent.

The Chadian National Liberation Front (FROLINAT) was created. Afterwards it
experienced diverse fortunes at the aercy of the confrontations between its
successive leaders. The Chadian opposition is as divided as the country it-
self. Its internal quarrels are continuous. and it is in extended order that
the various groups are going to present the-selves at an eventual round table,
considered--with reason--as a last-chance meeting.

As paradoxical as that may appear. it is the government in place--cr lore pre-
cisely one of the coaponents of that government--that is in a position of
weakness. in recent months everything has happened as if each protagonist was
being careful above all to strengthen his foundations so that he may be in a
position of strength when he presents himself at the negotiation. That is

how the northern part of the country is in the hands today of the different
_factions of the FROLINAT; while the head of the gendaraerie.

Col Nada: Abdelkader Xaaougue is arguing,with President Felix Malloum. over
Priae Minister Hissein Habre's redoubt in the Nd‘janena region. the South is
still loyal to the president of the Republic.

But are the players on the field in control of the gage? Chad is known to
have long been the object of international covetousness.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL as: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although Nigeria and the Sudan are jostling each other in order to propose
their own mediation plans and although the can itself has formed a reconcil-
iation committee that is paving the ground, France and Libya are playing the
part of gendarmes firmly determined to impose the “right choice." The idea
of a Chadian federation is not a new one for France. It previously took five
years after independence for an important region of Chad, the BET (Borkou-
unnedi-Tibesti) to come under Chadian administration. Until 1965, in fact,
the BET for strategic reasons continued to belong to France. Gen de Gaulle's
government wanted the region to serve as a refuge for Algerian-born Frenchmen
coming from Algeria. Afterwards. he unsuccessfully asked President Tenbalbaye
to make available to him the region of Harare Mangueigne, to serve as a train-
ing base for mercenaries favorable to the secession of the South Sudan.

Col Qadhdhafl, for his part. gave priority to the extension of Islamic space
and influence. An eventual Islamic state in the North could be one of the
components of the "Chadian federation."

That possibility as envisaged by Tripoli would not have net with

Geulouni Oueddei's approval. That attitude would be behind his quarrel with
the Libyan leader and would also have precipitated a new explosion in what re-
mained of the FROLINAT. The group that seems to be favored by Libya is led
by Muhammad Acyl. Despite a certain influence exercised by Paris and Tripoli,
no Chadian politician is really in favor of the federal system. Gen Malloum
perhaps lacked clarity and vigor in stating only that he would not take the
initiative. But Nissein Habre downright rejected that formula. On that

point he is in total agreement with his potential enemy, Col Kamougue. as

well as with other leaders. including Dr Abba siddick, a former FROLINAT lead-

er. who is waiting to make his real re-entry into politics around the nego-
tiating table.

The federal system having been rejected outright, everyone is in agreement on
the necessity for an administrative and political reform. This requires a
new regional carving up and a decentralization providing for a certain margin

of autonomy at the local decision level. A consensus will have to be swiftly
arrived at on this subject.

There will rennin the thorny problem of division of responsibility. it is far
from being solved and yet that is what will determine the future of the insti-
tutions. The open war that Felix Malloum and Hissein Nabre have been waging
has shown that it was impossible for them to govern together. Nill one of the
two protagonists agree to efface himself on behalf of the national interest,
or will it really be necessary again to resort to the judgment of arms? In
any case, the fundamental charter signed in August 1978 flew to pieces with

the recent events. A new experiment-~one nore--is going to be attempted.
What form it will take is not yet known.

Drawing a conclusion from the bloody week that Chad went through in February.
a cadre from the South, disillusioned, said to me. not without bitterness,
"Up to new the leadership in these matters has been exercised by a national
from the South. We are trying an experiment with a man from the North. Ne

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shall see what cones out of that." Today that sentinent, which expresses
a certain laziness. is shared lore and lore by Chadian cadres.

COPYRIGIT: Jeune Afrique (IRUPJIA 1979

8946 '
680: 4400

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

ANNOUNCEMENT OF REFERBNDIM mrms MIXED REACTION
Paris JBUNB APRIQUB in French llo Her 79 pp 73-76

[Article by Sory Serinde Disllo: "Neither Referendum Nor Reshuffling'q

[Text] Surprise and disappointment-«hose vere the feelings that any
Gabonese experienced when, on 20 February 1979, President 31 lladj Omar Bongo
announced to then that he was calling off the referendum on constitutional
rotor: and that there vould not be any ministerial reshuffling before 1980.

The second special congress of the soc [Gabonsse Democratic Party] held in
January 1979 in Libreville had decided that upon the end of the term of the
existing legislative the deputies would be elected for 5 years (instead of
7 years) separately from the Gaboneso president whose tenure has been kept
at 7 years. This decision was to be approved by referendun. It will now
be passed by'the central coauittee and political bureau of the P06 and by
the national Assembly.

The head of state justified this procedure by the need not to be co-eitted
to new expenditures in this period of austerity. Aw voting costs noney for
transportation and the printing of ballots, not to nention the mobilization
of the activists to the detriment of their occupational activities. The
same concern to save public funds within the framework of the austerity
plan hes prompted Gabon to renounce the celebration of its independence
anniversary in Port Gentil this year. A saving of 30 billion CPA francs
will result.

A referendum makes it possible for the governors to subject their policies
to a plebiscite. it is rare when they are voted down. To renounce a
referendum for the sake of saving noney under these conditions redounds
coapletely to the credit of the Gabonese head of state. The taxpayer will
not couplein of it.

But surprise and disappointment stem more from the postponement of changes
in the governsent. They have been pushed back to 1980, following the
presidential election. President Bongo has in a stay wanted to save a cabinet
reshuffle. The latter had been assued to be iminent on the morrou of the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

P06 congress. It was sll the users expected ss those nestings were the
occasion for the formulation of harsh criticism of the administration of
public affsirs by nunerous participants. One of the nest virulent criticisns
cane fro- the heed of state hilself. Tribslisl, nepotism, professional
incowetence, leadership crisis, the holding of severel offices by sons,
diversion of public funds, corruption, and densgogy sung others were unani-
mously denounced with particular virulence. It ssensd to go without saying
the: hesds would roll in very short order. Some csdrss further-ore were
snxious to replsce the possibly outgoing ones. They did not hide their
disappointment at the postponeuent.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Mrique GRUPJIA 1979

2662
cso: 4400

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

COUNCIL OF MINISTERS APPROVES PROPOSED CONSTITUI‘IONAL REFORMS
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX 81' HEDITERMNEBNS in French 16 Mar 79 p 699

[Text] Meeting with President Bongo on 7 March. the Gaboneee Council of
Ministers approved a bill concerning nodifications to be node in the consti-
tution following the second special congress of. the Gabonese Democratic
Party (P06) hold in Libreville from 210 to 27 January (see HARGIBS TROPICAUX
of 2 February 1979. p 262. and of 2 Hatch 1979. p 578).

The bill will be submitted to the Central Conittee of the party and the
National Aseenbly, aeeting in a joint session in April.

The main provisions of the bill, which is to confirm the preponderant role
played by the party in the governnant and specify objectives to be achieved
and terms of operation of institutions within the national and international
framework. have to do with the party. the office of president and the
governnent, the National Assembly and the High Court of Justice. the APP notes.

According to the new provisions of the constitution. if the presidency is
definitely vacated. the Supreme Court is to be invested jointly by the govern-
nent. the National Assembly and the Political Bureau of the Central Co-ittee
of the party neeting together. Under the current systen. the text stipulated
the National Assembly of the Central Couittee of the party.

New articles give the Central Comittee and the Political Bureau the power
to take the measures and make the decisions falling within the fralework
of their respective coepetencies. If it is a natter of texts of a legis-
lative or regulatory nature. they are carried out by the president of the
republic by en‘ order or a public adainistration regulation.

The term of the presidency remains unchanged: 7 years. As decided at the

last congress.- the term of deputy is reduced iron 7 to 5 years. Elections
will henceforth take place iron in list in each province.

in order to take the new provisions of the constitution into account. the
Council of Ministers has decided to postpone until 1980. on a date later to
be set by decree. the elections scheduled for the selection of the council

22
me nrrmm. new: MN
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ounhuru from the local rollnctiveo. Liheviue. it approved a bill setting
25 Pebrunry 1980 as the date on which the current tern of deputies will

expire. in addition. the neehers of the high Court of Justice ore to be
elected by the Control Cunnittee of the P00 fro. along its neobers. They
were previously elected by the National Aoseobly Eran asong the deputies.

Finally. in keeping with the resolutions of the second specisl congress.
President Bongo has decided that the members of the government and high
officioln named by decree cannot sieultsneouely hold sore than two posts
of hoard chairman of industrial. agricultural or colnercial coupsoias.

COPYRIGRT: Rene Moreux ct 010.. Paris. 1979

11.1.51.
cso: “no

23
roe 0917mm. use mu
FUR (WPNYIAI. USE ONLY

GABON

PORT FACILITIES, ESTIMATED COSTS REVIMD

Paris JZUNB APRIQUB in French lb Her 79 pp 16-17
(Article: "beginning Today, Ports of Tonerrow"l
[Excerpts] Libreville-Owendo

For a long tine Gabon's capital had by way of a port only one pier located
close to Libreville' s downtown section and able to receive only vessels with
shallow drafts. It was necessary to build a deep-water pert. Owendowaa
selected, 15 kiloneters southesst of Librevills, because the natural channel
at this point is ll nsters deep.

In 1977 Libreville-Owende traffic rose from 800,000 tons to 1.3 nillion
tone (of which 1.2 million tons represented inports) because of the prepara-
tions (or the ow sunit conference held in Libreville in July of that year.
At this tine the volune of cargo handled is in the order of l ullion tons,
a level which causes concern that the saturation point for the port coqlen
will be reached in the near future. It is planned that by 1903 the terre-
pleins and hangars will be expended, that two new pier stations (with an
ll-neter draft) will be built as will too neters of pier with shallow draft.
The estinated cost of the projects is 25 billion CPA francs.

The New Owendo Labor m:

with the opening in Dccenber 1978 of the first section of the Trans-Cabanas
Railroad it is anticipated that beginning in 1900 Owendo will receive 1.5
nillion tons of floated lumber annually and 250.000 tons of heavy lunber.

to ecconodate this traffic it was indispenseble to lay out a large lunber
port. Located east of the tip of Owendo, this port will be inaugurated on

10 North 1979. The work (12 billion ct-‘A francs) bore on the laying out of

15 hectares of terrepleins for heavy luﬂser, 600 neters of piers in iple-
plan]: and 1,500 necers of protective dikes delimiting an enclosed lo: floating
area of 40 hectares.

2':
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Santa Clara and Maya-be

In connection with the Tranc-Caboneaa Railroad which will naha poeaible the
outahipnant of mane" fro. hoando and, by around 1990. of iron fro-
Belinge. chore are plane to build at the cape of Santa Clara (1: h- northeaet
of Libtavilla) an ore terninal capable of handling at laaat 16 aillion tone
a year end eccenodating very large vaeeala with drafta exceeding 13 aetara.
Until now couthweetetn Gabon haa had only the Congolaae port of Pointa Noira
at a uritine outlet. It in alao planned to lay out a deep-water co-ereial
port neer the entrance of the manic legoon at Hayuba which for the ment
specialize. in luabet traffic.

The project would involve the following: 800 noteta of protective btaakntat,
a pier-docking etation with a lO-aeter draft. 2 hectaree of terrepleina. and
en encloaed 1o; floating area of 6.3 hectarea for ludur. The eetinatad coat
la 7 billion on francs.

Tho conatruction of thia port will be coaplenented by that of the Mende-
Tchibenga road. Additionally. a regional inprovaaent prosru envieiona the
laying out of agricultural and foteetry far-a, the opening of the Hiliuui
iron nine. and of met- and narble quarriea.

Port Gentil

In Auguet 1979 the deep-water port of Port Centil will be coqlated. lta
coat totals 13 billion CPA franca. ltn nejor faaturea arc ac followe:

680 neten of pier (of which 400 aatera with an 11-aatar draft). 6.000 equate
actors of warehoueee, 110 hectare. of induatrial parka where an noniac
plant and induatrial fiahins plante will be built. In 1977 traffic (includ-
ing oil at Cape Lopez) totaled 12.6“,719 tonc.

comment: qunc Aftiqua GRUPJIA 1979

2662
(:80: M000

25
you ontcm us: ONLY
FOR lll-‘l‘ICMU. USE ONLY

GUINEA

AMINISTRATWE. PlfMllClM. “POM STRMINB BMW
Parts HARCRES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEINS in French 16 liar 79 p 690

[Test] A series of reform is now being applied in order to ensure sore
effective nonngesent of the Guinean econosy. in keeping with decisions node

by the Congress of the Desocrntic Party of Guinea (P06) held in liovssber.
notes the APP. which suites a sunsry of then.

As a result. the structure of iiiPOll‘l'Bx [presusably lsport-Esport Cespanyl.
the largest national co-ercinl firs in Guinea. is going to be cespletely
changed. This sessure was just approved by Guinea's Council on Standards
nod Accounting. Radio Conakry reports. The Council followed a refers pro-
possi presented by President Seltou Tours sised nt naking 1mm sore
functional. All of Cuinee's regulnr ieports and exports go through mom.
According to provisionsl figures given by Radio Conakry. [m reportedly
node a profit in 1978 of 1.7‘ billion sylis (l syli - about .22 french francs
or ll CPA frnncs).

The accounting systess of the different couercial firss in Guinea are
also going to he standardized before the second psrt of the annual National
Econonic Conference which is to take place in April.

In addition. the Guinean JOURNAL 0?"an has published a list of ll appoint-
sents of finnnoinl directors of national enterprises. Only three of then
are transfers free one company to another. The others are appointsents of

i inancinl esecut ives who previously held posts in goverruent supervision or
the ndsinistrstion. Seltou Toure recently told participants in the first

part of the nnnusl National Econosic Conference that there would be ispor-
tnnt changes at the bend of national enterprises in order to avoid "favori-

tiss. nnrrow group interests and indifference to other sectors.”

Pinnlly. the JOURNAL OFFICIEL of Guinea notes two presidential orders sised
nt isproved ssnegesent of funds. The first provides that wages and salaries
owing to enployees and officials of the governsent and public organisations
will he pnid at the latest on the fifth day of the sooth following that

for which the sun is due. The second stipulates that fines and ispound
fees previously collected by police-en and gender-ea as part of their duty
will henceforth be paid directly to the ‘I‘ressury and receipts issued.

COPVlli‘Jit: Rene Moreux et Cie.. Paris. 1979

"$66
C80: 6500 26
NI! (WPICIAI. USE ONLY

mummy:

NMIQUB FACES REQUMSCBNCB 0P ARMED RESISTANCE
Perie JRUNB AFRIQUS in French 7 Her 79 pp 39-60
[Article by Frencoie Souden: "Crueeder of the ﬂeet"]

(Excerpts) "Attention. it ie poeeible to be bleck end en eneq of the
people!" Thip red closen which need to cover the uelle of Lourenco Herquee
(today known ee Newto) during the eerly egiteted houre of Hounbique'e
independence cen nor be eeen esein on the vooden feneee o! Hoe-bicen citiee.
On 12 Pebreery 1979 the otticiel deily mucus eonounced thet ”300 eneny
esente” hed been erreeted theee peet few veeke in ‘l'ete Province, in the
veet-centrel portion of mtenbique.

Sepionege end Sebotege

bong then were bleck children eged 12 to 16 treined in Rhodeeie end then

cent to Moeﬁique in call groupe on eepionege end econenic eebotege nieeione.
Unqucetionebly. thie renewed upeurse of the ectivitiee of en erned oppoeition.
connected with increeeingly deedly end effective reide by the Rhodeeien erny.
reproeente e epecific plea of the [en Snith ethinietretion: ‘i'o deetebiliee
thie etron; link in the frontline which Hoeedique hee becone.

the Seliebury euthoritiee ere vein; for thie purpoee end for note then e
yeer now Not-bicen novenente hoetile to the Houdique Liberetion Front
li‘Rﬁlel of Semrn Hechcl.

The opposition novenente, node up of eeceeeioniet nenbere of 9mm: who
broke with the ruling perry for ideological or ethnic reeeone. or toner

Africen troope of the Portugueee coloniel erly, withdrew to Dhlevi end
Rhodeeie efter Hoeeﬂiquc'e independence in 1975. with cone lhodeeien

“Selou ecoute" or Europeen nerceneriee ee their cedree, they for- e eiule
front--Afriee Livre (or Free Mrice). Hounbicen leedere eeeert thet they
are finenced by the for-er Portugueu eoloniet, Jorge Jerdin.

2?
Iron ontcm. use ONLY
NR OPVICIM. "8!! ONLY

with the eid of the Seliebury euthoritiee, Jorge Jerdie hee erud end
toneolideted the hove-onto oppoeing mum end eetehliehed in Melewi.
Ze-hie. end moduie. But thie ie not hie only activity. Treveling
conetently between Brazil, South Africa, end Portugal. Jerdie ie involved

very edroitly in politite, hueineee, end litereture.

Thie eethete with the deleenor of Hechievelli. e toner boy ecout end the
tether of 12 children, hee indeed written two hooke: 'Moreehique, Torre
Queinede" [Nor-hique, Fiery Lend], e work of rounticited e-oriee which,
in 1976, vee the yeer'e hut-teller in Portugel; end eepecielly "Rhodeeie:

0 Zecendelo doe Sencoee” [Ihodeeiex Scendel oi the Suction] publiehed in
1978 end which nerretee fro- the ineide end in ninute deteil hov “touregeoue‘
Rhodeeie” hee been able to elude the oil eebergo “pond on it eince 1966.

it to true thet Jorge Jerdin, uho hed euhetentiel intereete in the Note-bicen
oil refineriee, wee one of the principel ectore in thie elueion.

COPYRIGHT: Jeuno Mriquo GRUPJIA 1979

2662
cso: M00

28
M OWICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOZAMBIQUE

BRIEFS

NATIONAL SUGAR INSTITUTB BSTABLISHBD--A decree issued by the Hora-bicen
Council of Ministers concerns the establishment of the National Sugar Insti-
tute (IRA. to use the Portuguese acronye). which will be in charge of
directing. planning and coordinating all activities of the sector. The

text eaphnsires that the sector has priority in the processing industry. not
only because it employs nearly 30.000 persons. but also because it plays a
great role in the populrzion's food supply and as a source of foreign ex-
change for the country. The establishment of the INA. which cones directly
under the Ministry of Industry and Energy. also responds to the urgent need
to guarantee the rehabilitation of the sugar industry by using all the

existing capacity and by rationally distributing available human and eater-
ial resources. The main objective is to increase production. productivity

and yield in this branch. The INA will supervise all activities linked to
sugar cane growing. the sugar industry and other couplenentery industries

that are totally devoted to this branch and considered essential to the
activity. [Text] [Paris HARCRSS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEENS in French

16 Mar 79 p 711] ll.‘6b

050: 4600

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UPPER VOL'M

BmmHIC DEV'EWPHENT DELAYS REPORTED
Pario JBUNR M‘RIQUB in French 28 lr‘eb 79 pp 37-38
[Article by Francoise llubscher: "A Certain Deception?

[Text] is it because it’s the season for war- evenings when the trees still
show the beneficial effects of October's rain? Never has msadougou received
so any visitors so early in the year. Colloquium, conferences, ninieterisl
visits--five events of this kind could be counted in one week. The Voltnn
capital see-s to be taking on the role of a regional center. The Pen-African
Cineaa Festival, the cuo (West African Econonic Co-Jnity), have chosen it
as their headquarters and nuaerous interstate educational institutions have
been installed there. Doubtless it is the air of liberty which can be
breathed here "our only true wealth" as Voltans love to say, which accounts
for the attractiveness of the town.

Proud of this success, the 180,000 inhabitants of Ougadougou are nevertheless
worried. The presence of an increasing nui’er of foreigners fosters develop-
nent of the building and service trades, but also feeds inflated prices

(10 to 15 percent annually). And nine Ionths after the new Assedly Ins
seated end General Lenizene re-elected to the presidency of the Republic,

the lining up of the econouy so such hoped for is still being waited for.

"Hhen I returned fron France." a young Voltan reported.M to wait six
six months to find a place to live. A house with running water and elec-
tricity which can acceuodate seven persons costs between 50,000 and 100,000
CPA francs a month. The nonthly salary of a category c govement eqloyee
is around 30,000 Cl-‘A francs per nonth. Only international agency eqloyees
can afford Io pay. 80 they pile into little huts without utilities
constructed in undeveloped zones and it is still necessary to pay 6,000 to
8,000 on francs for 3 room!"

The stands at the central aarket are well furnished with neat and fresh
vegetables. But provisions are not cheap. Millet is 75 CM francs a kilo,
rice is 110 or 125 according to the quality, potatoes are 150. If a f-ily
with five children would eat rice only, 2 and 1/2 kilos a day, it would have
to spend more than 8.000 CPA francs a math (the linin- monthly salary does
not officially so over 12,500 CPA francs).

30
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

in spite of all this. life goes on in the town's wide dusty streets.

Bicycles overloaded with cut wood, Japanese notorcyclequenshe and vonen's
nodels of Suzuki are the nest popular-wobbly taxis and occasionally a
Mercedes or overblown air-conditioned Peugeot circulates nore or less happily
enong the pedestrians. Hhst do they do to get by? They contrive. Go into
debt to the point they never see a penny of the end of nonth paycheck.

Cross the border vhere one pays less. Every Friday evening a cohort of
vehicles leaves the city towards the Ghaniain capital Accra uhich they will
reach the next day.

A Lackadeisioel Attitude

But the system D is not all. And salsry increases in the public sector
given 1 January (6 to 25 percent, while the unions cleia 60 percent to catch
up) heve not succeeded in quieting conplaints. Above all, the inefficiency
of these ”businessmen-clerks” is deplored. President L-ieana hiuelf in
hie end of the year nessage denounced "the lackadeisical attitude of certain
leaders whose cars by lo o'clock in the norning are lined up in front of
various coffee houses and snack bars in tovn end who nake only episodic
appearances at their desks, preferring to spend their ties on private
business." He added, We find ourselves faced with a fundenental question,
the definition itself of the kind of society ve can pronote in our country.
It will not be an easy task. 111a econony, essentially based on agriculture,
is subject to the fortunes of ell-ate; per capite intone is nong the lowest
in the world; the budget is nodest (30,000 nillion CPA francs in 1978) and
the develop-ent plan is largely financed by foreign aid. The projects are
taking u long tine to see daylight. Fifteen are waiting. Sons. like
Sotexko (Kongoussi Textile Conpany) have insufficient technical and financial
preparation. Others suffer fro. a lack of enthueieen on the part of local
promoters who prefer short tern speculative operations.

Foreign Aid

And if the reopening of Boure's gold nine has started off well, the nsngenese
deposits at Tadaao still have not been exploited; the international clinate
has changed and foreign investors ere no longer very interested.

In spite of the dymnisn of sone agro-food businesses and acne success in
developing agriculture regions such as the Volta Valley, the Voltan econony
has not succeeded in getting under way.

Certainly, the exploitation of phosphate is being counted on. It is hoped
that the substrate will be found to bear uraniun, as Niger's does. Prospec-
ting is in course. But for reach of the young iqatient unageriel class.
the niroculous discovery is not enough. "My country cannot pay for the
luxury of a laisser-faire econoly," one of th- stated. "the government

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ehouId affirm ite euthority while etin roepecting the free play of

denocretic principlee. It wee hoped there would he chenged cite: the
eioctione end the eeetins of the new man. Nothing heppened."

So, we continue to wait.

OOPYRIOIIT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

8860
080: “00 END

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY