FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10610
24 JUNE 1982

Sub-Saharan Africa Report

FOUO No. 778

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non

JPRS publications contain infornmtion primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicalu and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MBRSHIP OF
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE. THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICT- POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS J
24 .111:

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REPORT

2000 No. 778

CONTENTS
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Agricultural Dcvalopncn: in Africa Examined
(Prancoia do Ravignan; PROJET, May 82) ...................

Briafa
Ouaddci Denied Entry Into Rigaria

IVORY COAST

Economic Situation, Pocaibility of chovary Diacuaacd
(um Manna; APRIQUB-ASIE, 26 Apr-9 May 82)

TANZANIA

Briefs
Rabiaa Kills 12

ZAIBE

Military Action Only Hope for Change in Kinshasa
(Francoic Luna-ha Intarvicv; APRIQUEvASIR, 12-25 Apr 82) .

Loadcra Plundar Zaira'a ?a1terin¢ Economy
(Pietra Clary; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 12-25 Apr 82) ...... . . . . . . . . .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nurse-mic»: muss

AGICULMAL DEVEIDPHBNI' IN AFRICA m
Paris PROJBI in French No 165. Hey 82 pp 559-570

[Article by sgrononist kancois de Ravignan: "Countradictions in Africa: ls
Para Development Working for the Peasants?"]

[Text] Everyone is aware of the chronic food supply difficulties experienced
by the black African countries of the Sahel. The increasing food deficits
are not. however. exclusively reserved for then. They are also found in the
countries in the equatorial zone, not only in the overpopulated cities. with
increasing unelploylaent. but also in the comtryside. although the climate
may be favorable to highly productive agriculture. For example. in the South
Caneroon. infant malnutrition exists. and it is widespread in Burundi. More-
over. the majority of the black African countries are. apart fros their geo-
graphic situation. increasingly dependent on inports of foodstuffs, grains in
particular. which are constantly increasing in volume. According to no sta-
tistics. although it is not in Africa that the worst examples of want occur.
it is on this continent that the food situation is deteriorating the fastest
today. To stop at asking this statenent would be donning the steps taken

to treating the synptous of the evil. as has so often been done. “us it

is necessary to take the trouble to establish where the true came of the
evil lie.

Hunger—A Continuous Development

Drought followed by fanine has long been experienced in the Sahel. as Diulde
Lays revealed in his interviews with livestock breeders in Niger.1 But these
calamities seen to have cone closer together and become sore acute in the
course of recent years. "the fanines which occurred after the 'Bvasion' (so
culled because sole ate while their relatives were unable to watch them) have
not even been counted. because they are too maerous. so mach so that they
have not even left us the tine to find a nsne for then." one of the farmers
Questioned answered. Is the weather beconing dryer? Is the land deteriorating
as a result of unprecedented denographic growth? These causes exist. If
they were totally at fault. it would only have been necessary to urge an ac—
celerated exodus of the peoples of the Sahel toward regions with less arid
clinates. But history teaches in that faines have occurred in zones with
clinates ordinarily favorable to agriculture. Apart from those which have
marked the history of Europe. we identify such cases in Africa itself. In

1
FOR OWICIAL US! ONLY
his thesis on Gabon.2 Gilles Sautter showed how a famine developed in a country
with ample water and rich 3011, leading mainly to the deaths of women and
children, following the requisition of the manpower for the building of the
famous Congo-Ocean railroad. There was indeed no population or weatter factor
here. but with the men absent. preparation of the fields was inossible. A
amber of reflections born of observation of the events in the African Sahel
suggest that the climtic and demographic causes of food shortage be regarded
as less important than has been readily asserted.3

Nor can the present food situation in black Africa be blamed on the too fre-
quently suggested "traditional thinking" of its peasants. They have proven
themselves capable of taking up a amber of new crops (peanuts. cassava. sweet
potatoes. beans) and perfecting adapted cultivation techniques. Today they
are entirely ready to inrove their work methods. as many of those who have
lived in close conjunction with them in the villages can testify. Uithout

a doubt the peasants would. mder other conditions. have been able to develop
the traditional cultivation systems. using their own resources. in order to
adapt them to a growing population volume and to diversified needs. This

has been seen in other regions of the world and in other historical epochs
(in Europe, in particular. during the "agricultural revolutions" of the 18th
n:-J 19th centuries). But today. the traditional African cultivation systems
are no longer developing of their own accord: blocked by a century under a
colonial economy. they more nearly reveal a regressive development.

The nature of colonizati n was to destroy the peoples' autonomy. that is to
say their capacity to resolve their own problems by themselves. In some cases
these people. always kept under subjection. were aided. But the moat forceful
inpact of the colonial period was cultural. The Africans were persuaded that
there was only one model of development--that of the peoples of Europe. and
that they themselves were basically incapable of imitating this model without
the assistance of the mother countries or the former colonizers. Independence
did nothing but stress this cultural dependence. taken up in turn by the new
nations. 0n the economic level. this was reflected in the desire to acquire
an industry as quickly as possible as a sign of wealth and power: a "developed"
country is an industrialized country. But industry is costly and is purchased
from the white man. and he must be paid. To do this. it is necessary to step
up the export of mineral raw materials when there any. or in any case. farm
products. Thus the peasants are urged to expand the area planted to peanuts.
cotton or coffee. which in some cases in fact compete. in the realm of labor
time and available area. with basic food crops. Moreover. this industry pur-
chased at such a cost from the white man creates few jobs (it even happens
that it eliminates then. when it replaces a craft industry with which it com-
petes and which it destroys). Such industry is located in the few large cities.
which are growing at a much faster rate than the number of new jobs. In
Cameroon. for example. for 1.2 million young people expected to join the urban
workforce between 1976 and 1980. the national plan provided for only 81.000
jobs in modern industry.

An activity which is so marginal in relation to the weight of the population

as a while is hardly of a sort to fill a demand for local food crop agriculture.
Moreover. the food demands of large cities swing. to some extent. but in-
creasingly, toward export goods, thanks to the desire to imitate and the

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

urgings of advertising. The increase in the consuption of bread. for example.
in the black African cities. is impressive. Under such conditions. the growing
of export crops becomes a necessary evil so that the peasant can obtain the
little bit which he absolutely cannot do without. Indeed. from a technical
point of view. one could in a certain number of cases contemplate entirely

or almost entirely replacing an export crop cultivated with a food crop useful
to the comtry.‘ But this cannot be developed without a broad enough market

to give the price stability. And on this point. the choice of the method

of industrialization is basic. The foreign market responds to industries
concentrated in large cities. providing few jobs and this limited food denand.
with a concentrated supply at stable and relatively moderate prices. Domestic
supply. on the other hand. scattered and involving small quantities. is subject
to sharp fluctuations which are reflected in the prices. It seems that little
thought has been given in Africa to this effect of the method of industrializa-
tion on the development of food crop agriculture. In any case, no country

has made any original choices here in the realm of industrialization. Imitation
of the Western model is the rule. and the Buropeans. moreover, have contributed
greatly by their advice. their education. their "aid" and their bribes to

the adoption of this model.

Industry which does not provide jobs and agriculture which does not provide
food....Under such conditions. the population growth which nodern Africa is
experiencing develops like a cancer on a continent which. however. despite
some zones of heavy density. is very far from being among the most heavily
populated regions on the planet.

Prograns and Plans

Rural development programs and plans were exclusively oriented. as national
independence dawned. toward export crops which were to bring in the famous
foreign exchange needed for industrial developsent: there were oil palm plans
in various equatorial comtries. a 100.000-ton (cacao) project in Cameroon.

a peanut project in Senegal. and plans for cotton development in the countries
of the Sahel (Upper Volta. Chad. Niger. Hali). The African governments easily
found companies and experts in Europe to direct these projects. Intensive
technical aid made it possible to obtain often spectacular results. for example
the quadrupled cotton production in west Africa during the decade between

1963 and 1973.

Elsewhere. however, the coffee plantations abandoned in ‘rogo and the cacao
plantations in Cameroon have experienced low price periods which serve to
discourage the peasants. In Senegal. the drop in peanut prices up to 1968

and their failure to rise subsequently finally led in that period to a reduction
in plantings by the peasants. Generally speaking. the producer countries

have not obtained the income they expected from export crops. since they have
had constantly to pay ever increasing prices for their isports. They were
forced thereby into forward flight. seeking to supent the production of these
crops further by increasing the areas and yields in order to maintain their
income.

But the increasing food difficulties have sometimes worked against these in-
tentions. in particular in the countries of the Sahel. In Niger. the production

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of marketable peanuts increased from 150,000 tons prior to the 1973 drought

to 18,000 tons afterwards. The lessons to be learned from this drought were.
however. ill understood. It was as if the recovery in 1976-1975 suggested

to the governments that the weather hazard had been dispelled forever. In

the Hausa territory in Niger. an integrated project called In (Hatameye. Myrria,
Magaria) was drafted in a region in which the peasants said "the land is dead."
Despite positive aspects, this projects remains. however. heavily based on
peanut production. and the cadres are very often mobilized to deal with opera-
tions pertaining to this crop. The French Company for the Deve10pment of
Textile Fibers (cm). the leading manager of cotton operations in French-
speaking Nest Africa, deemed it necessary at that time to justify cotton culti-
vation as posing no threat to the development of agriculture in general. "The
cotton crop has become the technical and economic bulwark of a mater of re-
gional farm development operations."5 This arguaent must have had weight.
since far from halting the "white tide." the government of Upper Volta. for
example, continued to encourage it. Today 57,000 tons of cotton are produced
annually as compared to 30,000 in 1969 and 6.000 in 1962. while famines have
recurred on a maniac? of occasions since 1974. giving the lie to the optimistic
predictions of the cotton experts.

In this same country. food shortages have never raised the issue of the volume
of dry season garden crops. green beans and peppers. which. produced between
December and Hay. find takers at high prices on the European market. It would.
however, be possible to irrigate to produce vegetables wanted on the local
market. rice, wheat and tubers. The Wench companies which serve as middlemen
in shipping to Europe profit heavily from the disparity between the prices

on the production and consumption levels, from which the producers themselves
hardly benefit. A national comany in Niamey. Niger. organized domestic truck
garden production, of green beans in the main. for Europe. Badly managed.
this company has a serious deficit. and as a result Niger is subsidizing the
winter consunption of green beans by the people in France!

Generally speaking. the major projects based on export crops are thus still
functiOning. The competitive nature of income crops and food crops so often
denounced has hardly been contemplated at all. it appears. by the national
planners. However. the increase in imports of food. grains in particular.
which has been necessary for urban consumption has since 1975 been a source
of concern to the governments. They have tried to set up specific, and often
quite inefficient, projects: a wheat cultivation project on the Adamaoua
Plateau in Cameroon. of which the only economic result has been a substantial
increase in the country's indebtedness;6 rice growing projects in the river
valley in Niger, which have led to warnings abOut the dangers on the level

of preservation of the ecosystem and the food supply of the peasant producers;7
sugar production projects based on large national plantations with an ultra-
modern plant adjacent. on land taken from the peasants. in Niger. Upper Volta
and Senegal.

Noting the increasing difficulties in supplying the cities. the government

of Cameroon lamched the "green revolution" just prior to the party :ongress

in 1975, which was to make possible a consistent increase in marketable food
production. The National Rural Development Fund (FONADER). established to
finance this "revolution." allocated its credit in fact above all to government

I

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

employees who profited therefrom to establish capitalist farming enclaves.
large coffee or cacao plantations in particular.

The livestock breeding projects, newcomers on the scene. have been established
in the countries of the Sahel to turn the disorganization of traditional live-
stock breeding which followed the 1973 drought to advantage. Ranches were
organized to take over a part of the herds of the livestock breeders forced

to sell, with integrated pasture fattening for the peasants. with a view mainly
to supplying the more prosperous classes with meat. and in fact exporting

it to Europe. Thus. even when it is a question of producing food products
usable in the producer countries, there is strictly no difference in concept
between these pregame and those which are based on export crops. It is not

a question of feeding the peasant and his family. of helping him develop a
reproducible tool for work. first of all. but of getting him to produce products
which will save money or bring in foreign exchange for the state. Under these
conditions. rice can be "famine producing" in the same way as Rene Dumont

said coffee was in Togo.

No Peasant Participation

A scattering of varied and ill-coordinated projects do coexist. nonetheless.
with these major programs. The FAO fertilizer program implemented in a nn-ber
of African countries in the years between 1970 and 1980 provides a good illus-
tration. The "experts" for these programs selected a certain nnnber of peasants
and helped them cultivate a crop plot with a ready-made fertilizer formula.
alongside a control plot without fertilizer. In the nunjority of cases. the
other farming techniques were not altered. One wonders aabout the efficiency
of fertilizer nmder such conditions! In Niger. the "modernization" of millet
cultivation is limited to a few technical aspects which those who staff the
base levels never cease to reiterate. without taking variations in local con-
ditions into acconlntnthe use of improved seed. fungicide treatment of the
seed. fertilizer. proper density in planting. and thinning to every third
plant. None of these prescriptions is good or bad in itself. but it would

be better to look first at what the peasants do and what results they achieve
rather than merely reciting this catechism.

One frequent weakness of the programs is their sectorisl distribution under
the responsibility of various departments which most often do not work together.
For example. the forestry programs most often come under the water and forest
departments. which. since they regard the peasant as the main enemy of the
tree (or perhaps surpassed by the goat!). take great care to avoid peasant
participation in any of the programs at all. regarding any relationship with
the peasant solely in terms of penalizing him. Now. the reaforestation needs
of such regions of the Sahel are such that no administrative department can
do anything substantial at all with its own personnel alone. Nothing can

be accomplished here. moreover. without mobilizing the peasants. And in addi-
tion to the scattering of the departments when it comes to village action.

in the majority of countries, itinerant rural development agents preach the
good word about modernization and village cooperation with hardly any results,
for lack of follow-up and realism. doubtless. but also for lack of support

on the part of other departments.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Some of the countries have tried to correct the scattered nature of the campaigns
on the village level by organizing "integrated operations." Cameroon has

had its own, as has the: Central African Republic. Congo, Mali. Niger. with

its aforementioned 31 project. Upper Volta, with the establialment of the

Rural Development Organization (can). which integrate all the departments
concerned with rural life at the base level. Technical carpaigna, farmer
training, encouragement of rural craft activities. health and social projects
can thus proceed in harmony. But as we said in connection with the 34 project.
these operations are always based on priority for the development of marketable
production. This goal, always taking precedence over the others, is not in

itself a goal of development for the rural sector. and very often even works
against balanced development.

I l l-Adap ted Pro gram

Could the situation be otherwise? As they have been conceived. the programs
require heavy investments. generally covered by credits of foreign origin,
including the IBRD. USAID and EDP [European Development Fund]. for the repay-
ment of which plans must be laid. The "experts" affiliated with the bodies,
who are generally very closely involved in the drafting of the projects (when
the whole of the concept is not their work) always plan for heavy and speedy
production to make the investments "profitable." This concern. in the majority
of cases, eliminates any consideration of the ecosystem balance and the priority
needs of the inhabitants, food requirements in particular. as well as concern
with the peasants' participation. If it is true that not all of the programs.
like the wheat project in Adamaoua, Cameroon, exclude the peasants. it is

in no way an exaggeration to say that none is based on the requirement of
satisfying their priority needs to feed. cloths and house themselves and educate
their children. Under these conditions, one cannot be surprised that nany

of these programs bog down in a few years. once the "experts." equipped with
heavy resOurces. who made them operate, have departed. Marketing difficulties.
a failure to maintain what has been achieved and general disinterest are the
fate of the projects whose single dimension fails to take into account the
overall and participational nature of true development.

Nor can one be surprised that the "priority for agriculture" incorporated

in the prefaces to a nunber of African national development plans proves,
when it comes to evaluation, to have been nothing more than a pious wish or
incantation. 0n the one hand, difficulties are often encountered in finding
financing for the projects announced. 0n the other hand. doubtless for lack
of adapation to the reality, projects very often lag in their progress. with
equal frequency, mainly because of structural and organizational reasons,

the national agriCultural departments fail to use up the credit allocated

to them. It is so much easier to build a factory and get it operating than
to invest in agriculture! And in fact. the planners regard agriculture as

if they were confronted with an operational plant the production of which
_should be strictly consistent with the investments made therein. Now this
plant (if agriculture could ever be regarded as such) is not in functional
condition. It is in fact precisely in a state of breakdown. It is the very
structure of rural life, destroyed by the colonial economy, which needs to

be rebuilt before expecting to make it function satisfactorily and profitably.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If this is not done. the peasant. already wrooted culturally. has no option
remaining but to plan to leave for the city or to go abroad in the hqe. in
most cases illusory. of finding a steady job.

Deterioration of Cultivation Systems

This profound deterioration in the structures of rural life emerges clearly
when one considers the cultivation systems used in the majority of the black
African comtries. Outdated today. they are not. however. successfully being
altered. as if the internal development spring of the rural societies had
broken and their capacity to innovate had been stifled. A basic element in
crop raising systems is rotation. the succession in time of cultivation and
fallow periods. In SOuth Cameroon. in the equatorial forest zone. 3 years

of cultivation alternate with a fellow forestry period which lasts at least
7 years. with burning of the area at the end of the cycle. Reestablisluent
of the soil is effected by the trees and the perennial plants in the fallow
period. which draw from the deep soil layer to enrich the surface layer. The
leguminous varieties among these plant species enrich the soil with nitrogen.
sheltered from erosion by the rain and sun. the husus can thus rebuilt itself
before a new cultivation cycle is undertaken.

In Upper Volta. in the Sudan-Sahel zone. 10 years of crop raising alternate
with 10 years lying fallow as savannah, used for animal pasturage and then
burned. In Togo. on the Danyi Plateau. a savannah on which there is tree
growth with patches of forest. 8 to 15 years of lying fallow follow every

8 years of cultivation on burnt-off land. In the river region in Niger, the
traditional system involves 6 years of crop cultivation followed by 6 years

of lying fallow as savannah. Re any involved. for this system no longer func-
tiona. The population of the region has become too dense for the system to
remain viable. In fact, with an average yield of ”0 kg of millet per hectare.
an average of 0.8 hectares is needed to feed one inhabitant. Taking the tradi-
tional system of fallow years into account. one would thus need 1.6 hectare

of arable area per inhabitant. half of it mder cultivation and the other

half lying fallow. Conversely. if the population density were to exceed one
inhabitant per 1.6 hectare of arable land. or 63 inhabitants per arable square
km, the traditional system wOuld no longer be viable. for lack of sufficient
area. As the arable land represents about half of the total. our density
limit is 30 inhabitants per total square in area. In the river zone. popula-
tion densities. which have already reached about 50 inhabitants per square

km. explain the inevitable abandonment of the traditional system. In practice,
the fallow period has simly been eliminated. The peasants raise millet crop
after millet crop. compensating more or less for the decline in fertility

by the use of the organic manure provided by the sheep and goats kept by the
Peul herdsmen on crop fields after harvest. The traditional system has dis-
appeared. but it has not really been replaced by a more intensive one. It

is a matter only of patching up the old system. which is in any case inadequate
to prevent the progressive deterioration of the subsoil due to the effect

of chemical and physical erosion. In fact. the fertility of certain areas

has declined to the extent that they are no longer cultivated. A peasant.
asked about the past development of a plateau area near his village. answered:
"Millet was raised here in the past and it produced well. We cannot do that
any more today: the land has aged, like the rest of us."

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the Danyi sector of Togo, the traditional fallow periods have also been
shortened. A decline in fertility can be observed. Soae peasants are forced
to purchase foodstuffs from the residents of the plains. which never occurred
in the past. Diseases are affecting cassava which might well be for lack

of nourishment. In the Eton sector of Cameroon, to the north of Yaounde.
where population densities of 100 inhabitants per square km are not uncommon.
the practice of leaving land fallow has almost disappeared. This ancient
forest. in an advanced stage of conversion to savannah. also is characterized
by often much deteriorated and practically sterile soils.

In all of these cases. the traditional cultivation system. with the alternation
of crops and fallow years as forest or savannah, is no longer viable. Every-
where it will become less and less viable as the population increases. Simply
shortening the fallow period. without altering its nature. Ileana deterioration
of the soil within a more or less short period.

The Needed Agricultural Revolution

It is necessary to change the system of cultivation, in the direction of intensi-
fication: cultivation followed by fallow periods in pastureland, plowed under
r..ther than burned, making it possible to shorten the fallow period without
reducing fertility. It is not a question only of introducing a new element

into the old system. In fact. if a short herbaceous fallow period is wanted.

it is necessary to plow it under at the end of the cycle instead of burning

it in order to recover as much organic material as possible. For plowing
fallow land under, the "daba" thus no longer suffices. Flows and draft animals
are needed. Oxen would. moreover. provide fertilizer, very useful for the
crops. but which the farmers must learn to compost instead of leaving it to

lose half of its value in the sun. The spread of plowing with draft animals

in a village will increase the water needs. New well. perhaps necessitating
drilling. will be required. The village sniths will also have to learn to
repair the new type of plows and harrows. An increase in village storage
capacity will have to accompany the increase in production. All these things
go together. and it is this couple): one can call an agricultural revolution.

It must be disseminated in Africa today. with priority over every other concern,
and with the food supply for the people and the ecological balance as the
primary goals.

With this requirement in view. it is clear that the develop-en: of peanut

or cotton crops within a traditional system of cultivation in which no other
factor is changed accelerates the exhaustion of the soil and its vulnerability
to all forms of erosion. It is also clear that scattered popularization cam—
paigns resulting from ready-made concepts about the techniques to be used

and the peasant mentality do not take into account the various complementary
fields of action and can have only negative effects. Now generally speaking.
the agricultural programs do not correspond to the various and complementary
requirements of an agricultural revolution. They are conceived to produce

as much and as quickly as possible at the least cost.

Those who are called upon to draft such programs are trained in this same
approach. It is difficult to find in Africa an agriCultural school or develop-
ment institute which integrates education on human nutrition and diet or

8
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
ecoloy in the training provided. Rural economics is taught. as in Europe.
solely in relation to marketable production and the acquisition of monetary
assets. It does not take into accomt the deterioration of the land under

the effects of erosion. nor the decline in the labor force due to malnutrition.
Economics thus viewed must be denounced as a fallacious representation of
reality and economic education must be closely linked with the study of ecology
which pertains to the reproduction of the land the study of human nutrition,
which is not a health problem. but the very foremost of economic problems.8

Village Projects and Peasant Revolution

If the development programs frequently fail to work. when one compares them
with the goals. the failure is the more seriOus if we take into accomt the
social objectives which should always have priority. to wit. guaranteeing
each individual. thanks to his labor. satisfaction of his needs. beginning
with the right to each one's fill. The situation will remain the same as
long as matters are viewed from the point of view of the profitability of
monetary investments alone and production marketing. rather than the needs
and the potential of local populations. When the Inter-State Omittee To
Fight the Drought in the Sahel (cuss) says that the priority in the Sahel

is water resources. and builds a whole dam construction program on that basis.
it is forgetting that the priority of priorities is to enable a presently
undernourished population to feed itself thanks to its own efforts by reestab-
lishing its natural environment which is in an accelerated state of deteriora-
tion. The priority is to mobilize people. not to build dams. There is no
lack, moreover. of dams in the Sahel which are not being used. for example
those build through the ED? program in Upper Volta. not to mention such bitter
failures as Irhazar in Niger. or those probably in store in Senegal.

In the majority of the African countries, village projects for which the peasants
are responsible. often sponsored by private aid sources. point to other possible
solutions. linking increased food production with the perfecting of service
crafts (smiths, weavers). the education of children rooted in the rural world.
and the training of local nurses. Such projects can readily do without inter-
national aid. although launching them requires some credit. They alone, because
they are situated on the village level and seek to involve all the peasants.

can put to work the principles of an agricultural revolution designed to rely

to the greatest possible extent on the creation of nonagricultural jobs in

the rural sector itself. within the logic of a complementary scheme. These
principles call for priority concern for the most difficult regions (whereas

in general, planning projects focus priority concern on the richest zones).
Then an effort must be made to understand. through a knowledge of the territory
and its population. how the present ethos-ecosystem works. in other words.

what the interaction of the inhabitants among themselves and with their environ-
ment are. Through a series of assessments. it is necessary to estimate food
production. how it is distributed in time and space. and to study the environ-
mental problems. erosion and declining fertility in particular. A careful
examination nust be given the demographic situation and its development. The
adaptation of the food and job potential to the Current and potential demnd
must be contemplated. and concern must be devoted to nonagricultural jobs

likely to be created. above all where farm euployment already seems saturated.
as is seen for example in Burundi. Rwanda. the Bamileke and Eton sectors of

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cameroon, certain regions in Togo. and as will be seen increasingly in Africa
in the next 25 years.

It will then be necessary to see what the priority actions to be mdertaken
might be. If. for example. a majority of deficit food balances is found among
the families of a village in which the basic nourishment is provided by millet.
which has a very low yield per unit of surface. moreover, for example 300 kg
per hectare. a search for a way to increase this production. within the balance
of the whole of the system, would be clearly indicated. It will be necessary
to establish whether by iuproved methods some peasants are not already obtaining
better than average results. as is often the case. These iaproved methods
would obviously be those indicated for generalization which. moreover. often
proves easier than the inauguration of more sophisticated methods developed

on the basis of the experience of the classic research stations.

It will be necessary to work with the village groups responsible for campaigns
pursued on this level. such as for exawle to estimate the grain needs, the
corresponding production and the progress year after year. Thus little by
little it will be possible to modify the cultivation system by intensification.
while respecting the ecosystem balance. "Hater resources" will then take

on their full meaning. because we will know precisely to what crops to allocate
the water supply and the means of guaranteeing it at the lowest cost for the
peasants will have been studied. We are speaking here only of food supply:
health. housing and education should also be the focus of projects paralleling
the former and correlated with them.

Eliminating Colonial Trade

International financial aid and the experts generally provided along with
this aid are likely to be very little interested in this kind of project.
which does not place the stress on export production or products marketable
in substantial quantities. at least in the first years of functioning. Such
programs. moreover. do not generally require costly water pumps, concrete
dams or substantial infrastructure projects which the peasants could not amor-
tize and would thus be unable to manage. All of this equipment of foreign
origin is paid for in fact by aid which, as is known. serves first of all

to assist the industries in the country of origin. But above all, it must
be expected that such projects will bring in little foreign exchange. As

a result, a country which adopts a rural policy inspired by these principles
must also ask its government employees to accept a standard of living much
below that of their Western comterparts. Such a country would have to cease
to have recourse to foreign aid which is not oriented to the development of
such a model. It would have to break with the traditional thinking of the
leading classes. with the industrial ideology. and with the colonial market
system-that would indeed be a revolution!

The implementation of such cultural and political revolutions does not depend.
moreover. only on the will of the peoples of Africa. It presumes that active
minorities in Europe and in the "eat more generally would undertake to work
for the drastic elimination of the colonial trade system. The need to place
less reliance on the industrial raw materials from the African countries,

the labor of their peasants and their land would require our companies to

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
liuit their waste. their material growth and also to make better use of their
own resources. It is obviously not this path which is being pursued today

in the European policies with regard to Africa. with the reiteration of the
fact that Europe needs us as we need it. But can Africa. which has not. and
for good reason. had colonies to develop. undertake the path of its own develop-
nent. which is based on colonization. and relies today on redeploynent in

the Third World? The solution to the problella of hunger and full enploynent
in Africa does not lie in the extensive econo-ic model used by the colonial
nations. which cannot do without the constant absorption of new space. It
lies in an intensive model of use of our own rescurces in labor. raw materials
and land. which means that these oust not be plmdered to the advantage of
foreign beneficiaries. Utopia? Yes indeed. but when the only alternative

is the broader spread of famine. contemlation of it is nonetheless worthwhile.

FOOTNOTES

1. Diulde Lays. "Listening to the Peasants and Livestock Breeders of the
Sahel." mmoumm AFRICAN, Dakar. April 1975.

2. Gilles Sautter. "From the Atlantic to the Congo River—An lhderpopulated
Geographich Area." Mouton and CoIpany, Paris-The Hagm. 1966.

3. Herve Derriennic. "Fa-ills and Donination in Black Africa--'l'he Peasants
and Livestock Breeders of the Sahel Under the Yoke." L'ﬂarnattan. Paris.

lo. We verified this for Upper Volta in 19%.

5. cm [French Comany for the Development of Textiles and Fibers], "Twenty-
five Years of Cotton Activity." illustrated brochure.

6. Jean Boutrais, "Agriculture Vithout Peasanta--Large-Scale Hheat Cultivation
in Cueroon ." 8001“)!!! am, No 167-1158. January-March 1982.

7. Jacques Berthelot and Francois de Ravignan. "The Fields of nger,"
L'narnattan, Paris. 1980.

8. Pan-African Institute for Develop-em. "Understanding a Rural Economy-
A Practical Study Guide." L'Hsrnattan. Paris. 1981.

COPYRIGHT: cums, 15 rue R.-Harcheron. 92170 Vanvea. 1982.

5157
080: 4719/965

. 11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3R1 BPS

OUEDDEI DENIED ENTRY INTO NIGERIA—Lagos. 8 Jul (Emu—Counted Oueddei,
the Chadian president who was driven fro- hie capital. wanted to flee to
Nigeria yesterday. Monday, when Bissene liabre's FAN entered hdjaaena but
the authorization to enter Nigerian territory was denied him by the govern-
ment, official sources said on Tuesday in Lagos. It is further indicated
that the former president has probably fled to Camroon. The same source
adds that Godtouni Oueddei had asked the oonanders of the 0M! peacekeeping
force stationed in Quad to intervene in his behalf as the rebel forces
approached the capital. This appeal was also rejected and the Nigerian
troops in the peacekeeping force which also cowrises Senegalese and
Zairim soldiers, received orders to remain neutral and fight only if
attacked, the sane uources indicated. [Text] “3081363 bondon REUTER

in French 1321. GMT 8 Jun 82]

60: (0719/1069

12'
me omcw. usronur
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

IVORY COAST

ECONOMIC SITUATION, POSSIBILITY OF RECOVERY DISCUSSED
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French 26 Apr-9 May 82 pp 26-30
[Article by Koffi Hamsne: "The 'Ivorian Hiracle' Put to the Test"]

[Text] Sparkling. ultramodern. bristling with skyscrapers and other buildings.
the Abidjan Plateau. the administrative and commercial district. is motionless
during this nonth of April 1982. The giant cranes and excavators are idle and
the projects which, throughout the past decade. turned the downtown area of the
Ivorian capital into another Rio de Janeiro are at a standstill. perhaps only
temporarily.

Like the building and construction industry. the economy of the Ivory Coast is
going through the difficult tines of recession. The "situation." an "in word"

sonewhat tinged with the caustic humor of the lower class people, is assuredly
difficult.

At the root of what can only be called an economic crisis. even if national
officials insist on emphasizing its completely tenporary, passing nature. is
the steady drop, year after year. of export receipts since 1979: from

800 billion CPA francs a year to 500 billion. That which may have been toler-
able in neighboring countries takes on the look of a catastrophe here, or at
least of a serious shock that opens one's eyes and awakens Ivorians from a

long and peaceful sleep. a sleep made all the more profound by nearly 20 years
of an "economic miracle."

In Africa. the Ivory Coast is definitely not just another couttryl While it
may have enjoyed a deep sleep. the awakening is restless. President Felix
Houphouet-Boigny's fellow citizens have constantly brought up their difficul-
ties. their trying situation. Quite obviously. it is the lower-income groups
that have been the hardest hit. as in the case of the taxi driver who. a
worried look on his face. begins his long complaint: "A year ago. all I needed
was four liters of gas in order to start making a profit. Now. I have to use
up as much as five or six before I find ny first customer. Middle income

people. my usual custoners. are now forced to use public transportation, to
take the bus." His math is perhaps a little exaggerated, but it nevertheless

illustrates the difficulties and spectre of the future that are on the minds
of Ivorians in what may euphemistically be called the "less favored" categories.

13
Fill¢lﬂﬂCJAl.US£(N‘LY
He went on, growing more precise in his explanations: "Six months ago, the
price of a liter of gas suddenly went from 475 to 525 CPA francs. At the same
time. the basic price on the meter went from 80 to 100 francs. Every 330
meters. the price on the meter would go up 30 instead of 20 francs."

Obviously, in absolute terms. these figures are not at all impressive. but
when added together, they seriously begin to discourage the user. Like the
driver. the rider gets less and less out of it. especially since the result is

a rate of inflation of about 20 percent.a afigure close to the official na-
tional average last year.

It is not only the taxis that are enduring the difficulties. Many population
groups in Abidjan or the other large cities in the country which maintained a

high standard of living are now forced to give up certain leisure activities
that had become an integral and important part of their way of life.

In the heart of the lower-income district of Ireichville. a large Muslim family

could not afford the usual festivities celebrating the baptism of a newborn
child, the supreme sacrifice. "It's the situation." commented a'prominent
member of the household. '

For some, the rising cost of living is even more dreadful. Unlike their
Malian. Voltan or Guinean neighbors, the Ivorians have grown accustomed to eat-
ing outside the home, at one of the innumerable maquis in the urban compounds.
However, between 1979 and 1982, the cost of the excellent kedjenou chicken.
cooked by steam, went from 500 to 1.500 CPA francs, a dizzying increase of

300 percent! '

"Ah! This 'Situation'!"

Naturally. not all widely consumed produdts have gone up so much. And yet,
every increase, coming at a time of a very clear slowdown in economic activity.
can only help make the "situation" even more difficult. for the “economically
less well- off" as well as for those who for decades have acquired a taste for
Western-type living. One executiye told us: "With my wife, who is a teacher
in a public high school. we earn about 1 million CPA francs a month. It is

a lot. but believe me, we do not save a thing." Furthermore. this is a family
without children that pays little attention to the ritual African solidarity
of the' 'expanded family." The couple's income goes for maintaining their'

car (15.000 to 20.000 francs a month), telephone bills (the unit price of an
urban telephone call is 100 CPA francs. nearly four times higher than the

rate in Paris!) and the merciless bills of the water and electrical companies.

Mr and Mrs Koffi are not on the list of the "economically poor": _Their monthly
income is on the order of 200.000 CPA francs. Naturally, they have grown

accustomed to having a fine table, wines -- of an average quality -- aperitifs.
after-dinner drinks. and other delicacies were rarely lacking. While-the
standard of living and level of expenditures would indicate a totally bour-
geois family. what one has is actually nothing but a question of status.
Elsewhere, in the Heat, the Koffis would be nothing more or less than true
representatives of the real middle class.

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The slowdown in economic activity does not only affect those whom the scien-
tific classification of peoples labels as "lower low" (uncertain income). "
"upper low" (they enjoy a better fate than those in the previous category)

"upper middle" (socioprofessional groups that are better off). For the
past 2 or 3 years, the rate of investments has clearly slowed down. Horried
over a continuing recession. both national and foreign businessmen hesitate
to take risks, to say the least. Public investments, 12 percent of the gross
national product (GNP) in 1979. now make up only 7 to 8 percent. Officials
do not hide the,fact that the'drop will accentuate in the next 2 years. Al-
ready. business failures are legion in Abidjan. "And same over a few tens of
thousands of francs," one economic official told us privately.

The fact is that the government has taken the harshest possible measures in
order to meet the crisis. Among them are: very short-term payment. by ailing
enterprises. of back taxes; strict control of bank credit. so strict that it
sometimes endangers enterprises whose finances are shaky or not quite sound.
As a result. the ranks of the unemployed, already inflated by the liquidation
of dozens of national companies in l981-l98l.-are even'fatter.

They are joined by those freshly out of the university whom the "economic
miracle" can no longer acconmodate. According to official statistics, a
thousand new graduates at the master's level could find no jobs on the national
labor market in 1981.

Faithful -- to the point of intransigency -- to the doctrine of economic
liberalism that has so far guided his action and ensured its success, the
regime of President Houphouet-Boigny is curbing the government's "life style"
with cuts that cannot fail to leave victims, beginning with the social successes
that, to date, have given a particular cachet to Ivorian capitalism. Among
them is national education which. a rare thing in the sub-Sahara region of
Africa. takes 60 percent of the national budget. To its credit. 70 percent
of all Ivorians attend school (compared with 45 percent in Senegal and the
same in Cameroon) and the number of high schools and institutions of higher
learning rose from 36 in 1960 to 116 in 1979. At the sane time. the number
of elementary schools leaped from 300 to over 1,000.

In addition. a system of scholarships offering between 40,000 and 90.000 CPA
francs a month -- and which has few equivalents in Black Africa'-~ has hereto-
fore protected students from urgent need. what is more. half of the scholar-
ship is paid monthly to the student's wife. His housing costs between 2, 500
and 3. 000 francs and the government subsidizes meal tickets, paying 800 francs
while the user pays 75.

Nor is that all:_ A boarding school system for thousands of children of the
”economically poor" exists throughout the country. However, at the end of

tne first quarter of 1982, the Ministry of National Education announced a
sweeping reform of the boarding school system. a reform moving in the direction
of its transfer to private ownership. Naturally. there is no lack of arguments

justifying the turning out into the streets of thousands of boys and girls

who will now be turned over to the responsibility of parents caught up in the
"situation." At a press conference in Abidjan on 25 March, Minister of

15
FUIIOFFHJAL.USE(MNLY
National Education-Paul Akoto Yao noted that out of the 4.6 billion CPA
francs allocated for the 1&0.000.elementary school children. 3.9 billion --
about 85 percent -- helped only 23,000 boys and girls that were actually
boarders. In reality, it is more a question of giving up a policy that was
costly but positive in its results. than of a "work of justice." After all,
inasmuch as the boarding school situation is nothing new. the ministry in

qeustion could have become aware of the "injustice? well before the "situation"
and fight its harmful effects!

Under such conditions. how can one not think of an outright liquidation result-
ing from the new wind of economic realism blowing over the Ivory Coast?

"The liberal system in which we live authorizes every person to set up his own
private boarding school. so that reform of the boarding school system means
nothing more than a transfer to private ownership," we were told by a teacher
at a private school in Adjame, one of the "African” quarters (that is, non-
residential) of the capital. It is a frightening prospect in these hard
times. for during the past years of the ”fatted calf." it was notoriously .
well-known that the administration of some establishments left something to be
desired. we know that the government spared no effort to subsidize private
schools. among other reasons. so that they would provide a substantial income
for the "privileged ones" of the regime. the teachers. whose salaries, in .
secondary schools and universities. range from 371. 000 to 742, 000 CPA francs.
According to one of these' 'piivileged persons." these quarterly subsidies
varied between 100 and 300 million CPA francs, depending on the size of the
institution. Our interlocutor condemned veritable' 'misappropriatiuns of funds
by some school officials, who engage in real estate speculation more than

they concern themselves with paying salaries to their employees on time."

In Treichville. Adjame. Marcory or Bormakote, rumors run rampant, fed by the
official silence. Measures are being drafted to dismantle the public health
system. At any rate. hospital equipment is already outdated and old and
there is no hope for new in the foreseeable future.

It was such grumbling. within a definitely difficult situation. that in

February. brought about the hottest social alert in the young history of the
independent ivory Coast. when students took to the streets. forreasons more
political than financial. it must be admitted. While these movements at no

time threatened -- contrary to first impressions -- the regime of the "Old
Man." there is nothing to guarantee that the next time. they will not spread
to the unhealthy districts of Sanfil. for example. These are districts which,
as everyone is aware. are riddled with crime and which are therefore potential
powder kegs.

Together. the “situation" and economic neorealism. joined with a greater

thirst for freedom expression born of the opening desired by the chief of state
(see AFRIQUE-ASIE, No 260, 1-14 March 1982). came as a revelation, warning

that nothing would be as it was before. Politicians (beginning with the
president of the republic). businessmen. intellectuals and simple citizens

became aware of the fragile nature of a newly-acquired prosperity.

l6
POI! OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
while political and economic officials hasten to plan the recovery and to

meet the most urgent needs. the man on the'street has been bitten by the bug

of politics. The maquis and other bars in Abidjan are becoming new temples
where there are heated discussions of politics and economics. of the fate and
future of the country and its children. "Bock." the king of beers. flows
freely as these lively-discussions turn into the new feature of the Ivorian
social scene. This is all the more important because it marks the boundaries
of a deliberate policy of apoliticization of Ivorians followed for two decades.
a policy which, relentlessly and with panache. set out to make money the only
value worthy of the name. It is perhaps because money has become so scarce

that the Old Man's flock has acquired such a taste for.discussions of govern-
ment! -'

As a result, the condition of the poor man. that bizarre being previously
among the most highly scorned in the Ivory Coast. is now claimed by those who
tried. legitimately. but in vain. to flee it: "I an the son of a poor man
and proud of it." says one of the most popular songs in Abidjan. Furthermore.
songs witha message, long lost in the flow of. romantic ballads, are now the
ones Ivorians like.the most. Is it a sign of the times? Perhaps.

Future

It is perhaps also a sign of the inevitable “post-Houphouet"-period, which all
politicians anticipate without mentioning and for which a number of "young
wolves." the big shots of the regime. are fsnatically-preparing for. Powerful
clans are now being formed with an eye to the prospect, more on ethnoregional
bases than on political proposals. "hen the Old Man does finally step down.
this could endanger the work of national unification and exchange security

so patiently put in place by the founder of the Ivory Coast of today. with
the renewed enthusiasm of an old fighter. he has personally frozen political
fighting. calming the impatience of those aspiring to succeed him. "When
Houphouet-Boigny is no longer there-to contain the centrifugal forces and the
strong personal ambitions. our country will experience its growth crisis,
perhaps even the entry of the army onto the political scene," one journalist
completely won over to the government policy somberly predicts. He adds that
"the most difficult thing will be to maintain the cohesion of the single party,
the Democratic Party of the Ivory Coast (PDCl-RDA [African Democratic Rally])
and above all, to make it a mass party" instead of the current elitist group.

Beyond the disturbing nature of this prospect. which could be contradicted by
the events -- as has occurred in other places -- these remarks nevertheless
illustrate an irreversible reality: The Ivorian people are thinking calmly
and seriously about their future. less and less content to delegate their
vote.

Keys to Recovery

"Houphouet-Boigny laid the foundations for Ivorian prosperity. It is up to
his heirs and future successors to maintain what has been achieved!" The
speaker. one close to the regime. is not given to understatement! A good
disciple. he has confidence in what he says. It is true that. in 22 years of

17
FOIIOITWC1A1.USBIDNIN
PU“ UPI‘ILIAL use UNL'

African independence, few nations. whether progressive or conservative. can
boast such a positive balance sheet as that of the Ivory Coast. Did the
average annual per capital income not go. between 1260 and 1980. from $100 to
$760. placing the country right after the oil-producing states such as Libya.
Algeria and Gabon. the latter having seven times fewer people than the Ivory
Coast? Even better. with an annual growth rate of about 7 percent. this un»
usual tropical country exhibits a feat admitted by even the most bitter adver-
saries of the "Old Man," a feet that brings it close to nations such as South
Korea or oil-rich Mexico, which have spectacular growth.

Furthermore. nations such as Senegal or Cameroon (by way of example). which

got off to a better start and which benefited more from colonization. can

no longer compete with the Ivory Coast of today. Houphouet-Boigny's country
has many other advantages: a road system which..with respect to communications.
makes it the brightest jewel in the southern Sahara; two ocean shipping compan-
ies: SITRAH [Ivorian Marine Transport Company] and SIVOHAR [expansion unknown].
which can compete with the most modern enterprises of the type. giving the '
Ivory Coast relative autonomy in the field of international dealing. Since
1978. SITRAH and SIVOMAR have brought in nearly 76 billion CFA francs a year
for the country.

Another asset: a very real industrialization which. when one combines large
trusts with the,small and mediumésize enterprises. employs several tens of
thousands of workers. Above all. there is its commercial agriculture, whose
mainstays are wood. coffee and cacao. with these three providing some 70 percent
of the nation's_export receipts. In this agroindustrial field. one is. all
things considered and without yielding to the magic of figures. in the presence
of a feat. From its position as a modest producer upon_its accession to inde-
pendence. the Ivory Coast has now hoisted itself up to third place in the world
(first in Africa) for coffee and first place in the world for cacao. leaving
Ghana. formerly the titleholder. far behind, experiencing unspeakable difficul-
ties. Coffee and cacao-provide the country with nearly 500,000 tons a year,
while cotton and peanuts are experiencing spectacular progress.

There is also farming for food: yams and other sweet potatoes, pineapples.
bananas, and so on, which cover the country's essential needs, while the Ivory
Coast. through an unprecedented effort. managed in just a few years to halt
all rice imports. a new food from the north and which has won over all the
people in the south.

Is this growth or development? Is the latter possible without the former?

Those who once posed the question are now forced. not only to make the distinc-
tion, but especially to exercise caution.

At the root of the "Ivorian miracle" are naturally the political choices of
Felix Houphouet-Boigny. a choice already gestating when. in the middle of the
1950's. that rich Baoule planter who wanted to succeed the French settlers

in handling Ivorian affairs. "broke off" from the communist group in the
French Parliament. Moreover. he was more forced to lead his country to
independence than he accepted it himself. this for obvious economic reasons

18
Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

because for him, while one cannot succeed without money, one can do everything
with it, even buy souls or freedom!

At the time, ”H.B.," as he is commonly called, went against the grain of those
holding to a central idea that moved hearts: "Rather freedom and dignity
with poverty than luxury under foreign'domination." Perhaps a. B. wanted to
reconcile the two terms of the alternative -- a dangerous exercise -- because
he had understood (only too well?) the complexity of the modern world and the
interdependence of nations. whatever the case, following independence, he
proclaimed and put into practice capitalist choices which, by virtue of their
clarity, confused the most fervent follbwers of the liberal model. In sub-
stance, he told the Ivorian people: "Make money first and forget all the
rest." He plunged into the Western system as deeply as possible after choos-
ing dependency. He bet everything on.export products, opened wide the doors
of his country to foreign investors, but also to notorious looters. At home,
he worked toward the emergence of a class of businessmen (often politicians)
with unlimited aggressiveness and voraciousnesa. Consequently, he created a
capitalist nation worthy of the name headed by the very men who could ensure
the vigor of the economy and vice versa.

The system resulted in resources and a surplus that financed growth, made it

possible to create a "social capitalism" and contributed to political stabil-
ity. which in turn helped the growth of the economy and attracted millions.of
foreigners.

But there is also another side to the coin. Social disparities are shocking:
Skyscrapers stand next to.shanties. impressive highways for wealthy car owners
cross miserable shantytowns overpopulated and riddled with crime, both petty
and major. The penniless continue to slave for millionaires and multimillion-
aires.

Finally, acculturation is very real, which sooner or later results in cultural
demands.

Inversely, the government provides itself with the means of a relative politi-
cal autonomy. One might even wonder. of the Ivory Coast or the "political
giant” which Senegal-is, which of the'two now enjoys the means of that auto-

nomy, which uses them the best.

And yet. it was realized that the whole edifice, too greatly patterned after
the western economy. was fragile. It is precisely the economic and world

crisis (and the wheeling and dealing of Giscardian France) that threatens to
ruin the "Ivorian miracle." This explains why, in the solutions being drafted
as part of the 1981-1985 Plan. the government gives the impression of having
understood the limitations of the model. But, caught up in the trap of its
political choices, it nevertheless continues to work within the framework of
furthering its relations with international capital. This policy provides for
an average growth in export agriculture of 5.5 percent; unprecedented moderni-
zation of market gardening,.which is now bearing fruit in terms of productivity:
the upgrading of livestock raising: revival of building which, thanks to the

19
ltllCHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NNLY
Ivorian Construction and Property Manageuent Coupany (SICOGI, 65-percent
goverment controlled), made it possible to build 35.000 housing units in
8 years. including 25,000 lav-income unite (SICOGI "rent" of 1.500 to 3,000
CPA francs a month for a three- or four-roan apartment is col-Ion). To top

it off, the goverment bas'es great hopes-on .oil. which is already meeting half
of the nation's needs. an estimated 600,000 tons a year. The Ivory Coast

hopes to export the "black gold" in 2 years. It will be one of the keys to
recovery. Will it be enough to ensure that the Ivorian systu can demon-

strate its effectiveness? Or will it be but one lore respite given to the
econony of this country. which essentially depends on the Iultinational con-
panics?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

11.4610
CSO: ’019/951

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TANZANIA

BRIEFS

RABIES KILLS lZ—Dar es Salaam, 9 Jun (“WED—At least 12 people have

died of rabies and (more) are critically ill in the northern Kilinanjaro
region of Tanzania, the official Tanzania News Agency reported today.

There in no anti-rabies vaccine in the entire region and no bullets available
to shoot stray doga, cats and squirrels, the agency quoted regional

mdical officer 8.8. Kivelu as saying. "In fact. (the sick) are at home
dying quietly. Sone of then are already dead,” he eaid. adding that he

had asked the government to order the only to ehoot atraya. Tanzmia cannot
afford to inert vaccinea or mention due to the country's current
economic origin, the agency reported. [Text] “3091001 London mural:

in English 0323 our 9 Jun 82]

(280: 6700/1359

21
”WW“?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRB

MILITARY ACTION ONBY HOPE FOR CHANGE IN KINSHASA
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French No 263, 12-25 Apr 82 pp 30-3l

[Report on interview with Francois Lumumba, secretary general of the

revived ENC/L [Eongolese National Hovewent/Lumumba7, by Antonia Blis,
date and place not giveﬁ7. ‘

{Texg7 Mobutu repression has never been able to completely silence
he struggle or the aspirations of the Zairian people for independ-
ence and freedom. But after crushing the resistance (inspired by the
National Liberation Council) which followed the assassination of
Patrice Lumumba, it succeeded in creating such a situation that the
patriotic forces (and, consequently their leaders) have been kept
isolated a long time from each other. That cannot but explain, in
any case partly, the extreme dispersion which still characterizes the
Zairian opposition today, all of whose members proclaim, however,
with more or less sincerity and for purposes which are not always--
far from it--identical, the need to unite in a single front all those
who want to end the destructive regime of Hobutu Sese Soho.

In January 1981, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the
death of Patrice Lumumba, a group of members, among them Francois
Emery and Julianne Lumumba, son and daughter of the former assassi-
nated prime minister, announced in Brussels the revival of the
HHC/L.* According to the organisers, this initiative was the result

of coordination carried out for some time with members inside the
country.

One of the proclaimed objectives of the revived NRC/L, whose secre-
tary general is Francois Emery Lumumba, is to reorganize ”the alli-
ance of Lumumba forces”, with the latter becoming the central nucleus
of a broader front uniting all those who want not only to end
”Hobutism" but also facilitate a radical change in Congo-Kinshasa.

Certainly the sponsors of the MIC/l who, at the time of the public
inauguration of their effort, had introduced their party's manifesto
in broad outline, had no illusions about the extent or difficulty of
the task. They also warned it would be a long range project.

Who 235 of 16-29 March l981

22
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A year afterwards, where is the revived “NC/L which Francois Emery
Lumumba leads? It is understandable that it is not possible to draw
up a concrete balance, if only because the clandestine situation of
the members who remained in the country amends a minimum of cautio .
But, if the original membersof the NRC ongolese National Movement,
(founded by Patrice Lumumba in 1958), such as Mathias Crispin
Kemishanga‘ have supported Francois Emery Lumumba's undertaking and
if the contacts between one and the other continue we confirm that
the process of reunification around the revived MNé/L, which is in-
tended to be the ”cornerstone of the building“ is still an objective

to be attained.

"The founding of a political party having clear objectives, which

take into account both the characteristics of the domestic and foreign
situation, is a necessity if we want to get the country out of the
bankruptcy in which it is involved, free it from foreign control and
lead it towards a society of genuine justice and democracy, the lead-
ers of the revived HMO/L say in short, but we want to learn the les-
sons of the experiences of the years 1964-1965.

"As the son of Patrice Lumumba, I could mobilise people, the secretary
general of the revived “NC/L declares. But it should not be a ques-
tion of starting pitched battles, in no matter what conditions, which
would lead to a failure for which we would be responsible. This is
why we believe that in the immediate future, priority action consists
in raising the consciousness of the masses in depth. It is necessary;
when they come to us,that the people know why. We have marked out
some positions on the level of this work of consciousness raising.
Thousands of copies of our party's manifesto have been distributed,
both inside as well as outside the country. In fact, we are carrying
out a great work of information in Africa and the Arab countries and
we have made many productive contacts with friendly countries and

movements.

"As for the distribution of the manifesto inside Zaire, you can imag-
ine the courage and intelligence it has demanded on the part of our
members. And in spite of the arrests made on this occasion, we can
believe that this information work was carried out successfully.‘

 

*See insert

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

8490
cs0: 4719/1027

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRE

LEADERS PLUNDER ZAIRE'S FAUTERING ECONOMY
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIE in French No 263, 12-25 Apr 82 pp 30-31

[Krticle by Pierre Clary: "A Pillaged Economy27

[Text] It seems futile to again emphasize the weaknesses of Zaire's
economy: the internal disorganization, foreign indebtedness, the
existence of foreign companies...But it certainly is interesting to
show the process of deterioration which has continued for 20 years.
Thus Zaire's economy has followed a cycle which brings it today to

a level lower than that of 1960: this is the thesis of three Belgian
research workers who describe these last 20 years as those of
"accumulation and underdevelopment."*

In 20 years, a bureaucratic class has managed to infiltrate all the
country's economic and commercial mechanisms, not to take in hand,
control or develop the process of accumulation, but to literally
appropriate the surplus for themselves personally. State interven-
tion in the economic field has been transformed into a general sur-
render of principle which has allowed the diversion of all agricul-
turel, industrial and commercial processes from their economic

purpose.

0n the basis of that, all the so-called development projects become
financial abysses, since, by nature they cannot achieve any tangible
economic result. In the case of a textile plant project designed to
use local cotton production, we find almost total imports of raw cot-
ton to get the plant to operate at a reduced rate. The same phenom-
enon has taken place in the metallurgical sector and in many others.

Until l97h, the bureaucratic class claimed to make productive invest-
ments, the investments actually were sizeable in value. But, in
fact, all this equipment concealed a complete inability to put a
diversified economy in operation. The development of public financ-
ing only had the purpose of favoring a fully expanding commercial

*Fernsnd BEzy, 3ean-Phillipe Peemans and Jean Marie Wautelet:
.”Accumulation and Uhderdevelopment in Zaire l960-l980,” Louvain
University Press (00L), Louvaingla-Neuve l9él

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sector. But in Zaire, a large part of the embezzlementa of funds
made by the ruling class is recorded for beekeeping purposes under
this sector term. Since it was no longer possible to continue this
policy starting in l9?3--because of the combination of the rise in
price of petroleum and manufactured products and the drop in copper--
this class plunged into a series of actions and liquidatione which
all had as a common denominator the lack of long term objectives.

Because of the economic policy which it chose to establish its
power-~control of the domestic and foreign trade networks--, this
bourgeoisie has no control of the economic apparatus on which it pre-
fers to increase its piratical interventions. This policy was ex-
pressed by "zairianization" (1973), which consisted in redistributing
small and medium scale capital-oagriculture, trade, servicee--to the
national bourgeoisie through the subterfuge of an acceleration of
credits granted to the private sector. Starting with the next year,
it was ”radicalization"--after confirming the ”failure" of "zairiani-
zation"--aiming at increasing the state's role in the economic sec-
tor. In fact this operation permits a perfect osmosis between polit-
ical and administrative power and commercial functions.

But political power at this time no longer has sufficient financial
means to maintain the illusion of any productive role. Capital ex-
penditures in the state budget rise from 108 million zaires in l97h
to 129 million in 1979, while at the same time current expenses in-
crease from 537 million to 2.166 billion. International financing
becomes indispensable to continue the system of domestic and foreign
privilege. The foreign debt has increased fourfold between l97h and
1979, but the management of this indebtedness leaves nothing to
chance, with the Zairian state being careful to distribute this debt
between the western countries: the united States, France, Belgium
and the PRC.

In view of this situation, all the creditors concentrate their atten-
tion on mining copper and cobalt which is the favored method for the
ruling class to preserve its international credibility. Now the rise
in the price of copper and that of cobalt since 1979 have made it
possible to ward off financial disaster, with Zaire exporting besides
much more cobalt in value than copper.

The game, for the international financiers who are involved in
Zairian public finances, consists then in measuring out the distribu-
tion of income between, on one hand, the repayment of the debt and
the renewal of the mining investments and, on the other hand, provid-
ing the bureaucratic class with income which insures the system's
stability.

On the social level, the results exceed everything that could be ex-
pected. The three authors have calculated that "on the eve of the
First World war, the Congolese workers were twice better paid than

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIWFKJALUSEONLY

v

the present Zairian workers." In 20 years of independence, the stan-
dard of living has deteriorated by 80 to 90 percent! Today, Zaire no
longer has a national economy. What remains of it are agricultural
operations which hardly provide the minimum of self-surf ciency in
rural areas, with the cities being supplied with imports. Manufac-
turing production in 1980 is structurally the same as in 1958, with
brewing being the nest important industrial branch. 0n the other
hand, the commercial sector has risen frou 9.3 percent to 27.7 per-
cent of the national product which indicates the astounding energy
of this remarkable bureaucratic and business class. The mining
branch still is also dependent on multinational groups on the tech-
nical and commercial level. As for the so-called public sector, its
dismantling continues in 1982 to the advantage of private and foreign
interests.

Under these conditions, reintroducing the Zairian situation, as the
Belgian authors do, in a system of analysis, according to which
uining countries are naturally led to such waste and such inbalance,
the results of an inevitable dependence, trivialises it when it shows
exactly all the characteristics of a model of de endence, with a
local ruling class which perpetuates and consoli tes, thanks to
close collaboration with international capitalism, the operation of
a system which it set up itself for its own interests.

COPIRIGHT: 1982 Afrique-Asie

8490
cso: 4719/1027 sun

26
FORCHFKJAL£S€¢ﬂﬂN