APPROVID FOR RILIMI: 2007/08/00: cIA-RDP02-00000R000100080000-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030050-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/8347
22 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 626

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030050-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGUIATIONS GOVERNIh'G WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
03' THIS PUBLICATION SE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ORLY.
O.

0. Palm-mp Oman-xenon Name and Addie-e 10. Poona/Tannin" Cum no.
Joint Publ icatione Reaearcb Service

1000 North Glebe Road II. Connect/Gum No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201
I). Spec-me. Gauiaatuon Home and Meet
Coveted
Ae above

IS. Sank-eaten Note-

a. Abauaeu

The report contains intonation tron African and specialized Heat European
publicationa and radio on political. aconoaic. and eociological develop-cuts.

I). In 'ouio and Darn-eat Analytic. "e. Deeeﬁptocl

Political Science inter-African Aft . _X_0bana _Rvande

Soc io logy Angola __Guinea ___Sao Tone and

Economics Alain Guinea-Biaaau Principe

Culture (Social Abotawaua Ivory Coast _XSenegal

Sciences) _Burundi Kenya __Seychclles

Tee hnologice l __X_Caneroon Lesotho _S ierra Leone
_Cape Verde Liberia _Sonal in
Jeentral African Hadaaaocar ___South Africa

Empire Malawi _Swaz i land

A Chad Hal 1 _Tanzan ia
___Conoro Inland a Hauri t iua 41030
Jeongo _X_Hozanbique _Uganda
_Dj ibouti _Nanibia Upper Volta
__Equator ial Guinea _Niger ﬁlaire

"b- ide-"Hen /°D¢B-i~lcd Tel-I Tgsizpu —:::::::

:GaIbia Ikhodesia

|||||

m. cosuu ska/amp 02.50.50.“

llbvanleboluy Sealer-en: . 2|. No. nl Pun
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of . . 58
(Ionics Available From JPRS '

00 a , . , .
" ”' ' " "" ’ "' rats tom m1! at atnoouceo "‘°"" °‘ "" "'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/83‘7
22 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

F000 No. 626

Coureurs
INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Briefs
Senegal-Guinee-Biseeu Dispute Adjudication

ANGOLA

UNITA: HPLA Will Be Compelled To Negotiate
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEENS. 19 Jan 79).......

Benguele Railroad cleins and Counter-Claims Reported
(HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HZDITERRANEENS. l9 Jen 79).......

Briefs

Alleged UNITA Supporters
Portuguese Prisoners' Release
UNITA on the Offensive

603 Port Equip-ent

BENIN

Kerekou Cells for Revolutionary Unity
(Hethieu Kerekou Interview; AFRIQUE-ASIB, 19 Feb 79)..

BOTSWANA

Briefs
FRO Petroleum Storage Loan

CAMEROON

Circunspection characterizes Attitude Toward Oil
(Francois Souden; JEUNE AFRIQUE. 7 Feb 79)......;......

Cameroon. France Issue Joint Coanunique
("Ancuss TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS. 16 feb 79).......

- e - [III - NE 6 A - 122 F000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAGE

UIU'UIM

ll

12

16
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030050-2

NR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

Innense Rift Between Bokesse. People Cleined
(Herise Sysle; AFRIQUE-ASIE, 3-18 Feb 79)..........

Briefs
BNCD's Activities

CHAD

Reporter Witnesses Battle Between Helloun. ﬂebre Troops
(Noel Ngouo Ngebiseio; JBUNF AFRIQUE, 28 Feb 79)...

CONGO

Sessou Nguuseo's Presidency Seen as Victory for Left
(Nerien Sysle; AFRIQUB-ASIE. l9 Feb-b Her 79)......

GABON

New Feces in Govern-eat Hey Assist in Austerity Progren
(Sory Serinde Diello; JEUNB AFRIQUE, 21 Feb 79)....

P06 threordinery Congress Results Reviewed
(Sory Serinde Disllo; JEUNE AFRIQUB. 7 Feb 79).....

GAMBIA

Netion Undergoing ‘Serious Economic, Sociel Difficulties'
(Sen Eesono; AFRIQUB-ASIF. l9 Feb-b Her 79)........

GHANA

Briefs
Clinker Import Licensee

MOZAMBIQUE

Briefs
GDR Agricultural Equipment Trsining

RHODESIA

Huzoreve Defends Position in Autobiogrephy
(JEUNE AFRIQUB. 21 Feb 79).........................

-5-

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROP82-00850R000100030050-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONTBRTS (Continued)

SBNECAL

Sengbor Seen ss Able To Cope With Opposition
(Sirsdiou Disllo; JEUNB AIRIQUB. 31 Jan 79)...........

Five-Year Plen Reviewed. Future Augurs Hell
(JEUNB APRIQUB, 7 Feb 79)eeeeeeeesesssoeoeosooeeeseeese

Phosphete Sector Temporarily Kurt. Future Plans Outlined
(Jm AFRIQUB, 7 P.b 79)seeseessoesseosessesoossoeeeoe

ZAIRE

'Belgiun. United States 'Convinced Hobutu Regine st Last Gasp'
(Pode Ansdou; AFRIQUB—ASIB. 19 Feb-b Her 79)...........

Conditions Not Viewed es Improving by 1980
(A. Fall; AFRIQUB-ASIB, 5-18 Feb 79)...................

Briefs

Foreign Investments Reexamined
ZAHmlA

New Cabinet For-ed To Control Political Tut-oil
(Cherif Rechid; APRIQUB-ASIB, 5-18 Feb 79).............

-c—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dim-MIC”! AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

smmWIm-mssm DISPUTE ADJUDICM'Iw—During a recent debate before the
National Assembly. the Senegalese linister of foreign affairs. Houatapha Niasse.
officially confirmed that Senegal and Guinea-Bissau would subit their disagree-
went over their Iaritine frontier to The Hague International Court. Answering
a concerned question over the delay taken by the offshore oil exploitation.

off the coast of Casanance, the minister declared that one of the main reasons
for this delay was the frontier dispute. Four unsuccessful meetings—the last
held last 3 Julyb-betveen delegations from the two countries were called in an
attempt to settle the issue. The different positions of the two countries are
a legacy from the colonial past. Guinea-Bissau is using a layout resulting
front the 1885 international agreements, signed by France and Portugal. as a
basis for the delineation of its waters. 0n the other hand. Senegal is using

a 1960 exchange of letters between France and Portugal. bearing on a modifi-
cation of the layout. Bissau disputes the legal validity of these letters.
pointing out that they did not lead to the publication of a legal text by

Portugal. [Excerpt ] [Paris mm mormaux 31' norms in French
19 Jan 79 p.135] 6857 .

080: M00

1
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OF!ICIAI. USE ONLY

AMT-OLA

UNITA: MPLA WILL BE WELLBD 1‘0 NEGOTIATE
Paris “ARIES TROPICAUX 31' wims in French 19 Jun 79 p 154

[Text] Jonas Savinbi. leader of the op sition muent National union for
the Total Independence of Angola (UNI'I'A . indicated in Dakar; in an interview
granted the liberal Portuguese weekly TEMPO. that this novenent was present in
11 of the 16 provinces of Angola and it even had athinistrative infrastructures
in five of then. More precisely, according to Savinbi. UNITA has control over
the Guando-Cubango. Mexico. Bie, Hus-b0 and Omene regions and “excellent
prospects" are shaping up in the Huils and Cuanu-Nord regions.

According to the Angolan rebel, it means that UNI‘I‘A would control over 3 lil-
lion people. a fact which enabled him to conduct the messful sabotage
operations which were recently nentioned in 8a da Bandeira, laobito and Benguel.
Jonas Savinbi added that his movement had 8.000 nilitianen in addition to
12.000 trained and equipped nen.

He said that increased foreign support was available to UNI'I'A in Africa as
well as- fro. parts of the West which "has now become aware of the ground it is
constantly losing in Africa to Soviet strategy." Savinbi assessed that his
love-em could also take advantage of the "anti-Russian activity" of the
People's Republic of China.

Concerning the attitude of the United States. the rebel leaders thinks that
Vsshingtor could "reconsider its overall strategy" under pressure frol Hester-n
Europe which "is constantly reminding the United States that it is slowly
relinquishing its role as leader of the western world." Savinbi feels the
recent Guadeloupe SI-it Conference can be explained in that context.

The UNI‘I'A leader believes that. in general. observers interpreted erroneously
Agostinho Neto's recent reshuffling of the HPLA machine. by presenting it as a
sign of a more open attitude toward the West.

According to Savinbi, Neto dismissed Lope do Nasci-ento because he "was begin-
ning to assuae too nueh inortanee not only within the party. but also before
the world." Ii: added: l'Agostinho Neto tried to lake believe it involved the
dislissal of more radical elements, but it is not true. I know fron a trust-
worthy source that. prior to that event. he had gone secretly to Moscow."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion, Jones Sewn-bi asserted that “PIA.“ceuld not escape nesting with
UNITA. There are Ien within “FLA who adult thst. sooner or later. it will be
compelled to negotiate with us end the sooner the better." According to the
rebel leader. this problem would be the subject of debates within “FLA.

common: lloné Koren: et Cie., Peris. 1979

6857
630: 4400

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

mam RAILROAD CLAIMS AND COUNTER-CLAIMS REPORT“
Paris mans mommx 31' NEWS in French 19 Jan 79 p 155
[Text] Buguela Railroad: "Paralyzed." According to UNI'I‘A

In a coununiqué dated 6 January and received in Paris on the 9th, the National
Union for the 'fetal Independence of Angola (UNITA) declared that the Bulguela
railroad continued to be "systenatically paralysed by its military activities."

The conuniqué specified that “Although it had promised world opinion to reopen
this path of conunication to international traffic, Agostinho Neto knew he did
not control the Benguela railroad."

Drawing up an mount of UNITA's "lilitary activities" for Decenber 1978, the
coanuniqué stated that a railroad bridge, one train and 1,126 meters of tracks
had been destroyed.

The communique pointed out that, during the sac period, "184 enaies were
killed, over 200 wounded and 35--three officers among then—nade prisoners."
while "important uterial“ had been recuperated.

Finally, the 1mm conuniqué assessed "The Cuban presence in Angola to approx-
iuately 28,000 Ien. now further strengthened by East Germans."

"In 0peration.’I According to Angolan Authorities

The comuniqué of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola
(UNITA) published in Paris and reporting a state of total paralysis for the
Bengucla railroad. was categorically denied on the same day in Brussels by
Jose Luis de Alneida. ambassador of Angola to Belgian and France.

"It is another caper from this movoent.“ declared the ambassador who is also
surprised that "Contrarily to the assurances given by the French goverr-ent.
Paris continues to be the European capital from which such coununiqués anamte."

comma: Rene Moreux et Cie., Paris, 1979

6857
080: 4400 la

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

ALu-nsl) UNITA SllPNMW-According to Angolan governmental sources, Jonas
Snvinbi's UNITA is still benefiting frets the support of the French Secret
Services. the Alerican CIA. certain circles close to the Italian christian
Democracy. Senegal and Zairian opponents who, bitter over the Neto-Mobutu
reconciliation, have taken ref e in Brussels. [Text] [Paris JWNE AFRIQUE
in French No 942. 24 Jan 79 p 26 6857

PORTUGUESE PRISONERS' MASS—Seven Portuguese. prisoners of the Angolan rebel
movement UNITA. will be released in the near future, following contact angle

with Jones Savinbi by a group of liberal Portuguese personalities. STextJ
[Paris MARCHIS TROPICAUX 31' museums in French 19 Jan 19 p 154 6857

UNI‘l‘A ON THE OFFENSIVE-~11. large nuber of Angolan refugees have arrived in
Namibia following further battles between the MPH-Labor Party and the

rebel forces of the warm. South African television reports that the
refugees, the majority, of when crossed the frontier st Kovango, said that
the battles in the southern part of Angels were extremely violent. [Excerpt]
[Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDIMENS in French 16 Feb 79 p 667] 5157

GDR PORT EQUIPMEN‘P-Exports free the East German Kranbau Bbersvalde firm
are currently installing modern handling equip-ent at Angolan ports, in-
volving ll. cranes imported from the German Democratic Republic. which will
make it possible initially to increase the loading and unloading capacities
in Luanda, Lobit‘o and Mocenedes by 30 percent. [Text] [Paris HARCHES
TROPICAUX 3T HBDII'BRRANEENS in French 16 Feb 79 p 667] 5157

630: M00

5

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“KIN

moo CALLS FOR REVOLUTIONARY UNIT!

Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French 19 Feb 79 pp 39-61

[Interview with President Hathieu Kerekou by Simon Halley: "African
Revolutionary Countries Must Organize a Joint Strategy"]

[Text] The purpose of the attempts by imperialism and its vassals to desta—
bilize progressive governments is to regain recently independent countries.

Yes, the Benin revolution does cause fear. Yes, the imperialist countries and
the African puppet governments which they control from a distance fear that
it will gradually contaminate the entire continent. Yes, the attack that was
launched on 16 January 1977 by the mercenaries who were led by Bob Denard

is only one episode in the battle (today limited, but perhaps generalized
tomorrow) that the West is waging in order to regain recently independent
countries and in order to safeguard their financial interests.

Yes, the colonial powers, alas, find among their vassals. as in the case of
Gabon and Morocco, accomplices to help them in their nasty job. President
Mat} ieu Kerekou knows this, and makes no secret of it. but, far from lessen-
ing his desire to defend the revolution at any cost, that threat only
strengthens it. Let's listen to him. '

[Kerekou] "You asked me about the status of relations between Benin and
Gabon. Hell. I should like to tell you inediately that, contrary to what
the Western reactionary press is trying to have one believe, relations
between our two countries are not in any way conditioned by any personal
rivalry between President Omar Bernard Bongo and myself. It is quite a
different thing. Everyone knows, in fact. that Bongo and lessen II, chiefs of
state who are closely tied to Hestern imperialism. are the ones who inspired
and financed the sercenaries that treecherously attacked us on 16 January
1977. We know this with certainty thanks to the damning evidence in docu-
ments that mercernaries, in their headlong retreat. left behind in the
field. Do not forget that Bob Denard is Bongo’s lifetime technical adviser
and that he is responsible for ensuring Bonzo's personal safety.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

You are. ay journalist friend. facts are relentless and speak for theaaelves.
Our people have always profoundly believed in African unity. They therefore
feel at hone everywhere in Africa. That is why a great Iany people free
Benin settled in Gabon in order to cooperate with their Gabonese brothers

in the building of this country. But when Bonzo's role in the January 1977
aggression was sade known. the letter brutally expelled all our fellow
countrymen."

[Halley] "Yet Guinean President Sekou Tourc offered to be a mediator in
order to try to find a peaceful solution to the conflict.“

[Kerekoul "We have always been. and we still are. ready to settle through
lair negotiation any conflict that sets us against a brother country. He
have moreover given proof of this by sending a delegation to Conakry. where
an lnterninisterial conference. sponsored by the OAU [Organization of African
Unity] and presided over by President Sekou Toure. was to take place. Hell.
it was not possible to hold that conference because Bongo. who was hostile

to our revolution. did not send a delegation."

[Halley] ”What about Morocco? Do you think that it is because of the
courageous attitude that you took in the Saharan affair that it financed and
armed the mercenaries that attacked you?"

[Kerckou] "No doubt. Revolutionary Benin since 1976 has recognized. supported.
and encouraged the POLISARIO. Our position has always been very clear with
respect to the struggle of people who want to obtain independence and

national sovereignty. Now. historically. the Saharan people have their own
identity. They therefore have a right to independence. and no nan. king or
president. has the right to oppose this. For us. the Saharan question

cannot be settled by aaslganation with any other country. and the Saharan
people. in taking up area. have further-ore proved that they were capable of
assuring their independence. It is therefore absurd and shocking for two
nenber countries of the 0A0 to challenge this right."

In supporting the just struggle of th. people of the SDRA [Saharan Osaocratic
Arab Republic]. we have aerely exercised our internationalist principles.

He. ourselves. have suffered too greatly from colonialisa and neocolonialisa
not to understand and support the Saharans in their struggle. And no doubt
our attitude did incite the despotic Horoccan government to participate in a
plot that was hatched against us."

[holley] ”In your speeches. you have often spoken at length of the role
played by France in that plot and in asny others that tended to destabilize

the new progressive governaents that were constituted in various African
countries. "hat is your opinion today and what are your relations with Pnrin?

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE "SLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hathieu Kerekou did not hesitate. In spite of France's recent attsspts to
establish good relations with Cotonou and even though in the past it had
recalled its ambassador, who very certainly was involved in the January 1977
attack. he clings to hope for the future.

[Halley] ”He clearly said this on 30 November 1977 in our platform speech
concerning reconstruction and national independence: Benin's relations
with all foreign countries are based on the principles of nonalignmsnt. of
equality. and of mutual respect of all nations for the severignty of all
others. The January 1977 aggression for a time seriously impaired our
relations with Paris. But. as a consequence of the solemn commitments made
by the new ambassador of France when he handed us his credentials on

15 December 1978. we hope that relations will improve in the forthcoming
months.”

Hathieu Kerekou then went on to the problems that concern Africa as a whole.
He did not hesitate to speak of the crises that are upsetting the continent
and the outcome of which. if fevorable--which he does not doubt-will
establish stability and peace throughout the continent. Hith regard to the
conflict between Tanzania and Uganda. started by Amin Dada's aggression
against the national territory of President Nyerere's country, he said:

"This maneuver was mmrifestly provoked by an imperialism with its back to
the wall. whose objective was to rout the forces of the two countries. espe-
cially those of Tanzania. which is part of the first line of southern
Africa's front and firmly supports all people who are struggling for their
independence in that region of the continent. That action is particularly
detestable because it tends tc weaken Tanzania at a time when the South
African racists and their Zimbabwean protegea are becoming increasingly
threatening. Re observe the UN Charter. which requires member countries to
scrupulously respect the borders inherited from colonialism. Everything
must be done to thwart the imperialist game. which tries to divide in order
to rule. Thus we openly support, and we will always support. those to fignt
for their freedom in Zimbabwe, Namibia. South Africa. Uestern Sahara.
Palestine. or anywhere else. Freedom and independence cannot be bestowed:
they must be won. with weapons. by all those who are still oppressed by
colonialism. neocolonialiam. and racism.

If you speak to me of the tragedy that is taking place in the Horn of Africa.
where a fratricidal conflict opposes Ethiopia to Sommlia. I will anower that
we hope to see these two countries settle their present differences and find
an equitable solution. which would be of great benefit not only to them but
to all of Africa. We are ready to help them to resolve the problems which
set them against each other. But. I repeat. a principle governs us here. as
elsewhere: respect for the borders inherited from colonialism."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

[Halley] "A little while ago you spoke of the Palestinian people. Hhat
do you think of the efforts in behalf of a separate peace between Egypt
and Israel?"

[Kcrckou] "In our Opinion. any real peace in the Near East must first take
into account the Palestinians and their right to independence. Not to do
this means to deny the existence of the Palestinian people who. during

years of struggle. have given so much tangible proof of their very real
existence and their determination. Not to do this is also to shamelessly
disregard the resolutions of the UN and of the 0A”. organisations to which
some countries belong. but which. in spite of belonging. constantly and
shamelessly violate the rights of people. Under the present circumstances. a
separate peace between Egypt and Israel would make sense only if it makes it
possible to settle the essential question. that of the right of the Pales-
tinians to have a country that is truly theirs."

Then President Kerskou broached the subject of Benin's domestic policy. which
is still one of his major preoccupations. He spoke of it with the same
enthusiam as do all the leaders of the progressive countries of the Third
World. who understand that foreign policy and domestic policy closely oVerlap
each other and that especially without ideological training of the masses. the
building of a just and progressive society will always remain uncertain.

[Kerekou] "The adoption of the Fundamental Law and of the First Three-Year
Plan. on 26 August 1977." he said with spirit. "has made it possible for

Benin to set up. with full sovereignty. the revolutionary institutions that
serve it. and will serve it. as instruments to carry out a truly revolutionary
action in all domains. The first phase was accomplished on 26 October 1972.
we are now in the second. during which we must establish a people's democracy.
Thanks to the Fundamental Law. the working masses for the first time will be
able to freely and effectively participate in a people's government. with the
objective of accomplishing urgent tasks which are incumbent on us: to pro-
duce. build. and ensure the defense of the country and of the revolution.

The oblective of all these tasks is the absolute liquidation of colonialism
and of its aftermath. it is a question of changing our society. which is
still neocolonialist. into a socialist society. By means of the 30 Hay 1978
law. which institutes the voting card. the central committee of our party

has opened the way. And if certain people fear our revolution so much. as
was shown by the January 1977 aggression. it means that imperialism. aided by
its puppets and its mercenaries. is looking for something in return and wants.
at any cost. to protect its threatened interests."

Escorting us out. Hathieu Kerekou elaborated this idea with a profound con-
viction: in Africa and in the Third Uorld in general. inperialism is carry-
ing out a global strategy that aims to regain the countries that recently
acquired independence and to - «in control their i-aense riches.

9
FOR OFFICIAL I'SE OXIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kerekou] "In order to accomplish this." said Hathieu Karskou. "the western
countries are trying to destabiliss the nevly set up progressive govern-ants.
They recruit mercenaries. send couandos. and even prepare large ailitary
expeditions on the sane scale as the bloody operations of the 19th century.
‘l‘hst is uhy we mat net only organize our defense but also. and perhaps
especielly, aaintain continuing relations with our friends and our allies.

in order to organize resistance with then to our mutual sneaies."

COPYRIGIIT: 1979 Afrique-Aaia

080: 6600

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

BOTSWANA

BRIEFS

FRO I'l-TI'ROUUH STORAGE LOAN—Early in January, a spokesman for the Ministry of
Caner-cc announCed in Gaborone that Botswana had received a west Geman loan
or 3.4 million doilars for the purpose of building two oil storage facilities.
The spokesman specified that "This project was intended to cope with an
eventual oil crisis in the country following an enbargo on oil eannarked for
South Africa." One or the stor 0 facilities will be built in cabarone and
the other in Francistown. [Text [Paris mm 1'80le 81‘ MEDI‘ﬂ-JMWS

in French 19 Jan 79 p 154] 6857

CSO: #400

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm

CIRCIIISPDCTIN GMRAC‘I‘BRIZES ATTITUDB WARD on.

Paris JEUNE ”M9!!! in French No 944, 7 Feb 79 pp 68. 69
[Article by Francois Soudan: "After oil Gives Out")

[text] Yaounde hae repainted its seven hills in festive colors. Valery
Giscard d'Bstaing. the second French president, after Georges Pomidou in
I971, to tread on the soil of independent Cameroon. mdoubtedly has not come
to the heart of Africa. fro- 8 to 10 February. to talk about utters that
businessnen straighten up very well without him. But there is one subject.
perhaps, that he will bring up with Ahudou Ahidjo between official dinners
and the rustling rows of paper flags: that new gift of life to Cameroon
that goes mder the name of oil.

forbidden swject

‘oh yes. oil!" a high Caneroon official said to us, smiling. “It is true
that we have a little, but I beg of you. don‘t talk too such about it."

In the image of the person of its president. Cameroon is a country that is
often discreet and sonetines secretive. me sane halo of mystery surromds
this forbidden topic today. which seen to have beco-s black gold. just as
it veiled the arled disturbances yesterday that were tearing the comtry

apart and just as it will undoubtedly tone down tomorrow the tensions that
Aheadou Ahidjo'e succession will not fail to cause.

Nevertheless. Cameroon is an oil-producing country. It is true that the
contrary would have been astonishing. Aside from so-e kind of “geological
scandal,” we do not see why that comtry. tucked away at the end of the
Gulf of Guinea. surrounded by neighbors with oil in varying mts, like

Nigeria. Gabon or Congo, would not also have a few offshore platforae bat-
tered by the waves.

Prospecting. which started in 1951, while Cannon was still a territory
under French protection. and which was abandoned several tines and named

several tiles. led. in 1976. to the discovery of a deposit at the aouth of
the hey River. not far from the Nigerian border. Hole.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh’LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This discovery has been surrounded by the greatest discretion. No chan-
pagne and no startling speech. silence. The only official intonation pu-
blished to date in this connection mntioned the presence of a modest. al-
most negligible deposit. BL? [Gasoline and Lubicants Cospany of trance)
SERBPCA (Cameroon subsidiaryof BI! Aquitaine). which hadobtained rights to
exploit this deposit in association with mom (a shell subsidiary) . was
just as reserved. 'no such a degree that a world Bank report. dated April
I978. estimated that Camroon's oil production would not exceed 700,000 ne-
tric tons a year in '982 (by way of cowparison, Congo produces a little over
2 million netric tons a year and Gabon. ”.5 uillion).

silence

It was noted very quickly. however. that not less than 10 oil coepanies were
engaged in prospecting and search activities in Caneroon. At the beginning
of 1978, it was learned that two new deposits had just been discovered at

the south of the hey River -- Bkoundo-Sud and aetika-Harine -- and good possi~
bilities had been discovered farther south, between the island of Fernando
Poo and Victoria, and off Kribi. At the end of 1978, production of the

Kole deposit (the only one being exploited) already amounted to 800.000 ne-
tric tons in 12 months and. contradicting its first forecasts. a second
World Bank report , confidential. dated in Novesber. estimted that Caseroon's
oil reserves -- just like the reserves of Ivory Coast -- were “sizable.”

NoDoom

Between the few drops of black gold about which oil “forecasters“ talked

2 years earlier and the future boon predicted here and there. no one. from
Douala to Yaounde. knows any longer what to believe. One thing seems cer-
tain. nevertheless: Cameroon will never be ﬂigeria. It is true that es-
timating a country's oil reserves has as much tightrope walking as it has
exact science in it, but it would see. exaggerated. at least. to place
Caneroon's offshore potential at over 100 million netric tons. Moreover,
this figure is generally the one put forth at present by international ex-
perts.

With regard to onshore prospecting. it has only just begun in the north, not
far from the border with Chad. where the Norwegian womuon. cogeany is
studying possible extensions of the Kaneur deposit. located on the other
side of bogone. merefore. no boo- in the Nigerian unner, but certainty
of mating its own needs - a refinery with a capacity of 3 Iillion metric
tons a year is under construction at Victoria. financed by the "loco-trance
cospany, a subsidiary of the American miversal Oil Products coepany -- and
the possibility of becoming a small exporter one day. in the image of its
neighbor. Congo. That is all and already that is not bad.

Therefore. in view of these reasonably optimistic prospects. what explana-

tion is there for the fact that the authorities express themselves so re-
sorvedly as soon as the word oil is sentioned? Oil revenue included in the

13

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1978-1979 budget anomts to close to 5 billion CPA [African Financial Con-
nunityl francs, paid in dollars by BL! and PICTEN. Even though manna fro.
heaven is not exactly involved. the results are appreciable for a first
year of exploitation and on a single deposit (the Role deposit). he do
not see why the Cameroon Government would abstain from iaitating its Ivory
Coast opposite nudsor. which announced, in 1977. the ”good news” to its
countrymen. with a little emphasis and ninth certitude.

of course. President hhidjo cannot be reproached for being prudent in the
utter. ell the more so since false hopes are expensive. But there are
other reasons for this discretion in that Iosaic country with a sisable
English-speaking minority.

In fact, uncontrolled utilisation of oil and its resources runs the risk of
aggravating sons of the actual or potential splits that weave Canoroon's
daily web. The very location of the hey River deposit". near Nigeria’s
indecisive sea frontier. nay very well lead. in the long rm. to one of
those many. couplicatsd water boundary disputes for example. like the ones
setting Senegal against Guinea-Bissau. or Tunisia against Libya.

Regional Isbalancss

But there is something more serious: the sere possibility of a timid oil
boon runs the risk of intensifying still more the constant flow of rural
migration toward the outskirts of cities in the southwest. me Douala ag-
glomeration, where thousands of huts and overpopulated poverty shantytowns
are piled up, already has over a million inhabitants. Indigestion -- or
explosion -- nay not be far off.

Moreover, and unless there is a strict distribution of receipts. the oil
boon will profit only southwestern Cameroon. 'mat southwest. already
richer and with a higher rate of school attendance than other parts of
the country. ﬁrst southwest where the enterprising Ba-ileke niddle class
prevails. at tines accused of controlling all of Cauroon's co-srcial
channels. Cameroon's unity, built on blood and tears. would then run the
risk of being challenged once more by moans of an intensification of re-
gional imbalances.

111s barrels of Roy River oil are not powder kegs, however. In that country.
which, over the years. has been successively described as “capitalist.“
"African socialist," then “planned liberal." many undoubtedly would like

to know what prospects are offered by the oil discoveries and especially
how these new resources will be used and distributed. But the silence of

the Yaounde authorities conceals, perhaps. a certain a-ount of confusion
in view of the cosplexity of this encmbering gift.

16

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

, 0'0“!“
OW-.. "MD
"H“

m "‘0‘... '9”

o “In. ‘0-..

O nuance
nun . new.
euc- nu-

M
“u.

 

launch“!

The only deposit being exploited in the Role deposit, in
the Ray River (heavy-printed derrick). Off Douala and
Kribi, two more deposite not yet exploited (light-printed
derricka).

Key: 1. area: 2. density: 3. capital; 4. cities; 5. laaa
than: 6. more than: 7. aaphaltad roads; 8. other road: and
traile; 9. railroad: 10. planned railroad; 11. international
airport; 12. other airports and main aiftielde: 13. Chad:
14. Central African [Wire]: 15. Bquatorial Guinea;

16. Gulf of Guinea: 17. Ray River

COPYRIGHT: Jeane Mrique GRUPJIA 1979

10 . 042
cso: «oo 15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSli ONLY

CAMEROON

CAMEROON, FRANCE ISSUE JOINT CONNIQUE
Perie MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANEENS in French 16 Feb 79 p 431

[Text] Caroua, 10 February l979--0n the invitation of the preeidant of
the United Republic of Cameroon and ﬁre Ahmadou Ahidjo, the preaident of
the French republic and ﬁre Valery Ciecard d'Bataing paid an official
visit to Cameroon from 8 to 10 February 1979. Accompanied by Preeident
Ahmadou Ahidjo, they viaited the towne of Douala, Yaounde and Caroua.
Throughout their atey, they were given a particularly friendly welcome by
the people of Cameroon.

This viait, of major political importance. enabled the two partiee to
strengthen etill further the feelinge of very deep friendehip and high
esteem which have long linked them. In an atmoaphere characterized by
cordial calm and confidence, reflecting the quality of the relatione main-
tained between the two countriea, the chiefe of atate held eeveral talke
to diecuae bilateral queatione and current international probleme. The
same atmoephere characterized the talka between the two delegatione, made
up as followa:

chreeenting France: Hiniator of Cooperation Robert Galley, Hinieter for
Universitiee Alice Saunier-Seite, Niniater of Traneporte Joel Le Theule.
Secretary of State to the Minieter of lnduetry Jean-Pierre Prouteau.
Aaaietant Secretary-General to the Preeidency of the Republic Francoie
Polge de Combret, and Hubert Duboie. the French ambaaeador in Cameroon.

chreacnting Cameroon: Secretary-General at Preeidency of the United
Republic of Cameroon Samuel Eboua. Hinieter in Charge of Hieeione at
Preaidency Francoie Sengnt-Kuo, Director of Civil Cabinet of the Preeident
of the Republic Philemon Beb A Don, Minieter in Charge of Hiaaione at
Presidency Abdoulaye Yadji, Miniater of Foreign Affaira Jean Reutcha,
Minister of Economy and Plan Youaeoufa Daouda, Minieter of National
Education Ndam Njoya. Hinieter of Social Affaire Delphine reanga, Hiniater
of Traneporta John Nkengong Monie, Cenaral Repreeentative for Touriem
Aninou Oumarou, Special Adviaer to the Preaident of the Republic Eteki

Hboumoue, and Salomon Bekoto, Cameroonian ambaaeador to France.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The two statesmen took up various social. cultural and economic aspects of
French-Cameroonian cooperation. On this occasion, they expressed mutual
satisfaction with the multiplicity and quality of the cooperative relations
existing between the two countries. They expressed the view that these
relations should continue to develop without interruption in order to adapt
to the needs and the potential of Cameroon itself. as well as the means

put to use by France. Within this perspective, they discussed the main
subjects which should be taken up at the meeting of the high French-
Cameroonian Commission which will be held next March. On this occasion,
apart from the work of this commission, the negotiations pertaining to
maritime transport will be pursued.

In the economic cooperation sector, the two chiefs of state noted that the
interests of each of the parties should be balanced and reciprocal.

Special interest was again expressed by france in certain development
projects in Cameroon, and in particular that nation agreed to take the
proposed route link between Yaounde and Douala under consideration. The
means of participation in this financing of an international nature by
France will be agreed upon by the two countries.

The two chiefs of state noted the expansion of trade exchange between the
two nations with satisfaction, and stressed the desirability of encouraging
its development. They expressed concern about the need to absorb the im-
balance in this trade, believing in this connection that the implementation
of a certain number of industrial development projects should allow the
transformation of Cameroonian economic structures such as to reduce the
existing disparity further.

In order to respond to the priority goals of Cameroon in the training
sector, France will step up its aid efforts, in particular in the fields
of higher education. research and technical training.

In the same spirit of mutual understanding, the two chiefs of state voiced
their agreement on the need to sea to it that the exchange agreement which
sets forth the conditions for stays by their respective nationals in the
other country is implemented in a spirit of goodwill and humanity. To
this end, it was agreed that a work group will meet as soon as possible.

. In the international sector, the two chiefs of state noted the similarity

of principles guiding and directing their approach to international problems,
and they agreed to pursue their fruitful joint efforts in the interests of
peace. In this connection, they stressed the need for respect of the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all nations. The
primary role of the United Nations in the maintenance of peace and inter-
national security was reaffirmed, as was the need to ensure that the spirit
of dialog and joint action prevails within it.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Where relations between Europe and Africa are concerned, the two chiefs of
state expressed their desire to contribute to their development end con-
solidation in a spirit of solidarity, with respect for the sovereignty of
the partners and the safeguarding of their interests. In this connection,
they expressed their desire to encourage the pursuit of the North-South
dialog by various means, and to see the negotiations with a View to the
agreement linking African, Caribbean and Pacific nations with the Buropasn
Economic Community lead to positive results in the fields of trade,

financial, industrial and scientific cooperation and the transfer of tech-
nology.

The two chiefs of state voiced their desire that the various discussions
pursued within the framework of the UNCTAD [United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development] and the Conference on International Economic
Cooperation lead to equitable solutions allowing absorption of the imbalance
remaining in international economic trade, guaranteeing the countries in

the process of development the means for sustained economic growth. Special
stress was placed on the need to persuade the industrialized countries to

agree to make an exceptional effort through new means to promote the devel-
opment of Africa.

In this connection, President Ahmadou Ahidjo expressed his appreciation for
the special and consistent interest President Valery Ciscard d'Bstaing has
devoted to Africa and its development, as well as to aid to the Third World
and the establishment of a new international economic order. The president
of the United Republic of Cameroon also praised the dynamic and far-seeing
action pursued by President Valery Ciscard d'Estaing as the leader of France,
within Europe and in the concert of nations.

The two chiefs of state expressed regret that peace has still not been
re-established in the Near East, despite the recent undertakings with a
view to a negotiated solution, and they stressed the need for reaching an
overall solution, which alone can lead to a just and durable peace in the
region.

The situation in Africa was also the subject of profound analysis. The two
chiefs of state reasserted the inalienable right of the peoples of Africa
to independence. They reiterated their condemnation of the policy of
Apartheid and stressed the need to achieve a settlement facilitating access
to equal rights for the African majority in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa. In addition, they reconfirmed their support of the efforts under-
taken to this end by the international community.

The two chiefs of state stressed once again the right of African nations

to govern their affairs themselves, to determine their own destiny within

a freely chosen framework, in solidarity and agreement, safe from any desire
for foreign domination and intervention. They expressed the hope that the
conciliation efforts undertaken under the aegis of the GA” to find a solution
to the conflicts rending Africa will be crowned with success.

18

FOR OFFLCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The president of the French republic took the opportunity offered by his
visit to Cameroon to issue a solemn appeal to all Africans involved in

the conflicts which have multiplied on the continent in the course of

recent years to agree to put an end to fretricidal struggles. embarking upon
negotiations which should make it possible to find just and enduring solu-
tions. The president of the United Republic of Cameroon joined in this
appesl, stressing that the re-establishment of peace is a prerequisite to
the development end progress of the African peoples.

The president of the French republic paid homage to the wisdom and realism
of President Ahmadou Ahidjo's policy. he praised his leading role in the
consolidation of national unity and his contribution in the work of peace
and agreement among the states and nations.

Ilia Excellency the President of the French Republic and Hrs ciscard d'Bstaing
expressed to His Excellency the President of the United Republic of

Cameroon and Mrs Ahmodou Ahidjo, as well as the people of Cameroon and its
government, their extreme gratitude for the very warm and friendly welcome
given them in the course of their stay. They voiced their hopes for the

prosperity, happiness and lasting friendship between the peoples of France
and Cameroon.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux st cie, Paris . 1979

5157
C80: MOO

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICAN EMPIRE

IMHENSE RIFT BETWEEN BOKASSA, PEOPLE CLAIMED
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIB in French 5-18 Feb 79 p 18
[Article by Mariam Sysle]

[Text] Neither the emperor's police, nor Zaire's arny
will succeed in keeping the people in indefinite
slavery.

One year after the coronation parody, Bokossn's "imperial" regime has been
hit heed-on. Indeed, the bloody events which just occuresd in Banqui
prove the deep dissatisfaction and widespread weariness overtaking this
country, as a result of a dictorial regime whose failure is evident.

A new, obviously ridiculous, whim of the emperor of Berengo, was enough to
kindle the fire. He had decided to impose uniforms on schoolchildren and
students, so as "to distinguish them from non-schooled children who are
often bandits." Thus. showing the deep contempt he feels toward his people.
Bokassa had in fact thought of a new way to pressure parents and replenish
his coffers. Outraged by this measure. high school and university students
revolted on 18 January, supported by many residents of Bangui. For 3 days.
despite a savage repression, demonstrators attacked everything which was

part of the hated regime. This was an open explosion of bitterness, humilia-
tion and resentment that had accumulated for 12 years.

The conditions suited for a popular uprising have been present for a long
time in the Central African Empire. Only through a dreaded police system
of surveillance, accusation and detention, has the usurper of Bangui been
able to continue his reign and fatten his fortune.

For the large majority of the people. the situation has become even worse
during the past months. Daily necessities are becoming scarcer and prices
are climbing very fast. in 1 year. to take but one example, sugar prices
have tripled and meat prices quadrupled. In this country filled with
misery, pressured and abandoned, there is only a single island of opulence:
Berengo, where Boksssa has established his fiefdom where nothing is lacking,
from plantations and herds to stores, movie theaters, factories and schools.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Not only were the artificial creation of the eepire and the coronation
ceremony felt as a cruel humiliation by the Central African people. but

thin trogl-comedy was also an occasion to increase the personal taxes.

'nnun. Bokausa found a new subterfuge: he has made businesses and enterprises
--nlready generally in financial difficulty--pay their taxes for 1979 and
1980 in «dvance. Sieilarly. through another trick. he has had public
euLerprises paying for government employee salaries since August.

Buhussu's isolation

It is almost unnecessary to say that the anger even reaches into the relatively
privileged strata. such as government employees and teachers. who have

waited in vain for their wages for several eonths. and into the arey. which

he» been considered "suspiscious." as a result of the January event. lso-
[clad in his Berengo palace. which has been turned into a veritable fortress
and surrounded by crooks helping him to loot the country. the eeperor lives
with the fear of plots. coup d'etats. and popular uprising. Bangui's dic-
tator used his friend Hobutu’s soldiers. with their sinister reputation.

to stop popular insurrection. Zaire's eercensries used mortar shells and
victims number in the hundreds.

Thin ferocious repression can only widen even more the large gap which
uepnrutes the former French army corporal free his people. Giscard's France.
financial and political support of Bohassa--which gave him a part of its
territory to install in important military bese-night be more prudent in
the future.

COPYRLGHT: 1979 Airique-Asie

C30: 6400
892k

2!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CENTRAL AFRICA” EMPIRE

BRIEFS

BNCD'S ACTIVITIEs--Somewhat behind schedule. the Central African National
Deposit Bank (BNCD) has published a report on its activities during the
1977 fiscal year. The BNCD is the third largest bank in the territory.

On 31 December 1977. the voluse of its custoaera' deposits (dc-and and

tern deposits) amounted to 1.8 billion CPA francs. an increase of 26.5 per-
cent over the end of 1976. Growth was particularly noticeable in the area
at private accounts (at the end of 1977. the bank had 4.516 accounts. com-
pared with 3.311 a year previously). Compared with other local commercial
banks. the BNCD represented 20 percent of all deposits made. At the end

of the fiscal year. liabilities (bills in case. advances. credits, guaran-
tees and securities) amounted to 6.8 billion CPA francs. an increase of

95 percent over the and of 1976. Out of this total. yearly credits amounted
to 2.9 billion (+ 37.6 percent). while standing deficits came to .9 billion
(+ 77.1 percent) and guarantees and backing represented .4 billion (+ 361
percent). The 8NCD's aid to the economy amounted to 36 percent of the
ccsmitaenta of the three coamercial banks. After the hiring of personnel
for the Bamberi agency. the INCD had a total of 88 officials and eaployees
at the end of 1977. The trading account showed a favorable trend: Gross
proceeds rose by 39.7 percent and expenses rose by 8.3 percent. with an
allowance of 77 million CPA francs being asde for supplies. Trading results
totaled 156.8 million CPA francs. compared with 38.5 Iillion for the 1976
fiscal year. [Text] [Paris HARCRRS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBENS in French
12 Jan 79 pp 89-90] 11,666

CSO: 6600

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm use om!

REPORTER HIMSSBS um BETWEEN "ALLOW. HABRB TROOPS
Paris JBWB minus in French 28 Feb 79 pp 23-20

[Article by Noel Ngouo Ngabissio: "It All Began with an Incident at a
High Scheol"l

l'l‘extl It all began with an incident at the Ndjsnens general high school
on Monday. l2 February.

In answer to the convocation of the political-military couittee for
security and surveillance announced by the president of the republic on
Saturday. 10 February, the supporters of Prime Minister llissein Ilsbre
began to distribute a pamphlet calling ’4! a general strike, in the edu-
cation end trade sectors seen; others. on Monday, 12 February.

On Monday, as a precaution against possible trouble, Chadian National Any
troops were posted as of 0600 hours along the approaches to educational
establish-outs. The population, on awakening, believed there was a coup
d'etat. Toward 0700 hours. Hr Ilissein llabre's car was spotted near the hose
of the minister of national education. not far fry. the Felix Bboue high
school. which in turn is a few hundred teeters fro. the residence of the
priae minister, heavily guarded by his nan. Apparently. the strike order

was not being heeded. But the pro-northern students contributed to dis-
tribute the flyers.

Classes proceeded as usual until about l000 hours. when a scuffle broke

out among the students. Hr Gilbert, a teacher on cooperative loan from
France. who died in an accident on Thursday, 15 February, was present. he
described the scene to ne. "1 had just finished uy class and was chatting
with another teacher. A fight started. Then the ANT [Chadian National
Amy] soldiers cause to separate the students. They nay have beaten one
student. The others fought to prevent their putting his in the police
wagon. The police, in order to discourage the resistance by the youths,
fired in the air and made as if to set up a ”millimeter gun on a tripod."

It was then that liissein Habre's guard appeared on the run and fired at
the ART detachment. The students had tiae to scatter. But two passers-by
were killed.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it woo l030 houro. The regular erwy. alerted. arrived with ice heavy
weapono. A witnooe ooyo that after theoe firot incidento. the prime
ninioter went to the RN? [Chadian National Radio Broodcaotlng] ototion to
deliver an addreeo. The radio authoritioa, after conoulting tho prooidoncy.

refuoed to put him on the air. A half-hour later. the broodcooting otation
woo .o be burned.

Alerted by gunfire while near the Parcha induotrlal ooctor, l proceeded
rapidly toward the co-bat cone near the city hall. I wao chatting with
my colleague free the APP'and photographero when two Dc-ko of tho oevon

the Chadian army hoe attached the reoidenco of tho prime niniotor. lt woo
neon.

Battle at the Hoopital

Toward 1300 houre, tho hoopitel battle began. It wao launched by niooein
Hebre'a oupporter , who tried to block tho policeman who were taking oome
wounded policemen there. The battle raged for an hour. Rockato. machine
guno, automatic weepone. Toward 1500 houro all woo quiet.

Deopitc the police barrage. I managed to get to the oite. l counted about
20 dead. including 5 or 6 civilione. 1 aow an intact rocket which. by

acne fantootic luck. did not explode deepite the fire which broke out nearby.
Three vehicleo had been burned. on aubulaneo wee in flanee, and a whole aide
of the prenieao woe doetroyed. The AP? office oppooite woo etruck by a
rocket which fell in tho nidet of tho diroctor'o office. The town hall woo
aloe struck. A euetone van with five diefigured bodiee lay on ite aide.

The battle moved toward the African quarter. Kilinat, near the coin connond
poet of Mr ﬂabre'o oupportere. There woe the noieo of 75- and 90-uillinetor
guno, rockete, etc, particularly toward the bone of the uinieter of interior.
one of "abre'o clooe friendo. Toward 1900 houro, a 00-6 launched l6 rockete
at Mr Hioeein "abre'o proeunod col-and poet. From my hotel, located between
the presidency of the republic. which had become a veritable entrenched camp
patroled by ooldiore armed with Soviet-wade light automatic nachino gene.

and the 13 April borracho, on the other oido, I could clearly hear the noieo
or the rocketo.

ﬂodcration

Rumoro began to fly about the "diooppoaroaco" of Hioooin Hebro. Had he
taken refuge in the Sudaneee enbeeey? Hoe he dead? The latter would be
ecttlcd for all ohortly. But it woe noted that the police, the elite
troope commanded by Lt Col Nodal A. Kanougho, had not attached. Thuo in
the cyeo of the regular army, the oituation did not oeo- oopecielly to

require it. Some military leadero cloeo to Melloun wanted energetic and
rapid action, but Hallou- urged moderation.

For three weeka. the intelligence eervicce had been warning that Rioeein

llabrc wao concentrating weapone and partioano in the African quarter of
Ndjamena. 24

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it eeemed that Helloum preferred to let uieeein etrike firet. 0n Tueedey,
13 February, he criticized one of the army con-andere. Lt Col Plecide
Adoum Ngamarou. for ordering the air attack on the prime ninieter'e reel-
dence. Thie officer. vexed, wee to be erreeted on the afternoon of
Thuredey. is February. in Here. Caneroon. 160 kilometere from the frontier.
practically under my noee. for I had left chad that day in order to try to
make contact with JBUNB AFRIQUE.

0n Tueeday. the bertlee reeuned for fair. An effort by hebre'e forcee to
eeire the 13 April barracke during the night had failed, but they eucceeded
in taking and deetroying the teleconmunicetione etetion Monday night.
Ndjemene no longer had any telephone or Telex linke with the outer world.

Two automatic 7.65 rifle bullete were fired through my roan, number 33. at
the Grand Hotel.

There woe to be a certain lull during the day. But there wee talk of
battlee with machetee and bowe end errowe in the neighborhoode where moat
of the reeidente are Corane (Hebre'e tribe) and choe Arebe--Kilinat. the

noeque area. etc. The neighborhoode with e Hbei or Sere najority--Houreel.
Chegoue end Parie-Congo. were celn.

Hieeein "abre'e chief of eteff hed regrouped the partieene in a eecret
command poet in the Saint-Martin beein. Ae of Hedneedey, 16 February. hie
forcee were able to mount a new attack on the police barracke end the 13
April camp. They were repelled. But the advantage then eeemed to owing
back to hebre'e troope. Toward 1330 houre. runore about Hellou-‘e
"capituletion" were circulating. Only Xaloughe wee fighting on. it wee eeid.

Evacuation

However, the people eeened eurprieed by thie capituletion. The preeidency
ie not far from the zone etehed out by the French troope near the French
enbaeey. It wee not in danger of falling. In addition, there wee epecu-
letion about the attitude of helloun. who had not ordered the Chedien
troope baeed at the 27 April canp in Ferche into action.

Beginning on Redneedey noon, elnoet ell the French end other foreignere
were evacuated to the Franco-Chedien beee at the Adji-Koeeei camp in Ferche
(2,000 to 3,000 French eoldiere). The French connunity euffered only a
eingle cneuelty--a pilot in the French cooperation program. who wee acci-
dentally ehot in hie own doorway while returning from Sehr where he had
gone in eearch of DC-b reinforcemente. The next day there wee e eecond
victim. aleo accidental. a Hr Gilbert.

The seven "individual" French pilots in the Chedien army had been eent out
of Chad "eo ac to avoid any threat to the French conunnity ae a whole,"
according to the enbaeey.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Canoe-Fire

An inpllclt ceaae-fire vae in effect ae of 15 February. That day. only a
few burete of machine-gun fire violated the truce. '

Holloun reeolutely played the gene of pacification, on the advice of the
French General Foreat and certain African chiefe of atate. During thla
tine, hahro'a troope adopted guerrilla tactlce, eending eeverel commando

unite against the police atatione and harracke. which euggeeted a certain
advantage in the field for "abre.

1 left Ndjanena on Saturday. 17 February. when the eituation vae politically
confueed but atebillred fro- a military point of view. The dieegreenente

within the ANT command and the heeitation uere eerioue hindranoee to halloue'e
troope.

nut no one "won" in the field. On the other hand. there vere heavy loeeea:
for Chad and it. citizene, 1.000 to 2.000 dead. aubetentiai deease, and
infrastructuroe dcatroyed. Chad loet lo yeare in a few daye.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRﬂPJlA 1979

5157
cso: 6400

26
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SASSOU “WESSO'S RESIDENCY 3m A8 VICTORY FOR L3H

Paris WWI-A813 in French 19 Peb- 4 Her 79 p 30
(Article by Marian Syele: "The Clearing")

[Text] The crisis triggered by last year's assas-
sination of President Marian llgouabi at last eeens
to have ended.

Bvents of entrees inportmce have just taken place in Brazzaville. The
CM? (Party liilitery Counted-which had held full power since the assas-
sinetion of President Ngouebi on 18 March l977—raturnad this power to
the hands of the PCT (Congolese Labor Party) Central Co-ittee. The
chief of state. Can Yhoaby Opango. who had also been chair-an of the DIP
and of the cabinet, resigned. lie was replaced at the head of the state
by Denis Seseou Nguesso who had been deputy chairman of the GI! end de-
fense sinister. Finally. a special party congress was scheduled for 26
ﬂarch end a directory of four embers. under the leadership of Thisthere

Tchicaya. pernanent Central Co-ittee secretary. was appointed to prepare
this nesting.

These upheavals are certainly not the result of an alleged palms revolu-
tion—as a certain aspent of the press, which is more interested in sense-
tionsl news then careful analysis. is trying to have everyone believe. 0n
the contrary, these upsets are the outcoas of a bitter and prolonged strug-
gle between two political lines.

"hat "I. At Stake

To understand what was at stake. we not go back to the assassination of
President Ngouebi. The brutal and tragic disappearance of the chief of
state had created a vacuu- full of danger. in a context Iarkad by politi-
cal and econoeic plots, hatched by the inperialist powers and. doeesticslly.

by the counterrevolutionary forces. The iaportant thing therefore was to
stop these i-ediate threats as quickly as possible. to face then under the
best conditions of effectiveness.

27
'08 ORIGIN. "SB ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

Under these conditions. the PCT Cutral Oosnittee ”until further orders"
entrusted full power to en ll-nsnbsr nilitery eo-ittee. In the spirit of
the snjority of the Control Couittee seders end. nore generally speaking.
the nilitants. there was no question of en abdication by the party and its
leading role: this was sorely e question of constituting an exceptionsl
structure in response to e situation which itself was exceptionel.

howo-end this is the first split that nenifestsd itself within the GNP-
this exceptional situation tended to perpetuste itself. A certsin nus-
ber of leaders went slong with the idea of putting the-party end its organ-
izations on all echelons to sleep and suppressing the people's powers
which hsd been instituted in 1974. The decisions were node st the eunit
without having been submitted for discussion esong the rank end file. This
produced profound uneasiness snong the nilitsnts and s denobilirstion
which could not in soy wey help overcone the redouteble problem which

the country hed to fees.

In effect, the foreign and domestic plots-~the occnonic qussi-boycott.

the failure of the ettenpts on the life of Denis Ssssou hguesu. etc.--
continued without effective countsrneesures being taken. The econonic
situation kept getting worse. bringing financial difficulties to the point
where civil service salaries were paid after considerable delay while
prices on daily necessities skyrocketed.

The Height of the Younger Generation

Popular discontent wee further stirred up by the diversion of public funds
for prestige purposes es well as the inactivity of the emission charged
with investigating ill-gotten grins.

A second split developed on the way so to how to tscltle these problems.
In view of inperislist pressure. the right-wing tendency reco-snded s
policy of concessions end. on the donsstic scene. nessures the least of
which one night say were in no way suitable for restoring the situation.
The left-wing tendency—supported end pushed by the less orgenieetions.
especially the young people—on the contrery denended thet the country
elbnrk on en offensive policy of redicslixstion. such as it had been
suggestud by the notional conference held in October 1976.

The owning. during the weeks to cone. of e speciel congress. charged
with thoroughly looking into these problens end appointing the men
charged with carrying out the decisions—not just the regular congress
announced on 1 anuery by Gen Yholby Opengo. lilited only to econolic
problem—constitutes e victory for this tendency. just as did the sc-
cession of Denis Sessou Ngussso to the presidency of the republic.

A victory which, sccording to all evidence. is in line with the s:pectstion
of the people of the "Three Glories.”

COPYRIGB‘I': I979 Afrique-Asie

5058 28
C80: “00 roe 0177mm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

NEH FACES IN GOVERNMENT HAY ASSIST IN AUSTBRITY PROGRAM
Pnrie JBUNB AFRIQUK in French No 956, 2l Feb 79 pp 36-37
[Article by Sory Serinde Diello: "New Fecee")

[Excerpte] The congroee of the Gaboneee Democratic Party (PUG) which wee
held in Libreville from 24 to 29 January marked a relative democratization
of political life in Gabon (eee our ieeue No 90‘). it eleo revealed
Preeident Omar Bongo'e intention of partially replacing hie team for
implementing the aueterity policy the economic eituation in the country
makes neceeeery.

But thie democracy ie etill taking etumbling etepe. Certain membere of the
Central Committee etill occupy eeete on it ea a function of their poeta
(preeidente of epecialized bodiee of the party. the National Aeeembly,
Supreme Court. the minietere of economy and finencae and national defence)
or their dutiee.

The prime minieter automatically ie a member of the Political Bureau, the
members of which are in fact choeen from the Central Committee by the
secretary-general. The founder of the party, El “adj Omar Bongo, the
president of the republic who calla himeelf "the great comrade." remeine
eecretary-generel by right. That having been eaid, the main reetriction
on democratization remaine the aingle-party eyetem. The PDC continuee to
monopolize political lite and the eecond congraee endoreed ite primacy
over other inetitutione, governmental and adminiatrative.

The congreee in Libroville wee marked by the reeumption of party control
by Preeident Bongo, to whom the membere of the Central Committee, eomo of
whom are elected by the people. ewore an oath of fidelity and loyalty. If
indeed euch a man ne Henri Minko. who hae been e member of the Political
Bureau for about a dozen yeare, wae retained, the choice of the new membere
was characterized by the epectacular departure of Dr Bloi Rahandi Chambrier
--a departure eome rightly or wrongly linked with the Auguet l978 affair
involving citizene of Benin-and the etriking incorporation of euch young

technocrata ea Jean-Prancoie Ntoutoume, minister in charge of coordination

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of economic and financial affairs at the presidency; Etienne Moussirou,
minister of commerce and industrial development; Hamadou Diop, customs
director for the pest dozen or so years; Jules Ogoulinguede, an eminent
jurist; and Julian Hpouho, a peraonal adviser to the chief of state known
[or his diecrotion and courtesy.

Theaa personnel changes, to be followed by a ministerial reorganization and
diplomatic changes, seem to be the result of the chief of state's desire
to appoint new man for a new policy.

"Democratic and concentrated progressiviam" ie the new ideology which will
replace "directed and planned liberalism." This is the Gabonese path of
development. It differs from capitalism, socialism and all the other
economic doctrines insofar as it "givea development priority over growth
and gives social progress priority over consumption." Its goal is to make
the nation the master of its own economy, by protecting certain professions
againet foreign competition, by facilitating access for citizens to credit
and business ownership, by creating amall businessmen. But it will involve
no nationalization. ln a period of economic recession, it is clearly a
question of reducing the very important role of foreigners in business
somewhat.

Before the country can put this new economic policy into use, it must
emerge from the serious financial crisis it is currently experiencing.

The etate launched a number of major work projects and had to go heavily
into debt to finance these inveatments. The debt came to $07 billion

CFA francs ea of 31 December 1978 (ac compared, it is true, to 576 billion
a year earlier). In the year just past, 147 billion CPA francs (more than
51 percent of the export income, more than 65 percent of the budget) went
to cover the debt service.

To avoid bankruptcy, Gabon was forced, under preasure from the world Bank

and the International Monetary Fund in particular, to put into operation,

at the beginning of 1978, an austerity plan which overall is yielding good
results.

This led the etate to reduce its rate of advance. Public expenditures
fell from 296 billion CPA francs in 1977 to 167 billion in 1978. The
hiring of public employees was suspended, except for young people completing
their schooling. The Cabonese Cellulose Company (SOGACEL) and cattle
ranch projects were postponed for lack of funds. Construction on the
trans-Cabonese railroad will continue, but at a slower rate than planned.
The expenditure: to be made on this railroad line this year come to 23
billion CPA francs, as compared to a little more than 40 billion for the
preceding years. The investment total in 1979 is in principle to be
limited to 82 billion 300 million CPA francs as compared to 87 billion

in 1978. "here prices are concerned, inflation was reduced to ll percent
in 1978 from lb percent in 1977.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Better neetory of production coete (vegee, energy) will neke it poeeible
to find e cure for tho emecietion of tho Gaboneeo eoono-y. Then it will
be poeeiblc to put the new econouic policy into ptectice with echo chence
of eucceea.

copygxcur; Jenna Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

5157
030: 6‘00

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PDG EXTRAORDINhﬂ! CONGRESS RESULTS REVIEWED
Paris JBUNB AFRIQUB in French No 944. 7 Feb 79 pp 22, 23
[Article by Sory Serinde Diallox "Limited Dssooracy' in bibrsville']

[Text] The second extraordinary congress of the solo party in power, the
P06 [Gabonese Democratic Party] , coepleted its work on Monday 29 January
before over 300 delegates.

For 6 days. the mothers of the congress, at tines wearing uniforss bearing
the effigy of Bi Had) Onsr Bongo. chief of stats and secretary general of
the party, examined the nany draft resolutions sub-itted by the Political
Bureau. 1he preceding congress. which was also the tirst one organised
since the establishment of the P06. in 1968, was held at the beginning of
1973.

”Concerted democratic progressionisl' was proclaiud the PDG's ideology.
The objective of this doctrine is “the people's well-being,” by means of
controlling the country's natural resources (oil, ainsrals. wood) and "par-
ticipation by everyone in the canon task of work and dialog."

The congress was an opportunity to introduce a limited dose of democracy
into the party's operation. ‘ihus, the rank-and-file esters had the possi-
bility of having more names than the actual nuiaer or nelbers of the Central
Oomittee appear on the lists of candidates for that body.

Bach candidate could be elected only by the delegates from his district of
origin. That was for the purpose or taking the pulse of the popularity (or
unpopularity) of a given candidate.

Sm high officials, sons teachers of Parlianent. had the disagreeable sur-
prise of not being elected by their fellow countrymen. hat was true of
ﬂartin Hagnana. governor of Ogooue-Lolo, Joseph Ickuba, deputy sayor of
Koulanoutou. or Douinque Bomouere. principal private secretary to the
chief of state. Sons people are already saying that these unlucky candi-
dates will not be long in losing their adainisrative poet. At any rate.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this is probably a logical consequence. Party mowers would find it hard to
understand that it would be otherwise after their verdict.

Cabinet ﬂeshuffle

The congress also decided to forbid henceforth plurality of posts. And the
government was invited to take the necessarv steps. At present. a number
of high-level state officials and oven sons monsters hold several posts
as director general of memes or of public services. tilde: these con-
ditions, it should not be amazing to hear the radio give out the following
refrain all day long: "Corruption is a snake. honey earned dishonestly
is n venom"

A cabinet reshufflewill undoubtedly be the first consequence of this. con-
gress. It will involve. perhaps. the reduction of a government teal that
is too nuaerous (25 linisters and 9 secretaries of state). as well the dis-
missal of those who are suspected of incoupetency in their adsinistration.

COPYRIGWP: Jeune Afrique GNPJIA 1979

10,042
(:80: 4400

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

GAMBIA

NATION UNDERGOING 'SBRIOUS BWMC, SOCIAL DIPPICULTIBS'
Paris APRIQOB-ASIB in French 19 Feb - 6 Her 79 pp 62, 63
[Article by San Bssono: "Deaocracyn'ro Do Rhett")

[Text] Being Country of "Roots"-Not Bnough

Banjul, 15 ainutes by plane fros Dakar, at first sight looks like a pro-
vincial capital with an unchanged colonial air. This ispreasion is es-
pecially strong downtown. along Wellington Street, which leads to the port.
or along Cameroon Street and Buckle Avenue. the section with nest of the
eabassies and banks.

Not for free there. close to the crafts and notions narket, the head--
quarters of the old British administration, which, after independence,
heceae the State Rouse, remains intact.

A fist of the Holof of Gaabia. but a town controlled by a heavily western-
ized local bourgeoisie, the Akous, Banjul has for several years been
really sweaped with tourists. The Swedes, the first to be interested in
the coast of Ge-bia, grabbed about 10 kilo-stars of beach where they put
up hotels and bathing facilities which are filled up the year round.

After this Scandinavian tourist case the Afro-Anericans, ever since 1977.
For the latter. as a latter of fact. Gambia has becoae a kind of pilgrinage
place ever since "Roots" was published by the Black Auricen novelist
Alex Raley who, as us knov. said that he had discovered his origins in
the null Genbisn village of Djouffoure and told of the forced voyage of
his presuaed ancestor. Kunta Kinte, to the Americas. Thus. 6,000 persons
crossed the Atlantic during the year "Roots" was published. This was a
trenendoue windfall for Gambia which had just been devastated by the
drought. This influx of tourists produced foreign exchange earnings and
helped gain a hearing for the SOS launched by the Ganbian govern-sot to-
ward the international cos-unity.

But the beneficial effect of this "invasion" turned out to be very lisited.
The arrival of these foreigners with a purchasing power that was way out of

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proportion to that of the local citizene wee bound to trigger a real
epeculetivn frenzy.

According to one neeber of the Gambian Labour Union. a union founded in
1928. Gaebia and banjul. in particular. today are experiencing eerioue
problem. "In leee than 3 yeare." he declared. "in epite of the exiatence
of a coneultative co-ittee on wagee and a eubco-ittee on price controle.
the workere no longer eanage to lake ende neat. Pricee have tripled in
record tine and they keep going up. while wage edjuetnente are far free
keeping up with the aituation."

In effect. Banjul hae joined quite a few African capitele in tern of the
cent of living; without riek of being wrong. one night even eey that the
Genbian citieene .todey get very little advantage out of the free port that
wee eetabliehed in the city.

Horeover. phenonene of an entirely new character in the country—
eebeuleunt of public funde. corruption. and delinquncynheve nede
their appearance. The enotione caused aeong public opinion by the re-
cent ecendal involving the enbeuleeent of aid deetined for the drought
victim in particular pereuaded the chief juatice of the Suprene Court to

denend eevere penaltiea for the guilty individuale. eepecially the "white-
collar crininale."

It wee thue a Mia beeet by eerioue econonic end eocial difficultiee
which. on 18 February. celebrated the lloth annivereary of ite independence.
Thin in en independence which. it wae believed at the beginning of the

sixties. would be followed by neeociation with Senegal. into which Gubian
territory finde iteelf wedged.

but we know that. in 1965. the Ganbiane preferred to go it alone. firet of
all an independent “er of the cn-onwealth and then, following 2‘
April 1970. with the proclamation of the Republic.

One of the cheracterietic feeturee of this country in ite eyeten of
bourgeoie denocracy inherited iron colonial tinee. which the Gubiane
are very proud of. Su-arizing thia uentinent. Preaident nawda Kairaba
Jaware delcared on the eve of the April 1977 legielative election: ”If
there are African countries that can bout of having petroleum. then
Gambia can bout of having democracy." Indeed. judging by the nuﬂer
of politicﬁl fornatione that were able to eeteblieh theuelvee eince
independent. but whoee existence ie. to tell the truth. often rather
eupheneral. Oubie renaine one of the rare African countriee that now:
put on end to the lutliparty eyeten. However. eince 1962. political
life hne been entirely doninated by the PPP (Progreeeive People'e Party)
of Sir Dawda Jawara. Thie has been were true than ever before eince the
1977 electiona which gave the PPP 27 oeata out of 3S and after the oldeet
Gadian organization. the United Party. joined the governunt party (fol-
lowing the death of ite leader. Hr Ioreter).

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

De Panto Two-Party Syste-

Horeover. with the disappearance of the National Liberation Party—which
had been created in 1975 by Master Tieyacine Seek-Mia presently in feet
does have n two-party system. Facing the party in power. we have as a
matter of fact only the NC? (National Convention Party) which has five
seats in parliament. In spite of the very personal attacks by its leader.
Hr Sheriff Houstapha Dibba. against the chief of state. the fact that the
NC? is recruiting followers especially «long the Handingue tribe. hardly
gets it a nationwide audience. Moreover. personality clashes are the out-
standing feature of the political debate in Bsnjul and the personality of
Mr Dibbe certainly does not really lend itself to that sort of thing.

he in as s natter of fact being approached for having tried to cuouflage
the "Sum scandal"--a snuggling affair in which his brother was inplicated
ut the tine when, prior to his expulsion fro- the PPP. he was vice presi-
dent of the republic. It is true that this situation still incites hr
Dibba into denouncing the corruption existing within the party in power.
This is especially so since politicel life has. since last Decenber, been
dominated by the senaetional disclosures caning fro. a high civil servant.
They concern a diversion of gifts and food intended for the drought vic-
tina--eoeething which allegedly was done by government personalities. This
scendalnin which several aides of the president of the republic are inpli-
cated--persuaded Hr Jawara to get rid of three of his einistere while the
administration's secretary-general preferred to take off.

But the denuncietion of corruption is far fro- enough when it cones to
putting a govern-eat program together. As for the party in power, one
night ask oneself whether-through its policy oriented toward the free-
enterprise system—it has not above all become a refuge for certsin un-
scrupulous businessmen-politicians.

COPYRIGBT: 1979 Afrique-Aaie

5058
(:30: “00

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6W

IRIBFS

CLINKBR IMPORT LICENSES-"The govorneent of Ghana hae decided to grant
liccneoe for the import of Clinker in the anount of M) aillion cedie thie
year. Lo. 6 million more than laet year. However. with the devaluation

of the local currency. and if other cheaper eourcee of eupply are not

found, thie amount will not even cover purchaee of the equivalent volune.
Thie etetcnent wee node by Col 3. K. Ahlijah. courieeioner for induetriee,
who enpheeircd the low level of etocke currently on hand. They totaled
about 30,000 tone laet is January. 6.000 of which are exclueively allocated
for the building of the Kpong hydroelectric power plant. At a coneunption
rate of 6.000 tone per week, the comieeioner eeid, the 26,000 remaining
tone would be exhaueted by 25 February. The two ceaent plente are operating
at only 25 percent of their capacity, due to lock of raw neteriela. The
eituetion ie thue extremely critical, but Ghana hea already experienced
einiler onee. which ie the reeeon it ie relying heavily for conetruction

on the uee of clay depoeite and encouraging the conetruction of brick hilne.
[Text] [Peril mums TROPICAUX ET lﬁDI‘l’ERRANEBNS in French 16 Feb 79 p 652]
5157

(280: M00

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

momma

BRIE“

COR AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT TRAINING-Within the fraeework of a national
program with a view to epeoialiring enterpriaee. the Machine Diatribution
(DIM) company, the nanagenent of which the atete hae taken over, waa
recently placed under the juriadiction of the horubique hinietry of
Agriculture. It ie to be nationalized within thia year and will then.
under the name MECANAGRO. concern iteelf aolely with technical aeeletance
for form equimnt. "ith a View to expanding the coepany on the national
level, plans new call for the eatahliaheent of three regional centers
(Maputo. Beira and Nanpula) and the eetahliehnant of provincial branchea
for small and large repaira. Draft bylawe are being written. They were
to have been conpletad by laat 31 December. but anendnente decided upon
on the higher level led to certain changaa in the text which could not
therefore be finiahed in the acheduled tine. Intenaive training couraea
have been organized for peraonnel. Cadrea will be trained in Beat Germany.
and a group of aix pereone will leave for that country next Hay. [Text]
[Paris mums 1110le ET mznmws in French 16 Feb 79 p 667]
5157

CSO: “00

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”IQ-M

MOMMA DIP“ PM!!!“ W AUTOIINMY
Perle JMI ”KIWI In Punch 2| Peh 79 p ‘7

[levles hy Hoh-ed Helge of the hook ”Ilse Up end Helm M Autohlogrsphy“ by
M»: Human, hens Brothers memo. London end mm, ma]

[Text] The style. In ehlch self-setletsotlon oontends Ilth lystIolsI, Is
so-eehet elhemsslh‘. Ins the very heglnnlnq. limelgnor Abel Mums
eepheslsse for us the feet thet ell Me “Is, he hes hed not only to struggle,
hut shove ell to hesltete heteeen too worlds. 1! not between lIle end deeth.

Thus ehen llttle Ahel (eho Is of toyel descent on both hIs Isther's end hIs
eother's sIde) use horn In Old Untell on ll: April 1925, he see pro-tun. Ile
owed hIs Ills only to the shlll of s Seedlsh nun, SIetet lllen ”ottlund. Then,
chmlcelly III, e hospItel pstlent In s hush clInIo, he eutvlved thenhe to
the eeplrlcel knowledge of Ms sehuru (nsternel uncle), the heels: Meterechlel.

Next one the ﬁrst yesrs of hle sducstlon: e cunMn; sum" of ttsdltlonel
Mtlcsn culture end the ehlte schools conducted by the IlssIonerIss.

Pm then on, the future Hethodlst pnlets would lIve dIvIded between e devout
fellly amp In the olty end the unforgettehle love of e smhother tho hsd

renelnsd In the country. Ilnelly. the omelte Influences of Ms tstIehIst
uncle end hIe mute! tould Deco-e cleet.

All thls does not represent en unusuel heckuomd In thls southern Melee,
toned hy Che-letlenlty hut bound to the trsdItIonel vslues. Thst Is thy, out
of thls hook thet ls ever-Ina Ilth deteIl end not eIthout hut, we shell
sentlon only the ”nnlstlone" concemlng the Intrleues, personsl rIvelrIee,
end ditty ttlchs ehIdI hsve constently netted the steuuls of the hlech
netIonelIsts. Ills ohservetlons ere sspsclelly Interest“; hsceuss Abel mums
Is the lest o! ell the Zlnehle lseders to etrlvs on the poIItIcel scene! In
1910, sttst theologIesl studlss In the UnIted Stetss end slut hsIn. ne-ed In
1968 es s hlshop o! the Unltsd Hethodlst (hutch of Ihodssls.

IIIs Intellectuel honesty mot he questloned. But when he eccusee Hr Joshus
hto-o, hls pet eversIon end orlglnel tIvel, ot hevln; sshstsgsd the struule
of the lehehve people sInce 1975 In order to he In s hotter posItIon to lesd

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OH’ICML USE ONLY

it, ho io roaaritably ouiot concorning tho Iothodo ct hio on out! (Huaorova
had no political training until tho croation o! hla Unitod African National
Council .. UANC .. in 1977). Didn't hio Ion oanouvar to oxcluda likooo'o nan
tro- tho loadorahip of tho looortont agoncioa ct tho Ziobabvo liboration Coun-
cil. tho oxtornal cantomrt cl tho African National Council (ARC)! Sioiiariy,
ha tonda to forgot that it vac at tho ouggootlcn or thia aaoo hkooo that ho
attainod tho prooidoncy of tho me in 197‘; tho AN: voa trying to ho a broador
nationalist front. until it brcho up 2 yoara lator.

”Hut” io no ooro convincing than ho aapleina that ouot bo collod an about-taco:
rallying to Ian Soith attor an iniatuaticn uith aroad atrugglo. Ila aayo, in
ahcrt. that ha vao ioroad to do thia by tho ubigucua ottitudo of tho front-
lino ccuntrioa -- oopocially Zambia, uhoao oroaidont. lionnath Kaunda, io not
door to hio and which oolcoooo Ntooo'a troopo. Thoao countrioo aioultanoouoly
cncouragod anod atrugglo and nogotiotion vith tho ohito gmrnoant. According
to mtcroua. thia could not loot. to ho had to choooo, or bo accuaod or con-
tuaion. Tho truth io that ho no doc-ad to loao at that “go-o, " tor uant or
aroad aoldiara. in tho and, ono comet halo aooing in thia autobiography

a oloa for tho “intornal ogroonont" that liuoorova aignad with lan Soith on

3 March l9" .. with tho intontion. anong othar thinga, of looping out of

pcwor tho Patriotic Ircnt, cno o! vhooo too proaidonto ia tho vary aaoa Joahua
NRO”.

COPYRIGIITI Jouno Africuo Chill’JlA 1919

8629
(SN 6600

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SENEGAL

Sb‘NGIlOR SEEN AS ABLE 1'0 COPE HIT" OPPOSITION

Paris JEUNS AFRIQUE in French 31 Jan 79 pp 32-34
[Article by Siradiou Diallo]

[Text] if it is true that democracy dies for lack of debates and discus-
sions. it must be believed that. as far as this point is concerned. the
experiment initiated in Senegal has no need of life insurance. For the
past few months. the debate between those in power and the opposition has
been experiencing such dimension and such vitality that it no longer leaves
anyone indifferent. The press. whose development is reflecting and accou-
panying this new policy. is widely echoing the debate.

A day no longer passes without a newspaper. either governmental or of the
legal (or clandestine) opposition. publishing the contribution of a poli-
tical personality or an independent intellectual. From the official daily
LE SOLEIL to the TAXAH. organ of Sheikh Ants Oiop's National Democratic
Rally [8ND]. through ANDE SOPI. of former Prime Minister Hanadou Die. and
LE DEMOCRATS , organ of Haitre Abdoulaye Hade's Senegalese Democratic Party
(PDS). a review of the Senegalese press presents an unusual sight for the
mind accustomed to the African journalistic landscape. It must also be
completed by reading independent newspapers like LB POLITICIEN. a satirical
organ. and PROMOTION. whose harsh criticism caused. of late. serious prob-
lems for its young and "relaxed" editor. Boubacar Biop.

No One Spared

All Senegalese political personalities. cadres and well-known intellectuals
are participating in the debate. Attacks. counter-attacks. replies and
other restatements thus accumulate into interminable columns in the news-
papers. At the same time, each one is now subjected to the surveillance

of the press and must take it into account. The smallest public or private
statements. activities or actions by anyone are watched. reported. and
submitted to criticise. Accuser or accused. no one is spared. from the head
of state to the cheirean of the National Asseably. through the ministers.
opposition leaders. heads of central services. bank directors and other
prominent business-en.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“hat is the root of the debate in progress in Senegal? Beside the increase
in prices, distribution of income. abuses of power, themes which are in-
variably found in the south and in the writings of members of the opposition
from all countries of the world, two subjects dominate the Senegalese poll-
tlcal scene in particular: the multi-party system and national independence.
The first directly results in the problem of Senegalese democracy. For--
and at first sight this can be surprising--the opposition believes that

the democracy practiced in Senegal is not only "inadequate" but also "il-
lusory." Consequently. the opposition condemns, in unison, the multi-party
system as it now functions: a system which, since the December 1978 con-
stitutional revision, limits the number of legal political parties in
authority to four and which determines for each party a proper ideological
current from which it cannot deviate under penalty of suspension: con-
servative, liberal, socialist and Marxist.

Upper Volta Model

All opposition leaders will invariably tell us that this limitation is not
only "absurd" but also "arbitrary" and, consequently, unacceptable. Never-
theless. among one and all, the positions involve differences of opinion.
Thus, Maitre Abdoulsye "ads is in agreement with President Senghor in be-
lieving that the non-limitation of parties would result in a proliferation
which is needless and even detrimental to democracy. However, he considers
"unacceptable" the constitutional procedure tending to confine the parties
into pre-established ideological corsets. The leader of the PDS would,

on the whole, favor the Upper Voltan Model which limits political parties
to three. but allows all those which are established to freely offer them-
selves to universal suffrage at the outset. And it is the first three,
those which have obtained the most votes, which are legalized; the others
being destined to disappear or to merge with the legal organizations.

0n the other hand. Sheikh Ants Dipp and Mamadou Dis are advocates of a full-
scale multi-party system. The former has been fighting for 2 years for the
recognition of his party, the RMD. Moreover, this is not the first time
tlwt the eminent Bgyptologist has been at variance with the authorities.

In the past, he created the coalition of the Senegalese masses, then the
Senegalese National Front. which were dissolved respectively in 1962 and
1966. For all that, he is not discouraged. 0n the contrary, "We intend

to inscribe our action within the framework of the rapublic'a law," he
told us.

But the leader of the IND explains: "Senghor refuses to recognize our

party under the fallacious pretext that we have not clearly defined our
political personality, our social plan." In a peremptory tone, he protests
against this attitude on the part of "someone who. in other respects, denies
the existence of social classes in Africa." while claininn to be refraining
from boasting. Sheikh Arts defies President Senghor to admit him into the
legal democratic game: "Since the chief of state affirms that we are only

62
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a handful of intellectuals. let him authorize us to present ourselves
before universal suffrage. And the world will see." While waiting. he
protests most vehemently against "those who call the R80 e clandestine
party." The RND is. according to him, an actual party which is fighting
for its recognition, and which has nothing to hide."

As for the former prime minister. Hsmadou Dis. he is even more categorical
when he condemns the multi-party system established by President Senghor.
Pretending to forget the suspension measures which he took not so very long
ago against certain parties and opposition movements. today he declares
himself an advocate of "full-scale pluralism". Until 1963 (he was arrested
and imprisoned in 1962). he says without wincing. there was in Senegal a
de facto and de Jure pluralism.

And he affiras: "There is no danger in returning to full-scale pluralisa
in Senegal. If there is danger. it is more from the arbitrariness which
prevents parties from being freely established than from their proliferation."

Convergences

in foreign policy. the critics proved to be even sore virulent. The PDS
does not go without condemning the government's positions on Angola and

the Sahara. Haitre Abdoulsye Wade. moreover. is aultiplying his diplomatic
missions to capitals where President Senghor's policy is on the black list:
Algiers. Tripoli, etc. The leftist opposition is going still further. In
the name of national independence. it denounces "all the unequal so-called
cooperation or assistance agreements." in particular those passed with
France. It is committed. in the possibility of acceding to power one day.
to abolishing the foreign bases established in Senegal. and to preventing
any possibility of the national territory being used by foreign troops.

The allusion to the French Jaguars stationed in Senegal which. a few months
ago. were flattening the POLISARIO'a columns is clear. however. most of
these agreements were signed by Hamdou Dia's own hand. But that was in
1960, he said in his defense.

On these questions. as on others concerning domestic policy. convergences
of opinion among the different oppositiongroups are numerous. Could they
serve them as a platform, if not as a basis for agreement? Hamadou Dia is
convinced of it. Especially since. in November 1978. he founded the C080
(Coordination of United Senegalese Opposition). "A truly dynamic unity
was launched." he told us. In reality. it in only in its infancy. A long
road remains to be traveled in order to attain unity.

The Carrot and the Stick

Not only did the RND not respond to the former prime minister's invitation.
but also the clandestine African Independence Party (PA!) was reluctant to
hack the 0050's manifesto. Not to mention that the PDS. as well as Hahjmout

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diop's legalPAl,were both excluded fro: the conclave. "He only invited the
parties and organizations not forming part of the constitutional system
required and created by Senghor," Namadou Die indicated to us. Under these
conditions, the Socialist Party in power seems to have beautiful days ahead
of it. Moreover, it does not waste any opportunity to play on the incon-
sistcncies of its adversaries, while in turn dangling a carrot and wielding
a stick. That was how not long ago it announced, one after the other. the
legalization of a fourth aprty. the Republican Party of Naitre Boubacar
Gueye, and the promulgation of laws severely punishing "seditious associa-
tions." Among others, it concerns, of course, Hamsdou Dia's cosu. Like-
wisu. a series of laws is being prepared aiming at strictly regulating the
press. There, also, the opposition knows what it is all about.

A true pursuit race between the power and the opposition now seems to be
involved. The leaders are striving to contain their adversaries' impulses
within the framework which they have chosen, but Dia and Sheikh Ants do not
want this framework. Moreover, they ignore all the injunctions in order
to organize the-selves and act as if they were entitled to it.

An Effective weapon

Then what means are left to President Senghor to make them listen to reason?
"Let him arrest us if he wants", they reply in unison.

Between the laissez-fnire which, obviously, is irritating it more and more
and the prison to which it seems to be averse, will the power be able to
find the effective weapon which its backers demand? For the 35 years during
which he has doeinated the Senegalese political scene, President Senghor

has proved that he has more than one trick in his bag. '

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

9181
C50: 6400

6‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FIVE-YEAR PLAN WIND. FUTURE A0605 "ELI.
Paris JEN! APRIQUE in French No 944 7 Feb 79 p 47

[Text] 11090 has obtained sore loans than it wanted, in order to carry its
third 5-year plan (1976-1980) to successful conclusion. It had estimated
97.7 billion CPA [African rinancial Cos-unity] francs for the iirst 2
years. loans received have exceeded 129 billion. hat was sore than the
country could absorb. Only 78.9 billion were used.

Growth

The lesson drawn at home is clear. 'I'bgo's policy enjoys an excellent re-
putation abroad as well as at house. But there is a certain degree of de-
ficiency when it is a question of imlesenting the scheduled projects.
Having said that, the total investnent voluue is increasing at an anaring
speed. Prom 40 billion CPA francs tor the first 5-year plan (1966-1970)

to 76 billion for the second plan (1971-1975). it is going to readl or even
exceed 250 billion for the third plan.

As 1. result of. this developuent effort, growth of the gross donestic
product was particularly rapid in 1976 and 1977: 11.1 percent on the aver-
age at current prices and 8.8 percent at constant prices. that is to say
greater than the forecasts and than the performance or met African coun-
tries.

Development has been especially rapid with regard to the ccanunications
infrastructure. urban and tourist equipment (37 percent of projects carried
out with regard to the objectives or the plan). as well as in industry.
handicrafts and trade (35 percent). On the other hand. there has been

a serious delay in the imlementation or projects pertaining to administra-
tive equipeent (15.4 percent) , rural development (15 percent). esploy-ent
and projects of a social-cultural nature (11 percent).

The slowness of rural develop-ant has worried President Gnassingbe Byade-a
very much. For over a year now, he has been trying to make the country
aware of this problen on the topic of the "green revolution.“ Steps were

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were taken to hasten application of the agriculture-landed property re-
Eorn and several awareness seninare were arranged for that purpoee. In
order to give Vigor to the “green revolution.” the financial means of the
National Agricultural credit Bank (men) were increased. M increase in
the number 0! hydroagricultural projects by leans of better water control.
development of agroindustries on the basis or local resources. establish-
ment or regional food products offices (ORPV) and 'vertical" coqaanias like
WK)”. ”006M111. Togoloee Fisheries and many others.

Austerity

0n reaching the middle of the plan. at the end of 1978, stock was taken and
it had to be admitted that a certain danger. pointed out by the world Bank.
was threatening. Investments underwent too fast and high a rate. I! this
trend persists, indebtedness say give rise to some problem. But the ori-
tical threshold has not been crossed and the government. in order not to
accentuate these difficulties, is thinking about restraining certain in-
vestments. rectifying various projects. reducing the foreign debt to ac-
ceptable limits. All the same, the state has never been "at the edge of
the abyss" or ”in suspension of payments." It still has excellent friends
all over the world in the fields of. politics and finance.

Moreover, the government has gone over from theory to acts by establishing
a 1919 budget less ambitious than anticipated, balanced at 62.6 billion

CPA francs. an increase of barely 3.3 percent in colparieon with the 1978
budget. And without new tax burdens. Forty-seven billion (+3.8 percent)
are allocated for operating expenses and 15.6 billion for invest-ants. 1hie
budget will be characterized not only by austerity. but also by a stricter
control of expenditures.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

10 .042
C50: 4400

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

momma some mommw nun, arms: puns comma
pm. mm: APRIQUB in French No 9447 p.» 79 pp 54, 55

[ﬂirt] Phosphates are still the country’s nain mineral resource and its
prinary source of foreign exchange. ‘nogo ranks sixth among the world's
phosphate producers , at a respectable distance, it is true, fro. the
three giants. the United States. the Soviet Union and Morocco. It belongs

to the second squad together with Otina. mnisia. Senegal. Jordan and South
Africa.

but this resource is being seriously disturbed by the drop in prices and
especially by the depreciation of the dollar in cosparison with other cur-
rencies. with 2.5 million metric tons exported, phosphates brought in
34.5 billion CPA [African Financial Oosmnity] francs. in 197‘. In the
following year. tonnage declined to 1.1 million metric tons for 17.4 bil-
lion CPA trance. more seriously, tonnage increased in 1976 (1.9 nillion
metric tons) while its value continued to decline (13 billion CPA francs).
In 1977 and 1978, tonnage continued to rise: 3 million Istric tons in
1977 and 2.8 nillion in 1978. But prices stabilised at a level 50 percmt
lower than the 1974 and 1975 prices. when phosphates were sold at over $70
a metric ton.

Dotbti'ul Haneuvers

About 20 kilometers separate the Akoupasne deposit fro. the ocean. The
mineral, which is transported by railroad for 27 kiloseters. is processed
at the erne industrial center, 35 kilometers east of Ions. men it reeches
a loading wharf on a conveyor belt. Mining began in 1961 (700,000 metric
tons). Production doubled in 1965. tripled in 1973, quadrupled in 1977.

The main custoeers are France and the Netherlands. Between 1961 and 1974,
the Benin Mining Cowany lads large profits from phosphates, but the 'lbgo-
lese state, at that tire a very small shareholder, derived little profit
from then.

As the result of doubttul maneuvers. the cospany was nationalised on 4 Feb-
ruary 1974. Under the new acronyn of ms t'i‘ogolese Benin nines Many].

(07
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR oruc'm. use can

controlled by the state from then on , it enabled Mo to have a favorable
balance of trade starting in that very ease year. 1974. hat was also
the year of the great price rise. But fertiliser conaulere made sone
cavinge. Prices and purchaees decreased.

Beyond the Year 2000

mile waiting for the end of the crisis, 11090 in not giving up the gene and
is working at developing a processing industry for its phoephatea. Poor
and a half billion CPA francs have been allocated for the establishunt of
a fifth production line in the xpene plant. A good part of this investnent
(3.1 billion CPA francs) cones free: a pool of Arab banks and the root from
the French Central hand for Bcononic Cooperation.

Production . which eaploye over 2,000 workers at preaent. nay thus be in-
creased to 4 nillion Ietric tone as early as 1980.

‘mis effort belies the runora according to which the hkoqpaae deposit is
eaid to be allaoat depleted. sizable discoveries have been node. aoreover.
and the government is planning the construction of a phosphated fertilizer
plant, in the medium tern.

mgoleee phoephates will continue to be lined beyond the year 2000.

Mo even wants to enter the international fertilizer market. It is plan-
ning to build a phosphated fertilizer couplex using raw material free the
erne region.

oopuucm‘: .Jeune Afrique 6mm 1919

10,042
C80: 4400

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DBLGIUH. UNITED STATES 'OONVINCBD HOBUTU REGIME AT LAST GAS!”
Paris ”RIM-ASK in French 19 Feb - I. her 79 p 103
[Article by fode Nasdou: " A State of Sui-Insurrection?”

[Text] Several Restern captiela are convinced that
the Hobutu regine is on its last lep-

It was in reality the Ansrican press which sounded the alarn. Several
correspondents fron big New York and Washington newspapers in recent
weeks wrote several articles stating that an explosive situation pre-
vailed at Kinshasa. that the people are starving. that there is practi-
cally nothing left to be gotten on the urkets in the capital, that
corruption anong neabers of the Hobutu fanily keeps spreading. and that
nost of the Zairian provinces no longer obey the central authority.

In other words, the Aneriean ewnssy. whose diplonats often serve as
"authorized" sources for journalists free the United States. thus tried
either to exert strong pressure on Hobutu or to prepare western opinion
for the inevitable downfall of the bloody Zairisn dictator.

This «as followed isndiately by Hobutu's appeal to Brussels. Paris. and
Rabat: “Zaire is once again threatened by red 'subversion." hobutu
telephoned his Belgian and French friends. "Re need a nev danonatration
of your support in order to deter our adversaries. Help In.” That was
on honday. S february.

The Belgian government did not hesitate for an instant. It looked for
an excuse, a pretext. Thus. 24 hours later. the paracomandos. stationed
at Flawinne (llamr), south of Brussels, were alerted. while the ninistry
of foreign affairs confined that they would be stationed at the Kitona
Military Base, near Kinshasa. in the northwestern part of zaire. "by
virtue of the bilateral nilitary cooperation agreensnt calling for the
training of the Zairien arned forces." Hhile Brussels is talking in
terns of 300 paratroopers. foreign diplonsts stationed in Kinshasa are
talking about 1,000 and perhaps even sore.

49
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPIICIAL 083 ONLY

The Belgian praaa in general did not ehere nor believe the etatanenta tron
governeent circlee. Several editorial vritere talked about an "ieninant

expuleion" in the country while othere talked about the arrival or the Del-
gian paratroopere to protect and. it neceeaary. to guarantee the evacua-
tion of 30.000 Burepeane iron him.

And the correepondent of the wasnmcrou POST at Kinahaea reported. in a
lengthy nnalyeia of the Znirian eituation, that the people in in a atete
of eeni-inaurrection: "clothing in working any core in thin country.
Neither politica, nor the econony, nor financee. nor education. nor public
health. The cxperte froe the m are deeperete.” And an m [French
Preee Agency] diapatch dated Irueeele, 8 February. quotee a Belgian
traveler returning free Kieahaee. according to when "the zairian capital
ie etill on the brink of dieaater. Everything eaene to he dieorganieed."

As for Elyaee [Palace]. ita poeition romaine reeerved for the accent.
There in no queetion of diepetching French troopa to Zaire. according to
hr Pierre Elunt. ite epokeelen. But the fact reneine that hr. Simet.
the head of Belgian diplo-ecy. kept hie Preach counter-pertinforned an
to Bruaeela' decieion and that the latter replied: "Preaident Giecerd
ie not in any way thinking of aending torcea to Zaire.”

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Mrique-Aeie

$058
080: 4400

$0

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIRB

CONDITIONS NOT VIEHED AS IMPROVING BY 1980
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIE in French 5-18 Feb 1979 p 21
(Article by A. Fall: "Operation 'Smilc'"]

[Text] The dictator has promised that by 1980 Zaire's
people will smile again. But can one live on hope?

After a stay in Brussels where he owns a house end has many friends. on l5
January General Hobutu visited his "pal" Giscard d'Estsing in Paris. The
French chief of state. who some weeks ago had publicly deplored the fact
that Occidentels have not managed to overcome their reluctance to help
financially a regime on constant probation. promised to double France's
contribution (which will reach Fr 35 million) to the "recovery plan" for
Znire's economy. which is being called. simple. the "Hobutu plan."

This support from the French government. which has not faltered since Shaba's
first war in 1977. is appreciated by a regime entirely in submission to

large capitalistic countries. International Monetary Fund experts are
already working in Kinshasa. where they have teamed with high government
employees in charge of the country's economy and finance.

Hishing to obtain the promised funds as soon as possible. General Hobutu
initiated a new devaluation of the :aire. the national monetary unit. at

the beginning of January. The zaire has thus lost. in less than 2 months.
around 100 percent of its value. Thus. he satisfied one principal condition
laid down by occidental countries. which ehouldtakedefinite positions re-
garding their financial aid in March during meetings in Washington and
Brussels.

Zaire'e chief of state also wants it to look as if he is putting some order
into an administration which does not have a reputation for being orderly.
With the new governnent established in January he reduced the number of
ministries to 20. notably creating a super-Ministry of Economy.

51
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

National Capitalists

with his usual affinity for words and the spectacular he asserted that "the
year 1979 would be the year of choice between government or commerce for

all of Zaire's managers." Hebutu'a decree would attelpt, according to the
Zairinn Press Agency. "to stop a trend observed for several years. in which

high officials have mingled unlawful business activities with their adminis-
trntive functions."

But it ia difficult to imagine how this presidential injunction could by it-
self end a state of affairs which is the nillar of Zaire's economy. Besides.
to deprive the only genuine national capitalists of all or part of their
financial or real-estate interests, would speed up a "derairisation." by

creating more opportunities for foreign investors. Is this what is desired
in Kinshasa?

Much more will be needed to see "Zaire's people smile again." despite
general Hobutu's premises for 1980.

COPYRIGBT: 1979 Afrique-Aeie

8926
C50: 6600

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAIIIB

BRIEFS

7033108 mama WD-ﬁmrm enterprieee under the multi-

netionele ere in the proceee of teen-into; their iemt-ent progrele

in Zeire inﬂating the exploeive tension preveilins in eeverel Zeirien

citiee. People in Kineheee ere wondering vhecher the Jepencee counties.

which hee just eisned e coutrect for the conetruction of en 8021“"

euepeneion bridge over the hire liver. neer Hetedi. with e price tea

0! $170 million, night not poetpone the dete et which work ie to be

granted. [Text] [Perie Arum-A313 in French )9 teb - 4 Her 79 p 66)
58

(:80: 4400

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZAMBIA

N8" CABINET FORMED TO CONTROL POLITICAL WWII.
Paris AVENUE-AS!!! in French 5-18 Feb 79 pp 20. 21
[Article by Cherif Rachidl

[Text] A new government to insure control of a political
class in turmoil.

Kenneth Kaunda. Zombie's chief of state. devoted weeks following his re-

election in Deceder to a takeover of the governaent and the United Nation-
el Independence Party (UMP).

In 1978 he had elreedy silenced those accusing him of "encouraging capitalise
while condeming it" and those-dike Sinon Kapwepwe. onetine candidate for
the presidency—who were in favor of a return to econonic liberalisn and of
negotiation at all costs with Zenbie's neighbors. including Rhodesia.

Zeabie's president needed elbow-roon in political latters so that he could
invite foreign capital into the country. negotiate an aid agreeaent with the
ell-powerful International Monetary Fund and in order to reopen borders with
Rhodesia for trade. These initiatives antagonized the party's left wind and
worried leaders of the Patriotic Front. of which one wingnthe ZAPU led by
Joshua Nkono-v-has its headquarters in Zalbia.

Recent incidenta have demonstrated the tension created by sons of these
neasures. At the end of Decenber. for the first tine since independence
young Zanbians attacked foreigners. particularly Europeans. in the streets
of the capital. In addition. after several raids in inigration circles
last year. which concluded with the expulsion of several hundred "mdeaira-
bles." on 10 January Zanbia's police arrested a dozen guerrillas free the

ZAPU who were accused of participating in violence against villagers east
of Lusaka.

Lusnka‘s Suprene Court insulted the chief of state in 1978 by invalidating
the sentence condeming a former parlaaent newer and Livingstone's forner
nnyor to death who had been accused of attempting to overthrow the regine
by force 2 years ago. A young Zadaian any officer, Cap Francis Zyado.

56
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was also tried on l0 January because "he spoke in favor of a Iilitery coup"

and because he said such things as. "Let the arqy take over the governsent
in lesbia and you will see changes."

To take control of a political class in tar-oil. President Rounds chose to
reinforce the staff of the single party: Hainza chone. released fro- duty
as prise minister was appointed to this post. Moreover. Kenneth Keunda
accused South Africa and Rhodesia of supporting Zambian dissidents in order

to "sabotage end destroy the country." distinguishing between those of his
political opponents who have a constitutional right and those who all at
destroying the regine. -

The new cabinet formed in January further demonstrates this takeover by the
president and the party's leading teen (in charge of "keeping in touch with
the mosses"). however. it is possible to wonder about the efficacy of this
"double government" and about the conflicts of interests and tensions that

will undoubtedly arise.
COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

8926
CSO: £400

55
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY