FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10538

24 May 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 9/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

”I OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPIS publications contain infarction prinsrily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro. foreign-language
sources are translated; those fro- lnglish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and asterisl enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itets. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was suansrired or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trsnsliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nsnes preceded by a ques-
tion out and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the

original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
iten originate with the source. rises within items are as

given by source .

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGT LABS All!) REGIMTIOIB MINING MRI? 0?
MATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE TIMI DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION 3E RESTRICTED E08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOl OFﬂCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 14
24 Hay

VEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND Tscuuomev

(rouo 9/82)

Coursms

MIG?

Progreea Report: Thyaaengaa 'Cmflux' Pilot Plant
(H9021. 6 m-znncas-nnccm. Na: 82) ......... ...

Briefa
Solar Power Plant Operating

IMS‘I’RIAL TICIINOLOGY

Fully Auto-atlc l’lexible Hachinxng Center Developed
(”1-2."03. 1982) 0.09.GOOOOIOOOOOCOOIOO...IOOOOOOOOOOI

cuc Interconnection. Automated Machining
Huino Machinery. Parta Illuetrationa

TRANSPORTATION

Doubt Caat on Economic teaaibility of Nanette Levitation
(Peter Tho-aen; STERN, 1 Apr 82)

-l- [III-WI-ISI
mmmoutv

BERG!

PWRBSS REPORT: TdYSSENCﬁS 'caawx‘ PILOT m
lie-burg anon. 6 reﬁnances-mm: in (hr-an Mar 82 p 108
[Article: "8216; Thyssengases 'Conflux' Pilot Plant"]

[Text] Since 1975 Thyasengss (hhll, Duisburg, has been working on the develop-
nent of a process called .Oonflux for nethaniration of gases produced fron
coal gcaification in a fluid-bed reactor. Following successful operation of
the first “perinatal stage, a pilot facility was built end put into oper-
ation. Didier Enginearing (tbs. Essen. was heavily involved in the develop-
nent of the process. The installations are located on the preniaes of
Ruhrchenic AG in methausen-holtan next to a Texaco coal gasification facil-
ity which supplies the gas for nthaniration as needed. The pilot facility
has a capacity of 2.500 s3/h 81%. During the planned experinental period
extending to 1981., inportsnt design data relating to technical optimization
of equipunt and procssaea vill he developed for a large-scale denonstration
installation. The ‘l'hyasen process carries out the nsthaniration in a single
reactor. 1*.» basic features of the process mks this possible:

1. The Ni catalyst used here guidss two reactions ainultansously, nansly
nethanization end conversion. Since in general the gas fro. ccsl gasifica-
tion does not contain the required percentage of hydrogsn for mechanization,

conversion of a part of the CO present in the gas with 32) to produce 82) and
002 is required.

2. The reaction takes place in a fluid-bed reactor which per-ice an especial-
ly largo heat exchange during isothernic operation.

The hest of reaction can be transfoned almst without loss into hide-grade
process stean (120 bar, 380 degrees C). Utilization of this stean nakes the
Cal-flux process about 97 percent energy efficient.

The public as supply is standardized on natural- gas with a heating value of
10 tun/e3. The gas generated with ceenux exhibits e heating value between
I .

9.5 and 11 mm] It can thus—depending on requiremts—be produced in l.
or ll quality gas.

Independent of the present coqetitive capability of 8106 for the heating ner-
ket, the develop-cut is being pursued vzth the following in view:

””0“.“le
FOR OFFICIAL {BE ONLY

«A nature technology shall be resdy for insulate service when coal miti-
cstion projects make $106 ecououically protiteble.

«lhe development work shall enable “thyssenzes end the Ger-an fecilities con-
struction cowenies to offer the uorld market s service-resdy process: Local-

ities with fsvorable coel prices and corresponding gee deeand can sake ecoooa-
icsl use of 8108 before the no can.

-‘l'he fluid-bed reactor process developed by Thyssengas shell be researched
relative to technological suitability for other chalice}. processes.

The Thyssengss develop-eat projects ere being supported by the Pederal Minis-

try for Research and Technology: the senitechnicsl stage st about 67 per-

cent (costs of about on 210 million); the pilot stage at about 60 percent
(coats of about DH 50 Iilliou).

COPYRIGHT: Industrieverlas von Hemhaussen KG, llaburg 1982.

9160
CSO: 3102/ 231

2
mmmoﬂu
”WWW?

BRIEFS

some PM! PLANT OPERATING—A 50-year-old French power plant concept—the
generation of electricity from rising air currents produced by solar heat-
ing-is getting a new boost on Spain's Mancha high plain with German technol-
ogy and financial aid. ‘Ihe Spanish llanrsnares updraft power plant, a pilot
facility supported by the Bonn research ministry and designed by the Stutt-
sart engineering bureau Schlaich and Partner, is presently going into oper-
ation. It coabires well known energy technologies such as wind wheel power.
the green-house effect and chi-nay suction. An exposive plastic-toil col-
lector canopy with a diasetsr of 250 a standing 8 a above the ground conducts
the eolar heated air into a lo-rdianeter and ZOO-rtall insulated aheet
natal tower. The pressure differential of the heated air in the tower pro-
ducee a strong updraft which drives a turbine and connected generators in
the tower. For areas bordering on deserts, Schlaich and Partner predict
that, "Electricity produced free solar energy can be availdble anon fro-
large-ecale, low-priced facilities." Requirenenta for a 100-!!! power plant
include a tower with a diauster of 100 n and a height of 600 n plus a collec-
tor canopy with a diaseter of L3 Inn. The idea ste- fron the Irenchnan
Bernard Duboa who in 1920 wanted to generate electricity on the steep slopes
of the North African nomtains bordering on the Sahara. A greenhouse at
ground level heated by burning hot desert air was to induce a flow throud:
an insulated riser to the nountain top at 200 kn/h, driving a turbine in

the process. [Text] [IIaabui-g Capital in Ger-an Her 02 p 37] (COPYIIGB'I':
1982 cm: + Jshr AG 5 00.] 9160

090: 3102/231

”WWW?
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL ucunowcr

FULLY AUNMTIC FLEXIBLE MINING cum WP”
cut Interconnection. Auto-ted Machining
Dueeeeldorf VDI-Z in German No 3. 1982 pp 101-102
[Article: "Fully Automatic Manufacturing Cell for hehined Perte")
[Text] I. CDC Controlled hchine Complex for Sawing, Turning and Gauging

A joint program between the eieter firna Aneda Gabi! and ﬂeeino own, P.0.
Box 17 13. 0-5657 Bean 1, which involved linking various mechinee reaulted
in the robot eupported ayatem ehoun in Figure 1. All required proceaeee
for center wot-ting. froa uncut bar atock to the finiahed turned part. can be
carried out automatically in a aingle cycle with the new production unit.

The flexible machining ayetem conaiete of the following elemente:

«A llA-ZSO automatic bend aaw. e production eaw with the following featurea:
cutting diametere up to 250 u; autonatic height adjuetnnt; feat aaterial
feed; patented feed-preeeure regulator end hydraulic pull-in gripper with
hydraulic centering unit. The etart button initiatee a complete can-
controlled cycle including centering. aquaring and clawing. Figure 2.

“No high-performance lathea of typee IA-J and 1.5-.) with the following

features: integrated gauging ayetem; revolving dine with 12 tool stations;
length between centere, 800 -; aachinahle length between centere. 63$ -;

ewing over bed. 580 II; machinable diameter. 260 In; turning speed. 10 to
3500 rpm. The automatic two-stage reduction gear ie program controlled.

"A Fanuc 6-exiu, CNC path controlled robote aervee an a connecting link

between the individual ayetem coqonenta and eaaumea all loading and unload--
ing fmctiona.

An interface unit coordinates the execution of all conanda between the new
and robot. CNC lathe and robot. robot and gauging atation and gauging atation
and (INC lathe. Final inapection ie accowliehed by an external, independent
measuring unit.

MOWMONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The individual phases of the overall operation are precisely synchronized

to eliminate idle time. A signal from the interface to the saw starts a
cycle. After the end cut is ends, the established length to be cut is
automatically advanced; the material is rotated and centered by the center-
ing unit and then cut by the saw. All steps are executed in dialog with the
interface unit. At the start of a new cycle, the robot takes the material
from the saw and positions it in the first lathe. The next several steps
proceed with continuous con-unication between the robot and the lathe:
removal of the machined part from the lathe; insertion of the new material
stock and start of machining. If this sequence is prevented at the first
lathe, the robot goes to the second lathe and executes the same sequence of
steps: The robot removes the finished piece, reloads the machine and mves
the finished part to final inspection according to program. The part is
gauged with respect to contour (see also section 2); and if it passes. it is
placed on the parts delivery conveyor. If it does not pass, the piece is

laid aside and the system is shut down. The system triggers an optical and
an acoustical alarm.

During the taming operation. the material feed system (band saw and center-
ing unit) has prepared another part. The overall work cycle involving the
individual system components is repeated with no idle time. In order to
eliminate scrap, the individual turning operations in the machine are moni-
tored by measuring sensors. Dimensional deviations are automatically compen-
sated via the correction memory of the particular lathe. The tool-break
monitor is an additional safety device which helps to ensure smooth produc-
tion flow without human operators. The coltination of tool condition moni-
toring and automatic error compensation provides a high degree of quality
assurance.

II. Automated Machining of Bar Stock With Path Related Tool-Break Monitoring

With the robot-supported Hasino LG 81 lathe system. Figure 3. the work flow
from bar stock to the finished part is highly systemized. Preparation and
machining times are significantly shortened and production control is greatly
siaplified. The flexible system makes possible complex machining involving
boring. milling and turning. For the problem of reverse machining. Hasino
offers the following solution. After the bar stock has been automatically
advanced and machined from the front with appropriate tools. a gripper
spindel which is synchronized with the chuck rotates the part end for end
and machining continues to the butt end.

The LG 81 lathe specially designed for machining small parts is offered with
standard or collet chucking. The maximum machinable bar-stock dimensions

are a diameter of 62 I- and a length of 120 an. In general. the machine is
designed for chuck work up to 120 III at 120 n. It is equipped with a hori-
zontal tool carrier slide (linear revolver) which provides for a maximal of
z. milling or boring tools among the total tool complemnt. A special tech-
nical feature is the heat-removing oil bath which prevents expansion of the
area by maintaining constant theml conditions during the entire machining
operation. The result is uniform accuracy with high surface quality. The

minimal slide movements required for tool changing eliminate dwells. This
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is a criterion of overriding iaportance in machining small parts. Attached
to the lathe are a bar feed and a cue controlled Panuc robot which functions
as a mechanical arm. Added to this is an external gauging system which
controls all deviations from a prescribed value.

The sorting unit of the LG 81 system employs b selection criteria: good,
plus tolerance, minus tolerance and unacceptable. The interface unit
coordinates all information exchange between the gauging station and the

robot. All reports from the gauging station are transmitted to the robot
and the machine control, enabling the lathe to correct to zero all values

which lie below the programmed target values. This leads to a tighter
tolerance hand .

The LG 81 flexible machining system is equipped with a special tool-break
monitor which automatically displays any deviation from a prescribed value.
Before production machining. a sample part is test machined under optimal
cutting conditions. During this operation, lathe motor power is recorded
and plotted. and a characteristic envelope is drawn which provides a power-

limit curve for the production runs. If the envelope is exceeded, the
machine stops and a fault address is immediately displayed on the CRT which

instantly pinpoints the cause of failure. The special advantage of this
tool-break monitoring method is precise control of the entire machining

process down to the lowest power levels. This differs from the usual case
wherein monitoring is on certain peak values; here the machining process is
controlled in all phases.

A Start of tool-break monitoring
3 End of tool-break monitoring
C Main motor power consumption

3 5>8

5'

Current consumption
2
3
3

I6 IO 20 21 20 268
no '3

 

 

Figure 4. Path related tool-break monitoring. Power as a function of time

is determined while machining a sample part and an envelope of this curve is
used as the expected value for tool-break eonitoring.

(Article prepared using manufacturer's data)

7
FOR OFFICJAI.USEZ€HILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hasino Machinery, Parts Illustrations
L‘Jesseldorf VDl-Z in German No 3, 1982 pp Al, A2

(1119 following are examples of wasino products. Note that the format of all
captions is the sane. The first line is machining time; the second is

material and the third is diameter 1 length. For nonround parts, such as
hexagonal, diameter is measured across opposite flata.]

 

[Text]
.. summons“ 61.1: {mt
Masons C45 Mm
022mx35mm ossmxzsm

  
 

 

"it 4 " . Lure-3:22:10. “..: fiscqusruzOMk‘v (".2511
WWW was M046
wasn't: esostzmm 022x20mlli3120mm

W1” .
mus
036mmu8mm

‘

 

.' MWIA-l ',
WM
017nmx30mrn

 

. USE ONLY
Key:
Raw 1:

96 seconds

645
22 u— x 35 I.

Raw 2:

113 second.

cast steel
length 35 a-

Row 3:

87 seconds
C34
28 an x 50 an

Row 4:

80 seconds

065
25 an x 22 In
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL\

We offer you a turning system with which you can machine your small parts
about 30 percent faster, and we would like to see anybody beat our speed.

 

Top left photo:

With our LG 70 and LC 81 CNC lathes. you lose no time with idle time. The
linear revolver takes care of this. It brings the tool to the work by the

shortest path. Instead of large motions. the slider requires minimal motion,
and this saves time.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Top right photo:

While a disc revolver requires a rotary notion to bring up a new tool, the
slider often requires only an infinitesinal notion. In fractions of a
second. a new tool is in operation. You can't get any are econosicel than
this in turning small parts.

Center left photo:

A constant operating teaperature from the start is a prerequisite for unifor-
precision lathe work. Our heat-resoving oil bath establishes this condition.
It assures high thermal stability and thus prevents expansion of the axes due
to heat. The result is a top quality surface: 0.001 - roughness for steel
and 0.0006 In for alunimn fron the first part to the last. And this is
guaranteed!

Center right photo:

The Fanuc 6 1' CNC control is distinguished by its reliability and ease of
operation.

Lower left caption:
Specification for the LG 70 CNC lathe:

Maximum disensiona of nachinable part: 100 an diameter, 100 a- length
SHing over bed: 320 an

Spindle turning speed range: 40 to 6,000 rpa, stepless control
longitudinal slider notion: 250 In (2 axis)

Transverse slider notion: 680 an (X axis)
Spindle drive power: 5.5 kw Dc (bed slider)

Lover right caption:
Specification for the LG 81 C80 lathe:

Maxims dimensions of nachinable part: 120 an diameter. 120 In length
Swing over bed: 660 m
Spindle turning speed range: 60 to 5,000 rpm, stepless control

longitudinal slider notion: 260 m (z axis)
Transverse slider notion: 550 u (x axis)
Spindle drive power: ll k9 DC (bed slider)

(DPYRIGHT: VDl-Verlag Gabﬂ, Duesseldorf 1982

9160
C80: 3102/ 201

ll
POI OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FtIICIWNCJAL USEGNHLY

TRANSPORTATION

DOUBT CAST ON ECONOMIC FEASIBILITY 0P MAGNETIC LEVITATION
Hamburg STERN in German 1 Apr 82 pp 37-38
[Article by Peter Tho-sen: "A Train without A Future"]

[Text] In the middle of the uninhabited waste between the abandoned secondary Ems
canal and the Bundeswehr training ground at Happen, an endless concrete beam
crosses the billiard table-smooth Bmsland. Like a larger than life-size windowbox,
it rests on massive supports 6 meters in the air and disappears in the hazy distance
on the horizon. Occasionally, a group of workers appears, climbs the airy

structure and performs some task on the supports. "Pine tuning," construction
supervisor Peter Hurm says. "He are adjusting the beam to exactly one-tenth of a
millimeter."

Accuracy like this is mandatory, because in 1 year the concrete strip is supposed
to carry a special type of high-speed train: The ”Transrapid 06," which is
supposed to reach speeds of 400 kms/hour and, in the distant future, compete with
airplanes.

Transrapid 06 is a railroad without rails and wheels. Powerful electromagnets on
the underaides of the concrete beam exert a pull on the chassis of the railroad car
and keep it in suspension. A complicated system of electronics regulates the eag-
netic force in such a way that the train and the beam do not make contact with each
other and always remain at a distance of approximately 1 cm.

Leading German industrial companies have working on the "railroad of the 21st
century" for 13 years: The aircraft constructor Heaserschnitt-Boelkow-Blohm, the
locomotive and tank builder Krauss-Haffei, the electrical conpanies Siesens and
AEG-Telefunken, as well as Thyssen-Benschel and Brown Boveri. "Transrapid 06" is
supposed to prove that magnetic levitation technology can function reliably in
continuous operation at maximum speed, in heat, rain and ice. ”That will be our
greatest hour," enthuses Juergen Borchert, the Krauss-Haffei engineer who heads
the project in Munich.

One-quarter of the 32-kilometer long test track in Emsland in already finished.
The Sb-meter long power unit, which has 200 seats, is now being completed in
Munich and will begin operation in the spring of next year. Following a 10-year
test program, the operators of the magnetic railroad plan to submit a report of
their experiences to the government. After that, the facility, which cost DU 600

12
IIIRCIﬂﬂC1A1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

million and was financed with tax money, will be torn down. since there is no
"transportation need." as the bureaucrats call it. in this remote region.

it is extremely doubtful whether there is any chance at all for magnetic rail tech-
nology. The Bundesbahn, at least. is keeping its distance very obviously from this
novel form of transportation. "He are certainly not opposed to magnetic levitation
technology," is the assurance of Dietmar Luebks. president of the Development
Planning Department in the central office in Munich. "But there has been no sign so
far that it is profitable." These are the major objections of the Bundesbahn to
fashionable magnetic levitation:

—-The magnetic railroad requires its own "rails“ and it cannot be integrated into
the existing network. This contradicts one of the basic requirements of the nondes-
bahn for any new method of rail transportation.

-The magnetic railroad train must be light in order to levitate. Like an airplane,
it is only suited to carrying people or light objects. Carrying freight is the
most important source of revenue for any railroad.

--The magnetic railroad requires more energy than traditional wheel-to-rail techno-
logy. At high speeds. energy is used aostly to overcoae wind resistance. That is
the sane for both systems. In the case of the magnetic railroad, there is the
additional current required to lift the vehicle.

--The magnetic railroad is not, as is claimed, quieter than the conventional rail-
road. At high speeds. wind noise conceals all other sources of noise. The slip-
stream is equally strong for both systems.

Officials of the Bundesbahn are not even willing to concede the main drawing point,
superior speed, to the magnetic levitation railroad. The principle of propulsion
used in Emsland, they argue, cannot be employed on a large acale: The rig-sag
cables laid in the concrete beam, which pull the train forward by means of mobile
magnetic fields ("linear propulsion"), require huge amounts of copper and make
long distances prohibitively expensive. If the propulsion unit is moved into the
vehicle, the track becomes less expensive, but the vehicle has to be supplied with
current from the outside. The Bundesbahn knows tron its own experience that the
sustained maximum speed is limited to 300 kma/hour with the pantographs now in use.
When the crack new French train "Train a Grande Vitesse" (TGV) established the
current world record of 380 kms/hour in February 1981, it was accompanied by an
enormous shower of sparks.

Railroad engineers confidently believe that they can easily achieve 300 kms/hour
with wheels and rails--without the drawbacks and developmental risks associated
with the new levitation technology. They plan to prove it in the next few years
with a driving unit on a 23-kilometer long arrow-straight test tracks, also in
Emsland.

The French have been reaching a speed of 260 kms/hour on scheduled routes since
September 1981 with the TCV. They laid the track for their supertrain in a
straight line across hills and valleys. Freight trains continue to use the old

13
IN)! CNﬂﬂCJAl.thEZ(MNLY
FOIIOF1NC1AL.USEIMVLY

tracks free the 19th century. which have few gradients hut many curves. "ling (his
nethod. the new track for the IGV cost only on 6 nillion par kilo-star.

The Dundesbahn. however, is paying up to DH 37 aillion per kilo-star for its new
tracks-~because it is clinging obstinately to the idea of "nixed traffic." freight
and passenger trains on the sane line. As a consequence. new lines have to avoid
curves (because of the high-speed trains) and have to be built without steep grad-
ients (because of the freight trains). This hotbed of construction requires
expensive viaducts and tunnels.

Critics accuse the Bundesbahn of having trapped itself in a blind alley with this
ides. In spite of this. it wants nothing to do with "pure passenger traffic."
Dietaar Luebke. the planner of the railroad's future. states. ”New routes without
freight traffic are not profitable.”

At the Ministry for Research in Bonn a study is currently in progress on an
inaginsry magnetic levitation railroad fron Paris to Frankfurt. In the study. the
cost per kiloneter is estinated at D“ l7 nillion-slnost three tines as nuch as
the French TGV technology. A connlete nagnetic railroad network. linking the
principal central European cities. would cost about DH 70 billion. In View of the
horrendous Bundesbahn deficit and depleted European treasuries. plans like this
appear totally unrealistic at the nonent.

"Let us be honest." says Karl Schnidt. narketing head at Krauss-Haffei. "the
opportunities for a nagnetic railroad are poorer in the IRS and they are nuch
better abroad." his conpany is campaigning in Saudi Arabian daily newspapers
for a high-speed nagnetic rail link between Jedds and Hecca-so far without
success.

Magnets Instead of wheels

Magnetic trains are regarded as absolutely inpossible to derail. because the
vehicle wraps around the guide rail. Magnets nove the vehicle without the car
and rail touching each other. Conplcx windings in the guide been (lower picture)

create a nobile nagnetic field when current is passed through then and pull the
train forward.

1‘
F0l1OFFKJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

the vehicle

ey keep the vehicle on couree
They keep the vehicle in euepet
e cones down on it if the magnet

am, the magnetic treln'e "reil'
ion of the rail

ae the magnetic field

utde been

Jahr AG 6 Co

END

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY