FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

JPRS L/10504

IO May 1982

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 8/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

70‘ “FIG“. USE ONLY
1601'!

.ms publications contain information prinrily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also free news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translsted; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original. phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and naterial enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in 'he first line of each item, or following the
last line of a l- ief, indicate how the original infomtion was
processed. where .o processing indicator is given, the infor-
ution was summarized or extracted.

Unfaniliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by s ques-
tion aark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ice. originate with the source. lines within iteaa are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Govern-cut.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHIP 01"
lemme REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
01’ THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND Tecuuomsv

(FOOD 8/82)

Couteurs

ELECTRWICS

Advanced Equip-out for Production of Balconductora
(”1-2, m 3, 19.2) oaoooa.ooaoooooaoo'ooocoocooaooaocacao

INDUSTIIIAL Tampa?

Preach Pir- Producea Auto-ado minor-Pivot“-
(Nicole Boauclair: AIR 6 008)“, 27 Mar 82) ..............

Briefs
Punch llachine 'rool Induatry

TRANSPORTATION

Airbua Inductrie Predicta Good Harlot tor AirIinera
(An‘mm, 13m: .2) 00.0.00...OOOOOOOIOCIODOOOOIOO.o

Various Groupa kpreaa Support for Airbua Program
(Am‘cosms’ 3”: ‘2) no.aaooocooooooooaooooaooon.aaaaa

Aoroopatialo Co-ittee

Meta Ivorkora
m Covet-mane

-a- [III-NB-ISI
mmmmv '
ADVANCED EQUIPMENT FOR PRODUCTION OF SEMICONDUCTORS

Duesseldorf VDI-Z in German No 3. 1982 1) V

[Text] Kleockner-Hoeller, manufacturer of IC devices in Bonn, has set up a
semiconductor pilot line in its research and testing center which will enable
them to manufacture special-purpose semiconductors in the future. The pilot
line is so designed that almost all Ianufecturing processes covering the
spectrum from bipolar to silicon gate HOS technology can be realized. An
important equipment item is the ion ilplenter. The photo shows the vacuum

chamber loaded with thin silicon wafers which will be doped with P and N
materials

 

An investment for the future

9160
cs0: 3102/202

COPYRIGHT: VDI-Verlag Oahu. Duesseldorf 1982

1
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

PRENCI! FIRM PRODUCES AUTOMATIC DRILLER-RIVETER
Paris AIR & 608108 in French 27 Her 82 pp 19, 21

[Article by Nicole Beauclair: "Aeronautical hardware and Bolts and Nuts.
Automatic Driller-Riveter"]

[Tact] Until recent years, the aeronautical industry had
to rely almost exclusively on the 0.5. market for its
hardware. This trend is gradually disappearing and French
manufacturers are increasingly emerging on the domestic
market. However, there remained a gap to be filled in
Europe, that of the autcnatic assembly machine. A French
company, Recoules, is picking up the challenge.

Over the years, Recoules & File, a company created in 1948, has specialized
in the production of cutting tools for the airspace manufacturing industry;
during the 1960’s, it oriented itself toward the design and production of
countersink-bit holders.

Recoules & File was already a supplier to the aeronautical industry when it
perceived the necessity to fill the gap which remained with respect to riveters:
it started studying the problem in 1978 and a prototype was ready by the end of
1980. This prototype was then tested for three months at Dasseult and improve-
ments were made, as is usually required whenever a new machine is placed in
Service. This approach led to the development of a series of machines based

on the same principle (C-shaped frame mchines) but having different
capabilities. .

This series, called Preca, includes three standard machines. one of which has
a fixed lower riveting-die holder, while the other two (Preca 500 and 600) have
an added-on lower knee-bracket. These various configurations are a function
of the panels to be assembled; the opening width of the C-shaped frame of each
of the models is respectively of 1,200 m (Preca 300 S). 600 II (Preca 500)

and 600 an (Preca 600) for depths of 1.800 an on the Preca 300 s and 1,550 II
on the Preca 500 and 600.

The nachines are designed to drill and rivet at the sense work-station. In the
standard version, they are equiped with a light spot which ensures that the
an'aof the drilling unit will coincide with a line previously drawn on the
panels to be assembled. However. it is known that aeronautical assemblies

2
roe onrcm. use ow:
Principle of a machine equippad with
an endoscopic eyatal

Key:

1. Rivetins machine

2. Camera output

3. Optical fiber input

lo. TV objective

5. Optical fiber light-source
6. Adjuatable aetting

7. Bndoacopa

8. Front View

9. Video-endoscopic system
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

involve bulky panels and that workers sometimes encounter difficulties in
positioning the flanges correctly. This is why Recoules s Pils. in collabo-
ration wirh EPBR 3 B. haVe developed an endoscOpic position system which is
offered as an option on the machine.

The glass-fiber lighting endoscope has a sight angle of 90° and a field of
vision of approximately 35’; it is connected to an elbowed TV objective. This
assembly is connected to a camera output with a Newvicon tube; the camera, its
control unit and its power supply are French-made (Aston). The whole thing is
connected to a video-screen (Thomson) to enable an easy visualization of the
machine/drilling axis positioning to be achieved.

The Preca machines can handle wing panels up to 10 meters in length (or even
more), which is still only an average dimension for this type of parts but
nevertheless requires five axes to follow the evolved shapes of the panels.
The machines, which are provided with digital control only as an option, make
it possible to follow such evolved shapes: the machine has two axes, x and Y,
and the table moves according to three axes. 2 (vertical). 21 and 22, the
latter two being axes of inclination at the ends of the table; a sixth rota-
tion axis can result frcn a simultaneous motion according to axes 21 and 22.
The machines can be equ'pped with tables measuring either 8.000 an x 1,500 as
or 1,200 mm x 2,500 mm. -

As far as technical specifications are concerned. and as an example, the

Preca 500 is equipped with a hydraulic-motor spindle the speed of which can

be adjusted from 500 to 8,000 rpm.with an adjustable speed of 0.02 to 0.0 mm
per revolution. The maximum depth of drilling of the Preca 500 is 25 mm with

a precision 0.02 mm of the countersink depth in the extreme positive position.
It was designed for riveting with titanium or aluminum rivets having a dis-
meter ranging from 2.4 to 6.35 mm and a length of 25 any and either a flat or

a button head. The compression strength of this machine is 6 tons; the hydrau-
lic unit has a capacity of 250 liters for a power of 7 kW.

The Preca machines are equipped with a control console which also includes
control and safety lights: safety system making it possible to remove the
drill-bits without risking to start the machine (air-supply interruption),
detection cf broken drill bits, automatic shutdown in case of a failure of
the compressed air supply, detection of failures or anomalies, etc.

This series of machines designed from existing European equipment offers there-
fore a considerable advantage as far as machine maintenance is concerned. In
addition, these machines. which are primarily intended for drilling and rivet-
ing, can in the future be used for other types of attachments, such as the
installation of ﬂuck's GP systems to mention only one example.

Therefore. this series of French machines seems promised to a bright future;
four are already in service at Dassault (Biarrits and Boulogne plants), at
Reins Aviation and at SNIAS [National Industrial Aerospace Company (Aerospa-
tisle)] (Heaulte plant).

COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1982

9296
650: 3102/223
lo

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
machine tools will be cut back from today's 60 percent nirket fraction to about
30 percent by 1984. Minister of Industry Pierre Drcytua v1.11 punt: this goal
through governIent subsidies and contrecta to the French machine tool builders;
in reeponu. they are expected to inch their international competitive
capability through cooperative arrange-onto. The branch will concentrate speci-
fically on top-grade NC Inchinee thou sale. are expected to increase by e
factor of 6 to about No.6 billion by 1985. The not ilportent of the nearly

080: 3102/ 202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

TRANSPORTATION

AIRBUS IMUS‘I'RIE PREDICTS GM!) MARKET FOR AIRLINBRS
Paris AIR & cosms in French 13 Her 82 p 9

(Article: "Airbus Industria: Relatively Optimistic Forecasts for the Airliner
Market}

[Text] Airbus Industrie has just published the results of an airliner market
survey according to which 8,550 aircraft will be delivered to the 200 prin-
cipal airlines of the non-comunist world before the end of this century,
assming that no radical economic and social changes take place. Of this
total, 7,100 aircraft will be short/lediun-range aircraft and 1,550 long-
range aircraft.

These prospects include the replacement of over 3,500 narrow-fuselage short/
medium-range aircraft, of some 700 large-capacity long-range aircraft, and of
over 600 large-capacity short/nediun-range aircraft. In addition. .70 percent
of the B 707 and oc-s of the previous generation now Operated on liaisons of
up to 5,500 km will have to be replaced by more economical and less noisy
large-capacity aircraft of the A 300/310 class.

Airbus Industrie hopes that tte economic conditions which resulted in losses
for the airlines and in decreased orders for the manufacturers will gradually
disappear during the second half of this year, which would enable the airlines
to improve their financial situation and revive the market.

BVen if the high growth rates experienced by air transportation during the
1960's are not sustained. traffic can still be expected to increase from
1,000 billion passenger-kilometers in 1980 to 2,500 billion in 1995. With
an annual growth rate of 6 percent. traffic in the year 2000 should therefore
amount to three times the present traffic.

Markets such as those of the Middle and Ear East. which are developing rapid-
ly, will see their rate of growth decrease to a level comparable to that of
fully developed narkets (North America. Europe). 0n the other hand. Africa
and Latin America should experience accelerated rates of expansion.

Apart from the requirements for large-capacity short/Inediun-rsnge aircraft
such as the A 300. A 300/600 and A 310. Airbus Industrie anticipates a large
demand for high-technology fuel-efficient aircraft, such as the A-320, during
the second half of the present decade, while the replacement of large-capacity

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

long-range aircraft of the first generation will atart only in the late 1980':
or the early 1990's and will then require aircraft each as the A 310-300 and
the rA-nm-u. The replacement of large-capacity medium-range aircraft
during 1990-1995 will open the way to aircraft like the ‘l'A-9, an elongated
version of the A 300.

Thus, the range of Airbus Induatria'a producta is developed an that the air-
craft which will be in éanand are available in due time.

WMIM: A. & C. 1982

9294
080:3102/223

7
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

VARIOUS GROUPS EXPRESS SUPPORT FOR AIRBUS PROGRAN
Aerospatiale Conittee

Paris AIR 8: cosms in French 3 Apr 82 p ll

(Article: ”Aerospatiale: A CC! Statusent on the A. 320"]

[Text] At its 23 March meeting. the CC: [Central Enterprise Comittee] of
Aerospatiale studied the problems related to the employment of women by the
company, reviewed job training and solidarity agreuaents, adopted its own
budget and noted that the company's results will show a prcfit before tax for
the year 1981. The CCB also took note of the observations of the cowany's
president, Jacques Hitterrand, who expressed his concern about the state of
European cooperation which is now at a standstill both for political and
budgetary reasons, at a tile when certain large projects are tied to European
programs. National Defense budgets are insufficient to remedy inadequate
workloads. The civilian aviation market is in a decline. The market for
helicOpters in the United States has lost strength. Certain African markets
are vulnerable. Airbus Industries has had to alter its production program.
Its production objective, however, remains set at eight airplanes per month.

Importance of the A. 320 Program

In a statement on the A. 320, the CC3 of Aerospatiale underlines that this pro-
gram is a necessity for its engineering and design depart-eat. If the A. 320
were not introduced. the activity of this department would slowdown as
early as next sunset, and manufacturing activities next year. The CC! under-
lines that the A. 320 and AIR 42 programs complement each other and that the
an 62 cannot replace the A. 320. Under these conditions, Aerospatiale not
show as strong a co-itaent to the introduction of the A. 320 as it did to

that of the AIR £2.

The introduction of the A. 320 would confirn Aerospatiale's supremacy when it
comes to designing and asnufacturing an entire plans. (The conpany Inst not
engage into a specialization which could only'he detrimental to the consistent
development of our industry.) It would also strengthen SNEClIA's penetration
on the market of civilian turhojets, which started with the cm S6. The
(elected) when of the CC8 request that SNBCNA he the principal partner in
Iswfacturing the airplane engines. In this respect, considering the

8
FOR OFFICIAL U8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experience SNBCHA has already acquired with the cm 56 progrms, its participa-
tion should involve an engine which would enable this national enterprise to
achieve new progress in mastering the design, engineering and manufacturing

of complete engines for civilian use. Beyond the interest shown by Air France
and Delta Airlines. the international market for a 140-160 seat airplane is
estimated to range from 1,000 to 2,000 planes for the period 1985-2000; there-
fore, we must be represented on this market. For its part, the French govern-
ment has stressed its determination tc do all it can to introduce the A. 320.
It has demonstrated it by allocating some 300 million francs of credits for new
airplanes in 1982. To translate the govermnent's determination into facts, the
members of the 003 asked the management of Aerospstiale to press and do

all it can for the implementation of the A. 320 program. Also, the design and
engineering of the new TA 9 and TA 11 must be continued.

In a more general statusent, the CC! expressed the wish that the authorities in
charge will decide to introduce the A. 320, even if this implies a broadening
of European cooperation.

The ATR 62 Is Introduced at the Right “went

The CCB noted that the ATR 52 progras has effectively started and stated that
it ccmes at the right time since the work resulting from the subcontracting
agreement with Dassault-Breguet may revert to the latter company, in which case
the workloads of Aerospatiale facilities and subsidiaries affected by these
measures would have to be adjusted.

The CCE called on the authorities to introduce the PAH-2. Also, decisions
should be made as soon as possible concerning the HADES, SATCP, sx and H-5
programs, in order to provide work for the design and engineering departments
and manufacturing facilities of the divisoms involved.

The. CC! is pleased by the financial effort made with respect to investments
and equipment modernisation, which should enable the company to assert itself
on the international market although its profitability should be enhanced by
new programs; it should also make it possible to improve the working conditions
of the company's personnel.

COPYRIGHT: A. d C. 1982
Metalworkers
Paris AIR & COSWS in French 3 Apr 82 p ll
(Article: "FEM: For an Extension of the Airbus Family"!

[Text] Fearing that the situation of the European aerospace industry my become
a cause for concern during the coming years unless firm commitments are

made soon. the EurOpean Federation of Metalworkers in the Commity (FEM), on
the occasion of its executive co-Iittee meeting in Brussels. has taken a stand
in favor of the progressive development of the Airbus family. Among other
things. this implies that:

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- the industry will determine precisely under which market conditions the in-
troduction of new airplanes would be justified;

- the goverments of the countries involved, while respecting the GATT agree-
ments, will make the necessary financial comitments to help introduce new
planes. More than ever, the Airbus group deserves the support of the Euro-
pean states;

- the industry will increase its participation in venture capitals;

- the cooperation structure can be extended to other countries and manufactur-
ers. especially to solve financing problems;

- the workloads will guarantee medium and very long term employment stability.

The FEM believes that "no single European country possesses today the financial
capability to launch competitive programs. Only if countries cooperate will

it be possible to put together the financing and production means required by
large aeronautical and space programs. As a counterpart, these investments
should create a large nmber of jobs and bring about technological deve10pments,
not only in the aerospace sector proper, but also in the primary sectors,

and should therefore benefit national and regional economies."

"The European netalworkers' unions believe that it is essential to strengthen
cooperation within the civilian aerospace industry in order to improve job
stability—which is much more precarious in military aerospace manufacturing,
still the dominant sector of the industry. In fact, orders from the military
are subject to considerable variations and military export contracts are often
uncertain and often politically and morally condemnable."

The van calls on the European Comnities Comission to contribute to the suc-
cess of the Airbus-family development. It asks its affiliates to support the
FEM's position with their respective national authorities.

COPYRIGHT: A. 5 C. 1982
no Government
Paris AIR & COSIDS in French 3 Apr 82 pp 11, 64
(Article: "PKG: Increased Financial Support for the Airbus"]

[Text] Following a proposal by the Secretary of State for Economy in charge of
the aerospace sector coordination, Martin Gruener. the cabinet restated its
support to the Airbus program last week, at a meeting chaired by Chancellor
Helmut Schmidt.

The maximum amount of the federal guarantee was increased from DH 2.85 to

on 5.1 billion, which should enable 1433 to purchase the equipment it needs

to share in the manufacturing of 8 airplanes per month, and cover the produc-
tion of 860 airplanes in 8 years.

10
FOR omcm. US! ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. the amount of repsyable loans for the development of the Airbus-
family airplanes has been set at DU 165 million until 1985; this should make
it possible to finance the German participation in the development of the

A. M'm.

Assistance in marketing. which takes the form of advantageous interest rates
for 68 airplanes. has been set at DU 288 million. It could total on 2.0“ mil-
lions by 1986. Marketing assistance is limited to an average of DH 6 million
per airplane until 1985; it should not exceed DH lo million after 1985. For an
additional 520 airplanes. the amount of marketing assistance should no exceed
on 2.6 billion by the year 2004.

Generally speaking, the German government has reaffirmed its support to the
expansion of the Airbus program. Mr Martin Gruener argued that, now that the
design and engineering studies for airplanes like the Alpha Jet and the Tornado
have been completed, new projects must be introduced to maintain the workload
of the design and engineering departments, and he asked the manufacturers to
increase their investments in the preparation of future projects.

COPYRIGHT: A. 8 C. 1982

92910
050: 3102/219 END

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY