FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10107
9 November 1981

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 13/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERLALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L

9 Nave

NEST EUROPE REPORT
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(POUO 13/81)

CONTENTS
ENERGY

French Government Acts To Promote the of Geothermal Energy
(Edouard Rencker; ENERGEIA. May-Jun 81) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

INDUSTRIAL TECHNOLOGY

Manufacturing Materials in Space Under Microgrevity
(AIR‘cosmS’ ssep 81) OOOOOOOOOOC0.0.00.000000000000001

TRANSPORTATION

Engine Manufacturers Diecuu Joint Developnent Project
(Alkscosms. Ssep 81) I...I0.0....0.0000000000000000..1

Pint Pursues 'VSS' Experimental Car Project
(u STWA. 8’ 9 Oct 81) O0.0U0'0....‘OOOOCIOOOOOOOOOOOOCI

Theoretical' Considerations. by Perruccio Bern-do
Project Manager's Comments, by Michele Penn
Types of Plactica Used, by Gianni Rogliatti

-3... [III-WE-
FDR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ENERGY

FRENCH GOVERNMENT ACTS T0 PWE USE OI" Gm ENERGY
Paris ENERGEIA in French May -Jun 81 pp 6-5
[Article by Edouard Rencker: ’The Actions Taken in France")

[Text] In spite of the technical difficulties to which we have alluded, geothermal
energy is already usable. During a speech delivered last 2 April, the minister of
industry, Mr Giraud, while reviewing the progress made in this area during the last
10 years, outlined the French geothermal policy. The goal is to triple the number
of housing equivalents affected by this energy, that is, to raise if from 1,500

In the case of water at lower temperatures (of the order of 90 to lOO'C), conversion
of thermal energy to mechanical energy will be achieved by means of thermodynamic
machines using secondary fluids. (However it should be noted that this system which
is to be developed is still in the experimental stage). The most important use
should result from the employment of hot dry rocks by making them artificially
permeable. In this manner, the calories of heat would be recoversdbyrpassing a
fluid, called a transfer fluid, through these rocks. Such studies are being conducted
in order to achieve maximum utilization. Attention is directed to those studies
carried on in the Massif Central, particularly in the overseas departments (especially
at the geothermic power station in Guadeloupe). The second area of geothermic inter-
est ls the direct use of low level geothermal energy. Thisconcernslow temperature
water (approximately a maximum of 90'C) where the heat is used for a variety of
purposes such as heating of buildings, agricultural greenhouses, etc.). At the
present time, France ranks first in the world in this type of geothermal energy

which should contribute 1 million TEP's to the total available energy. Of course,
all of this is expensive, especially since the difficulties encountered in setting

up a geothermic project are considerable. The initial investment cost is high.

The risk of failure is still great. Lastly, the launching of a project must involve
a large number of participants, which is not always easy. Pinallg governmental
authorities have decided to establish a financial incentive system which has led to
appropriation of large funds for geothermal energy. Following is an Outline of

this financial policy:

Aid for conduction of preliminary studies, not to exceed 50 percent.
A "geological risk: guarantee to protect against failure. This guarantee furnishes

a coverage of 80 percent to the prime contractor.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nergy.
expect inportant Innovations in the field of geothermal energy.
uplcd with the substitute fuels program and d
geothermlcs program and its " '

Le gisemcnt
plus de——Sedi

 

l France posséde dc: mp calmed mm in 9mm Ii~
is d'oau sour-mines don: tutu mu: 1- How: do geochemic sources
rampanturo van”. do 40' nonwmmu‘cn. Pub at h

in 90/100°C. Lo: prim" Rdm‘on P ' ‘
In non: mute: dans In etc... Din: In inn“: & Vomit,
Bin parkien. L‘Alace. la la nudes mm“: on

m‘n Aquiuin. et la Linu-

». Le gm: avanuqc dc la
charm» nn France

tour
maqun utﬂbabla.
remurce: probable: ou
“in editions

2 1981 by Tec“
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDISTRIQL TECHNOWY

MANUFACTURIW MATERIALS 1" SP” [RIDER HIWMVITY
Paris AIR 6 cosms in French 5 Sep 81 p 46
[Article: “Forthcoming French Space Metallurgy Bxperiments']

[Text] The placing of the European space laboratory Spacelab, which is currently
scheduled to be launched by the American Space shuttle in August 1983, at the
disposal of a large number of users has made it possible for France to open access
to space to a new scientific community, that of material science. Thus was born
in 1975 the start of a national effort devoted to the study, experimentation and
indeed the exploitation of microgravity in the domain of material science.

Paralleling the efforts spearheaded by the cues [National Center for Space
Studies] Programs Directorate to stimulate this entirely new community of re-
searchers. the Toulouse Space Center undertook in 1916 the design and development
of a temperature-gradient oven for the actualization at four of the eight French
experiments currently programed for the first Spacelab mission. This oven will
also be used for a German experiment.

The cuts management, deeming it necessary to enlarge the basic scientific research
nffort and to carry out an in-depth experimentation phase, decided toward the end
vf 1930 i0 create at Toulouse the cams: [Studies and Research Group on Materials
in Space .

within the framework of the cues technical effort. this group was assigned two
primary missions:

-To provide technical and technological support to French scientific and indus-
trial laboratories for the study, development and exploitation of experimental
devices in connection with the manufacturing of materials in space:

--To promote the use of space for material science.
This group, consisting presently of eight persons, constitutes a technical link

between the national scientific community and the facilities for experimentation
under microgravity.

h
FOR¢OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the first Spaceiab payload, it will carry out the operational. takeover of the
gradient oven and its calibration for each of the experiments that will use it.
and will provide the technical assistance required for the development and accep-
tanoe tests of the experimental unit assemblies and participation in two crystal-
groving experiments.

For the Franco-Soviet stun-oz [Manufacture of Haterials (in the Salyut orbital
station)]. the cam will prepare the thermal calibration of the Soviet Magma
oven and assist the French experimenters (nine experiments being planned) with
regard to all interfaces. It is also studying the drawing up of the technical
specifications for the transporting of the gradient oven aboard the Salyut station
for the meraude project, the object of which is to open to French scientists
access to space flights of long duration (2 years or more) with availability of
an only ground facility.

The arms is also working together with MBA on a preliminary definitional study
of the MEPHIS‘I‘O [Equipment for the Study of Solidification Phenqaena in Earth-
bound and Orbital Environments] progra- being conducted by the Solidification
Studies Laboratory of the CUBS at Grenoble in scientific cooperation with American
laboratories (MIT and N35).

COPYRIGﬁT: A. 6 C. 1980

9399
C80: 3102/3

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

ENGINE WUFACTURERS DISCUSS JOINT mm mono-r
Paris AIR 5 C(SHOS in French 5 Sep 81 p 11

[Text] Pratt 5 Whitney and Rolls-Royce made public last weekend the fact that
they have been engaged in talks over the past several months in an effort to
determine whether they can cooperate on the program for producing motors having
a thrust of 25,000 pounds (11.3 tons), which are being sought by the builders of
airframes for the construction of the new generation of lso-seat airliners: the
A 320 (Airbus Industrie), mar-100 (McDonnell Douglas-Fokker) and 7-7 (Boeing).

‘rhese talks have an ambitious objective: The creation of a company that would be
assigned combined responsibility for the design and development and then the
marketing of the new motors, the world market for which it is estimated will
reach 4,000 to 5,000 units between now and the end of the century.

At the last Salon du Bourget, the president of Pratt 6 Whitney. Hr Carlson. termed
suicidal the situation , regarding these projects, that faces the three big motor
manufacturers--each of whom will be required to invest some 12 billion francs--and
three big builders of airframes, whose financial effort will probably have to be
of about a comparable order of magnitude.

'mlks were then be un in which can [expansion unknown] International (GE [General
Electrical Company -SNBCMA [National Corporation for Aircraft Engine Design and
Construction]) was invited to offer its views. It appears that on no longer
plans to throw in its lot with the 33-500 line of motors and that Rolls-Royce has
no intention of joining the cm motor lineup.

The executives of Pratt 6 Whitney and those of Rolls-Royce found themselves having
to come together again even if only to put the finishing touches on the details of
implementation of the Pegasus progrma, which is linked to the joint Anglo-American
Ail-8B program. It seems that {Ir Carlson found in Lord Mcfadzean a more understand-
ing interlocutor than Lord Kenneth Keith, who. it has not been forgotten. was at
the origin of the divorce between the two motor builders on the defunct JT-lOD
program, after which the two builders, now having separated. launched competitive-
ly the RB 211-535 and PW 2037 motors to snatch the market for motorizing the
Boeing 757, an operation the financial outcome of which has been an outright
catastrophe.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Exploratory and Preliminary Stage

The two big motor builders emphasize that their talks have not gone beyond an
exploratoy and preliminary stage. Many obstacles will have to be overcome to
bring about an effective joint operation. Suffice it to cite the problems raised
by the technology transfers while the two big builders are on a collision course
with regard to the PH 2037 and RB 211-535 programs. The assigment of tasks will
also not be an easy problen to resolve, each of the two builders having his own
lineup of partners: lshikawajina-aariaa. Mitsubishi and Kawasaki in the case of
Rolls-Royce and mu [Motor and ‘Durbine Co., which?) and Fiat in the case of Pratt 6
Whitney.

Any eventual agreement must also be sub-itted for approval by the governments
concerned and it is not clear whether the antitrust laws, although they did not
play a role in the case of association with mu and Fiat, light be evoked in the
case of an agreeuent with Rolls-Royce.

The developments in this affair will be followed very closely by Prench industry,

motorization being one of the main aspects of the problens associated with the
launching of the A 320 program.

COPYRIGM‘: A. 6 C. 1980

9399
C50: 310 2/3

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICI Al. USE ONLV

MSPORIATION

FIAT PURSUES 'VSS' BXPERIHDITAL CAR PROJECT

Theoretical Considerations

Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 8 Oct 81 p 13
[Article by Perruccio Bernado: "The Heaning of Research on the V88")

[Text] Writing in these columns about the VSS (Subsystem Experimental Vehicle) re-
search vehicle in the past few days, for reasons of space we were not able to detail
the energy aspects which characterize the vehicle. whose body is made of plastic
materials. We all know that any attempt to define the parameters of the car of the
future begin with the fundamental precept of lower fuel consumption. this is a

road that definitely can be embarked upon so much so that recent models. through
retaining their traditional structure, propulsion system and naterials, are a great
improvement over yesterday's models. Let us not, however. expect miracles, not

even in the far off future.

Nevertheless the car of tomorrow may permit significant savings in energy both in
the procedures and the materials used to build it. This is demonstrated by the

PSS prototype put forth by PIAI. Improve-ants include: greater production, greater
ease, lessened work times (first savings); substitution for the traditional steel
outer sheeting of the car with plastic. as well as substitution of iron and aluminum
in some components, less steel used in the basic framework thanks to a more rational
conceptualization of the framework itself and improved planning techniques. and
making use of sophisticated methodologies such as mathematical models. As a result.
the vehicle is lighter in every way.

One may object: aren't plastics obtained fro. petroleun? Isn't what may be saved
on one end being wasted on the other? FlAT’s technicians answer: "Specialized
plastic materials use for the VSS are derived from petroleum byproducts not other-
wise usable and not used in the past. Their availability therefore must be con-
siderad assured although their cost, at the present state of affairs, is not eco-
nomically profitable. Furthermore. the energy content of a product in plastic

(that is, the energy required to produce it and the energy contained in the nateriel)
is about half of that of a similar piece aade of sheet natal."

"If one were to consider the cost of the raw materials, the rough casting process
and the final finishing process. steel is one and a half times nore expensive than
plastic and aluminum is seven or eight times more expensive."

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Reiterating: the quantity of petroleum needed to produce plastic materials is
equal to only 2 per cent of that needed for other necessities: from the production
of electricity to that of heating, from the needs of the chemical industry in
general to those of transportation. Ihe balance therefore. is strictly in favor of
plastics. Caution must be exercised, however. It is not possible to think that
from one year to the next, setting aside the matter of investments, that a change
as radical as this, involving the whole steel producing industry, may be feasible.
Nevertheless, it is the task of research to explore, even if only in feasibility
studies, the new ways to safeguard those unrelinquishable m conquests.
Individual nobility is one of these.

The meaning of PIAT's work on the Subsystem Experimental Vehicle met also be
considered under this view.

Project Manager's Co-ents
Turin M STAHPA in Italian 9 Oct 81 p 13

[Article by Michele Fenu: "A Car Such as This Will Last for Twenty Years"]

{Text} "A car such as this can last up to twenty years." That is the opinion of
Engineer Paolo Scolari, in charge of FIAT's planning regarding the "VSS" prototype
shown recently in Turin. However, longevity in years is but one of the aspects

of this very particular automobile, "a car" eqhasisea Scolari, "that is real and
Emotional, not a dreamcar devoid of practical applications."

"This prototype" he said, "allows the demonstration of how some goals can be
attained such as the sinplification and reduction of assembly operations along
the assembly line as well as reduction in weight. The body is twenty per cent
lighter compared to a similar traditional model. That adds up to an overall
savings of about on hundred kilos."

The "VSS" however, is only one of the examples of research undertaken by FIAT. (It
cost three years of research in collaboration with various corporations and com-
panies.) "Research" stated Scolari. "represents 2.7 per cent of our budget, which
translates into 270-280 billion lire annually. This figure parallels the research
budgets of other major world car manufacturers. The research projects already
underway are numerous and include those that aim at lower fuel commtion as well
as those with other aims."

Scolari made mention of the constant changes industry will be implementing (at
least 21. months will be needed) following the positive results of a long series of
tests. FIAT is the leader in this interesting field. Mention is made of the
volumetric compressor, a type of supercharger already being used in the FIAT 131
and now in demand by many foreign manufacturers. In addition, work is being done
on electronic circuitry for engines, direct injection for Diesel engines and,

said Scolari, "many other things."

"Things" that are not part of the inediate future, though. Do not think it
possible to see a VSS a year or two from now. In theory, a vehicle of this kind
will be on the market only by the 1990's. This is due to economical reasons, not

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical ones. Investments of gigantic proportions are necessary, and the whole
process used in manufacturing a car must be totally changed. As an example, the
gigantic presses in use today would have to be substituted by much smaller sachines.
Another problem involves stamping plastic in presses. "In order to make s VSS at
this time," said Scolari. "another 100,000 lire would have to be added to the cost."

An excercise in futility then? No, because beside the general data acquired by
studies of this type, ml in the next few years will apply VSS derived technology
to some of its newer models. Continued Scolari: "In particular, we plan to use
the subsystems involving the front end of the car, the car's rear and above all
the rear hatch door, the defroster plate glass window and the dashboard.”

In essence, the application of ideas derived from the vss is a gradual one, as is
to be expected from any technical or industrial transformation. Revolutions, from

one day to the next are not possible. The ieportant thing is to be prepared, and
actually anticipate these changes.

npes of Plastics Used

Nrin LA STAHPA in Italian 9 Oct p 13

[Article by Gianni Rogliatti: "Hhich Plastics Are Used to Substitute Traditional
Steel Sheet Hetal?"I

[Text] PIAT's Subsystem Experimental Vehicle contains the highest percentage in
weight of plastic materials ever used before now: to be precise, it is 26 per cent
plastic, compared to Ritmo's 15 per cent plastic, "which is a car that by now has
reached full production schedule and contains an elevated percentage of plastic.”
Contrary to the past, when the term plastic was used generically to mean a nterial
substituted for other more costly materials, today, thanks to the advances of
chemistry, materials can be manufactured and set to use that have very specific
characteristics tailored to their specific functions.

In order to obtain weight reduction and improved functionality, PIAI's technicians
have made use of five different types of plastic materials. the characteristics of
which are adapted to each differing task, and which are briefly described below.

Unsaturated Polyester - This is a plastic with high resistance to bending and

breaking as well as to high temperatures. It is the material that has the highest
specific weight (1.7 grams per cubic centimeter) but still less than steel (7.85
grams) and aluminum (2.7 gram). This material is used for the four doors, the
hatch back door and for the external rear side panels.

Polyester Foss — As the name implies, this material is derived from the same
family of the proceeding material, but features a lighter specific weight and a
greater adaptability to insulation and soundproofing given its makeup. Its specific

weight is of 0.7 grams per cubic centimeter and it is used in the roof and the
engine hood.

\
Polycarbonate - This is a material of many uses in its varied characteristics (which
include even a transparent type). It has a specific weight of 1.2 grams per cubic
centimeter and has the highest specific breakage ratio, namely the pressure it can

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it be used
for the trunk

fuel tank due

It has an
rsus 100 par cent of the next closest
ycarbonate) and versus only 40 per
greater security.

This results in

it 15 possible to
sea for the new above-

 

END

1!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY