APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I00: CIA-NDPOI-OOOOOROOO‘I 000000“ 3-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050013-1

FOR OFFIUIAL USE ONLY

was L/0442
7 May 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 27/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100060013-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times witlin items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGlT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Iu’
7 May 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE

(F000 27/79)

Coureuts
THEATER NUCLEAR FORCES
ITALY
Briefs
Missile Purchase Delayed
COUNTRY SECTION
FRANCE

Massive Airbus Orders Noted
(AIR 6 COSMOS, 7 Apr 79) ..............................N

Air France Affected by Horld Air Transport Changes
(AIR‘wsmS’7APt 79) .0...’.I..O......0.0.0....00000‘

Aerospace Exports worth 17.154.000.000 Francs in 1978
(AIR‘cosms. 10“.: 79) OOIOCOOIOOOOOOIIOOOO0.0...CID.

Briefs
SDECE Deputy Director
Naval Base Changes

lTiLY

Soviet Dileuna Over PRC Ehergence in World Area Analyzed
(Franc Barbieri; LA STAHPA, 19 Apr 79) .................

Report on Public Finance Estimates for 1979
(Mario Daldsssarri; IL SOLE-26 ORE. 23 Mar 79) .........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER NUCLEAR FORCES MY

MISSILE means: mum-4m current budget of the Italian ground forces,

contrary to whet bed been planned, V111 not permit the ncqulaition of the

MEI-gate]. em'tece-to-ur missile. [ﬁne AIR e coauos in French 21 Apr 79
P 32

080: 3100

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
!OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

MASSIVE AIRBUS ORDERS NOTED
Paris AIR a COSMOS in French 7 Apr 79 p 39
[Articlex "Massive Airbus Orders"]

[Text] The early part of thsueek was narked by nassive orders for the
Airbus A310 wide-body transport. These new orders follow the recent
announce-ent of Swissair'a initial fire order and Air France's letter of
intent to purchase.

Lufthansa: 2S Tirn Orders. 25 Options

Lufthansa German Airlines placed firm orders for 25 Airbus A310'e end
took options for an additional 25. The fire orders alone represent an
invest-ent of 081.5 billion. or Pr3.65 billion. Deliveries will be from
1983 through 1990.

This huge contract was signed last Monday in Cologne at the German airline's
nain office by Dr herbert Culnann. airline chair-an, and Reinhardt Abraham.
the executive board's aesber in charge of technical matters. Abraham
personally had considerable influence on the design of the Airbus A310

and worked in close coordination with Swissair'e president, Armin Baltens-
weiler on the design. Signing for Airbus Industrie were Bernard Lsthiere.
the nanaging director. and Roger Beteille. the general aannger. This con-
tract nust still be ratified by the airline's supervisory boe;o. but there
is no doubt the board will give its approval.

Unlike Swissair that has opted for a Pratt & Whitney engine. Lufthansa
chose the General Electric 076-80 turbofan engine. This engine consunea
8 percent less fuel than the CP6-50 which powers all of the German air-
line's other high capacity aircraft: Boeing 707. 00-10-30. and Airbus
A300. All of Lufthansa'a large transports will thus be equipped with

CFG engines, a standardization policy that has obvious advantages fro. a
maintenance standpoint.

Lufthanaa's A310 will be configured for 211 passengers. with 18 in first
class. The A310'a will partly replace the airline's Boeing 727's on routes
in Europe and to North Africa and the Middle East.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conaenting on the choice of the A310 over the Boeing 767. Lufthansa's
statement said that although the two aircraft were comparable, the A310

was chosen because of its commonality with the A30032 and 36. 11 of which
the airline will place in service late this year. The German airline's
statement also said that due to the A310's large fuselage diameter, it

can carry containers and pallets identical to those used in other high
capacity aircraft. This capability is an iuportant factor in the aircraft's
profitability.

KI." Orders 20 3310'.

In Schiphol last Tuesday. KLH Royal Dutch Airlines signed a contract for
a fire order of 10 Airbus A310's at a cost of 1 billion guilders. Presi-
dent s. Orlandini and Mr Van Aneijden signed for KLM. Messrs Beteille and
Krook for Airbus Industrie. The Dutch airline also took options on 10
additional aircraft. Like Lufthansa's, KLH's A310's will be powered by
the General Electric CPG-BOA turbofsn engine.

Four of the 10 aircraft ordered by KL! will be delivered in 1983 and six
in 1986 and 1985. Configured for 210 passengers--8 seats abreast-these
aircraft will replace part of KLH's Dc-9's and Dc-8'a on routes in Europe
and to North Africa and the Middle East.

KLN called this purchase the largest one-tine order in its history.

Commenting on this order, ILH cited. like Lufthansa. the A310's advantageous
freight carrying capabilities plus its fuel saving capabilities and the
quietness of the new engines.

The A310 purchase will be financed partially fro. the airline‘s awn reserves
and partially with long-tern credit obtained in cooperation with Airbus
lndustrie and General Electric.

Air Afrique Hill Also Order Airbus Transports

At a press conference in Abidjan last week. Aoussou Koffi. president of

the aultinationnl airline Air Afrique. announced his airline had decided
to purchase three Airbus transports: one A3OOBA to be delivered in 1981
and two A310's to be delivered later.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSMOS. Paris. 1979

8041
C80: 3100

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

AIR FRANCE APIBCTBD BY UONLD AIR TRANSPORI CNANOBS
Paris AIR a COSMOS in French 7 Apr 79 p 61
(Article: "Air France Copes Hith Upheavals in world Air Transport")

[Text] Gilbert Perol. Air Prance's managing director. was the guest
speaker at last week's meeting of the Aeronautics and Space Public Rela-
tions Society. a seating chaired by Etienne Daum. The theme of Perol'a
reaarks was the democratization of air transport.

Political Aspects of Air Transport Democratization.

Perol's speech was given the very same day it was learned the Civil
Aeronautics Board had recolmended to President Carter that he reject Air
France' s proposed Vacances [vacations] su-ner fare. As justification for
this rejection. the CAB pointed to the French Government's refusal to
authorize the very low fares proposed by Braniff and THA for various
United States-France flights. Perol said he was convinced a compromise
would ultimately be reached that would end this stand-off in constructive
fashion.*

Perol discussed another current problem, the one created by fare adjust-
nents nade necessary by OPEC'a new increase in oil prices. Perol said fare
hikes nust follow. as rapidly as possible. this increase in one of the
principal factors determining air transport operating costs. This problem
is expected to be settled at the IATA [International Air Transport Associa-
tion] conference in Geneva early this week. Perol revealed that Air Prance' s
fuel bill this year will reach Pr 1.6 billion.

Perol dwelt at length on the political aspects of the democratization
of air transport. He analyzed three najor elements of this problem:

 

*This proposal was approved late in the week by President Carter and
federal officials.

1.
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. The United States' attempt to regain a predominant position in the
international air transport market.

b. The dispute between regular carriers and charter carriers.

c. Attempts to change marketing systems and practices.

Basic Principles of Air France's Policy

These different elements are creating very strong shock waves. Air France
is going to pit itself against them by basing its policy on the following
principles outlined by Perol.

a. Air France wants to move with the times. It will play the game

according to the rules of the times, knowing full well what risks the
game involves.

b. Air France takes an experimental and empirical attitude toward
upheavals in the market. The market is unquestionably the governing
factor. But Air France remains determined to provide a certain quality
of service.

c. Air France has no imperialistic design. It does not want to do every-
thing. Charter carriers have their place, including Air France's aub-
sidiary, ACI [Air Charter International]. So do commuter airlines. But
the role of both charters and commuters will change.

d. The national airline is motivated by a desire to operate profitably.

For this reason. it hopes the higher fuel prices will be completely and
directly passed on to airline customers. It would not be fair to pass

this increase on to the taxpayers. Likewise each passenger must pay a

fair price for the service rendered him and must not subsidize his neighbor.
Under an honest pricing policy. airlines must not he required to subsidize
the hotel industry or organizers of package tsurs and vacations.

e. Air France must serve French air transport. Ferol showed that during
the past 20 years, France is the only country to have maintained its
status and position in international air transport. Our commercial avia-
tion accounts for slightly more than 7 percent of all world air transport.
U. 5. commercial aviation accounts for only twice as much international
air transport as we do compared with file times as much 20 years ago.
British commercial aviation accounts for only 1.2 times as much as we do
compared with twice as much 20 years ago. Air France is determined to
act and compete in such a way as to ensure that France maintains this
position in international air transport.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in opening his remarks. Perol estimated that the percentage of the French
population currently using air transport lust be about 8 percent. He
emphasised that while air transport remains the prerogative of privileged
users. considerable progress has already been noted in the categories

of passengers. such as senior citizens or custosers fro. all areas of
France outside of Paris.

COPYRIGHT: AIR a COSMOS. Paris, 1979

8041
080: 3100

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

AEROSPACE EXPORTS WORTH l7,l5h,000,000 FRANCS IN 1978
Paris AIR A COSMOS in French 10 Mar 79 p 9

[Unnttributed article: "French Aerospace Exports for 1978:
Fr 17 , 15h Million"]

[Text] The Pool of French Aeronautical and Aerospace Indus-

tries (OIFAS) has recently published detailed information re-
gnrdinu its 1978 exports. The direct orders coming from for-
eign countries over the course of last year attained a total

value of Pr 17,15h million as opposed to Fr 23,830 million in
1977 and 9,710 million in 1976.

Included within this total are only the firm orders exclusive
of the options. As for materials produced through internation-
al cooperation, only the French portion has been included. The
value of this portion represents Pr 8,312 million, or h8.5 per-
cent of the total orders.

The distribution by activity groups is as follows:

Fr 9,892 million (of which “,61h million represent the result
of cooperative efforts) for airframes and completed aircraft;

Fr 1,h$6 million (of which 906 million represent the result of
cooperative efforts) for helicopters;

Pr 1,969 million (of which 935 million represent the result of
cooperative efforts) for motors;

Fr 2,161 million (of which 1,502 million represent the result
of cooperative efforts) for aircraft and clearance.

Fr 1,690 million (of which 356 million represent the result of
cooperative efforts) for.equipment and electronic systems.

The orders are distributed geographically as follows:

EEC countries: Fr 0,81h million (28.07 percent);
Countries of the free zone: “17 million (1.85 percent);
United States: 2,200 million (12.82 percent):

The Remainder of the world: 9,823 million (57.26 percent)

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GIFAS has drawn up a chart showing the proportion of exports

within the total business figure corresponding to the chief
programs: .

AIRBUS INDUSTRIES: A.300: 86.3 percent:

AEROSPATIALE: Alouette III: 82 percent: Lama: 91 percent;
Gazelle: 75 percent: Super Frolon: 72 percent: Puma: 70 per-
cent: Dauphin: 86 percent: Ecureuil/A-Star: 97 percent; 16
types of missile: 50.7 percent.

DASSAULm-BREGUET: Mirage III and 5: 6h.5 percent; Mirage F-l:
58 percent: Alpha Jet: 59 percent: Mystere Falcon-20: 92 per-

cent: Mystere Falcon-10: 93 Percent: Mystere Falcon-50: 99 Per-
cent.

SEPECAT: Jaguar: 57 percent.

MATRA: 530: hs percent; 550 Magic° 60 percent: Cretale: 20
percent: Otomat: 100 percent: Durandal: 100 percent.

SNECMA: Ator 9-C: 70 percent; Atar 9-K-50: 65 percent.
SNECMA/TURBOMECA: Larzac-Oh: 21 percent.

TURBOMECA: Taking its total production into account: 66 percent.
LIGHT AIRCRAFT: Mudry: 30 percent; Robin: “7 percent: Reins-
Aviation: 82 percent: Socate: hh percent

COPYRIGHT: Air a Cosmos, Paris, 1979

8117
080: 3100

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY ssc'nou mm

BRIEFS

SDEOE DEPUTY DIEM—Michel Bouleau, who served in Africa prior to
becoming an administrative subprefect, has Just been appointed deputy
director of administration and finance of the French intelligence ser-
vice [Len the SW. Acting as deputy to Jean Bontoux, appointed
last ear Bouleau will be in charge of a Io78-million—franc budget.
ﬂex; [ﬁn-1e mums Am in French 23 Apr 79 p 2;]

NAVAL BASE cannons-4m navy in cutting back on its overseas bases.

Of the five overseas bases available to the Ehipﬂ Royale (Papeete,
Dakar, Fort-de-h'ance, Reunion and Djibouti), only Papeete will con-
tinue to Operate its ship repair facility needed because of the nuclear
tests program's requirements. The navy [1:037 prefers to provide its
combat fleet with logisticial support based on the new mel supply
ships, repair ships and an rt vessels, all considered less vulner-
able than bases on shore. Text] [iris mamas mums in n-encn

23Anr79p2ﬂ

C80: 31!”

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ITALY

SOVIET [)le OVER PRC MRGBNCE IN wom AREA ANALYZBD

Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 19 Apr 79 pp 1. 2 LD

[Article by Frans barbieri: ”Moscow Atteepts Dialog with Beijing to Contain
western Thrust")

[Text] In a surprise diploeatic note Gronylto has suggested to leijing the
signing of s docueent laying down the principles of relations between the
two huge countries engaged in latent conflict. The docueent appears to

be chiefly an act of recognition by Moscow of China as a third world power.
we are a long way free the possibility of hoscow turning the tables ani
using the "Chinese card" against the United States. It is sieply a love--
skillful. at any rate, and how effective. we shall see--to prevent washing-
ton froe being able to use the sane card against Noscow.

China's eoergence on the world scene. acconplished by hue and Deng in
rather a pereeptory nanner, has now becoee an irreversible fact. Although
the Kreelin's hopes of being able to eenipulate Chinese policy froe its
position as sole center of a nonolithic co-unist world evaporated long
ago. Moscow believed that it could at least keep chine out of the eain
world disputes by relying largely on Mao's self-isolation tendencies.

when this objective vanished too. the Soviet Governeent recently found it-
self confronted with difficult option: To negotiate with Beijing through
washington. thus giving the Aeericans the power to deter-inc the levels of
tension and detente along the Siberian borders. The recent srgueents in
the 0.8. State Departeent over the need to nediate between the two
co-unist powers eust have seeeed to hoscow paradoxical, to say the least.
In all probability this is how they appeared to Beijing as well.

Groeyho's move would seen a logical reaction to this situation. The
Krenlin is atteepting a sharing gene with Beijing, trying to prevent the
weight of the Asian aubpower free felling entirely on the American side

in the bipolar relationship between the two superpowers. The Moscow docu-
eent constitutes the diploeatic response to the increasingly coeplex
Chinese question." A response which met not be confused with the positions
assueed by Moscow on the seee theee within the intercom-unist context.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the diplomatic front. in other words. it expresses its amenebility to
negotiations and peaceful coexistence. along the lines of the principles
applied to relations with all countries. 0n the ideological. inter-
communist front. coexistence is inconceivable for the Soviets under any
circumstances.

One of the top Euroconunist personalities spoke to me some time ago about
the pressures exerted by Moscow to eline the European parties more closely
with Soviet positions. A CPSU representative who came to visit him told
him: "You mistakenly believe that even in the face of the most diverse
challenges and provocations on your part the reaction will always be
rational and moderate. Be careful because even we can lose our patience
and take hasty steps for which we will all pay the price later. In short.
the balance of power and our Politburo's attitude can also change for the
worse." The Soviet was referring to Carter's challenge, to the attempt to
encircle the USSR. above all to the Eurocommunists' critical reservations
about the Kremlin's policy. He was applying strong pressure to foil any
Eurocommunist attempt to assume an intermediate position in the conflict
with china. Less persistent attempts have been made to unify the posi-
tions of the allied governments.

It is known for certain that the Kremlin did not expect China to react with
a military intervention to the provocation carried out against it in
Cambodia. Faced unexpectedly with the Chinese attack. the Soviet leaders
immediately dismissed the idea of direct reprisals along the Siberian
borders: It would have been the start of a war with no foreseeable end.
They opted however for a commitment by all the countries in the Soviet
camp on the Vietnamese front. It turns out in fact that bodies of volun-
teers to be sent to Indochina were being organized and trained in all the
Horses Pact armies apart from Romania. The Chinese withdrawal, announced
from the outset but implemented hurriedly perhaps, partly to avoid this
highly dangerous trap devised by the Russians. meant that the "volunteer

operation” was curtailed. But the "China question" did not disappear with
it.

we have information about the difficulties encountered by the officers
given the task of training the expeditionary corps for Indochina in
explaining to the young soldiers in political and ideological terms the
reasons for the conflict with the most populous socialist country. A
simple theory had been devised whereby the grass roots of Chinese society
had remained socialist but the leaders had deviated from the proper revolu-
tionary path. The theory immediately proved inadequate inasmuch as the
volunteers were destined to fire in Vietnam against the "grass roots.” in
other words. ordinary Chinese soldiers. and not against the leaders. A
piece of nonsense. typical of all wars. which acquire: a special and
almost transcendental value in a society obsessed by ideology. In fact
there was an Mmmediate outburst of ideological discussion on what Marxist
label should be attributed to Chinese society and the Chinese state. This
was necessary to explain the reasons and motives for an armed conflict.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-'PICIM. USE ONLY

The interpretations made by the different parties were not intended to
destroy the unity and create a flaw in relations between the socialist
parties and countries and the Soviet Union. The conclusion was that the
resolute and uncoaproeising struggle against Baijing's theory and praxis
are an inseparable part of the fight against inperialiss and capitalise.

China. and not just its leaders. thus becoaes s capitalist country.
Ponosarev's elaborate formulations will serve as a background for further
"oonolithization" of the eastern bloc. at least to forestall any possible
tenptation to sake overtures toward china. China is becoming a factor.

if not of polarization at any rate of diversification. in the couunist
world. Moscow cannot accept it as a variant or alternative tors of
socialise without losing its own hegeaonic or perhaps charisaatic posi-
tion. Hence it was necessary to place china in Marxist terns on the other
side of the barrier. ssong the "class eaeaies."

when it coaes to explaining the reasons why intercomnist wars erupt
the Krealin theoretician's theses have nothing very new to say: They
adhere to the religious forauls that wars are always triggered off by
capitalise (the reason why. in Ponorarev's syllogias. China could not
fail to becoae capitalist). The extent to which such a forum is
defensible was seen on the guest of honor platters at the recent PC!
Congress. where the Soviet Pelshe was obliged to sit beside the Chinese
ambassador. who had certainly not been placed there in tribute to his
country's conversion to capitalise.

With reference to ideology. the Kremlin has tried to lake the conflict
with Beijing coincide with the co-Inist aoveaent's struggle against
washington. but the approach has proved rather unworkable. The "diversi-
fied" parties. one of the Iain ones being the PCI. are already seeking
their "silk route" which will lead then to Beijing. Behind the dopatic
plans outlined by Pononarev. it turns out that even in Hoecow. along
Brezhnev's actual advisers (Aleksandrov). a magnetic pro'ols- is being
posed: Even though it is "capitalist" Chins does exist, and sooner or
later it will be necessary to negotiate with a country as derisive for
the world‘s future. if for no other reason than to avoid any breakdown

in coexistence. But when and how to negotiate? by waiting for and
encouraging the fall of the present leadership or by using Hashington as
an intersediary? Hence we arrive at Grosyko's note. in contrast to
Pena-arev's attitude: Diploastic prsgaatian and ideological rigor forts
a duality inherent in the whole of Soviet policy and are often contradic-
tory only in appearance.

COPYRICIIT: 1979 Edith LA STAHPA 5.9.A.

(:50: mo

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ITALY

REPORT ON PUBLIC FINANCE ESTIMATES FOR 1979
Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 23 H0! 79 P 3
[Article by Mario Baldassarri]

[Text] After the report on 1979 requirements for the
State and public corporations, at last they
are giving us the figures, even for public
finance.

From time to tile we learn of events which, when we read of them,
seem to be anything but sensational; as tine goes by, however,
it turns out that they say well make a resounding impact on a
nation's political and civic habits. The recent “Report on Bati~
mated Require-ante of the Expanded Public Sector for 1979.” sub-
mitted by the Treasury Minister on 5 March, is certainly one such
event a

It marks a turning point of sajor significance in that heralded
process of greater clarity and comprehensiveness in public ac-
counting started under the Sta-mati administration and carried
now by the Pandolfi adlinistration to a level which only a short
while ago would have seemed shoerost fantasy.

Preparation of an annual operating budget, a 3-year budget, and

a full accounting every 3 years on Treasury operations are in fact
tangible evidence of a 'figuree-and-data culture" which ought to
replace ballpark approach of ideological rhetoric and prejudice
which frequently dominate debate over our country's economic po-
lich

The scale and the analytical thoroughness of the accounting ren-
dered in the recent report (not only were the overall books of
the State covered, but so, for the first time, were the books of
every corporation and agency in the public sector) unquestionably
imply fairly long lead-times for the mental effort involved in
gathering and digesting all the data contained in the document.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OffICIAL USE ONLY
3 Keys to Valuation

Beyond these boundaries, it does seem possible, however, even
on a first reading, to single out three different keys to value-
tion:

a. the consistency among the forecasts which were gradually
forsulated over the course of 1978 and their cosparison with
the perforsance record and the final balance for that years

b. the scale and structure which the books of the state-owned
sector have taken in the four trimesters of 1978;

c. the forecasts for 1979 and the econosic policy saneuvers now
suggested as a means to achieve control over the growth in enlarged
public sector requiresents.

Table I shows the forecasts, in terns of annual cash flow, as
contained in the several quarterly reports free the Treasury and
the performance records actually chalked up in 1978. In connec-
tion with these data, three considerations eserge as most signi-
ficant.

We can see, in the first place, that the pattern of revenues and
expenditures was steadier than had been predicted in several
cases.

In the second place, most of the growth in expenditures scene to
be increasingly stronger than the increase in actual revenues.

In this sense, therefore, the State budget begins to look a good
deal like a puppy chasing its tail. Although revenues were higher
than anticipated, they failed to keep pace with the upward spiral
in actual expenditures. As a consequence, the requirrsents of

the State-owned sector swelled fro. the 27,000 billion predicted
in the March 1978 report to 28,760 billion in the final account- _
ins. -

And in the third and last place, the internal structure of reve-
nues and expenditures scans to have taken on a different shape
fros what was expected. In the revenue column, for one thing,
direct taxes accounted for sore than did indirect taxes. In the
area of expenditures, prediction shortfalls were almost invaria-
bly isputable to higher operating costs.

The various adjustsents made in the forecasts in August and No-
vesber of last year, however, were largely traceable to action
taken by the government and Parliasent. To this extent, there-
fore, they do not indicate actual errors in forecasting. That
sort of genuine error, however, loo-s larger when you colpsre the
data from the November report with the actual year-end figures as
contained in the recent March report.

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIDIM‘O DI CASSQ DEL SEND“ “ATM (I) ANKO mo

MthﬂOVl E CONSUKTIVO

"I. I

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1) Mutant «I:
7. Conwnme
ﬁlm» “one '70 Nam. ‘18 at 1142-70
:- 3““ State g;

. 3-»: «a sum .
., mm . m _ 2m: 23:: 212::
m." 1m no man 2:10)

I um am no a ‘

a. ma mum. 7) mo in a 1:33
1') Emu“: g] a}: man 1239) as);
an Como upon-l. 1“] um 33%: 33 3353
{I} . lumen-I: 31-10 m .1 am 29m 10 «a ”'33?
a - u- - - _. -1 "I"
4.1m w-u'nfun‘esou? 12) 90) - ISO -2:Jo -ms
V - Pubbh. «um mate :3) 11.030 29.630 ' 2:0.‘0 'wo

 

(I) Le It! pmuiml oui
lam/19. Valor! In mm.“ an Inn.

. punctuate aouo mun-Ale Mlle nla ‘
MID/7s ed a! mu; II mun-um O (onlrnulu mlla «um: 'RTi'z’g'. $33.34;. II

 

 

TABLE 1: CASH REQUIREMENTS IN THE STATE SECTOR (1), 1978
FORECASTS AND FINAL REPORT
KEY
Final as of

l. Forecasts for MAY 78 August 78 Noveaber 78 31 Dec 78
2. State Budget 7. Non-tax revenues
3. Total revenues 8. Total expenditures
4. From taxes 9. Operating
5. Direct 10. Capital
0. Indirect 11. State deficit (II-I)

12. Treasury management deficit

(less carryover)

13. State sector requirements

14. The three forecasts shown here are contained in the quarterly

reports for 31 March, 30 June, and 30 Septenber 1978;

the

final balance is contained in the 1978 year-end report pre-

sented on 5 March 1979.

Amounts shown in billions of lirc.

-_—_____—__-—————_I—_—"—-—
W

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

As you can see, the ”surprises" involved by comparison with the
estimates made 4 months ago are duo to greater tax-derived re-
venues - higher by 1,230 billion lire -- but are offset by a
greater cash outlay,up by 1,308 billion lire. We also had less
carryover on the “Treasury management” books (a shortfall of
something like $50 billion lire) than was expected. On the whole,
then, the requirements of the State sector were more than 700
billion lire more than the November forecast called for.

from the data in the several quarterly reports released by the
Treasury, it is possible to reconstruct the flows that actually
took place in each quarter of 1978. These data, shown on Table

2, provide a second profile of valuation, in connection with which
two maJor considerations come to mind.

In the first place, we can see how much time it takes for the
”public corporations‘ to process the funds transferred to them
from the State into actual expenditures. what really happens is
that when the central government pays out appropriations ahead of
time, thus triggering a bigger deficit in the Treasury accounts
(as we see happened in the first quarter of 1978), the "Treasury
management" books show a fat surplus; on the other hand, when
the accumulation of deficits in the State budget slows down, the
accounts of the State-owned corporations, on the whole, tend to
show a deficit.

Above and beyond these factors, we can see, however, that the
requirements of the State sector came close to 6,000 billion lire
in the first two quarters of the year, dropped to around 5,000
billion in the third quarter, and.only “exploded“ in the final
quarter to top 11,000 billion lire.

In the second place, then, we find this "anomalous“ behavior in
the closing 3 months of the year which, all by themselves, made
up more than 37 percent of the entire requirement for 1978.

This phenomenon can be partially explained by the elimination of
the January supplemental budget, which may have brought on a
stepped-up spending pace in the final weeks of the year.

Beyond this purely “bookkeeping“ aspect, it will be interesting

to find out whether these expenditures, largely to transfers from
the State budget account, turn into actual outlays during the

first quarter of 1979 particularly, or instead turn up as 're-
entries” in the Treasury's management account for the other pub-
lic corporations. In this case, and to the degree to which it

can be demonstrated, we could argue that the overall requirements
of the State sector, from the economic point of view, were actually
smaller in 1978 than we are led to believe, from a “bookkeeping“
point of view, by the accounts embodied in the report.

16
FOR OFPICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\nal

[\IINSOGNO DI (“9| DEL SETTING OTATAI.‘ ANNO 1m - FORMAZIOSE ‘I’Rl\1&
81140.3 nu. FAODISOGNO

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1) l‘ hill. tum. 3' trim. to trim. Totals I

A . Bilanclo Smo 3) ' 1 "m ' on m, 3 I
.5 n I Imu IN .. 1 ”J
573$: of!” 3 mo mm mm was gum
Dlmtc mo mo cm 7.2:: a! 5n
Inmnnu 6) ) sun 3;» ssn an) --m
m Emmnbutado 7 mo LIN 1.95: 33.3 :92
F . s - m u ) mm mm as» raw n“:
J! 0.33.3“ a). 8 I! .‘.' um mm :m. A; no
MConIo ca It 10 4M! . 2.5“ 2.700 5.843 I .‘28
m . Di-aum Smo m-n 11‘ 9.0» 3373 am 1mg 30.43:
I“ . l\’ - ')i .'\.1|I!I) «mom ~27!” {Ki -'.”3 - m -|075
' dl lr-umu I—awmo: 12} ' -. _.

 

 

V . Pam-k. mum «and. w) 6w ”‘3 II on H 760

\

     

       

TABLE 2: CASH REQUIREMENTS IN THE STATE SECTOR FOR 1978:
QUARTERLY FORMATION OF REQUIREMENTS

1. 1st quarter 2nd quarter 3rd quarter 4th quarter TOTAL

2. State budget 8. Total expenditures

3. Total revenues 9. Operating expenditures

4. From taxes 10. Capital expenditures

5. Direct taxes 11. State deficit (II-I)

6. Indirect taxes 12. Treasury management deficit
(less carryover)

7. Non-tax revenues 13. State sector requirements

————_—_
M

Some possibility that this phenomenon just may have occurred
emerges from the data contained in the supplement to the Bank
of Italy BULLETIN, which deals with the formation and utiliza-
tion of the currency base. In its issue for 20 March 1979, the
BULLETIN reports a balance of 676 billion lire in the current
expenditures requirement account of the State sector.

If this situation were to persist through February and March,
the likelihood of their being an overlapping between the “book-
keeping" size of the requirement and its ”economically signifi-
cant" sizemight be increased to certainty.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Beyond these "detailed explanations" of the 1978 final report,
however, it seems considerably more promising to be given the
chance to assess the coeplex economic policy maneuvers that are
to be counted in the course of 1979.

The Maneuver Factors

As readers will remember, this naneuvering was initially suggested
in the 'Pandolfi document“ last August, and has since been pressed
anew and further spelled out in both the 3-Year Plan and in the
Report of last 5 March.

W

 

TABLE 3: ECONOMIC POLICY MANEUVERS FOR 1979 TO CONTAIN
EXPANDED PUBLIC SECTOR REQUIREMENTS

- 15PM dell'ueuo ’10 25 P-noomid cum I”!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

o.

:{dwwdunu 3) I)! a I1» a
I?» £333.“ «1. P‘ Lam 373
c) EnII Inca“. "It 31'
?{“22“°'"LELM__JL_________.3” F”

3:15?“ «am. 81 a 7333 s?
It: {mgm'w&. 9“”.- 10‘ l” ' 0”
mun Ian Inn
" Imam” “m n‘ m

in Rldm. diamante com 12‘ III _—'¢3§o_—_n

 

 

IV mmmlmnu 13)

V e M M
:duﬁm'e. 50m“ :3 1'“
um

I.” N ”9| G
\‘l . lid-niece mm 15‘ MD M um I“
KEY
1. August 1978 proposal 9. Sec. Sec.contributions
2. March 1979 proposal 10. Surtaxes, policies, discre-
tionary
3. Spending cuts, including: 11. Taxes, greater "spontaneous'I
flow.
4. Pensions 12. Lower current deficit
5. health costs 13. Greater invest-eats
6. Local agency transfers 14. Treasury redeposits to cut

down pub. corp. balances
7. Lower interest pay-ents 15- Reduced require-eats

8. More revenues, including:
18

10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3 shows the various maneuvering factors according to the
proposals made last August and according to the guidelines set
forth in the recent report.

From these guidelines we can see that, while fitting into a fair-
ly compatible “logic," the two proposals contain features which
are markedly disparate. The "cutback in current expenditures,"
which in August was pegged at 3,750 billion lire, seems now to
have been itself pared down to 1,770 billion. This translates
into a sharply reduced relative impact for this part of the ma-
neuver (from 61 percent in August, these proposals now amount to
only 21 percent of the total planned cutback in requirements).

0n the other hand, volume of increased revenues now seems to be
greater and the impact of higher contributions and witholding
taxes is up from 50 percent to 58 percent. It must really be
pointed out that, as actually stated on page 87 of the report,
"the contribution (to the reduction of the current deficit) is
provided by a slightly more favorable pattern of revenues than
originally foreseen.“ As evidence, the reduction in the current
deficit in 1979 is now limited to a total of 4,800 billion, in
place of the 6,700 billion lire forecast last August. At the
outside, thus, we can assume the possibility of achieving a higher
"spontaneous'l flow of tax revenues than what was then predicted,
falling somewhere in the neighborhood of 1,900 billion lire. To
this higher sum are then added the "discretionary“ policy move,
which calls for additional tax revenues of 2,000 billion lire,
and social security contributions, accounting for another 1,030
billion lire.

Under this assumption, therefore, the reduction in the current
deficit, as compared with the August forecasts, is still somewhere
around 6,700 billion lire, but with the difference that this sum
will now derive from two sources: 1,900 billion from an adjust-
ment of the "spontaneous' deficit, and 4,800 billion from the
discretionary policy maneuvers.

From this reduction in the current deficit must also come the
predicted flow into greater investments which, as we see from

the table, are now just about halved (down from 37 percent to

19 percent of the total policy maneuver amount); and added to

it must be the volume of bank deposits by the public corporations
in the State Treasury account, which now seem to have grown spec-
tacularly to some 40 percent.

Upon careful reading, thus, the impact of the adjustments and
policy moves as shown in the recent report turns out to be greater'
by 2,000 billion lire than it was in the August forecasts. Fur-
thermore, the items which, out of the overall commitment, drawn
from higher revenues and higher "bookkeeping redeposits" turn

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

out to be far greater than the role assigned to cutbacks in cur-
rent expenditures and to greater flows into investments.

There still remains one more doubt to be voiced. The Report sets
37,300 billion lire as the overall requirement for the expanded
public sector in 1979, after taking into account the effects of
the maneuvers we have just described. If, however, we allow for
the improvement in witholding tax revenues, that sum becomes in-
consistent with the "spontaneous' requirement forecast, which in
August was set at 43.720 billion lire. If that last figure were
still valid today, in fact, we should be able to achieve a lower
requirement for the expanded public sector, equivalent to something
like 35,000 billion lire. In that event, then, it should be pos-
sible to hold the requirement down below the level indicated.

If, showever, the 37,300—billion-lire level for the requirement
should prove correct, it would imply-a 'spntaneous" requirement
of better than 45,000 billion lire, as against the 43,720 bil-
lion forecast in August (both gross figures including the 1,900
billion in greater "non-discretionary" revenues).

So we see that this is one aspect that remains unclear in the peru-
sal of the document and which, perhaps, might benefit by a little
further thought. These difficulties in pinning a correct figure

on the "book balances“ demonstrates once again how important it is
to be able to analyze manipulations of the public budget in its
multifarious components of revenues and expenditures.

We night well say that the 'figures-and-data culture" which we

are beginning to develop in this country, thanks in part to do-
cuments as estimable as the recent Treasury Report, must avoid

the peril of naking a fetish of book balances, which have a way
of remaining strangely steady, while all the others tend to hob
and weave around them.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Bditrice Il Sole-24 Ore s.r.l.

6182
CSO: 3104

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY