FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10145
30 November 1981

West Europe Report

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 15/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[J are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
TRANSPORTATION

Mercedes-Benz 'Auto 2000' Project: Status Report
(ATZ AUNNOBILTBCHNISCHB ZEITSCHRIPT, Sep 81) .....

Phase Tvo of Volkswagen 'Auto 2000' Project Couplete
(ATZ Auronoaznncnmscnr zalrscnm. 8ep 81)

Briefs
ATR 42 Conditional Order.
French Gear for CM 235
Funding for HDP 100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

MERCEDES—BENZ 'AU‘I‘O 2000' PROJECT: STATUS mom

Stuttgart an AUTOMOBIL‘I'ECHNISCEE 2311868117! in German Sep 81 pp 395-396,
399-601

[Text] Within the framework of the "Research Car" project which is being spon-
sored by the Ministry of Research and Technology (0111‘) Daimler Benz Inc. is
developing a touring car with various kinds of drive. In this report the most
important*construction groups are described in terms of the present status of
the work.

Abstract

Daimler-Benz A6 are developing two research vehicles which will to a certain
extent be sponsored by the German Federal Department of Research and Technology.
One of the cars will be driven by a two-shaft gas turbine (Fig. l), the other
one will be driven by a turbocharged Diesel engine (Fig. 3).

Development activities concerning the body aim at low aerodynamic drag, low
weight, and high safety standards, especially during front collisions which
frequently occur in an offset manner (Fig. 5), side collisions, and during
accidents with pedestrians.

Great attention is paid to the development of electronics. Besides the well-
known anti-lock braking system. a drive control device will be installed for the
first time. A radar controlled distance-oonitoring system is shown. The driver
can choose fuel saving driving progrns. The output of variom calculators,
i.e., a monitoring computer. a trip computer, a route computer are shown on an
LCD-monitor (Fig. 9).

When this report was written the Diesel research car (Fig. 10) was just being
assembled. Though no driving tests could yet be performed Daimler-Ben: are
sure to fulfill the stringent requirements for fuel consumption, exhaust and
noise emissions, and the safety required by the specification list.

 

*The author expresses his thanks to his many colleagues who supported his in
writing this report.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Introduction

The BMFT is supporting the construction of German research cars with the goal
of improving, through the application of new technologies, vehicle character-
istics which are in the public interest. such as energy consumption, environ-
mental compatibility, safety and economic value.1

In contrast to earlier projects. which had a one-sided emphasis on the realiza—
tion of the greatest possible passenger safety or a high degree of economy, in
this instance compromises must be made between the various contradictory demands.

Daimler-Benz Inc. is involved in this project with the development of an automo—
bile in the upper space and weight class, Fig. 1. The spectrum of use with em—
phasis on extended trips for business, vacation or pleasure with high degrees

of occupancy, requires good comfort for long trips in respect to space, air
conditioning, driving and noise. This journal carried a report on the design

of the vehicle in 1980.2 There have been no changes in it since then. except
for a few details which are to be given special consideration in this report.

 

Figure 1. View of the Research Car From Daimler—Benz

2. Drive Units

Since the beginning of the project the plan called for utilizing a gas turbine.
which is being developed at Daimler—Benz, to drive the research car. As an
alternative to that, two V-8 engines, a gasoline and a diesel engine, were to
drive the other research cars. As a result of funding cuts by the BHFT, support
{or dcvalopmental studies on the gasoline engine were given up. The second re-
search car will be driven by a diesel engine which was altered in respect to the

original planning.
2.1 Gas Turbine

in order to achieve comparable fuel consumption with gasoline and diesel engines
the process temperatures of the gas turbine must be as high as possible. with

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the new developments which are supported by the German ceramics program of the
GMFT. temperatures of 1.600 K appear attainable. They alone make development
of a vehicle gas turbine feasible.

The Hercedes-Benz research gas turbine was designed along the lines of the two-

sheft type of construction. In Fig. 2, the gas producer with the impeller com-
pressor and the compressor turbine can be seen at the left (in the direction of

travel. in the front). The gas producer rotor drives the auxiliary equipment.
which is necessary for the car and the turbine. via the gears underneath.

 

Figure 2. Schematic Longitudinal Cross-Section of the Mercedes-Benz Two-Shaft
Gaaturbine

The combustion chamber which in this schematic drawing is tilted into the plane
of the picture is inclined to the left side of the vehicle by 57°. Its con-
struction permits premixing and prevaporiration of the fuel which are essential

for low emission of pollutants. Pig. 3.

Primary air

     

\

Dilutin: air

 

h; 3 Sena-mam cmt-srﬂ-on oi combumon chambet

7-14 lnmllauon assembly of 1M supercharged v.6 Done! engmc "I
IN Mutton-Bent "search car

3
IN)! OFIICJAI.[EHE(MVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the right in Fig. 2, the load turbine rotor with its turbine wheel and the
gears are arranged in a common housing part which reduces the maximum rotational
speed to 6.500 l/min, the customary value for cars. Connected to this is an
automatic variable speed transmission. In front of the load turbine there is
an adjustable guide baffle which can be used to slow the car down.

The turbine wheels are made of hot-pressed silicon nitride; the stationary parts
which are loaded with hot gas were produced in part from ceramics, in part from
high heat resistant special metal alloys.

The turbine inlet spiral made of silicon carbide is shown in the middle of
Fig. 2 and is currently being examined on a test stand for components.

The heat exchanger disc of aluminum silicate rotates around a vertical axle. It
is driven by the gas producer.

The turbine housing which consists of alloyed spheroidal graphite cast iron was
thermally insulated inside with a ceramic fibrous material.

Proof of the efficiency of ceramic integral turbine wheels represented the most
important task in an experimental program which has been in progress for several
years. Ceramic turbine wheels were tested for 100 hours in stationary and non-
stationary test runs with maximum temperatures of 1.523 K and speeds up to 60,000
l/min.

The gas producer part was put into operation at the end of last year. The first
run of a full power unit took place in May 1981. An effective power of 94 k"
with a combustion chamber outlet temperature of 1.523 K is expected to result.
Additional data are contained in [2].

2.2 Diesel Engine
A diesel engine is scheduled as an alternative drive for the research car.

Its design was substantially modified in respect to the initial plans.2 The
4.4-1 V-8 suction engine was replaced by a supercharged 3.3-1 V-6 engine, also
having a rated output of 110 k", primarily with a view taward a further lowering
of fuel consumption, more favorable conditions of installation and lower weight.

The light metal engine block with a 90'V-angle has dry gray cast iron bushings.
The cylinder heads are also made of light metal. Ceramic port liners are sup-
posed to reduce the heat of the cooling water and contribute to better utiliza-
tion of the exhaust gas energy. The valves are controlled by an overhead cam
shaft per row of cylinders and cup tappets with automatic valve clearance com-
pensation. The precombustion chamber process is utilized because of its low
noise level and the smoke behavior. which is satisfactory in all states of ope- ,
ration, with good fuel consumption. An effort is being made to favorably influ-
ence particle emission by changing details in the precombustion chamber.

The series injection pump is located between the cylinder heads. It is jointly
driven with the cam shafts by a double roller chain.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The arrangement of the two exhaust gas-turbo-superchargerswith a 60’ incline
is new. Fig. 4. They are driven by a multiple switch system in such a way
that under 2,600 l/min only one rotor operates, above that, both. From this
arrangement we can anticipate both better torque characteristics with low
rotational speeds and a better time response.

All auxiliary systems are driven by a polyvinyl belt with an automatic belt
tenser. The crankshaft belt disc has a two-gear planetary gearing system which
in the case of low engine speeds makes possible sufficiently high speeds for
the auxiliary units.

Engine and gears are enclosed to meet the specified noise requirements.

2.3 Driving Programs

In actual driving operation fuel can be saved if the driver voluntarily does
not use part of the engine output. As an aid in driving three driving programs
are to be offered for the driver to choose from for this purpose:

Economy--by adjusting the injection pump and gears, output and maximum speed are
limited.

City--low shift speeds in the automatic transmission keep fuel consumption and
emissions low.

Fast--makes it possible to utilize full engine power.

The automatic transmission is electronic-hydraulically controlled in such a
way that in all the driving programs the most consumption-favorable gear is
chosen as needed.

3 . Body

In addition to high level riding quality for four to five people with sufficient
luggage, the goal of the development work on the body is low drag, lowering the
weight, testing new air conditioning equipment and increased safety for passen-
gers and for people outside the car who are involved in an accident.

3.1 Aerodynamics and Weight

The area of drag surface c . A, which is decisive for air resistance, is to be
lowered to 0.6 m2 which megns-—compared with the S-class limousines which today
are already favorsble--a 20-percent improvement. Since in spite of a slight
lowering of the roof because of the requisite interior space and the essential
protection against side collisions the front area could be reduced only insig-
nificantly to 2.09 II2 this requirement means a drag coefficient under 0.3.

Changes in respect to today's vehicles were done primarily in the rear. The
flow affects the entire length of the "XaII"-like roof. It was possible to
achieve substantial cp value improvements by enclosing the underfloor, elevating

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the spare wheel well along the back edge, and by spoilers in front of the rear
wheels. Additional decreases in drag resulted from optimizing the front and

grille, by carefully directed cool air ducts and by flush side windows.

Fig. 5 shows the clay model which was built for the wind tunnel experiments;
it has an original underfloor and an original undercarriage. The very favor-

able measurement results are to be checked with car bodies as soon as these
are available.

 

Fm, 5 “‘nd rhamzri model of the Mommies Beer :esearc'n ca:

 

P1,: 1 (“venom-nu! base we! crash upon stage berm-r

The two-Sheet doors were made of sheet aluminum. Their windows are plastered
over with the light metal frames except for small communication windows in the
front doors.

For the front mud guard, bumpers and the soft nose glass-reinforced polyure-
thane was used, in part with an energy-absorbing foamed plastic support.

By these measures, in spite of the extra weight required elsewhere for safety
measures, the weight of the body could be lowered by 5 percent as compared with
the S-class which was used as the basis.

3.2 Heat and Air Conditioning

With the Daimler-Benz research car for the first time an effort is being made
to utilize the technique of heat pipes, which is familiar from the cooling of
electronic components, for “cmfort control in the interior. 0n the one hand
the light and compact heat.1g heat exchanger can transfer engine heat from the
cooling water to the heating air and, on the other hand, release air heat to
the coolant of the air conditioning system. Thus, there is no need for a
separate air conditioning heat exchanger.

Since heat pipes can also be designed as sheetlike heaters, it is obvious to
use them to heat the interior body surfaces. Such units are also being tested
in the doors of the researtn car.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3.3 Safety

Heasures to inpove passive safety refer primarily to protecting the passengers
in the event of front and side collisions and to protecting pedestrians.

3.3.1 Front Collisions

Statistics from Dainler-Bens and Peugeot-Renault show that front collisions
involving AIS 3+—injured passengers (badly or fatally injured) take place 50
percent of the tine staggered to the left hand side. In contrast to the cen-
ter collision which occurs in only 29 percent of the cases, the driver is thus
especially in danger since only the left—hand area of the front, rather than
the entire front section. is available to absorb the energy of the collision.
Horcover, the driver is liaited in his deceleration space by the steering
column and pedals. Also the frequency at which seats are occupied (driver's
seat: front seat passengerzback seat - 6:2:1) calls for additional protection
for the driver. In the research car, therefore, the following safety conponents
are being realised:

—-reinforced front and passenger seat structure ontheleft
--engine hood which is buffered and stressed on the left

--inproved coupling of the right front structure via fender holders and engine
hood

--disengaging, by means of aranide corrugated tubing. the steering gear-steering
wheel connection in the event of a collision.

In Fig. 6 a vehicle is depicted after collision with a staggered barrier.
The following provisions are being aade for all passengers:

—-inproved active restraining sytan with three seatbelt anchor points on the
seat, Fig. 7

--passive support of the belt system by an airbag in the steering wheel and
belt tighteners on all seats

--exchangeable child's seat in the back with a deflecting table, Pig. 8

--integrated head rests on the front seats. head rests in the back seat which
can be put into position if the seat is occupied.

3.3.2 Side Collisions

In this case there is no significant difference in the frequency of accidents
between the left and right side of the car. Thus, on the right and left the

following safety measures are being tested:

--clawing of the doors with the longitudinal Ianbers and the bases of the b—
colunns in case of a collision

7
FINI¢HNHCJAI.I£§E‘0IHJV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 7. Front seats with integrated Figure 8. Rear seat with exchange-
head rests and three—point able children’s safety seat and
belt system automatic head rests

—-increased cross—bracing for the passenger seat
——large surface hip impact zones

--side windows of impact resistant acrylic glass.
3.3.3 Pedestrian Protection

The worst injuries to pedestrians come from contact with the vehicle front.
Thus, among other things, the following injury-ameliorating measures are to be
tested on the research car:

——soit bumper having the area of contact with the lower leg placed low

--low course of the front contour with soft nose and impact—yielding diffusion
windows

-—e1astic mud guards and A-column coverings.
Fig. 9 gives an idea of the rounded front contour.

4. Chassis

The chassis basically corresponds to that of the S-class cars with hydropneu-
matic springing available on special order. Changes are to save weight. Thus,
for example, wheel rims of light metal are used. In place of the usual spare
wheel a light emergency wheel is available.

Parts of the hydropneumatic springing are made of light metal, the front torsion
bar has a pipe section. The cardan shaft is produced as one piece from carbon-

fiher-reinforced plasric.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig 9 anl are; n! lhc research car

5. Electronics

To a greater degree than to date the use of electronic components to increase
safety and to process infonmnionfor the driver is to be tested.

5.1 Control of Forward Traction

In addition to the familiar brack slipping control (ABS) 8 control for forward
traction in this car will control the frictional connection between tire and

road.
5.2 Distance Warning Device

A radar distance warning device. which has been under development for several
years.3'“ is to be demonstrated in the research car.

5.3 Multiplexing Cabling

The large number of electrical consumers in the car and the necessary expensive
and heavy cable trunk demand modern solutions for the electrical equipment.

The research car, therefore, is to be equipped with electronically controlled
multiplex cabling whose advantages lie in low weight. simple diagnosis capa—
bility and in the flexibility of the vehicle equipment.

5.4 Driver Information System

A new driver information system in the car is to represent the latest develop—
ments in the area of electronic information production and reproductionin the

car.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.4.1 Control Units

The control units consist of liquid crystal monitors. Information in the form
of text, numbers or symbols can be displayed. The to date familiar instruments
are no longer present as "hardware," but are stored as "software" in the compu—
ter. They appear on the mnitor when the driver wishes, or when the condition
of a unit is critical. In order not to distract the driver constantly, the
volume of information is normally restricted to the essentials: driving speed,
fuel level, time and mileage, Fig. 10. Individual desires for information can
he met. The instrument computer generates those instruments which can support

the driver in specific situations: speed revolution counter, oil pressure gauge
or coolant temperature gauge.

 

h: In Control um! orlhe research cs:

5.4.2 Monitoring Computer

The monitoring computer stores data about machinery condition and the condition
of components which are important for safety. It reports these values to the
driver as soon as they exceed a critical threshold. Indications from the moni-
toring computers can only be canceled by eliminating the cause of the problem.

5 . lo . 3 Maintenance Computer

From the monitoring computer data the need for service is calculated from driv-
ing distance, fuel consumption, brake lining wear and filter condition.

Variable maintenance intervals are thus possible.
5.4.4 Trip Computer
By measuring fuel use and the route the trip computer ascertain; fuel consump-

tion and makes the influence of the driver clear. Other values such as average
consumption values and range can be derived.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5.4 . 5 Route Computer

The route computer is an electronic atlas whose data at present cover the PRC
autobahn system. After input of starting point and destination it develops the
shortest routing and indicates the successive junctions with directional hints.

The planning of roundabout routes is possible. In today's stage of improvement,
the route computer is autonomous to the vehicle.

By coupling with existing traffic radio or tracking facilities the automatic

indication of detours is also possible. Experiments with the Institute for
Radio Technology in Munich are underway.

5.4 .6 Comunication System

A driver comunication system is being developed with which calls using the
public telephone system can be made, emergency cells can also be made and traf-
fic information can be received. Along main roads this system works with send-
ing and receiving devices, which are built in and are permanent, and with

antenna. The goal of this development is to clearly reduce the instrument cost
for the car owner.

The real probl- in using many computers rests in their maintenance and in the
organization of the data flow which a central information computer controls.

Dialing and adjusting the computers and the radio. the air conditioning system
and the conunicstion system is done with a few keys on the middle console and

a keyboard on the steering wheel which controls the devices in a menu technology
familiar from EDP.

6 . Cooperation

As in the development of any new car countless people are also involved in a
research car without whose cooperation the developmental goal in this short
time could not have been achieved. Thanks is expressed here to these people
without mentioning individual mu.

7. .Status of the work

At the time of writing this report the first of the two planned research cars

is being outfitted. New ideas and technologies are to be tested with them
which if they prove themselves could help out in the future in overcoming the
increasing demands on the car. Thus far no measures could be effected on the
car. Yet it is anticipated that the specifications required in the bid concom-
ing consumption, emission and safety will be able to be met.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWC1A1.USE(MNLY

FOOTNOTES
1. J. Bandel, "The Research Car." A12, Vol 82, No 2, 1980, pp 59-62.

2. B. Strackerjen. "Beeic Conditions for Autonobile Construction in the

Future and Their Effect on the Hercedee-Benz Research Car," ATZ, Vol 82,
No 2, 1980, pp 69-76.

3. S. Reiniger, “Driving Teete in Street Traffic Ueing Radar-Controlled Die-
tance Herning Devices. Lines of Develop-eat in Vehicle Technology and
Road Traffic 1980," Cologne, pp 206-213.

4. c. Neininger, "Measurements With PH/CH Radar in the Context of the Tent
Program for Self-Sufficient Dietance Warning Systems. Lines of Develop-
ment in Vehicle Technology and Road Traffic 1980," Cologne, pp 214-222.

Author's addreee:

Dr Bernd Strackerjan, Engineer
Brikaetrase 32, 7000 Stuttgort 60

COPYRIGHT: 1981. Franchkh'eche Verlagehandlung, ﬂ. Keller 6 Co., Stuttgart

12124
CSO: 3102/25

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

PHASE TWO 0? VOLKSWAGEN 'AUTO 2000' PROJECT COMPLETE
Stuttgart ATZ Autonouuscumscns zsrrscsnm in German Sep 81 pp 407-410
[Text] Abstract

Vw-Vehicle 2000 is an abbreviation of theproject officially entitled: "Demon-
stration of Automotive Research Results of Integrated Concepts of Experimental
Passenger Cars," which is sponsored 50 percent by the German Federal Ministry
of Research and Technology. This project was started as an exemplary project
for the German automobile and the supplying industry. Six contractors devel-
oped the specifications for the cars in phase 1. Phase 2, currently in pro-
gress is being carried out by four-contractors with the aim of building the
prototypes to these specifications. The program ends in 1982 with phase 3,
the prototype testing.

This article describes Vw's contributions to this project emphasizing a vehicle
in the size middle class of the Volkswagen Golf.

Introduction

Prom Volkswagen's point of view the goal was to offer as balanced a compromise
as possible between the various anticipated future requirements. 0n the one
hand, these requirements stem from the future international market situation,
on the other hand, from the pressures to protect limited resources and the en-
vironment, to increase safety and social and political demands.

In order to clarify these complex relationships and to develop criteria for
evaluating technical solutions to the questions of the 1990's, the general con-
text of the automobile of the 1990's has been described in a broadly based
scenario. Parallel with that numerous technical design studies were carried
out, for example. reducing vehicle weight, decreasing air resistance, improv-
ing the drive. the use of electronics, the use of alternative naterials, and

the like, and were evaluated with the help of the scenario and an extensive
analysis of economic value. In the process strict attention was paid to the
fact that it must be possible to realize the technical solutions in mass produc-
tion in the time frame to be considered.

The design of the research car developed at Volkswagen stands out because of
its great flexibility which is very important from our point of view since the

13
FORIOFTWCJA1.US£1NVLY
FOR(MHWCJAL.USE(NNLY

 

Table 1. Technical Data of the VW Auto 2000

Dimensions (mm)

Exterior Interior

Length 6,105 Finished space 1,825
Width 1,670 Elbow width front/hack 1,455/1,626
Maximum height (empty) 1,353 Headroom front/back 956/923
Wheel base 2,450 Trunk space (VDA Quader)(1) 320
Wheel track front/back 1,410/1,358 Seating ares (m2) 2.66
Road clearance (empty) 150 Clear door opening width 1,167
Turn radius (m) 10.5 Clear door opening height 902
Drag coefficient 0.26 Height empty (kg) 780
Cross-sectional area (m2) 1.86 Load (kg) 400
Operating range (km) - 1.400(diese1) Rim size (inches) 13
based on £08 cycle - 800 (gasoline) Tire size 155/70

 

Drive

Nominal rating (hp/kw)
Displacement (1)

Rated speed (1/min)
Torque (Nm) .
Speed at ”max (1/min)
Supercharging
Ignition

Number of cylinders
Compression
Mixture formation

Engine construction

Transmission

Light construction
in vehicle enclosure

Diesel Engine Gasoline Engine

65/33 75/55
1.2 1.05
4,000 5,800
98 106
2,500 4,000
0.6 0.5

-- Identifying fiel

controlled HTZ

[high output transistor

ignition system]
3 R a R
20 8.3

Injection Injection

Light constructior
in vehicle enclosur

Gear shift 6+! Automatic

16

P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

development of the energy situation issssociated with too many uncertainties.
The suggested design provides for the car of :Le 1990's to have the basic con—
ditions for less consumption because of less drag and less vehicle weight, yet,
on the other hand. through appropriate motorization to permit reaction to an
intensified energy situation by means of extremely economical motorization and
a very efficient version.

Design Description

This research car from Volkswagen is designed as a two-door fastback car. As

a four-seater it will permit over 600 kg additional load. The luggage compart-
ment in the rear can accommodate a large number of transport tasks by means of
various combinations with the back seats. The overall design provides for two
differently outfitted variants, the normal version widia diesel engine as an
extremely economical vehicle with today's road performance and a luxury version
with a gasoline engine. The average useful life will exceed 10 years and will
be equal to a road life of at least 140,000 km. Table 1 gives a short descrip-
tion of the car using technical data.

What special features distinguish this car? For the first time a new strategy
was tested in shaping the body. Thus, the primary consideration was the require
ment of a minimal drag coefficient. 0n the basis of the first form studies in
the wind tunnel, which recorded extreme proportions for the car body, our design
center, with consideration ofthe typical VW conception, developed a form which
we consider to be a successful synthesis of aerodynamics, technology and form
aesthetics. This was accomplished by constant interaction on the part of aero-
dynamic engineers, stylists and designers, Figures 1 through A.

 

Fig. l. Distinct side view of the VW-Auto 2000 Fig. 2. Front view of
with extremely low c -value(0.26), with both, the VH-Vehicle 2000
33kw (62 HP), l.2-li re-Diesel engine and SSRH with twin headlamps

(75 HP), 1.05-litrc gasoline engine with front-
wheel drive

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3 and 4. Other views of the VW-Auto 2000, with Kamm—rear end made of
plastic material and clear styling all—around

The demands of aerodynamics resulted in a number of new design principles,

for example, windows which close with the exterior covering, smooth under-
floor, the shape of the wheel discs. Even the cooling air duct for the entire
area was chosen in such a way that flow-through losses could be minimized. The
air enters in the front of the car in the lower baggage area and exits in the
front part of the engine hood. This in turn required completely new ducting
for interior ventilation. Fresh air enters in the area of the front mud guards
and exits in the rear roof columns.

Body Development and Design

Today's mass-produced bodies consist of a large number of shaped sheet metal
parts which are welded together. In each case, an essential component of this
shell is the support system or the structural design which serves to receive

and transmit the forces which affect the car. This structural design takes on
special importance in respect to vehicle safety, that is, in respect to deforma—
tion in the event the car collides with an obstacle. The production and process-
ing of these many parts requires a costly manufacturing operation.

In order to reduce this cost, to optimize the use of the material, to improve
corrision protection even more and to further humanize working conditions dur—
ing production, a radically altered body design was developed. In this, the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR40FFKJAL.USEIONLN

unfinished body is manufactured of sheet steel parts, which are by and large
not interconnected, and the mounted parts are produced to an increasing degree
of plastic. The shell consists of only three construction groups which can be
fully automatically produced: floor group, side parts and the cross-connections
with the roof in the roof area.

The following mounted parts are also made of plastic: forward part of the
front, rear section, rear door. back part of the mud guard in front with the
wheel house and integrated wheel bead and the lower side part in the back which
likewise is supplied with wheel house shell and integrated wheel bead. These
parts are put together in the final asselbly phase.

This body design can be characterized as a hybrid method of construction because
essential components are manufactured from other materials and bolted together.
0! course. this method of construction has become possible only in connection
with a very refined support system design which permits identical kinds of
rigidity of the body with torsion and bending.

Car Interior

The functional area, the dashboard with the instrument panel, the ﬂmmediately
visible digital controls, even the inner assembly which is not visible, embody
a new design. In this assembly all the components which normally have to be
mounted individually in the front interior space are integrated.

As the base for this assembly, the backbone so to speak, there is a flexurally
rigid support which during final assembly is mounted with the complete dash-
board between the hinge columns.

The numerous individual elements which are integrated in this assembly are the
following: knee cushion with tray, adjustable steering column with support,
accelerator, electronically controlled heating and ventilation system, glove
compartment and glasses case, ash tray with cigar lighter, movable interior
lights, car door electric contact switch, stereo system with cassette deck
and full electronic controls, the front stereo high-output speaker and, so to
speak, as the electronic heart, the central digital controls in the attach-
ment on the steering column which moves along with the height adjustment.
Thus, these controls are not obscured by the steering wheel rim.

As a subsystem, this attachment to the steering column contains the central
electric units, the fuses, an audio response unit and the central controls al-
ready mentioned. This is done in liquid crystal technology and divided into rou
roughly three equal fields: the fields to the right and left serve to indicate
operation and trip information while the middle display is used for ALI, the
driver's guidance and information system. The indicators for car speed and
engine speed in the left and right hand sections are very distinct in digital
numbers. Above these large numbers there is, as the case may be, a row of dis-
plays for warning indicators. for example. for legally prescribed controls
(turn indicators, bright lights). Other control functions are indicated only
via a general warning display, however, at the same time they are specially
described by the synthetic audio response unit.

17
FOI.0F1WC1AI.USE|DNLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a numerical display, the lower side displays serve multifunctional tasks
and can show variouskinds of information upon request from the driver via
keys, for example, fuel level. route, average speed, time. date, and so on.
In the design of this central control unit special attention was paid to keep
from transporting the driver into the world of an airplane cockpit and feel-

ing overtaxed. This becomes clearer if the three-way division of information
is considered:

--Necessary information which is constantly indicated as for example, speed.

--Warning functions which call attention optically and/or acoustically only if
something happens.

--0n-demand information which is displayed at the driver's request.

New directions were taken with the front seats, too. The external shape dif-
fers from the familiar series-produced seats. Except for a few individual
parts these seats are made completely of plastic and are to be manufactured on
a mass-production scale as injection-molded parts. The upholstered cushions
rest in a shell into which they are clipped. Thus, they can easily be cleaned
or exchanged. After detailed computer computations it was possible with this
plastic seat, to present the mass-produced VW design of the safety belt ele-
ment integrated into the seat in such a way that all the safety experts' de-
mands for strength are met.

Like the front seats the back seats also have integrated head supports. The
trunk can be altered for numerous transport tasks by lowering the seat back or
parts of the back and the seat proper.

The side parts have been designed by the stylists in a way that is visually
pleasing and functional. They make a very substantial contribution to the
overall luxury impression of the interior.

Chassis Design

The chassis of the front drive Auto 2000 was designed following the high stan-
dards which apply to VH-Audi products. Several individual units are worth spe-
ciai mention. The rear axle was made of glass—fiber-reinforced plastic. This
extreme use of plastic demonstrates the limits of this alternative material in
reference to costs and weight savings. In addition to a number of improvements
in details, the installed automatic antilock device (ABV) is particularly im-
portant. This was to be an attempt to maintain the steerability of a car while
braking using a three-channel system. The results achieved suggest the possi-
bility of a solution, at the cost of a high grade car radio.

With the car wheels of plastic, tires especially low in friction were used.
Overall, optimizing of materials was achieved in body work and chassis by using

CAD/FEM (computer aided design/finite element method). In addition to optimal
design, production costs and recycling were solved as special tasks.

18
FOR 0FF"JAI.US£|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drive Designs
Diesel Engine

The particularly economical design solution is represented by a water-cooled
three-cylinder direct injection diesel engine. This research design has ah
electronically controlled injection pump and an exhaust gas supercharger. The
crankcase. which is made of molded aluminum alloy, has cylinders with a likasil
coating. This light construction helps reduce weight.

The amount injected and the beginning of injection are controlled by an elec-
tronic system in the injection pump by interrogating the stored identifying
field. For this microprocessor technology is put to use. In contrast to the
traditional practices the turbosupercharger in this engine serves to produce a
good torque at low speeds.

This three-cylinder engine is designed in such a way that now special measures
to balance the mass became necessary, as for example. a differential shaft. The
characteristic vibrational behavior is accommodated in a motor mount that is
coordinated with it.

Gas Engine

The somewhat larger-scale motorisation, which was mentioned at the outset, is
presented as the so-called lumury version with a water—cooled four—cylinder
light metal gasoline engine in series construction with 55 kw.

In order to achieve the driving performance required in the specifications of
phase 1, as a suction engine a displacement of ca. 1.6 liters would be required.
This design concept, nevertheless, was realized as a supercharged 1.05-1 engine.
Compared with the suction engine with larger displacement there are comparable
kinds of elasticity, acceleration and speed reserves, yet this engine in normal
city operation achieves lower fuel consumption as a result of the smaller
displacement.

For supercharging. exhaust gas superchargers or compressors driven by the
crankshaft must, of course. he considered. On account of the more favorable
toruqe curve when using a compressor, which produces better elasticity at low
engine speeds. a Roots compressor driven by the crankshaft was used. A belt
drive takes care of exact adaptation of the compressor to the air requirements
of the engine; its speed ratio is automatically changed as a function of the
engine speed; thus, the compressor runs faster at lower engine speeds and in
this way takes care of a constant boost pressure. When running with a partial
load the compressor can be separated fruathedrive via an electromagnetic
coupling. Then the engine runs on suction engine operation in a consumption-
optimal way. Only if need be, for example. when accelerating. is the compres-
sor switched in. With the compressor switched in the boost pressure is adjusted
depending on the position of the accelerator.

Because of the relatively high specific loading, compressor engines tend to
knock. In order to guarantee optimal engine operation, provisions must be
made in respect to the ignition period in order to avoid knocking combustion.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the "adaptive" knock-limit control which was developed by V“ research the
ignition angle identifying field which is stored in the control computer--a
high output-transistor-ignition system controlled by the identifying field is
used--is individually adjusted lnaccordance with the knock-limit of the engine.
This adaptation is effective over a long term and reacts only to significant
changes in the operating condition of the engine (new start, oil temperature,
and the like).

when idling the engine speed is kept constant with digital idle stabilization.
This measure is necessary since to minimize consumption and pollution the
engine operates at idle with a low speed (750 l/min).

To set the mixture, gasoline injection is used; each cylinder is supplied with
fuel through a separate injection nozzle. The proportioning is accomplished

by an electronic control device which specifies the necessary injection amount
for every operating point according to the engine speed and air flow. The prepa
ration of the air-fuel mixture is guaranteed by means of electromagnetic injec-
tion valves.

Gear Technology

With the diesel engine the gears are an integrated component of an engine-gear
control system which in our company is taken to be an automatic momentum utilise
tion unit. In this system the engine flywheel is separated from the crankshaft
by an automatically activated additional coupling. This separation always takes
place if the engine does not have to exert any forward motion, that is, thrust
phases while moving and when the car is standing still (for example at a red
light). At the same time the starting coupling also opens by itself so that

the flywheel continues to run freely with a high speed while the engine stops
immediately if the fuel supply is shut off. As soon as the driver steps on

the gas again, the engine is immediately cranked by the starting clutch. Only
carefully coordinated electronic controls provide satisfactory interaction of
this function cycle.

For the gasoline engine a special three-gear automatic transmission will be
used.

Consumption

With a definite decrease in the c value to 0.26, a consumption-favorable die-
sel motorization by means of a augercharged three-cylinder engine, a refined
engine-gear control system in the form of an automatic momentum utilisation
unit. and in combination with weight-reducing components and tires which are
low in running resistance. it was possible to achieve low consumptions accord-
ing to DIN 70030.

ECE City: 4.2 1/100 km
90 km/h constant: 3.3 1/100 km
120 kn/h constant: 4.9 1/100 km

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even gasoline motorizing with automatic transmission will surely achieve its
specifications with a consumption of 7.5 1/100 km (50 percent city, 1.5 percent
at 90 and 120 km/h). However, it presunably camot be installed and tested in
the W research car until the end of 1981.

Design Example: Safety

From what has been described so far it can be seen that with a masher of tech-
nical developments special designs were followed by W research in this project,
as for example, with the aerodynamic design, the drive train, engine control
system or the suggested assembly design. This eat-oration can be expanded by
the energy design. the environmental, material and customer designs, which,
however, cannot all be adequately described in this publication. This will be
done in later articles.

Nonetheless, because of the special importance something will be briefly stated
about the concept of safety. It is obvious that the present level of technology
in automobile development. designed to meet U.S. requirements, was taken into
consideration. In this, an essential component of the structure is a general
concept which, vis-a-vis our series designs, was further modified and in re-
spect to front, rear and side collisions, represents a high safety standard.
Especially for pedestrian safety several measures were implemented in the area
of the front of the car for the purpose of softening accidents, as for example.
a lowered bumper. In addition to these measures, which serve so-called passive
safety, mention must be made here of a system which serves to improve active
safety: the "automatic antilock device" (ABV) as was previously described in
the section on chassis design.

Summary

with a number of partial designs, a car in the middle class was presented which,
as an integral overall concept in the view of W research, represents future
trends in car development. with the priorities of low energy consuption, high
safety standards, low outside noise, technically and economically justifiable
exhaust gas emission, just to mention a few, it was shown which technologies
will find increased use in the future in car building.

In addition to the committed involvement of our own staff members, the coope-
ration of numerous companies which are involved in this project should also be
mentioned. All participants are hereby thanked for their help.

Author's address:
Dr Ulrich Seiffert, Engineer
Jahnskamp 22, 3300 Braunschweig

COPYRIGHT: 1981, Franckh'sche Verlagshandlung, 9. Keller & Co., Stuttgart

12124
cso: 3102/26

21
FOR OFl-‘IClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSPORTATION

Association], Wright Airlines. a regional Anerican company based at the Burke Lake-
front Airport of Cleveland (Ohio), announced it had placed a conditional order and

beginning of 1986 at a purchase price of 85 lillion (1980 value) each. Hr Gilbert
Singernan, president of the company. stated that these planes will replace the
Convair 600's that "right Airlines uses on its network linking Cleveland with the
large cities in the region. The ATR 62 conpeted for this order against the SAAB-
Fairchild 360, the CAC 100. the Dash 7 and Dash 8, and the P 28. Hr Singer-an
added that the confirmation of the order would be communicated to the builders as

this plane--an interest backed by letters of intent and cash binders. It appears
that commitments under these conditions have already been made by sons 10 airlines,
including "right, for 40-50 planes. The decision by AEROSPAIIALE and AERItALIA

to definitely launch the ATR 62 program is expected to be made known by them by the
end of next nonth. [Text] [Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 19 Sep 81 p 9]
[COPYRIGHT: A. 6 C. 1980) 9399

FRENCH GEAR FOR C" 235--The CASA [Aeronautical Construction. lnc.-Spsin] and Nurtanio
companies which have formed a joint coepany to develop and produce the future CN 235
connuter biturbojet, have selected. through their joint subsidiary AIRTEC [expansion
unknown]. a landing gear designed by Messier-Hispano-Bugatti. The French firm is
developing for this progran a specific landing gear characterized by: simplicity of
design: mono-wheel forward landing gear. and nain landing gear with tanden wheels.
each equipped with lever suspensions suited for energency-strip landings; easy
maintenance; suitability for use under extra-e hot or cold clinatic conditions; and
extended operational life. It is recalled that the first CN 235 deliveries are
scheduled for 198‘. Kore than 70 orders have been received to date. [Text] [Paris

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUNDING I-‘OR MD? 100nm Nether lands government has announced that it is prepared
to furnish 1.7 billion florins toward the funding of the Fokker and McDonnell
Douglas MD? 100 project. This sum more than doubles the amount of aid initially
planned (800 million florins). Mr Gijs van Aardenne. the outgoing minister of
economic affairs of the Netherlands, submitted a statement in this regard. prior
to his leaving office, to the Parliamentary Permanent Cormittee on Economic
Affairs. in which he indicated that this governmental aid consists of credits in
the amount of 800 million flor ins and reimmreable loans in the amount of 900 mil-
lion florins backed by state guarantees. The funds will be made available to
Fokker beginning the end of this year. As of now, however. 53 million florins
have been furnished to Fokker for related design studies. Mr van Aardenne re-
vealed that a division of effort had been made between Pokker and McDonnell
Douglas, the Dutch builder having been designated prime contractor for the design
and the supply of components for the ND? 100. while McDonnell Douglas is prime
contractor for the marketing operation. For the moment, the plan calls for a
single source of primary components but two assembly plants--one in the United
States and one in Europe. The two builders expect to receive a reply by the end
of this ear to the offer of cooperation they have extended to Japanese builders.
[Text] EParis AIR a cosmos in French 19 Sep 91 p a] [COPYRIGHT2 A. a c. 1930]
9199

cso: 3102/13 8ND

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY