FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10716

5 August 1982

Worldwide Report

lAW OF THE SEA
(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDHIDE REPORT
LAN or THE SEA

(2000 5/ 8 2)

CONTENTS

WWW

USSR To Lift Motel: Herring Fishing Ban in 1983
(m SW, 25 am 82) 0.......OOCOOCOOCCOCCOOCOOIQCC

ASIA
INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

'ASAHI' m Japan-0m Fishery Pact iratim
(m m m, 1 Jul 62 OOOOOOOOOOOOOO'OOOOOOOO...

WEST HIROPB
ITALY

Preparatiom for Getting Deep-Seabed Mining Under Way in 1990':
(“38311.0 Moreno; m, 211 m 82) oooooooocoooooooooo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WORLDWIDE AFFAIRS

USSR 1'0 LIFT OMSK mam P188916 MN IN 1983

m270456 Tokyo ASAHI salmon in Japaneee 25 Jun 82 warning Edition p 1

[Text] The Soviet Union has decided to lift the 1976 ban on the “hotel: Sea herring fiehing
next year. The herring fiehing in the northern one. with an annual catch of rent of thoueande
of tone. had been a najor part of Japan'e fieh induatry. an the ealnon fiehing wee until the
USSR imposed the ban. It ia unknown if the Soviet Govern-ant will allow Jepaneee fiehernen
to catch herrine in the Northern Sea again; however. if a Japan-Soviet nongovernmental fieh-
ing enterpriae eiailer to the current one on crab fiehing ie eat up on herring fiehing.

f iehery conpaniea in thie country will have acceee to it. Thie wee diecloeed by Sakhalinakiy
Galiepolkoe Chairman Zakharov to ASA!!! Slm'a top officiala when he vieiud the daily'a
aain office in Tokyo on 26 June.

Both the Soviet Union and Japan had been catching herring inthe Mote}. Sea until the arrival
of the f'zoo-eue eee liaite" era. The reaourcea were dwindling becauae of the reckleee
fiahing and there was a threat of extinction. In 1976. therefore. Japan and the Soviet Union
agreed to a total ban on the aunt». herring iiehing; eubaequently. in late 1976. the
Motel: Sea wae nade an ”inland eea" of the USSR by a unilateral zoo-e11. linit declaration
issued by the Soviet Covenant. ‘

The Soviet Union has eince been nonitoring the conditiona of herring reaourcea in the area
by aending out laboratory veetele every year. "Ae e raeult of the total ban on fiehing in
the peat 7 yeate." Chair-an Zakharov eeid. "narked progreaa hae been obeerved in the recovery
of reaourcee and. according to reporta by ecientieta. the fiahing can be reeuned in another
year." Pieheriee cfficiale of Sakhalinekaya Oblaet. acting on recon-endatione. "have
decided to lift the ban on the Motel: Sea herring fiahing. effective next year." he eaid.

According to the Fieheriee Agency. Japan'e Northern See herring catch in 1970 wee 500.000
tone. the Soviet lifting of the ban will pave the way for Japan to eeek reinetateaent of
ite fiehing righta on the baeie of the peat record. Bacauae of the ZOO-nile Soviet eea
linite. however. the herring reaourcea now belong to the USSR and. in thie eituatio'n. it ie
unlikely that the Soviet Govern-ant will readily grant a Jepenaee requeet. Under the cir-
cuaetancee. Japan can coneider a joint venture with the USSR ainilar to what it hee on crab
fiehing. In thie type of venture. Japan contributee what ie called a fiahing cooperation
fund (a kind of fiehing charge) to the USSR for the right to fieh. herring ie a popular fieh
and relatively high-priced in Japan. llany fiehery coepeniee are expected to ehow intereat
in the deal if the "cooperation fund" pay-ant ie within a reaaonable range. Their reeponeee
will be noteworthy.

Hennwhile. according to information obtained by the Pieheriea Agency. the Soviet Govern-ant
authorized herring fiehing by Soviet fieheraen in the Uahotek See only for doeeetic uae.

up to 10.000 tone laat year and 5.000 tone thie year. m1. it ie conaidered quite poeeible
that the herring reaourcea have nade a good recovery an a reeult of the ban. it ehould be
noted that the Jepanaee denand ia aainly for the herring roe. Accordingly. even if the

ban in lifted. the catch will be liaited on herring with roe to prevent an unfavorable

iapact on the reaourcea. Thie meant that the Okhotek Sea herring fiehing. if it eaterialieea.
would have no eignificant impact on the doneetie eupply-deaand aituation in Japan. agency
ofticiola eaid.

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Nuvvrthcicu, the Soviet Union has been trying to sound out Japanese ofticiale on the
m-mihllity of private herring exporte to Japan. This led to speculation that the
Suviet Union. which in suffering from a foreign exchange shortage. is seeking en

opportunity to earn foreign currency. Japan‘s herring catch lest year we: 20.000 tone.
in addition. it iuported 50.000 to 60,000 tons frou foreign countries other then the
Soviet Union.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbun Tokyo Bonehe 1982
cso: 5200/2091.

2
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

'ASAEI' on JAPAN-OPEC nsmm tact turn-non
owozms ‘Dokyo asuu ammo ms in hglieh 1 .m 82 p s

[ASMII sumaun 30 June editorial: . "Piehery Talia with north Korea"]

[Text] The teaporory private fiehery agreement betveen Japan and ﬂorth Korea expired on
June 10. and there in no prospect of ite being renewed. Pyongyang Radio announced a
atoteaent (Intending the withdrawal of Japaneee fiahing boate fro- North Korean e¢onoaic
watere until a new agreeaent la reached.

There le lore to the aatter than the ban on Jepaneee fiahing boate. Although Japan and
North Korea are aeparated by a body of water. the two nationa etill do not have diplomatic
relatione. and the fiehery agreeeent wee the only link between then. Should the agreeaent
be allowed to lapae?

‘lhie private fiehery agree-ant waa aigned on Sept. 5. 1977 between the Japan-north Korea
Piehery Ocuncil and the Choeen Toni (Japan See) Piahery Cooperativee tederation after
north Korea declared the eetablial-ent of a zoo-aue econoeic tone in Auguet 1977. me
tern of validity of the agree-ant wee extended in 1978 and again in 1980.

Under thie temporary agreement. Japaneee fiahing boate of leee than 200 tone were permitted
to operate in the northern econoaic watera outaide the SO-eile military line eeet of the
Korean Penineula. North Korean iiehing boate are not operating of! the Japaneee coaet. and
Japan haa been allowed to fieh in North Korean watere without having to pay chargee; in
other worda. Japan alone ha been benefiting.

Japan had been requesting the extenaion oi the agte-ent ainca laet year. but" llorth Korea
objected on the grounde that Japaneeeliahing boate had violated the agreeaent. in particu-
lar by entering watere ineide the ailitary line. The fate of the agree-ant wee finally
eealed in late March thie year. when the government refueed to allow liyon Chun-kuk. the
leader of the llorth Korean tea- invited to Japan by the Japan-North Korea Priandehip

Pronotion Dietnen'e League. to enter Japan.

The reeeon given for the refueal wee that when liyon viaited Japan in the IWOK‘ of 1981. he
node political etateue'nte that violated the entry per-it conditione. liyon referred to the
confrontation on the Korean Peninaula and South Korea. which ie very aeneitive about euch
utters. proteated to Japan.

Nevertheleee. allowing. thie agree-ant. which had been kept in force for five yeare through
tho eiforte of both Japan and North Korea. to lapae aroueee feare that the private friend-
ahip which hae been built up through the yeara will be returned back to the etarting point.
For the preeent. we ehould like to eel: north Korea to adopt a broader view of the aetter and
to approve of the auto-etic exteneion of the temporary agreement. on the praeiee that eventu-
ally the agreeaant will be changed to a private agreeaent between equale that guaranteee
mutual benefite.

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There have been no diplomatic relations between Japan and North Korea in the 37 years since
the end of ﬂorid "or II. Seventeen years have passed since Japan established diplomatic
relations with South Korea. but the only links between Japan and North Korea are the private

trade and fishery agreements. This is an unnatural state of affaira in an age of inter-
national interdependence.

The governsent's position is that it cannot allow political exchanges with North Korea
unless the latter modifies its virulently anti-South Korea and anti-0.8. policies. but if
the present situation is frozen for this reason. the problems of the imadiate postwar
period between Japan and North Korea will not have ended. in addition. the hopes for peace-

ful coexistence in northeast Asia. which will have to be based on mutual dependency. will
be dashed.

At a time when the desire for greater unity between North and South is growing. Japan would
he justified in studying the possibility of establishing cooperative econonie relations with

the whole of the Korean Peninsula. The Japan-North Korea fishery agree-ant should be a link
toward creating such a peace plan.

COPYRIai‘i‘: Asahi Evening News 1982

CSO: 5200/ 2096

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PREPARATIONS FOR GETTING DEEP-SEABBD MINING UNDER HAY IN 1990's
Milan EUROPBO in Italian 26 May 82 pp 52-53, 55
[Article by Massimo Horello: "The Future Is a Dive into a Mine"!

[Text] Is it a good idea to go down to a depth of 1,000 meters
to collect the precious nodules of manganese, cobalt, nickel
and titanium? Italy has decided to do so. Here is_the why and
how of it.

A violent depression rages in the Strait of s1c11y. The wind blows at

Force 9, raising qumeter waves that break on the pylons of the Italian oceano-
graphic platform harelab 9. The spray goes all the way to the bridge, but on
the third level of the control tower, the technicians on duty sip their coffee
calmly. A complex counterweight system keeps constant tension on the formid-
able anchoring system that ties Harelab 9 to the bottom, 500 meters, down,
avoiding oscillations.

The technicians await a message from Phoenix III, a research submarine used to
sift the bottom of the trench (1,000 meters deep) that separates Sicily from
Africa. Phoenix III is driven by two diesel engines that run in a closed cir-
cuit and can stay on the bottom for 3 weeks with 22 persons on board: naviga-
tion personnel, technicians, researchers. Complex electronic instrumentation
enables the technicians to detect the presence of valuable minerals; this is

the mission of Phoenix III, on which the success of the "Deep Mining" program
depends.

While an inertial-piloting system guides the submarine on the canyon bottom at
a speed of 9 knots, with maximum safety, its headlights illuminate the sur-
rounding area to daylight brightness. In a darker area, the magnetometer indi-
cates an abrupt variation in the magnetic field. The pilot reduces speed and a
technician sends out an articulated arm with a television camera on it: the
macro lens gives an elargement of a kind of dark nut, the diameter of which is
actually no more than a centimeter. The spot on the bottom is a carpet of
these "nuts," and a second arm, carrying a collection basket, takes a few of
them on board. The analysts are able to establish immediately the composition
of these metallic nodules: iron and manganese. The bottom sand is actually
richer, with high percentages of cobalt and titanium-magnetite.

INDI‘OIINCIA1.\EHBINVLN'
base for recovery of metallic nodules. in
v1.11 be like: a platform will re-

dinate the work of deep-diving

his is stat. TWe's Italian

e "Deep nine" program,
he bottom and will coat
hour. cm.

accordance with th
min anchored to t
subnriues, with or ﬁx
FOR‘OFF1C1A1.lEﬂE(NNLY

The data, processed by the on-board computer, are transmitted to Marelab and,
after an initial evaluation, are communicated to the CENRADO (National Center
for Collection of Oceanographic Data) at Trieste. There, the information is
checked and its importance is verified. Just a few hours after a find that
proves promising, the Ministry of the Sea in Rome is already in a position to
give the go-shead for a new phase of study for possible exploitation. The ar—
rangements are transmitted to the third maritime department, which controls the
Strait of Sicily, from which they are forwarded to the men on Marelab 9. In
the cortrol room, the technician on duty turns on his terminal and sees the
time and date appear: 0800 hours/8 May 2002.

All this, then, will happen in 20 years. But it is not fantasy: the technical
and scientific foundations already exist, and there is already the will to get
to the bottom. Marelab 9 and Phoenix III are only the future devlopments of
Marelab l, which is presently in the preproject phase in Tecnomare, and of

PM 1350, the first of the Phoenix class, which will descend into the sea at
Gaeta in a few months for Sub Sea Oil Services of Milan, one of the most impor-
tant underwater-engineering companies.

The projections toward the future arise from the purpose-directed “Oceano-
graphy and Marine Bottoms" project of the CNR [National Research Council],
which has just concluded its 5-year period of activity. The biggest results
come from the "Marine Technologies" project: upgrading of the existing equip-
ment, and the working-out of a standard method for the analyses.

Above all, the basis has been prepared for the creation of a National Center
for Collection of Oceanographic Data. The CENRADO will serve to create a bank
of data on the marine environment and will be responsible for evaluating the
quality of the information, to extract from it, with successive processings,
all possible knowledge about the sea.

Meanwhile, another data bank has been proposed within the operational framework
of the law on protection of the sea (submitted last year); its nerve center
would be shifted to the Ministry of Merchant Marine, and its terminals to the
various maritime departments. The ministry's computer would also monitor all
movement on the sea, and it will therefore be possible to coordinate, from a
single operational center. all the activity of work, transport and, as neces-
sary, rescue and protection.

The researchers of the "Oceanography and Marine Bottoms" project have stressed
the absolute necessity of finding mineral resources within the limits of the
Italian continental shelf. Or, at any rate. of possessing a mining site in in-
ternational waters: for example, in the Atlantic zone, eff Central America,
called the Clarion Clipperton Area. That bottom contains, indeed, the equiva-
lent of all the proven reserves of nickel and manganese known today on land, in
addition to the equivalent of a quarter of the copper reserves and six times
those of cobalt.

In November 1980, SAMIM [expansion unknown] (a company of the ENI [National Hy-

drocarbons Agency] group) acquired a 25-percent share of Ocean Mining Associ—
ates, a very big holding company that isamong the giants of mining exploration.

FOI‘OIIIC1A1.tEni(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In a recent study, 581 foresees that industrial-scale mining of the polymetallic
nodules will begin in the 1990's.

According to the most probable hypothesis, the nodules were formed from the
metals present in the seawater. The micronodules that can be found on the
Italian continental shelf are composed 33 percent of manganese. Our real El-
dorado, though, seems to be the metal-bearing sands, rich in titanium, cobalt,
zirconium, magnetite. Hide-radius reconnaissance of the Italian shelf and de-
velopment of the related technologies are therefore more than justified. It
will, indeed, be no small matter to open up this new mining frontier, because
the environment is the toughest and most hostile that can be imagined.

Platforms and ships equipped with unmanned robot submarines for gathering the
minerals from the bottoms, sometimes at great depths, and also ships for trans-
port of the materials extracted, are needed for mining of the underwater depos-
its. But before this operational phase is started up, preliminary work is nec-
essary: surveying the topography of the bottoms; determination of the geologic-
al characteristics of thc bottom (with a View especially to the anchoring of
the platforms); compilation of an accurate map of the mean and extreme meteoro-
logical conditions; drawing of a map of the marine currents. All this work
will be done by platforms such as Harelab and submarines such as the Phoenix.

Marelab 1 will bea semisubmerged platform of 5,000 to 6,000 tons, capable of
anchoring on bottoms of 2,000 to 3,000 meters or of setting down on shallower
bottoms. It will have a deck of 60 m2 and will have equipment for moving very
heavy loads at different depths, as well as for producing all necessary energy
autonomously. It will house about 100 persons, including technicians and re-
searchers who will have multidisciplinary laboratories at their disposal.

Marelab will have to work in different fields simultaneously: oceanographic ro-
search, verification of data collected by the Seasat satellites, geological nut
geophysical study of the bottoms, diving and work by humans at great depth, re
covery of energy from the sea, extraction of minerals and of geological sam-
ples. monitoring of and protection against environmental pollution. Harelab 1,
whose first installation will be in the Strait of Sicily, should then be fol-
lowed by other operational bases in the open sea, to be used in missions fin-
anced by the CNR and by private industries.

Harelab's "arm" will be Phoenix, the ”multipurpose submarine" that will soon
begin its sea trials: 11.65 meters long and 3 m wide, it weighs 30 tons and can
reach a depth of 350 meters, staying there for 26 hours and covering 250 miles.
The crew will consist of four men, plus four divers housed in a hyperbaric com-
partment from which they can exit for research on the bottom or for any other
operation.

The revolutionary characteristic of PH 1350 is its engine, a l30-HP Fiat Aifo
diesel that functions in a closed circuit: the fuel supplied is a mixture of
oxygen and gasoil, as determined by a computer, and the exhaust gases are
cooled, scrubbed, and subdivided into their components, which are partly re-
cycled and partly expelled.

A series of successors to the PH 1350 is planned also--bigger and more powerful
and capable of reaching greater depths. Thus technology, which today already
has a good start toward results that seemed impossible, will reach the "science
fiction" of the forecasts for 2000.

8
itﬂlfﬂﬂﬂK1A1.USB(lﬁlY
.Hoou Houucou HBOuuonu

.uwoaaunllw umxuwu ﬂﬁkullu "muouuaav
.muo>«ullm ”unawaOIIc “wuwuuasv
:vuuulm unu3bu unaudOUIIN mmuuaaon
noun wuauvbsunnﬂllo can A umJuoavaH
muunasn uza .oauuaBASM oaoakznwudlﬂ
onna mu ozu we acauoom wdoa HAOuH