FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10117
16 November 1981

Korean Affairs Report

(FOUO 4/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONILY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/2
16 Nova:

KOREAN AFFAIRS REPORT

(POUO 4/81)
CONTENTS

SOUTH KOREA

POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

Japanese Paper Cautions on Politicizstion of Aid
(Shinsuke Ssnejius, 17 Aug 81) ..........................

Disuse of Japanese in Korean-Japanese Diplomacy Urged
(Nishiyam Takeshi; MAINE!!! SHIHBUN. 2 8ep 81)

'YOMIURI' Interviews ROK 'Diuident Poet' Kin Chi-ha
(Kikuchi; YOHIURI SHIHBUN, 2 Sep 81) ....................

-a- [III-ASIA-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

S.KOREA/POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

JAPANESE PAPER CAUTIONS 0N POLITICIZAIION OF AID
Tokyo ASAHI SHIHBUN in Japanese 17 Aug 81 p 1

[Article by Shinsuke Samejima, chief staff researcher: "Politicitation of Aid to
Korea"]

[Text] Japanese aid to the ROK is on the may to becoming political; ROK arguments
that such aid would be a “compensation for security" and "a partial standin for
defense spending" are being heard frequently.

Recently. Deputy Prime Minister Shin made the following statement to a group of
reporters visiting the ROK at the invitation of the Koreans.

"The peace of the ROK affects Japan directly. It is desirable for Japan to give
economic cooperation as reciprocal payment for the ROK's contribution to the peace
of Northeast Asia."

Emergence of Security Viewpoint

There are two main problems connected with the large-scale aid to be sought from
Japan by the ROK on the occasion of the Japan-30K foreign ministers' conference on
the 20th and let.

The first problem is that Japanese economic aid, handled so far at the working level,
is about to take on a strong political coloring with the addition of the viewpoint
of security. In the discussions about aid between the two countries these last few
years, the details of the ROK economic development plan were made clear by working-
level probing and negotiations, and the Japanese aid plan was determined in response.
This time. it may be taken directly to the political level, at the foreign ministers'
meeting, without going through hardly any of this process. An aggressive postune«
on the part of the ROK is evident. It is aiming at politicisation of aid.

The second problem is that the amount of aid requested is likely to be exhorbitant.

If we differentiate by referring to government development aid (ODA) centered on
long-term low-interest borrowings as "aid“ (what the ROK calls public borrowings)

and commercial loans from the Export-Import Bank or city bank as "economic cooperation"
(what the ROK calls commercial borrowings), the amount of aid to be requested by the

ROK is expected to be as much as $6 billion over 5 years, beginning next year.

1
FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This would by $1.2 billion or 210 billion yen per year. The amount of aid for the

last couple of years has been 19 billion yen (approxinately $86 million) annually.
That means that it will jump to 10 times the current figure.

Fear of Foreign Policy Change

Actually. a more difficult problem for Japan than the size of the expected fund

request is the desire of the Koreans to approach the problem from a political point
of view.

The problem of the amount of money can be largely handled in discussions and
negotiations on the working level. no matter how large the total amount of the aid
and the economic cooperation. by saying: "The aid will go this far. After that
commercial sources must be used." The ROK is a semideveloped country with a per

capita GNP of over $1.500 per year. It is easy to argue that there is a natural
limit to aid.

However. the ROK's presentation of the problem. as it seeks to politicize the aid,
has an implication that inevitably threatens to shake the foundations of Japanese
economic foreign policy. wnich has been devoted solely to economic aid. If this
argument of "security compensation" or "reciprocal payment" is accepted without
resistance by Japan. there is a danger that Japanese foreign policy will move far

beyond the problem of aid. Once it changes. i believe it will be impossible.to
go back.

I wrote that Japanese aid has been "devoted solely to economic aid." However, there
are some who would disagree with this view. Certainly, Japanese aid has been
directed selectively toward developing countries which are strategic targets for the
Western camp within the overall framework of the cold war between East and Best.
Using the Southeast Asian countries as examples. we can observe that the yen loans
to Indonesia began after the Suharto government took over. The aid to Thailand
expanded when the American military got bogged down in Vietnam and began to pull out.

However. if we look carefully at the content and purpose of the aid. we can say that
it was generally economic aid for economic development and stability of the
livelihood of the people of the country involved.

Even though the general framework of the East-Heat cold war existed. politics was
always pushed into the background at the stage of discussion of aid problems, and
from the point of view of the North-South problem economics was always brought to
the fore. At least this was the previous strategy of Japanese aid. The important
thing is that reasons such as "the safety of Japan" or "the security of Asia" were
eliminated from the Japanese position when actually giving aid.

Now Is the Time To Establish Principles

The ROK has raised the banner of "security" to attack the Japanese fortress flying
the flags of "economic aid" and "the North-South problem." The ROK has brought

two large signboards to the base of the fort. One shows a graph of its poor
economic growth, which fell last year. for the first time. to minus 5.7 percent.
The other depicts a firm handshake between the presidents of the ROK and the United
States. with a smaller picture of a handshake between the American president and
Prise Minister Suzuki .

2
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USI20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we look carefully outside the fortress, we can see the flag of the Philippines
flying in the distance. In January this year. when Prime Minister Suzuki visited
the ASEAN countries. President Marcos told him: ”The 0.5. bases in the Philippines
contribute to the safety of Japan," indirectly asking for increased aid. It may
be an exaggeration. but it seems that we are surrounded by a chorus of voices
proclaiming Bast-Heat confrontation and the need for security in the Hestern canp.

I used the phrase "the fortress of Japan," but it can hardly be maintained that
there has been a solid concept with a clear view of the North-South problem behind
Japan's aid policy. Another ominous fact is the strong posture of the United
States, with which Japan has recently reconfirmed an alliance relationship.

The Unites States places great importance on political aid which gives overwhelming
priority to security considerations. However, we must not forget the American
security assistance has almost never been successful. either in Latin America or in
the three countries of Indochina.

Japan seems to be comfortably enjoying peace and prosperity. however. it lust gain
a deeper understanding and awareness of the economic difficulties of neighboring
countries. I believe that it is necessary to build up the viewpoint that policies
which emphasize "North-South" over "Best-Heat" are the real road to peace and
safety. The present problem should force us to consider this anew.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shimbun Tokyo Honsha 1981

9651
CSO: 4105I-21

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. KOREA/POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT

DISUSE 0F JAPANESE IN KOREAN—JAPANESE DIPLOHACY URGED
Tokyo MAINICHI SHIHBUN in Japanese 2 Sep 81 p 5

[Article by reporter Nishiyama Takeshi: “To Commence a New Era of Japanese-
Korean Relationship, Eliminate Japanese Language Diplomacy Above All")

[Text] This summer several groups of Diet members visited South Korea one
after another. In South Korea generational change among members of the
legislature is said to have been rapidly advanced by the birth of the Chun
Doc Hwan administration. Members of the "Korean language generation," who
received anti—Japanese educations after the war and do not understand the
Japanese language, have become the numerical majority in the South Korean
Parliament. Though only for a brief period, I accompanied a Komei Party
group visiting South Korea. In covering the story, I have come to ask how
long the old form of exchange in the Japanese language will last if we take
into account the actual situation of generational change in South Korea.
After all, does not diplomacy between Japanese and South Korean parliamentarians
in the Japanese language narrow the scale of exchange between Japan and

South Korea in the long run? I think we should make a new start in Japanese-
South Korean relations by abandoning "Japanese language diplomacy."

The Chairman of the Republic of Korea-Japan Parliamentary Union Who Did Not
Come to Offer a Greeting at the Airport

An "incident" occurred in the rush of the visit to South Korea. On 14 July,

a group led by Ken Yasui, the former chairman of the House of Councillors who

has been newly elected chairman of the Japan-Republic of Korea Parliamentary
Union, arrived at Kimpo Airport. However, Mr Yi Chae-hyong, the chairman of

the Republic of Korea-Japan Parliamentary Union, did not show up at the airport

to offer his greetings. A South Korean newspaper reported this fact with the
comment that "It is time to establish a new relationship between Japan and

South Korea. Chairman Yi should have gone to the airport to offer his greetings."
It also criticized his "impoliteness." I personally met the South Korean

newspaper reporter who wrote the article. When I inquired, he explained as
follows:

'kmong the supporters of Chairman Yi, there is a group who hold strong anti-
Jopanese feelings. If Mr Yi had gone to the airport for greetings, he would
have stirred up the opposition of these supporters. In any country, a
legislator depends on votes."

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If he had gone to the airport. his appearance would look like polishing an apple
for Japan. Although he occupies the position of chairman of the Republic of
Korea-Japan Parliamentary Union--the "face of South Korean side in parliamentary
exchanges--he had to be aware of the "anti-Japanese feelings" of his supporters.
Of course, Mr Yi was constantly with Chairman Yasui during the rest of his stay
in South Korea. Can it be said that "not going to offer greetings" is one
aspect of caping with Japan that cannot be discussed apart from a dark history?

Japan controlled the Korean Peninsula for the 36 years prior to the end of the
war. It has been 36 years since the end of the war. Instead of "the Japanese
language generation" that can understand Japanese, in South Korea today "the
Korean language generation" that cannot understand Japanese constitutes an
overwhelming majority._ This fact can be proved from the population structure:

people under 30 years old number over 29 million of the total Korean population
of 38 million.

Five Cabinet Members Cannot Speak Japanese

Incidentally. according to a source in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. the
average age of the new administration's cabinet members (23 members) is

50.9 years. younger than that (53.6 years) of the Park Administration's cabinet
members (22 members). of the cabinet members, 11 "can use Japanese without
diffiCulty" (18 in the Park administration), 7 "can speak a little" (4 in

the Park administration) and 5 "cannot understand" (none in the Park
administration).

During their visit of 5 days and 4 nights the Komei Party group visiting

South Korea had a great number of formal and informal talks with many high
officials in the South Korean Government, political parties and economic
organizations. Among them. the speech of Minister of Foreign Affairs No Sin-yong
gave us the impression that "he did not mince his words."

I will quote some of his principal remarks here.

"In South Korea now, people in their forties are the leaders. They are the
ones who objected to the normalization of diplomatic relations between Japan
and South Korea (1965). Have things in South Korea become better as a result
of normalization? He cannot say they have become worse, but has South Korea
not been transformed from a political colony to an economic colony?"

'Me must reflect that in South Korea, too, there has been an impression of
collusion in the relationship with Japan. However. no matter how often the
relatlnnship is said to be a collusion, South Korea after all has a $20 billion
trade deficit, and has only received $1.2 billion in economic ai ."

'Thc method of economic cooperation that borders on looking down on Koreans
and doling out food to them has no effect at all."

Sinve Foreign Minister No is directly involved in the issue of Japanese economic
aid to South Korea which is the present focus of bilateral political relations,
he might haVe had the intention of publicizing the South Korean Government's
tough attitude through meetings with the Komci Party. The Takeiri—No meeting

5
Iron OFFICIAL use ontv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was held on the 26th. 0n the 28th, No Sin-yong was questioned in the South
Korean Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee for 5 hours about "a stumble"
during the previous Japan-Republic of Korea Foreign Ministers' Meeting in
Tokyo. Of the 276 members of the South Korean Parliament, two-thirds are
said to belong to the Korean language generation. The speeches of Foreign
Minister No seem to be made with consideration for the legislators of the
Korean language generat ion.

The Average Age of Members of Parliament Is 47

In the case of the Komei Party just as in the case of the Liberal Democratic
and the Democratic Socialist parties, the counterpart in the exchange of Diet
members is naturally [the ROK members of] the Korean-Japan Parliamentary Union.
Among 276 members of [the ROK] parliament. approximately 190 belong to the
Korea-Japan Parliamentary Union. On 25 March, the first parliamentary election
was held under the Chun D00-hwanadministration. More than 80 percent of the
seats are occupied by freshman members, and the average age among all members
is now 47. The present Korea-Japan Parliamentary Union was organized after the
election. Member of Parliament Pak Kyong-sok, who is the regular executive
secretary of the union, emphasized the following: 'Ve must change the style of
activities to which the old union is accumstomed. We must increase the posts
of vice chairman and vice general secretary and ask members of the opposition
parties to be actively involved. The basic principle of our activities is, in
a word, to avoid approaching Japan as our older brother."

According to member of parliament Pak, members of the union have reached a
consensus on the following:

I. To widen the scale of exchange.
2. To sweep away the image of collusion or closed door diplomacy.

3. To stop restaurant politics involving alcoholic beverages and to act
with good manners.

6. Except for limited occasions, to talk with Japanese Diet members througr
interpreters.

South Korean legislators who used to be called the Japan-Korea lobby have been
displaced from active service through a purge or other reasons. As member of
parliament Pak pointed out, the way South Korean legislators approached the
Liberal Democratic Party group led by Mr Noboru Takeshita. who happened to
visit South Korea at the same time as the Komei Party group. suggested that
they were filled with the spirit of a "new parliamentary exchange."

However. one thing bothered me. That is the problem of language. I wondered
whether or not the principle of talking through interpreters was actually
observed. Among [90 members of the union. only half tend to go and speak to
chase who can speak Japanese. The members of parliament who played main roles
in discussions with the Komei Party group were also those who could speak
Japanese. The members of the Japanese language generation and young members
who have had the experience of living in Japan (many of them are former
journalists) all have a positive attitude toward exchange between Japan and
South Korea. Moreover. they are well informed about Japan.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, as one of them asserted the importance of mutual understanding
between the young people of Japan and South Korea, he proposed the following
specific suggestions. 'Ve cannot erase the history of Japanese and Korean
relations. 80, what is important is if in the Japanese education [system]

this history is taught with critical attitude, and if South Korean education
focuses on grudges and bitterness as the history is taught. In educational
problems of this sort, parliamentarians of both countries have a role to play."
At the same time, however, he confided the following concerns:

'Ve meet Japanese and speak Japanese for the sake of South Korea. But, to
South Koreans this attitude appears to be an attempt to protect our position
by becoming a tool of Japan."

'The generation that understands Japan should speak out openly. When there is
no problem in South Korean-Japanese relations, all is well. But, when
relations deteriorate, we are accused by the young people and placed in a dilemma."

"Right now, the focus of attention is the issue of Japanese aid to South Korea.

When we enter parliament, we are looked upon coldly by members who do not speak
Japanese."

The reason i mentioned the problem of language is that I thought direct exchanges
in the Japanese language actually would obstruct the advancement of Japanese-
South Korean relations. As I commented previously. in South Korea the Korean
language generation is the majority now. The problem is not that the Japanese
language generation is the minority, but that a dialogue in Japanese reduces

the opportunity for contact with the Korean language generation. After all,

we are only informed indirectly of the Korean language generation's views on
Japan and their way of thinking.

"Japanese Can Be Understood in Korea" Is Haughtiness

It is not clear whether Japan or South Korea is responsible for the failure to
consistently observe the consensus of the Republic of Korea-Japan Parliamentary
Union on "conversing through interpreters." However, this problem can be
solved simply by the way in which the Japan side responds. Certainly, there is
an inclination to ask why we resort to such a troublesome method when we can
communicate in Japanese. The Japanese language generation may understand Japan
to a certain extent. Do we want to have an exchange through such a group as a
threshold? Or, even though it may be a roundabout way, do we want to have an
exchange through the Korean language generation as a threshold?

1 think the idea that Japanese can be understood in South Korea is haughtiness
on the part of Japanese who sit atop the dark history. The Japanese language
generation in South Korea will eventually disappear. As a realistic problem, if
we want to expand the exchange of legislators between Japan and South Korea, we
must start an exchange based on the position of equality. In order to do as,
first of all we must begin by respecting the language of our counterparts.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichi Shimbunsha 1981

9896
030: 4105/256

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

S.KOREAIPOLITICS AND GOVERMENT

'YOMIURI' INTERVIEWS ROK 'DISSIDENT POET' KIM CHI-BA
0H060632 Tokyo YOHIURI SHIHBUN in Japanese 2 Sep 81 morning edition p 7

[By Correspondent Kikuchi]

[Excerpts] Seoul. l Sep--South Korean ”dissident poet" Kim Chi-ha (autonym:
Yong-ii), well-known to the world for his settical poems "five thieves" and "wild
rumor." met with a YONIURI reporter (correspondent Kikuehi) recently and described
his present state of mind.

It has been almost 9 months since the 60-year-old poet was released from prison on
11 November 1980 with the execution of his prison term (20 year) suspended. During
this period Kim has avoided meeting with outsiders as much as possible. This is
the first exclusive interview he has given any mass media representative, Korean or
foreign, in the last 5 years and 9 months, including the time he was in prison.

The question and answer session in the interview with Kim Chi-ha follows:

[Question] Y0u seem to be in good spirits and I am happy about that. How have you
been getting along these days?

Kim: I am living at my house in Honju, Kangwon Province, with my father, mother.
wife (Yong-chu. 35). and son (Won-p0, 2d grade). I am painting orchids every day
and drinking as much as I can afford to buy. I am being paid 200,000 won (80.000
yen) a month from the church and for the remainder of expenses I support myself by

growing vegetables and doing other things. My health is excellent. I like a stray
dog, habitually wander wherever my whims take me.

[Question] There are many people in Japan who are worried about you.

Kim: They do not need to worry about me. Beginning long ago. Japanese intellec'uals
have been offering to help me, saying: "we want to help you." But I have always
told them: "There is no way you can help me." All the hardships which we are now
suffering originate in the division of the country. The root cause of this lies in
Japan's 36 years of colonial rule. Japan has built up the stability it enjoys

today at the expense of those hardships.

[Question] In Japan. your name along with that of Mr Kim Tee-Chung is regarded as
a symbol of the dissidents during the PAR era. What do you think of Hr Kim Tee-Chung?

8
FOR OFIWCIAI.USE()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Klm: i do not read newspapers nor watch television. Therefore. I am not certain
of what has become of Mr Kim Tae—chung and why. That is something I have nothing
to do with.

[Question] Do you think that you were imprisoned for nearly 6 years simply because
you carried out critical activities through literature?

Kim: No, I think that probably the Federation of Democratic Youth and Student's
incident had something to do with it. But I w0uld like you to refrain from asking
me such a direct question.

[Question] in the future are you plannnig to refrain from engaging in political
speeches and actions and concentrate on creative work instead?

Kim: Politics is a petty thing, as small as a fingernail chip. Of course, politics
is undoubtedly an important thing but I now clearly realize that it is not an
important matter for man :0 live. Hhen something goes wrong, I will shout: "It is
wrong!" But, is it not human nature to do so? In the past I tended to concern
myself too much with politics but I think as a man I have grown more nature. For
thousands of years the masses have survived even in the history of hardships. It

is a cock and bull story that intellectuals. men of letters and religionists should
lead the masses.

[Question] What is the hope you have for your future life? "hat is the theme of
the novel you are now writing?

Kim: Hope? For now, I have no particular schedule. Well, i will be different
eVery day and live life the way a river finds its way. I do not consider myself a
man of letters. I would rather liken myself to a mendicant. while I was in prison
I saw a large-sized image of the woman's womb in my mind. when "the positive" or
the male dominates "the negative" or the female, there can be no harmony. A new
matriarchai society which is based on equality of the sexes must come. This is

the theme of the novel I am new writing. I am planning to entitle the work "in
search of the lost abdomen." I have written about 500 or 600 pages. It will be
an astounding "tripe" which deviates from the beaten track in novel writing.

[Question] You w0uid not like to make political remarks. however. May I ask what
you think of the present relations between Japan and the ROK?

Kim: It is primarily a question which should be answered by either a politician or
an economist. Well, if Japan does not supply money. the ROK will have no recourse
but to follow a self-sustaining policy. This might be undesirable but there might

be no other alternative. Yet. it is considered indispensable for Japan to realize
the need to review its past crimes [against the ROK] from a moral standpoint.

COPYRIGHT: Yomiuri Shimbunsha 1981

(:50: 4105/8 END

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY