FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10375

9 March 1982

Korean Affairs Report

(FOUO 3/82)-

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications con:ain information primarily from foreign
neVspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or EExcerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OE TRIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
KOREAN AFFAIRS REPORT
(r000 3/32)

Comeu‘rs

SOUTH KOREA
POLITICS AllD 00W

Economic Malaise, Workere' Plight, Insurrection Reported
(m1, Feb 82) OOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOIOOOICOOOO000000000900

800N041

Five-Year Plan, $6 Billion Loan Request Analysed
(m0 mm, 16 J“ 82) 0....00.000.00.000...0000......

-a- [III-ASIA-I

roll omcuL us: ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. KOREA/POLITICS MID swam

ammo WISE. NW' FLIGHT, DIW‘IIOI! mom
Tokyo 5m: in Japanese Feb 82 pp 171-179
[Article by T.K.: "Undininishing Light”-News from 30K]

[Excerpt] Reports of a dark econonic situation continue. The reports say that

the "henorrhage of exports" of 'inportent industrial products such as color tele
television sets. passenger cars and cement continues at prices ranging from 62 to
73 percent of the cost of production. The newspapers say that free January- through
October of 1981, payments on interest on foreign debt alone reached 82.8 billion.
and that this is an increase of 63 percent over the previous year. In addition.
the trade deficit in 1981 will reportedly reach $5 billion.

"The hemorrhage of exports" is having its effect upon the donestic nrket prices
of manufactured products. These prices are two or three tines the price of
exports. The dollars earned through exports are cycled to pay for inports, and
the price of imported products has to be high.

'Purthersnre, in the midst of recession and inflation, the number of unpaid bills
is increasing. The aeount of defaulted notes in October was 8.8 billion won, the
highest total recorded in 1981. Meanwhile, wage increases in 1982 will reportedly
be hald'down to 10 percent, but inflation will be in mess of 30 percent. that
is to be done about this discrepancy?

Although the price at which the government buys rice will be raised 14 percent.
the price of fertilizer is rising rapidly. It is an extrenaly high, 68 percent
higher than the international price. Because of this, even the newspapers
finally could not stand by without raising the alarm over the situation. The
chemical fertilizer plant is, so to speak, the illegitimate offspring of the
multinational corporations. The agricultural cooperatives are under obligation
to take 90 percent or nore of the plant's production and have guaranteed a profit
of $2 million per year for 15 years. Gulf Oil and the others which invested
$10 nillion on the basis of this guarantee have already gotten a ”return" which
totals three tines their investnent. Furthermore, since the facilities are old
and cannot export, there is excess production. Because of conditions such as
these, the multinational corporations do their utmst all over the world to
support corrupt regines which make such profits possible. They also approach
politicians in their own countries to get then to support these regines.

- 1
roe omcm. use ONLY,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the farmers and the coma people not weep over poverty and inflation.
Furthermre, it is reported that because of the shortage of government funds, even
the government's rice purchases are not moving forward and the far-are. suffering
under the burden of the agr cultural cooperatives' debts, have begun to sell rice
at a loss. There has been whispering in- the streets about whether it is possible
to get safetly through next spring in this economic situation. Because of this,
the government is nervous about some by the workers. The govern-sat has continued
its large-scale arrest and imprisonment, mstly out of concern that the intellec-
tuals, and particularly the students, night spark activity on the part of the
workers.

The insecurity of the Chun Doo-hwan faction in this situation seens to be beyond
imagination. It is said that the answers of the faction have mde it known to
those around then that their very lives are at stake. Their rule is rooted in
insecurity and fear of the people. Therefore they cannot nuke caln. rational
:ecisions. Also. they try to lake the people afraid and unable to nske rational
ecisions.

One old person who was daring smugh to retire co-anted deploringly on the
situation as follows:

"They nobilized the newspapers and used any beautiful words. They promised not
only liberation from war and poverty but also liberation froa political oppression.
But, in fact, the oppression only increases. Host incidents go entirely
unreported. When it seems this night be the case, once in a while they give

only a brief report that students at some university have been sentenced for so
many years in connection with a demnstrstion. They pretend that in doing this
they are even reporting demonstrations. Their propaganda says that the rice
harvest .is good this year. In fact, however, even the govern-ant admitted that
the harvest will not be as great as the average yearly harvest for the past 5
years. They said they would provide scholarship noney for one-third of the
college students, but in fact they have sorely exellpted one-tenth of the students
fros half of their fees. Since this is supported not by govern-eat subsidies but
by the students the-selves. it anounts to nothing lore than taking away an munt
equivalent to 5 percent of the fees paid by other students. Their propaganda says
that they have liberalized student exchange and study abroad. Actually. they
have suppressed both coupletely and are sorely sending training groups abroad for
short periods every now and then for the sake of political show.

"Everything runs this way. Possibly because they are military people. they want
to say their tactics have succeeded when there are te-porary results iron their
propaganda. They ordered cospulsory sdnission of an additional 30 percent over
the authorised nude: of students and were threatening to she this excess 'drop
out' before graduation. At this tine, however, they are reportedly letting the
universities handle this because the setter seeaed about to become a social
problen. If there are lore than the authorised nuﬁer of students at graduation
tine, the excess students are to be given a 'certificste of comletion of
studies.’ now does that differ from a diploss? hrthermre. it is said that in
order to elininste even a few sore students fro. the 30 percent, strict political
surveillance is carried onand students are expelled free the universities if
they utter even a word of coaplaint. This is excessively irrational and
arbitrary. It is like what was done under inerial Japanese rule, when people

roe uracil. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were punished inadistely if they inadvertently started. to speak Korean. 1 do not
know what to call this unheard-of sort of politics and education. There is
probably nothing to call it eacept gang rule."

The old nan went on to say- that it "is truly absurd" that in addition to everything
else, at the and of last year when prices were rising the govern-ant raised the
charges for railway and other public services across the board. and because of

the increased service charges,- the prices of nenufactursd products rose.

"Our pocketbooks are certainly suffering because the regime continues to waste
apney. In Korea. politics usually cane first and the aconony cane afterward.
Politics did not support theeconony. But this Chun faction is even worse.
Overseas, the situation is that politics has been the salesun for scone-ice. _
At this tine Korea certainly needs flexible decoratic politics for the sake of its

econoay. but the politics are e couplets aass. Korea is like Poland, full of
contradictions .

"The core the Chun faction does, the worse the problena becons. The system of
having students in excess of the authorized atudentbody drop out of the
universities seen- to have failed. 0n the grounds of preparing for the Olywics.
they have imposed stiff penalties for throwing away cigarette butts or being
careless about street-crossing regulations. This scene to be something they
learned froa Singapore; nothing of this sort has been done in this country for a
long time. They have been pushing the police by assigning quotas for cases, but
this will break down, too. There is no instance where a measure of this kind has
been continued by the governnam when there is no cooperation at all free the
people.

"The government seys it will abolish the evening curfew. which has existed from
just after liberation up to the present. and it will begins systee of local
sutonony. These are benefits given to the geople in an attqt to win popularity.
They say they will change the things which have been necessary up to now to
maintain a dictatorial regiss. They think that if they do not do this they will
not retain power. One wonders, however. how long things which are supposed to be
changed will go on. ‘Just when it steal they will make the change. they always
create a 'crisis' and the change is reversed overnight. Local eutonony and so
forth will probably end up as nothing but ewty words. If this happens. there
will be further resentnent that the promise was nothing more than shouting. In
fact. given the situation in the fare villages, I do not know what would happen
if local autonony did cone about. If, however, local autonony is not put into
effect, there nay be another explosion. 0n the other hand, the govern-est says
it will intensify the "Senaul" novuent (this neans 'new village'). The president
has appointed his own brother Kin KyOng-hwan as director of this novenent. To
talk about simultaneously having liberalization and cowulsory organization is to
make pronisea which are filled with contradictions. It is a case of being wrong
whichever way they go. Disorder will set in while they alternate'between loosening
and tightening up. Disorder will result from challenges fron outside. It is said
that in 1979 Chun originally conferred with No T'ae-wu (cos-lander at the ties of
the then 9th Division) and brought about the caup d'etst when he heard. just after
Psk Chong-hui's death, that he was to be denoted from chief of security to
Peek Yong-to (a snail island facing the northern part of the west coast).

’

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Furthermore, he made a user with the butchery in Kwangju. There was absolutely

no vision and no political ability or fir- intention. New corpses are still being
found at Kwangju. Although the people of the city openly criticize Chun and his
faction as though the town were a liberated zone. there is no way for then to take
action. This could suddenly becone the atnosphere all over the country. I have

a feeling there would be no way for the United States or others who have conpletely
supported the gang to save it."

It see-ed as though the old nan could go on indefinitely. In fact, at this tine,
rather than concentrating its power on shifting to inlenentation of any
progressive progran, the Chen faction is afraid of a popular uprising and is
throwing all its effort into policies to counter such a rising. however, it is
not conceivable that neans other than oppression by physical neans would be
effective. Therefore they are nost afraid that the workers will join together
with the intellectuals and students. The Chun faction nay have learned this from
the situation in Poland. In this context they fabricated the so-called ”National
Denocratic Labor Federation" and National Democratic Student Federation"
incidents, which involved nainly the Kwang hin Se publishing house.

Of course, the several thousand students who were driven out of the universities
and the students who were inpriaoned and released have not been given a nornal
place to work. They go into the factories and the fare villages. They lust do
this even to secure a nini-un daily subsistence. The labor unions are either
languishing or under the government's influence. The intellectuals who up to this
point had expressed interest in labor problens have becone silent. Because of
this, the young students go into the factories with the idea of enduring the
suffering of the workers. They will share their awareness of the problens with
the workers who have already begun to be fully aware.

In the case of the So T'ong wig factory. there were 900 workers, nostly fenale.
Until March 1980 their wages started at 1100 won per day (a daily wage of 380 yen)
for an average of 12 to 16 hours of work a day. Then. in April .1981, job action
for a 30-percent increase in wages was started, but when the police intervened,
just as it seeoed that the issue had been settled at 23 percent, the leaders of
the union were arrested on the grounds that hard-line bargaining with the conpany
president was an act of violence. The union paper Sang Nok Su was declared
illegally published material. In this way. eight persons were charged,
incarcerated and tortured severely. Included snong these eight persons was Yi
ﬂak-hi, who had been driven out of the Planning Experts Co-ittee of the head-
quarters of the Textile Worker's Union. he was said to have violated the article
concerning "Prohibition of Intervention by Third Parties" in labor noveaents
because he explained to the woesn workers the "Denand for Increased Wages."
which was an official publication of the union, and because he was involved in
nanuscripts for Sang Nok So. This is the first case of a violation of the
”Prohibition of Intervention by Third Parties" in the labor law devised by the
Chun faction.

In her appeal, the wife of Chong Sun-hi asked whether workers have the opportunity
to receive education and the right to hold dialogue with soneone to receive
advice. She pleaded as follows:

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Is it intervention by third parties when scholars write books about labor
questions. when professors write on labor questions in the newspapers, when people
with brothers and sisters who are workers discuss labor issues or when pastors
hold a dialogue with workers in order to do missionary work in industry?"

I have in my possession an appeal by Chang Sun-hui which says: ”Why mast workers
starve because of the law?" This is an appeal published by a women who had
formerly worked at Sam Rip Foods because she had been put out of the company on
allegations of violating the "Labor Standards Act." I will cite a section in
which she describes the environment at Sam Rip Poods, where several thousand

people are employed.

"Excessively harsh wage levels and verbal abuse ere co-on. In sumsr, the work-
place is a steam bath without a single fan. In winter, the room temperature is as
low as in a refrigerator roon. The roof leaks terribly and machines are used to
bail out the water. Even now the floor is such that the workers have to stop
working sometimes so that the water can be cleared out. Because the sanitary
facilities are too terrible for a food company. the comany was cited by the city
of Seoul last September for poor sanitary conditions. The people from the Labor
Ministry who came to investigate saw the 'dormitories which are like chicken
coops' and went so far as to say, 'Sam Rip Ponds mast be called to account for
this.‘ This incident tells what our working conditions are like."

Far from rectifying this situation, the Chun faction regime has cooperated in
driving out the defenseless workers because they resisted these conditions.
Therefore, when they say "the welfare of the people is the building of the nation"
and "all harmony among the people," one Inst wonder what on earth their . _
intentions are. Even though they would consolidate their own power by rectifying
this sort of situation, it appears that they may take sadistic pleasure in keeping
the workers' dissatisfaction vt the exploding point and keeping it in check with
bloody repression.

The appeal continues as follows concerning the circumstances in which the petition
had to be made to the Ministry of Labor.

"For 2 weeks last May, the 1.50 workers in the Ice Foods Department were made to
work 12 hours a day. In June, however, when the rains suddenly came, the workers
were sent home almost every day. when we went to work through the, thunder at

10 pm, soaked by the pouring rain, we were sent home. when we came in at 6 an
we were sent home. When we came in at 6am, rubbing our eyes in the dawn, we were
sent home. Since when this happened our wages were cut to 60 percent, our daily
wage dropped from 2079 won (abOut 670 Japanese yen) to about 1200 won. Subtract
300 to 400 won in transportation expenses fron it...what is left? It should have
been possible to tell us in advance so that we could save this transportation
expense. Going out through the company gates, soaked in the evening rain, I felt
as though my heart would break when I thought of the loyal workers who are always
make to come to work only to be sent home. Boviever, when the rains ended, the
12-hour operation began in such heat that it was hard to breathe. There were

no fixed mealtimes. We were given a meal at around 9 am and we got a meal about
5 pm, but we ate in shifts. It was more like stuffing in our food on the run than

like eating. "

5
son omcm. use ONLY-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is behind the propaganda, "Health First, Sam Rip Foods." If a worker
conplains to the Ministry of Labor about the situation, the Ministry of Labor
gives the worker's nane to the cowany and the worker is fired. because of this,
Chung had to cry out: "This is the Fifth Republic, which said that the workers
who sweat would be given the price of their sweat and that a just society where
law and order are preserved would be built. would the just society and the
welfare state we are seeking be blind to the illegal actions of the comny, which
was wealth and power, and trample in this way upon the workers who nade their
appeal in an orderly way?’

This woman worker has resolutely decided that she cannot be silent in a situation
in which. as the proverb says, "the law is far away and the fist is close by."
What will happen to this wonan next? wm it be terrifying violence or imprison-
Ient? This should be watched.

In Pusan, 15 Young people who belonged to the Good Books Union were arrested. A
look at the indictnent of one of these persons shows that he had an interest in
labor movements and had read improper literature. Included in this inproper
literature were many publications which formerly had been published in Korea and
publications concerned with economics which had been published in Japan. Even
"Hhat Is History?" by 5.“. Carr was anong the inroper literature. A look at the
facts in the indictment shows that the charge was merely that by putting together
10,000 or 20,000 won from club dues. into which they each paid 1,000 won' a mnth,
and from the salaries of those who were teachers, four or five persons would get
together, read the so-called improper literature and discuss the political
situation. The charge says that the person must be inprisonsd on the grounds that
prior to January of this year the neetings constituted "asseably without permission
of the martial law authorities," and in February and thereafter, when aartial

law had been removed, the meetings became "assemblies which were cause for concern
about social unrest."

Countless people have been tried by laws which no one outside the group which made
the laws would accept. Then propaganda use has been nade of such incidents by
labelling then 'coamamist, when possible.

A fact which to sone extant nay have been t0uchad upon earlier is that the
"secret" document. "The Existence of Procomnist Students and Organizations with
Rebellious Ideologies as Seen in the Course of Investigations and Trials
Involving Leftist Incidents at Universities," which was produced by the "Section
for Research into Students' Ideology, Ministry of Education" in nearly every
instance labels as co-nunist those incidents which even the courts did not find
comnist. Let ne give just two very brief explanations from "Assumption of
Leftist Perceptions and Course of Criminal Actious' which is a record of the "ﬂu
Rim Incident" at Seoul University.

(3) Ryan Hu-hwan:
-Cane from the household of a civil servant who had seven children; because he

was poor, earned his school money by bone tutoring from his junior high school
days.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

-quediately after entering Seoul University in Hatch 1977 joined the club, “The
Society for the Study of Economics in Less Developed Countries" and in the process
of reading such books as "Theory of an Age of Transition" by Yi Yong—hi "whet

Is History?" by 3.8. Carr, "Tonghek and the Toughek hebellion by Kim Sang-k1,

"A History of Social Thoughts" by Hattie, "Studies of the Development of
Capitalism" by Maurice Dobb, came to perceive that the proletarisn movement. which
is the main element in history. is necessary. and became devoted to socialist
ideology.

--In August 1978, joined the "77 Student Guard Underground Organization" and took
a positive part in activities.

(4) Nam Myong-eu:

--Hss the second son in the family of an educator who had two sons end three
daughters; entered Seoul University (Linguistics) in April 1977 and left off his
studies in October 1980 when he was in his fourth year.

--His father was a promoter of education and his mother was a teacher at a state
school.

-Prom his infancy he grew up in impoverished surroundings and developed a deep
dissatisfaction with the social system in which the difference between rich and
poor is conspicuous. Then. in April 1977. at the urging of an older graduate of
his high school. he joined a club, "The Historical Friendship Society," at school
and, through reading subversive books such as "Reason and Revolution” (Harcuse)
and "Theory of the Development of Capitalism" (Sweetie). came to harbor ideas of
substantive resistance to the system.

In the document. the "philosophy of the proletariat" has become "a transformed
Christian ideology which was first introduced by the Reverend Psk Byong-kyu in
the 1970's." The document ignores or distorts the commonly known fact that the
philosophy of the proletariat was not introduced from the outside but is a philo-
sophy which developed in the midst of South Korea's struggle for democratization
and was transmitted to the world outside. The document also ignores the fact
that Reverend Pak is not the philosopher who proposed the philosophy of the
proletariat. The document says that a report which called upon "Beloved Comrade
Kim Il-song" was sent north in the name of "The Central Committee of the
Preparatory Committee of the South Korean People's Liberation Front." The docu-
ment includes the full text of such a report. The fact is, however, that it was
not proven in court that such a report was sent and the allegation was completely
denied. The method is the same as in the case of the poet Kim Chi-ha, in which

a government document was distributed which labelled the man a conmunist but which
bore no relation to what happened in court.

The document also goes on at length about the so-called "assumption of leftist
perceptions and courses of criminal actions“ of Mr Yi T'ai-Psk who had managed
the Kwang Hin 5a. The newspapers in Korea cannot report a word about his trial.
I would, however, like to quote what was said by the mother of this man who was
imprisoned, tortured and convicted in court.

7
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"1 am very grateful that I have a proud son. The newspapers in this country cannot
report a word on this trial. I would like mre people to know the truth about
this incident. I would like to have this made known extensively overseas."

The Imprisoned

The situation of those who are in prison this winter is miserable. They worry
whether they will safely survive the winter.

There is a runor that Kim Dae-jung may be released sometime but that at that point
he will probably be in a condition from which he can no longer recover. The
remains of Yi Chsedmn, who was imprisoned and sentenced to death in the incident
of the so-called “South Korean People's Liberation Front." were turned over to his
family after he reportedly died of illness on 22 November. The funeral was held
on 26 Novedaer and there was a great deal of suspicion about the cause of his
death. Ilia family was not told even the name of his illness. One of the

persons imprisoned in the Kwangju incident suffered paralysis over half his body
and his mind was impaired. It is said that his family met with physicians and his
illness was acknowledged but he was not moved to the sick ward.

Although the number of political offenses is rising sharply and treatment for
these offenses is extremely cruel. South Korean newspapers report that the Reagan
administration has announced: "The current situation in South Korea in connection
with the question of human rights has recently ilproved greatly." lndipantly
wondering what sort of farce is going on, the families of the conscientious
offenders have tried to organise prayer meetings but have been prevented by the
police. Therefore, in October these families issued a statement saying: "Confine
all of us." Also. on 4 December they issued an appeal on "Approaching Mun
Rights week." In this appeal they again criticised the Reagan administration's
support for the Chun government and "approval of the moVemsnt of troops under the
command of joint Korean-0.5. headquarters" in the Kwangju incident. They also
criticized the position taken by the Japanese Government in using the excuse that
it did not know whether the text of the judgment against Kim Dee-jung was genuine.

The appeal by the families of the conscientious offenders on 16 December. which
was sent "to all Christians in Korea and abroad" and which said. "He wish to
worship," was a thoroughly poignant appeal. It lamented the fact thet- it was
prohibited even to hold a Friday prayer service to think and pray about spouses
and children in prison, sick and suffering in the cold. The Friday prayer service
is a prayer service which was continued under the Pak regime to the very and.
An executive in the Ministry of National Security and Plans (the' former KCIA) is
said to have arrogantly remarked that. of course, "if the Friday prayer service
were allowed, not only the families of those in prison but also the families

of expelled students, teachers and workers and even the families of former
politicians and government officials would probably join in."

The families' struggle for the Priday prayer service is amazingly strong. 0n the
day selected. the authorities were to keep the families under surveillance
beginning at 4 am. when the evening curfew is lifted. and to restrain them by
violent force. Therefore, the families stayed over from the day before in a
Christian assembly hall. 0n Pridey the police were everywhere inside and outside
the Christian assembly hall. that happened then. on 26 November, was such an

FOR omceac USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uproar that the wife of Professor Ti nan-yang was knocked down and her teeth
broken. It sees- that in this harsh winter the wives have been trying to wage a
nrtal struggle for freedom of worship.

The Catholic churches in Mngju reportedly send constant letters of appeal for
release of political prisoners. The mass for human rights celebrated on 7 December
in the Catholic churches of Mngju was heavily attended. Because of this, agents
have also been regularly stationed in the noun Catholic churches. It is said that
17 agents move in and out of Kwangju and elsewhere and that 11 are always at their
posts. In Hokp's. too, the pastors of Protestant churches were rounded up and
beaten. The reason for this is not known. but is is speculated that intimidation
was the purpose.

For some reason or other. the Victory Union of the United Churches was recently
ordered disbanded. Since the union was not very popular. it would seem that the
Chun faction was trying to show publicly that it had washed its hands of the union.
A journalist friend consented as follows about the recent situation:

"Because neither exports nor domestic sales are doing well. firm are troubled

by accumlating inventories. The labor problem are by no means normal. Japan
is probably going to assist this tyrannical regime with $6 billion. Japan has
its own interests in doing this. Nevertheless. things will probably still be bad.
The people have no faith at all in the regime.. The regime nde lunch of its -
acononising on state expenditures by eliminating the posts of high-ranking
officials. In fact. however. they forced out old people and installed young
substitutes in whom they have a stake. Everything runs this way. The regime also
drove poor people out in the niddle of 'winter by tearing down shantiee on the
grounds that they were unauthorized buildings. This is the first time a
government has been this cruel. why would the government carry out such a heart-
less act when no previoua government did such a thing in midwinter? Probably, only
as a show of strength.

"In the organs of public expression. the gang from the Ministry of Security and
Planning has moved in and is in place at the bureau chief level. There is no I
reason to expect that these people can administrate. They sit around and sleep.
The people who were drawn over to the government from Toyo Television and Toe
Broadcasting are now the goat capable people at the government's Central
Television. Central Television collects a viewing charge and ashes coularcisls.
so it can use money freely. Still, since the people who work there would always
rather take other jobs if they had then, morale is not high. This can probably
be said of all the officials. The faction is like oil floating on water.
Therefore, while on the one hand they repress expression of ideas. on the other
they give out candy. They provide many benefits for their first-line reporters,
whoae children's school bills are paid if they simpley submit a voucher. bioney
is generously available for scholarships, trips abroad and so forth. How long
can the regime stay in power when it does such things?

"In October, the families of the conscientious offenders mat with the 0.8.
ambassador to Korea. Reportedly. throughout the meeting the ambassador
consistently explained that "America does not have influence over the Government
of South Korea." The families said that America had acquiesced in the butchery
at Kwangju and pressed the ambassador by asking whether the 0.8. Messy did not

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

maintain silence about the appeal mde by the people of Kwangju to the 0.8.
Government and did not approve of the attack by the army. The adassador evaded
the question by saying that he had not been present at the time, but reportedly
his face became red and he was irritated by the question. He says that he does
not like to hear people say. 'Yankee go hone,’ but he probably will not be able
to avoid hearing it now.

"Recently, a new warden is said to have taken over at the Ch'ongju prison and the
treatment of Kin Dae-jung reportedly has suddenly become worse. Kin is allowed
only one interview a month. he is given only three blankets. And so it goes."

There is no end to stories like these. Many young people who have gone underground
are not stopping their activities. I wish sincerely to ask assistance for these
people from their friends abroad. There are also problems with legal expenses

for criminal offenses. At half the regular legal fee, about $00,000 won (about
160,000 yen) was paid for the first hearing, and reportedly 300,000 won was paid
at the time of the appeal.

I would like to relay one more poignant appeal to our friends abroad. I wrote
somewhat along this line earlier, but a plaintive appeal from a nether will come
closer to the heart.

Her son [won Un-song is a physically disabled person who contracted infantile
paralysis when he was 3 year..- old. In 1975 he was expelled from the university for
leading a demonstration; he joined the United Socialist Party and advanced to the
position of chief of the Labor Bureau. Just after the incident at Kwangju, in
resentment at the holding of the Miss Universe Contest in Seoul, he complained:
"What good is a beauty contest at a time like this?" A friend replied: "1

would be good if someone threw a bonb." Simply because this exchange took place,
he was sentenced by a military court to 10 years in prison. Two witnesses
testified in the court martial, but they were coqletely disregarded. In April
of this year he was subjected to a gang attack by the jailers at Tsejon prison.
His teeth and his back were broken. he is still suffering from the aftereffects
and a complete recovery will be difficult. It is said that the paralysis in the
.lower part of his body could be extended to his whole body. Nevertheless, he is
not allowed even to put on a single sweater in the harsh winter cold. The nether
is crying at this cruel treatment.

As I send you New Year's greetings at the beginning of 1982, I would like to quote
for you one or two paragraphs from the latest letters from Kin Dae-jung to his
wife.

The chrysanthemns are in full, bloom where I go Out for exercise, but they have
only yellow flowers. The flowers I renamber bloc-ed only after a great deal of
hard work was done on them, but thev were full of life and lasted nearly a month
longer than other flowers. This cheers me and nkes ne grateful. whenever I
tench flowers, I renerber conteaplating the flowerbeds at home. when you send
me news of the flowers, I see them in my nind's eye. Nostalgia fills my heart.
There are also tines I think very fondly about the dog, Torutoruri. (From the
opening paragraph of the letter dated 28 October 1981)

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I learned from your letter that the flowers in the beds at hone have all died out.
The flowers here at the prison were finished long before the 20:11. But I recall
about 20 plants which still retain their beauty and to which the bees still cone.
while I consider anew hoe mch significance the devotion and love of a person has
for a flower, I consider again how such sore meaningful it is in the case of human
beings, where ambition and emtion are at work. As you know, I have read any
literary books and I continue to read good literary works. "The Old Man and The
Sea," "Por whom the Bell Tolls." "Farewell to Area." "A Streetcar Nailed Desire"
(he lists 50 Korean and foreign titles: the list is abbreviated here) and other
such good literature serves as lubricating oil which revives dried up stations and
gives vitality and resilience to the psyche. I think that particularly for people
of the older generation. like you and me. it is very necessary to revitalize our '
souls with good literature so that we will have the flexibility of soul to adapt
ourselves to the radical changes of the tines and be able to understand the
thinking of the younger generation and our country-an. I have listed the tales

of these books to reconsnd then to you. (Pros the letter dated 27 lioveeber 1981)

COPYRIGHT: Iwanam Shoten 1982

9111
080: 4105/45

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. ROM/mm

FIVE-YEAR PLAN, 36 BILLION LOAN REQUEST ANALYZBD

Tokyo mo rem: in Japanese 16 Jan 82 pp 64-65

[Text] A year has passed since the birth of South Korea's Chen 'l‘u Ewan government.
Despite initial fears, it achieved a degree of stability ad in January it lifted the
midnight curfew. Mid such a situation, it is fervently seeking a huge $6 billion in
aid from Japan.

Cleanliness highly Assessed

'rhe ain of the Chon 'ru awan' governnent, daestically, has been the realisation of
sociali. and. externally. the raising of South Korea‘s internaticnal status. In the
area of internal politics, in the me of social purificatim it has curtailed the
activities of ease 600 politicians and dinissed 5,000 public service enployees.
thereby raising the banner of social justice and inpressing the people with clean
goverment. ’

Another move was to implant a sense of confidence in President Chen through the
arrest of President Chan's cousin. tho was inlicated with a group of awindlers. and
the ouster of Pak Sei Jik, the capital city security ccnander and President Gum's
righthand than. .

In foreign relations, President Chm's concrete ms are highly assessed. In
February 1981. he visited the United States and net President Reagan stnrtly after
the latter‘s inauguration and a decision was ssde against the pullout of 0.8. ground
forces tron South Korea. In June. he visited the A88”! nations and strengthened
ecmonic relations. including those on arms exports. thereby laying the ground for
elevating the 108's international status.

President Chm's political stance is also exemplified in the cabinet lineup. Cmtrary
to early, expectations of a military government, he installed a cabinet with aphasia
on expert political and econc-ic figures.

Its link with economic quarters is said to be narked by fairness. squidistant
policies are adopted toward finmciel groups.

with the public acceptance of sud: a just political stance, the Chen goverrseent's
foundation has attained greater stability. In particular, in order to avoid any long-
tere rule. he personally set the president's tern of office as 7 years, enacted a
cmstitutional provision against reelection, and nade are that a president could not
undertake a constitutional revisim by hinself. This was intended to show that he had
no intention to hold onto power indefinitely. Thus. President Chen has been able to
gain the people's trust. 12

won orncw. use any
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Emphasis on Exports Unchanged

On 21 August 1981. the delayed public announcement of the Fifth aconalic Social
Development S-Year Plat was made. Its sajor characteristics are conversion from high
growth to stable growth and Iron a government-led economy to a private sector-led
econcny.

While the third and fourth plans placed top priority on growth, the fifth plan's basic
goals are "stability,' 'efficiency' and ”balance," with the word 'grouth' mitted.
While the past goals were an econaaic growth rate of 10 percent or above, the GNP
growth rate under the fifth plan is set at 7.6 percent real annual growth. In
recognition of the evils of structural inflation, the first half of the period
represents an adjustment period, and starting in the second half, attelpts will be
made to achieve a “second leap.”

For realizaticm of the 'second leap,‘ the key point seems to be l'efficiency,"
including improved productivity and rationalizatim of nanagenent. For this reason.
self-aid by the private sector is encouraged.

However, the basic strategy of an export-oriented econaay by nears of heavy chemical
industrializatim remains unchanged. The average annual growth by industry is as
follows: agriculture and fishery, 2.6 percent; social. indirect capital service,

7.3 percent: manufacturing, 11.0 percent; and a projected high growth of 12.1 percent
for the heavy chemical industry.

In exports, a high average annual growth of 20.3 percent is envisioned, climbing
from 21 billion dollars in 1981 to 53 billion in 1986. By type of export items, the
annual growth rate for light industrial products is 16.1 percent, and for heavy
chenical industrial products, 25.7 percent. Thus, efforts are made to maintain an
econanic development that is primarily export-oriented on the basis of the heavy
chemical industrial area.

Key somatic Indicators of the Fifth s-Year Plan
" Rate of average

annual increase,

 

 

Item Unit 1980 1986 1982-1986 (8)
GNP won, in 35.0 53.7 7.6
trillions
Same Dollar, in 574 900 7.6
100 minim
GNP per capita Dollar 1,506 2,170 5.9

I ndust ri a1 structure

Agriculture 6 fishery \ 16.9 14.8 2.6
Mining " 30.7 35.0 10.8
Manufacturing " 29.4 34.0 11.0
(Light industry) " (45.5) (42.0) 9.5
(Heavy chenical) " (54.5) (58.0) 12.2
(Machinery) " (16.7) (22.6) 17.6
Social indirect capital 6 others " 52.4 50.2 7.3

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Top Priority for Machinery Industry Developaent

men urrier the Fifth 5-Year Plan. the greatest effort is placed on the develops-em
of the machinery industry. The goverrsnent considers that the problems of employment
and the international balance of trade in the eighties would be unresolvable unless
the machinery industry were fostered internatimally.

in the course of the Fifth 5-Year Plan. the growth rate of the sadiinery industry
is the highest, with a real annual growth of 17.6 percent. Machinery exports are
estimated to climb frat $2.9 billion in 1981 to $3.26 billion in 1986. The average
annual growth during the period of the fifth plan is extruely high-~31.5 percent.
There are great hopes for sachinery as the future export strategy industry.

In the 1970's, the electronic industry and shipbuilding spearheaded the development
of the sachinery industry. In the fifth plan, for the flourishing of general
machinery, in which huge investments have been made, the sin is to develop it as an
export industry. In the period of the fifth plan, it is noted that anong export
items. the annual groath rate for general machinery is estimated at 43.5 percent.
Calpared to the growth of electronic/electric products with 25.3 percent and transport
nachinery's 35.3 percent. it can be seen that emphasis will be on general machinery.

The machinery industry has profmnd overtones of an arms industry. In order to.
foster the nachinery industry, including the general sachinery industry, South Korea
constructed the Changum machinery industrial base during the period of the fourth
p) an. This base is said to be the fortress for arms production. General machinery
requires huge investments, has a long period of gestation. and the recovery of
investsent can be difficult. It has been said that these are large factors in the
stagnation of South Korea's ecmasy. The purpose of President Chon's ASBAN visit,
it is said, was to help restore the econmy through arms exports. In the indus-
trialization of general nadlinery for exports the development of the arms industry
lies in the background.

Background of the $6-Billicn Loan

During the Japan-Ra! foreig: sinisters' conference in August 1981. South Korea asked
for a huge public loan of $6 billim our the 5-year period of the fifth plan. This
amounts to an mnual average of $1.2 billion. or fourteenfold over the actual 92-80

record of $86 million. Why is South Korea seeking such a huge loan?

South Korea is staking its econosic recovery on the Pifth 5-Year Plan. Hovever.
because of the enormous burden of defense costs. it is beset by a lack of econaaic
development funds. South Korea's defense costs mount to 6 percent of (NP. mich is
more than 35 percent of the national budget. On the other hand. econasic developsent
funds case to only about 20 percent of the budget. As a result. it hopes to obtain
“6.5 billion from foreign sources for the fifth plan, but with foreign debts of

$30 billion outstanding up to 1980. it finds it difficult to raise the huge amount.

For the Chen Tu liven goverment. econcnic recovery is the most isportant subject.

and it must successfully inplesent the fifth plan. But econasic recovery is unachievable
unless acne of the burden of defense costs is diverted to econcnic recovery. It

would even like to ask Japan to assume the burden of defense costs. But since Japan
cannot be asked to assuae sud. a harden in view of Japan's situation, it hopes to

have Japan asst-e the burden of security in the fern of econasic cooperation.

11:
F0! OFFIC‘AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Japan finds this hard to accept because of the huge sun and the security treaty
issue, but it might be willing to loan up to 83.5 billion. it is said. However.

South Korea remains aduaant. One story is that it is backed by the United States
thich is displeased with Japan's defame buildup.

At the same tine. it is said that actual power in the Chen governsent is held by the
non-Japanese speaking “Raoul“ generation. ‘rhey harbor strong anti-Japanese

aentinents and are said to be steadfast in their demand for a 86 billim loan.

The Japanese side has shown some tendency toward concessions, but a minor one wound

probably be rejected. This is because the $6 billicn Japanese loan is counted upon
in the fifth plan.

conuarr: Shukan 'i'oyo Kaisai 1982

9097
C80: 4105/51 “D

15
non omcm. us: ONLY