FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10371

4 March 1982

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION seavuce

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J‘PRS 1/10
4 March 1

USSR REPORT
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

-(FOUO 2/82)

CONTENTS

1m, PRICE, WET In FINANCE

Hays To Increase Efficiency in Capital Construction Reviewed
('1‘.S. Khachaturov, V.P. Kresovekiy; mm AKADMI RAUK 888R,

oct 81) IOU...O'COOOOOIIOOOOIDDOOI.OIOIODIOIOOOOIOOOOO‘COO...O

-a- [III-USSR-3]

ma Amt-v a v "tw- nnn u
FOR‘OF11C1AL.USE!MNLY

INVESTMENT, PRICES, BUDGET 6 FINANCE

HAYS TO INCREASE EFFICIENCY IN CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION REVIEWED
Moscow VESTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 67-76

[Article by Academician T. S. Khachaturov and Doctor of Economic Sciences V. P.
Krasovskiy: "Investment Potential and Its Use"]

{Text} The industrial construction complex, or the complex of capital-creating sec-
tors, is a very dynamic element in the economy's first subdivision. In addition to
the construction industry which carries out construction work and the installation
of equipment, this complex also includes the production of machinery and equipment
for new enterprises or those under expansion and reconstruction and the production
of construction materials and machinery used in capital construction. "The basic
task of capital construction is to increase the nation's production potential on a
new technical basis and to build housing and projects for municipal-household and
sociocultural purposes," state the "Basic Directions of USSR Economic and Social
Development for 1981-1985 and for the Period Up to 1990." The questions of the eco-
nomics and effectiveness of capital investments are at the center of attention of
Soviet science, in particular for the Academy of Sciences. They are studied at the
Economics Institute where there is a sector of capital investment effectiveness, as
well as at the Central Mathematical Economics Institute, the Institute of the world
Socialist System and the Institute for Horld Economics and International Relations.
The Economics Institute studies the ways for increasing capital investment effec-
tiveness, it elaborates the procedures for determining their effectiveness and
solves a number of problems related to investments. Under the Economics Department
of the USSR Academy of Sciences there is a Scientific Council on the effectiveness
of fixed capital, capital investments and new technology. This coordinates research
on these subjects being carried out in the Academy's as well as in the sectorial,
design and other institutes. The scientists are endeavoring to make an appropriate
contribution to solving the urgent capital construction questions and are making
proposals to improve work in this area.

On Capital Investment Planning

Each year our nation uses around one-quarter of its national income for accumulation.
In 1980 the volume of capital investments reached 133.5 billion rubles (including
91.3 billion rubles from national income and 62 billion rubles from the amortization
fund). The share of all the capital-creating sectors in the nation is around 17 per-
cent of the gross national product and 18 percent of national income as well as
around 8 percent of the fixed productive capital, 7 percent of the capital invest-
ments and 18 percent of the total number of persons employed in the national economy.

1
INJR'OFIWCJAL USI2CMHLY
Hm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This impeded the balancing of the plan for the means of labor as well as coopera-
tion between capital construction and machine building. In working out the long-
range plans in which the major social, economic and investment programs are estab-

plex, for mobilizing its reserves and for intensifjing its use. In drawing up the
Comprehensive Program for Scientific and Technical Progress at the USSR Academy of
Sciences and the USSR GKNT [State Committee for Science and Technology], provision
was made to establish the investment complex as a separate section.

For increasing the efficiency of economic potential in the nation and in the complex
of capital-creating sectors, of major significance are the Decree of the CPSU Central
Committee "On Further Improving the Economic Mechanism and the Tasks of the Party
and State Bodies" and the Decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of
Ministers "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Effect of the Economic Mech-
anism on Increasing Production Efficiency and Work Quality.” The actual implementa-

The impact of the new economic mechanism should be manifested in all the basic areas
where the complex of capital-creating sectors is active. Itcan be seen in improv-
ing capital investment planning, the organization and level of designing, materi '-
technical supply, the dates and organization of capital construction, in increasing
the investment role of machine building, in reducing the amount of incomplete con-
struction and the time required to open up new capacﬂzy. The quality of the con-
struction products should be increased and all the major aspects of the investment
process improved. Under present-day conditions, particularly essential ia the ori-
enting of the participants in the complex of capital-creating sectors to turn out a
complete construction product, that is, production capacity and projects that are
ready to operate.

pants in the investment process and the giving up of an orientation toward gross re-
sults in money at each stage of capital construction. It presupposes close coopera-
tion between all the capital-creating sectors and the encouragement of them only for

mobilizing the great resources frozen in the incomplete projects. These measures
should reduce the material intensiveness of construction products, sharply reduce
the use of heavy, expensive reinforced concrete structures, more widely employ local
and light building materials and eliminate unnecessary long-distance shipments of
building materials.

2
FOR OFTTC1A[.USEI)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The planning of current production and capital construction as a single whole pre—
supposes that the ministries and departments are given plan quotas for increasing
products in the required assortment. The ministries and departments themselves de-
termine in what manner this increase can be obtained more rapidly and economically.
that is, whether by reconstruction, technical reequipping of existing enterprises
or by new construction. Thus, the plan is given not for construction projects but
rather for products an! services while the projects are built solely as a means for
achieving the production plan.

Up to the present there has been great concern over the continuing scattering of
capital investments. As a consequence of the excessive amount of "incomplete proj-
ects" assets have been immobilized amounting to the annual capital construction
plan. The growth of incomplete construction, due to the measures adopted, halted in
1980, and by 1983, according to the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress, the task
has been set of bringing its volume down to the normed level, but this task would

be carried out only in the instance that state interests will be strictly followed
in establishing the need for each new construction project.

Ir the aim of rectifying the existing situation, over the next 1 or 2 years it is
essential to convert to the allocating of capital investments not only for the sites
as a whole but also for the projects which ensure the output of products. At the
same time a real concentration of investments will be achieved. In the USSR nation-
al economic development plans it is essential to establish the capital investments
for the major specific economic programs in a separate line indicating the volume of
investments and the completion date of the projects under each program. The techni-
cal and economic bases for the program must be established in special documents.
These should contain information about the amount of planned work, a schedule for
its atep-by-step inplementation, intersectorial ties and deliveries and executors,
calculations for the integral effect of the program as well as plans for the gradual
return of funds as the individual units of the program are completed. here it is
essential to also work out coordinated title lists, in moving from the establishing
of different title lists for the departments to the planning and approval of inte-
grated lists with their economic and technological coordination.

It is also essential to provide for the setting of limit indicators for the full
cost of new projects or limit norms for proportional capital investments which would

ensure the set efficiency of newly built enterprises and employ such norms in the
expert evaluation of the plans and estimates and in bank control over the effective-
ness of the extended credit. For the purpose of sharply reducing the duration of
the investment cycle as well as for preventing premature obsolescence of the enter-
prises the construction and completion of which have been drawn out, it is recom-
mended that thorough consideraticn of the time factor in capital construction be
organised. It is possible to combine individual capital construction stages in time,
for example: research, designing, the construction period and starting up.

Obviously it is time to change the procedure for compiling the standards for the
construction duration of projects. In this regard the question arises of gradually
converting the construction workers to two shifts. But this should be done without
increasing their total number.

3

FOR 0FFNJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

improving Designing

The amount of design and research work (and likewise the amount of money received by
the design organizations) is continually rising in proportion to the increase in
capital investments and the growth of the estimated cost of construction. This
makes it possible for these organizations to freely dispose of the funds and to
carry out plans for projects not included in the construction plan. As a result,
incomplete designing is annually increasing. The number of elaborated designs ex-
ceeds by more than 4-fold the need for design specifications for commenced projects.
At the same time year after year the national economy shows a lack of design speci-
fications for the planned volume of capital investments while many of the leading
construction projects receive their blueprints and estimates literally "right off
the press." An enormous backlog of design and estimate specifications pile up on
the balance sheet of the clients but in terms of their range these documents do not
conform to the composition of plans essential for construction.

At present a number of specific measures have been outlined to systematize and im-
prove designing and estimating. Their implementation, in our view, requires a
broadening of the rights and duties of the design organizations and the incorpora-
tion of them as part of the largest production associations. In this instance the
design organizations could perform many functions related to capital construction,
including orders for equipment in accord with the designed specifications of the
machines, devices, instruments and so forth, supervision over the course of con-
struction and the reaching of designed capacity as well as observance of the compli-
ance of construction costs and other technical and economic indicators.

Certain design organizations which work out the technical plans and working drawings
for equipment even now in practical terms are part of the large associations. The
construction design organizations can become a component part of the construction
ministries or their associations. An association of construction design organiza-
tions, aside from other advantages, creates the conditions also to reduce the amount
of design construction specifications.

Reserves for the Territorial Organization of Capital Construction

A major reserve for increasing capital investment effectiveness in building up in-
dustrial regions, as is known, is the complete and consistent implementation of the
principle of forming industrial centers. The experience of creating such centers
has shown the possibility of reducing the territory set aside for development by an
average of 30 percent in comparison with a variation of separate construction, the
number of individual buildings and installations can be reduced by an average of

32 percent due to combined-use units, the use factor for the territory can be re-
duced by an average of 20 percent, the number of auxiliary buildings and installa—
tions can be lowered by 30 percent. the construction volume of the buildings can go
down by 10 percent, the number of standard types and sizes for structural elements
can be reduced to 70 percent while the length of transport communications can be re-
duced by 50-70 percent. Here the one-shot expenditures are reduced and the volume
of fixed productive capital and operating expenses are lowered.

As a result of reducing the number of production buildings, the combining of spaces
for different types of production in one building and reducing the cost of the pas-
sive portion of the fixed productive capital, and due to the standardization of the

h

FONIOFFKJAI.UBE10NLY
FORiOFTWCIAl.USElDNLV

projects, construction parts and elements and the greater opportunities for
improving the organization of construction work and other design and construction
factors, the share of the active portion of fixed capital can be significantly in-
creased. At the same time the absolute amounts of the active portion of fixed pro-
ductive capital for the same composition of enterprises are reduced. This happens
primarily as a result of the concentration of preparatory, repair and auxiliary pro-
duction at the specialized enterprises of the center.

At present. the main impediment on the path of extensively introducing the progres-
sive center form for the territorial organization of capital construction is the
departmental and local policy of the ministries and departments which obstruct the
incorporation of their enterprises into the industrial centers endeavoring,to get by
with their own system. A system has developed where initially the departments in a
centralized manner are given capital investments, including for the center-common
projects. and later on a good deal of effort is made to see to it that they actually
use the money to build these projects. The procedure of persuasion works poorly

and the "primitive" construction of isolated small inefficient shops and services
continues.

For this reason it is advisable to allocate the money for the projects of the center-
common system not between the ministries participating in the creation of the indus-

trial center but rather allocate the money on a centralized basis to the head
builder.

The organization of industrial centers should be carried out not only in newly de-
veloped regions but also in existing industrial centers on the basis of the recon-
struction and technical reequipping of existing enterprises. The sectorial planning
for the reconstruction of enterprises here should be combined with territorial plan-
ning of industrial centers from these enterprises. However, unfortunately, the
plans for systematizing the existing industrial build-up are created by the terri-
torial design institutes of the USSR Gosstroy significantly less often than general
plans for new industrial centers (the ratio equals approximately 1:3).

In line with the territorial problems of capital construction, great urgency has
been assumed by the question of the mobility of the construction—installation organ-
izations and the increasing role of the so-called rebased enterprises in construc-
tion. This question is particularly pertinent in the nation's East where for virtu-
ally each new construction site one must recreate a construction base and at times
this takes up an extended time. However, this in no say means that the solution to
the question of the location of a new enterprise in one or another place must be
taken proceeding from the presence of a construction-installation organization at
this place. Unfortunately, this sometimes happens and this leads to the incorrect
placement of the enterprises. For this reason it is essential to set up mobile con-
struction organizations.

Reducing the Estimated Cost of Constru;tion

The normalization of the investment process is impossible without the adopting of
effective measures to reduce estimated construction costs. In the group of invest-
ment sectors one can observe the sharpest and most constant deviations from the com-
parable price system adopted in planning and economic practice. The problem is that
the so-called fixed (comparable) prices in capital construction are not the prices

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the finished construction product (for example, per unit of capacity at an en-
terprise turning out a certain product and so forth) but rather the prices for the
intermediate product2 (for l m3 of earth moving, 1 m3 of brick laying, l m3 of rein-
forced concrete, 1 m 20! plastering.and so forth). As a result of applying prices
for intermediate types in construction and the change in the structure of these
types, the cost of a unit of capacity can be substantially increased and made in-
comparable with the cost of the previously built projects. The capital intensive-
ness of capacity for steel production calculated per ton in 1965-1970 was 431.3
rubles, in 1970—1975 it was 586.1 rubles, or 135.9 percent in relation to the Eighth
Five-Year Plan, and in 1976-1980. 760.5 rubles, or 129.8 percent in comparison with
the previous 5 years. The price calculated per megawatt for a turbine with a unit
capacity of 800 megawatts is almost 2-fold more in comparison with a turbine having
a unit capacity of 300 megawatts. In recent years the cost of one place on a dairy
farm has risen by more than 3-fold, and on pig-dairy complexes by 4-fold. The most
sporadic and uncontrolled changes in prices occur precisely in construction.

The increased cost of const:uction and installation work, as noted even in calcula-
tions in fixed prices and estimate standards, have been aided by the desire to in-
crease the material intensiveness of this work as the more expensive the employed
building materials and structural elements the greater the product volume and, re-
spectively, the wage fund of the construetion—installation organizations. The fact
that the amount of designing also depends upon the scale of construction and instal-
lation established in the plans also impels the design organizations to increase the
cost of the projects being designed. The procedure adopted up to now of economic
incentives and work evaluation for construction workers and designers has frequently
led not to reduced costs but rather to increased costs of the projects being built
and to a reduction in capital productivity in the national economy.

Among the presently adopted measures to reduce the estimated cost of construction
and thereby increase capital investment effectiveness, an important place is held by
improving the structure of material resources employed in construction.

The task of the efficient use of metal has assumed particular significance. Con-
struction is responsible for approximately 20-25 percent of the national consumption
of rolled ferrous metals not including rails and steel pipe, while if these are in-
cluded it is 35 percent of national rolled metals consumption. In the latter in-
stance the building of large-diameter pipelines and the construction and repair of
railroads are taken into account. But the opportunities for saving metal in con-
struction are little used.

Little has been done about the production of metal substitutes, particularly non-
metallic pipe. One ton of plastic pipe can replace 5-5.5 tons of metal pipe and
considering the service life this replacement is the equivalent of 10 tons of steel.
The effectiveness of capital investments into the production of plastic pipe is 1.5-
fold higher than for the production of metal pipe. However, our plastic pipe pro-
duction for many years has been on a level of 60,000 tons a year and this is com-
pletely insufficient. Production has developed slowly and quality improved little
for other types of nonmetallic pipe such as pressurized and nonpressurized non-
reinforced concrete and asbestos-cement pipe, ceramic pipe and others. With the
shortage of shaped steel flooring for light coverings of buildings, a significant
portion of this grade is consumed for producing triple-layered wall panels the manu-
facturing of which could successfully employ any wall materials thereby ensuring

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

great durability of the buildings and a reduction in operating expenses. The delay
in the production of site-cast concrete leads to increased production of reinforced

concrete and this requires a good deal of metal.

One of the reserves for lowering estimated construction costs is the possibility of
reducing the cost of inert building materials. the production of which surpasses

1 billion tons a year. The development of their output up to now has been based on
the creation of large, highly mechanized enterprises in the aim of improving product
quality and reducing current expenditures on manufacturing the products. But it
makes sense to put up such enterprises only at large deposits which are frequently
located far from the product's consumption area. As a result there has been an in-
crease in the distances which inert building materials are shipped while their cost
"in use" has surpassed their cost in the production area by 2- or 3—fold.

The need has arisen of fundamentally reorganizing the development of the inert ma~
terials industry, having focused attention on the creation of highly mechanized
prefab and mobile enterprises of small and medium capacity (up to 200,000 a3 a year).
In this manner it would be possible to bring the product closest to the consumers,
small deposits of inert materials can be put into use, large areas of land will not
be needed for construction and the location of dumping grounds, short times (on the
order of 1—1.5 years) will be achieved for creating new types of production and

there will be a high share of the active portion of the capital accordingly.

Reducing the Material Intensiveness of Construction Projects

The total weight of building materials and structural elements produced in our na-
tion exceeds 2.5 billion tons a year. Their cost exceeds 20 percent of the total
capital investment volume. They are responsible for up to 15 percent of the freight
turnover of rail transport and an even higher share of the cargo turnover for river
transport. At the same time calculations show that a rationalization of the struc-
ture and quality of building materials would make it possible to reduce their weight
per unit of work by approximately 25-30 percent. This would tell on the construc-
tion time, the labor intensivenesa and costs.

The predominant use in construction of heavy structural elements, mainly heavy re-
inforced concrete, the share of which comprises 35-40 percent of the coat of all the
consumed materials, is determined predominantly by organizational factors. The en-
terprises of the contracting construction ministries produce 96 percent of the pre-
fabricated reinforced concrete. The prices for prefabricated reinforced concrete
provide comparatively high profitability, approximately 20-25 percent. Up to now
the cost of the employed reinforced concrete has been included in the fulfillment

of the plan of construction-installation work and has thereby encouraged the predom—
inant use of precisely this heavy material. Thus, the development of the production
of site-cast reinforced concrete has been checked and the use of this would save up
to 25 percent of the metal and concrete and significantly lower construction costs.
It is also essential to bear in mind that an enormous amount of fuel is required to
cure the 120 million m3 of prefabricated reinforced concrete while steam is required
in far from all cases for site-cast concrete.

Unfortunately, the growth of brick production has halted in the USSR. Even in 1977,
we produced less brick than in 1976, while the production of haydite and other types

7
FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USE20NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of wall panels increased correspondingly. This has led to a high consumption of
metal. The technical level of brick production is 12—15 years behind the present
level. At the new plant in Yaroslavl', equipment productivity is 800,000 bricks per
worker against 70,000 at the old yards. From the bricks produced in 1 year by a
worker at a modern plant it would be possible to obtain 1 GOO-1,250 m3 of brickwork
while one worker at a reinforced concrete plant manufactures just 200 m3 of prefabrir
cated reinforced concrete in a year, or 5-fold less (not considering expenditures on
the production of metal, cement and so forth).

The installation of compact, less material intensive machines makes it possible to
erect light foundations, enclosing structures and roofs, thinner walls and so forth.
The effect of machine building on reducing the material intensiveness of construc-
tion fixed capital by lightening the structural elements is more substantial than

the reduction of the weight (reducing the material intensiveness) of the machines
and equipment themselves.

For lowering the material intensiveness of products in the capital-creating sectors
it is essential to replace the indicators of physical tonnage in the production and
delivery of a number of metal structural elements, building materials and finished
equipment with other indicators but encourage a reduction in materials consumption.
For example, we have in mind the delivery of rolled metal according to a theoretical
weight in a minus tolerance field, the delivery of sets of equipment and so forth.

The Use of Construction Mechanization

The total cost of construction mechanization is presently many billions of rubles.
However, this equipment is not used with sufficient efficiency. Machinery stoppages
due to technical failure comprise 20-25 percent of the operating time. This is
caused by the existing practice where the machine builders are involved only with
one part of the machine's life cycle (technical designing, production and guaranteed
operating period) and are removed from the basic period of operation (including
major overhaul and write-off). As a consequence of this the construction machines
and mechanisms are overhauled not only frequently but also expensively and poorly.
The actual expenditures on a major overhaul of many types of machines are presently
60-70 percent of their listed price and 55-65 percent of the metal intensiveness of
a new machine.

Major overhauls on equipment must be turned over to the machine builders in creat-
ing an effective sysem of flaw detection for the machines. the units and assemblies
for them, the most rational production plans and unified standards and rules for
planned preventive repairs considering the design features and specific use of the
machines in the various national economic sectors. Also of national economic sig-
nificance is the creation of a unified interdepartmental construction-wide system of
major overhaul enterprises with the gradual centralization of major overhauls for
all basic construction equipment within the system of the USSR Minstroydormash [Min-
istry of Construction, Road and Municipal Machine Building] and the creation of a
special main administration for repairs and territorial trusts in the regions. Here
one may assume a rise in the average level of repair concentration of approximately
5—fold.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The carrying out of a unified technical policy in the area of construction equipment
repairs should lead to improved quality in the repaired machines and to a rise in
their operating life between repairs from 50-60 up to 80 percent and to a reduction
of the time spent by the machines in repair and waiting for this. This is the
equivalent of the additional use of mechanization valued at around 1 billion rubles
and to a corresponding reduction in the capital investments for creating this.

Shortening the Time for Reaching Pull Capacity

For Soviet industry as a whole, the actual times for completing the fixed capital
and production capacity surpass the standards by 1.8—2-fold. Here a significant
role is played by construction flaws, by design mistakes and by the mismatching of
individual elements of production processes. Delays in developing new technology
occur, as a rule, due to a few difficult assemblies. In cost terms their share is
not more than 5-8 percent but improving them takes up a good deal of time.

Starting-up work has been turned, in essence, into a continuation of construction.
Here in many instances it is a question not only of eliminating individual construc-
tion flaws or removing particular errors made by the designers but raiser the build-
ing of entire projects which had been excluded from the plans during their expert
evaluation and approval. Slow starting-up rates are one of the basic reasons for
the low return on newly completed capital which is substantially below the aver-
age sector (averaged) capital productivity.

World-wide experience in capital construction shows that the reaching of full pro-
duction capacity should not be made a separate item as the brief starting-up period
can be combined in time with Construction. Here the construction stage is not lim-
ited to the erecting of the buildings and the installation of machines but without
fail presupposes the testing out of equipment and the bringing of it up to designed
productivity. Under the conditions of the new economic mechanism, the acceptance of
new projects can be carried out only when the period of their starting up and put-
ting into operation has been completed. The “turnkey" delivery of capital construc-
tion projects assumes that they are fully ready to operate at full designed capacity.

Under the conditions of the new economic mechanism, an evaluation of the activities
of construction organizations and their economic encouragement should be carried out
in accord with the results of fulfilling the plans for completing production capac-
ity and projects, for commodity construction product, for the growth of labor pro-
ductivity, for net product and profit, that is, in terms of the specific contribu-
tion to increasing production efficiency and work quality. These same principles
lie at the basis of planning and incentives for the clients, the design organiza-
tions, the equipment supplying plants, the building materials enterprises and the
supply and transport organizations, that is, all the participants in the investment
process. They all should receive incentives only under the condition of achieving
the above—listed indicators which are tied to the successful carrying out of the
starting-up program.

A most important principle in the investment policy is the intensification of pro-
duction and capital construction and the greatest possible rise in their efficiency.

At present it is a question of increasing products, improving their quality and as-
sortment to an ever-greater degree by the complete and rational use of the already

0
a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY