H DR ( WI’IC ~I A I. I NF, "NT .\'

JPRS L/10235
4 January 1982

USSR Report

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS
(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOP. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattribw‘ed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate ..th the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

(POUO 1/82)

CONTENTS

USSR-CHM TRADE

Coordinating National Economic Ping of cm Member-States for 1981
1985

(I. Portyannikov, N. Rakhutin; VOEOS! EKONQIIKI, Sep 81)...
TRADE HITH an's
Book on South Yeman's Social, Economic Development
(V. N. Bumistrov; HARONAIA DMOIG'ATISHESKAIA

RESPUBLIKA Imam EKONCHIKA I TORGOVO-EKONMCHESKHE
mwmIYA, 1981) COO....OOICOCOOCODOOOO0.000000QOO‘OOOOOOOO

- a - [III - USSR - 38a

FOR OFFIHAI. USE ONLY
COORDINATING NATIONAL ECONOMIC PLANS 01“ 031A NEWER-STATES FOR 1981-1985
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 107-116
[Article by l. Portyannikov and N. Raklutin]

[Text] At the latest session, the 35th Session, of the Council for mutual

Economic Assistance [cm], which was held in July 1981, there was a summation of
the results of coordinating the national economic plans of the CMA masher-states
for 1981-1985. The Politburo of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of
Ministers, after considering the report of the delegation of the Soviet Union,
headed by Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers N. A. Tikhonov, noted that

"the completed coordination of the national economic plans and the session-approved
coordinated plan for multilateral integrational measures in 1981-1985, create a
solid basis for the successive development of the economy of the fraternal countries
and the successful resolution by them of the increased social and economic tasks."

The current five-year period is the sixth five-year period for coordinating the plans
of the CEHA mem her-states. After arising, during the first years of the activity

of cm, as a method of coordinating individual problems in economic and scientific-
technical cooperation, the coordination of the five-year plane has currently been
converted into the leading form of joint planning activity, a harmonious interna-
tional system of coordinating the foreign-economic conditions for developing and
executing the five-year plans for the social and economic development of the
fraternal countries under conditions of socialist economic integration.

"The main result of the coordination," N. A. Tikhonov raarked in his statement

at the 35th CEHA Session, "as we see it, lies in the fact that for the next five
years, and in individual areas for an even longer-range period of time, there

has been found. for the most part, the resolution of questions that are linked with
providing the countries with fuel, energy, raw and other materials, machinery and
equipment, and other commodities."

The community of cm member-states has succeeded in doing this despite the fact
that the economic development during recent years has been proceeding under con-
ditiona that are more complicated than those of previous periods. In a number of
countries there has been a reduction in the labor-resources growth rate. There
has been an increase in the expenditures, especially capital expenditures, for the
extraction and transporting of fuel and raw materials, inasmuch as their extraction
in the USSR -- the basic supplier of these commodities in the socialist market -

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
C U“ U. o 0"OI‘I- Us,“ 0"...

have been constantly shifting to regions that are remote from places of consumption
and that are relatively unasaimilated, and the deposits of mineral resources
possessing increasingly inferior geologicalqmining conditions are being involved

in operation. For example, during the past five-year period the expenditures for
the extraction of one ton of crude oil in the USSR more than doubled as compared
with the period until 1972, and during the current five-year period those expen-
ditures will increase even more. The specific capital investments for extraction
of iron ore during the past 15 years at least tripled. In the Czechoslovakian
Socialist Republic the further increase in the production of coal involved the
changeover to worsened conditions and, in many instances, the need to use deposits
of coal with reduced calorie output. The capital investments that were linked
directly with this alone constituted during the past five-year period approximately
one-third of the total capital investments in industry.

A definite effect is exerted upon the economic development of the CEHA countries
by the rise in prices and the inflation on the world market, and by the worldwide
currency-finance and energy crises. The rise in prices of raw materials has

led to an increase in prices of output of the processing industry. In certain

0‘ the CEMA member-countries this has caused shortages in the commercial and
payments balance sheets.

A number of factors that complicate the economic development of the socialist
countries do not have anything inrcommon with the diseases that affect the capi-
talist economy -- with its crisis-type instability, chronic unemployment, under-
loading of the production apparatus, disruption of the currency-finance mechanism,
etc. At the same time, the socialist community has also been confronted by tasks
of locating new capabilities for the development of dynamic and mutually advantar
geous c00peration within the framework of the CEHA, primarily by means of the
closer coordination of the national economic plans on a multilateral and bilateral
basis, and also the carrying out of a number of other measures involving mutual
economic cooperation.

In the Communique Concerning the 35th Session of the CEMA, it is stated that the
CEHA member-countries, using the advantages of the socialist system, on the basis
of their own efforts, and relying upon mutual cooperation, have moved considerably
ahead in economic development, have increased their economic and scientific-
technical potential, and guaranteed a rise in the material and cultural standard
of living of their peoples, while preserving for themselves the status as the most
dynamic economic force in the world. That is convincingly attested to by the fact
that the volume of national income in 1980 as a whole for the CEHA member-countries
increased by 66 percent as compared with 1970, and the volume of gross industrial
output, by 84 percent. During the past ten—year period there was a rise in the
average annual level of agricultural production; during the past five-year plan

it was 25 percent higher than in 1966-1970. With regard to the growth rates for
national income and industrial output, during the past decade the CEHA countries
surpassed by almost twice the developed capitalist countries.

Technical-production cooperation among the CEHA countries is being carried out
successfully. This manifests itself particularly in the planned development and
deepening of the specialization and cooperation of production. Solely on the
basis of the concluded agreements, the reciprocal shipments of specialized
output from the CEHA countries increased from 330 million rubles in 1970 to 25

2
FOR¢OFFﬂJAl.USEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

billion rubles in 1980. The export of specialized output of machine-building
has been growing at a rate that is approximately twice as fast as the overall
export of machinery and equipment.

The reciprocal foreign-trade turnover among the can countries increased during the
past ten years by a factor of 3.3 and at the present time exceeds 120 billion
rubles. The reciprocal shipments provide for the overwhelming part of the import
needs of most of the cm member—countries for machinery and equipment, petrolalm,
iron ore. and consumer goods. Last year the reciprocal shipments among the cm
member-countries for those commodities accounted for approximately two-thirds of
their total import.

By developing complete economic and scientific-technical cooperation and deepening
the socialist economic integration and the coordination of plans, the cm countries
create favorable -- but. most importantly, stable - prerequisites for their

steady, successive development and this substantially lessen the unfavorable effect
that the worldwide capitalist market is exerting upon their economy.

During the current f ive-year period it is planned to deepen further the complete
economic ties among the cm member-countries. The congresses of the communist and
workers' parties of the countries in the socialist community, which congresses
were held in 1979-1981, by planning for the forthcoming years a new growth strategy
that is aimed at increasing the final output without any substantial increase in
the labor and material resources. demonstrated the unanimous striving to overcome
the factors linked with the complication of the foreign and domestic conditions of

economic development. That played an important role in working out the scientifi-
cally substantiated basic directions for the social and economic development of

the CEHA member-countries for the five-year period.

The basic directions that are planned for the development of the national economy

of the cm countries during the present five-year period provide for the successive
carrying out of a policy aimed at the intensification of production, the improvaent
of the gdministration of the national economy, and the taking of all steps to
economize the natural and labor resources on the basis of scientific-technical
progress. The basic attention is devoted to the effectiveness of the national-
economic ties, since that will encourage the development of the national economies,
and will contribute to raising the national standard of living and to the resolution
of the tasks of communist and socialist building.

The work of coordinating the national-economic plans for the present five-Year
period was carried out in conformity with the program that was developed by the
cm Committee on Cooperation in the Area of Planning Activity and that was approved
at the ﬂat Session of the cm (1977) -- the Program for Conducting the Work of
Coordinating the cum National-Economic Plans for 1981-1985. That program

provided a coordinated organizational-methodology basis for the actions to be taken
by the Council countries and agencies in the process of the coordination work.

The program proceeded from the time-tested principles of combining multilateral
coordination -- within the framework of the cm Comittes for Cooperation in the
Area of Planning Activity and the other Council agencies -- with bilateral coordi-
nation -- among the central planning and economic agencies of the countries. with
the combining of both these forms and in the close tie-in with the development of
national plans, so that the CEHA countries could take into consideration its rewlts
at individual stages of preparation of the draft versions of their own five-year
plans.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f0“ Ul'l'lt IAI. UM UI‘LI

A great influence upon the carrying out of the work of coordinating the plans
for the present five-year period and upon deepening the mutual cooperation and
the development of socialist economic integration was exerted by the meetings
and negotiations of the party and governmental delegations of the CIHA aember-
countries, at which the most fundamental and most complicated questions of a
long-term nature were discussed and coordinated.

A new feature in the coordination of the plane for 1981-1985 is, first of all,
the fact that the coordination was carried out in combination with, and simul-
taneously with, the development and the initial implementation of the long-range
programs that had been adopted by the CEHA countries - the long-range target
programs for cooperation in the key branches of material production. Those pro-
grams reflect the coordinated strategy of cooperation for a long-range period.
when selecting the most important problems of cooperation for the purpose of
resolving them in the current five-year period, consideration is also taken of
the longer prospect. Thus, the long-term approach is intensified when the

CEHA countries implement the most important national-economic problems.

The experience of carrying out the work of coordinating the plans for 1981—1985
confirmed the great importance of the long-range target programs for cooperation
have for the further development of power engineering, fuel and rawhmateriale
branches of industry, machine-building, agriculture and the food industry, the
production of manufactured commodity goods, and the transportation ties of the
CEHA member-countries. The now-traditional questions of production cooperation
with the adoption of the long-range target programs, in the course of the coordi-
nation of the plans for the current five-year period, are resolved in a comprehen-
sive manner with a consideration of the cooperation strategy that has been coordi-
nated in these programs in the appropriate branches of material production for

the long-range period. This is, as it were, the prerequisite for the changeover
in the future to the coordination of the long-range national-economic plans of

the CEHA country, and that, together with the coordination of the five-year plans,
will serve the deepening of the cooperation in the field of planning activity.

Another no less important peculiarity of the coordination of the national-economic
plans of the cans countries for 1981-1985 was the fact that the basic attention in
the reciprocal cooperation among the countries of the socialist community is
devoted to the specialization and cooperation of production. In the course of
coordinating the plans there is an implementation of the Crimean accords arrived
at by the heads of the parties and governments of the CEHA member-countries, to
the effect that the next two five-year plans will be planned and carried out

under the sign of the further, increasingly deeper cooperation and specialization
of production on the basis of the broad use of the achievements of scientific-
technical progress in the interests of the effective development of the economy
of each of the CEHA countries and the reinforcement of the socialist community.
That was promoted by the preparation and the signing of bilateral long-term
programs for specialization and cooperation of production between the Soviet Union
and other European CEHA member-countries. The programs, which are computed for
the period until 1990, include a broad series of long-range measures that are
aimed at the maximum use of the capabilities of the specialization and cooperation
of production, upon the acceleration of scientific-technical progress, and upon
the increase in the effectiveness of social production. They determine the
sunnudkuumsﬁthemmﬂcmduhmﬂk4EMkdcwwnum.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cxpm'lnlly in uniting the material resources and scientific—tectmical potentials
of the countries for the ten-year period.

The can countries have coordinated and adopted the basic directions for economic
and scientific—technical cooperation for the period 1981-1985 and until 1990,
which have been called upon to assure a stable and long-term basis for the further
deepening, expansion, and improvement of economic relations. One can already dis-
cern tangible results. For example, there has been an increase in the voluses of
the reciprocal shipments of specialized output along the CDIA countries. Between
the USSR and the mropean cm masher—countries during the five-year period that
has begun, the growth rates for the volumes of reciprocal shipments of specialized
and cooperative output, primarily in the field of machine—building, will be con-
siderably higher than the growth rates for commodity turnover as a whole.

A factor of special importance for developing and deepening the integrational ties
in the field of machine-building is the state of agreement that was achieved during
the course of plan coordination with regard to the further expansion of cooperative
ventures dealing with individual assemblies and individual parts for passenger cars
and trucks, motor buses, electronic computers, equipment of nuclear power stations,
metallurgical equipment, road-building machinery, machine tools, railroad cars,
tractors, agricultural machinery, ships, etc.

At the present time approximately 120 mltilateral and more than a thousand bilateral
agreements dealing with the specialization and cooperation of production, which

were concluded between the USSR and other can countries. are in the stage of
inplaentat ion .

An important feature in the coordination of plans and the preparation of the draft
versions of certain agreusents dealing with measures for the long-range target
programs for cooperation in the present f ive-year period was the consideration of
the questions aimed at promoting the acceleration and increased effectiveness of
the economic development of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, the Republic of Qibﬂ,
and the Mongolian People‘s Republic.

In particular, the Soviet Union and Mongolia jointly developed a General Sci-nae
for the Development and Placement of the Productive Forces of the m [Mongolian
People's Republic] for the Period Until 1990. The measures involving the further
development of the material-technical base of the national economy of the m with
the technical and economic support of the Soviet Union are aimed primarily at
increasing the effectiveness of the already created economic potential in the
country; the completion of the projects for which construction has been begun; the
guaranteeing of the upsurge in agriculture, light, food, and sining industry; the
reinforcement of the fuel-and-energy and construction base; and also ained at the
resolution of the first-priority problems of the Mongolian People's Republic. In
conformity with the signed protocal governing the coordination of the national-
economic plans between the Czechoslovakian Socialist Republic and the HER. during
the present five-year period meawres will be implemented to assure the joint de-
velopment of the natural resources of the mm, and the processing of raw materials
of animal origin. Bulgaria will carry out the ranodeling and nodernization of a
number of production capacities that were created with Bulgaria's assistance in
Mongolia, and will also take part in the building of new projects. Together with
other interested cm countries. Bulgaria will participate in developing the najor

s
I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
deposits of plwsphorllcs, coking coal, copper, and other minerals. In the current
f ive-year period the operation of the International Geological upendition of the
Interested cm Member-Countries to the m will continue.

Cooperation on a multilateral basis will be carried out with the Republic of Ouba
in conformity with a DTsPs [long-range target program for cooperation] in the
construction of new capacities for the production of nickel- and cobalt-containing
output, for the comprehensive development of agricultural production and the indus-
trial processing of citrus crops and the production of sugar from sugar cane, and
for the intensification of geological prospecting operations.

when the plans of the m. Cuba, and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam were being
coordinated, consideration was taken of the specific features in the economy of
those countries, where, practically speaking, there is no domestic production of '
machinery and equipment, and the policy aimed at the industrialization and creation
of a stable economy with a well-developed agriculture and a number of branches of
industry requires a considerable quantity of that machinery and equipment. As a
result, a search is underway for the opportunities to assure the auxin): satisfying
of the needs that these countries have for machinery and equipment, and for

the rendering of technical assistance in the construction of projects.

The can countries and agencies, in conformity with the List of Problems to
Coordinated on a Multilateral Basis, developed recomendations for resolving a
total of more than 150 problems in economic and scientific-technical cooperation,
prepared drafts of multilateral agreements, and worked out the overall concepts
and directions for the cooperation and the methods and forms of carrying it out.

On a bilateral basis the CEMA countries coordinated large-scale national-economic
problems of reciprocal cooperation. They include, first of all, problems of satis—
fying the countries' needs for the most important types of fuel and energy and
raw material resources, machinery, equipment, and installations on the basis of
the further development and deepening of international specialization and coopera-
tion of production and other forms of cooperation. For example, in the process of
coordinating the plans between the USSR and the GDR [German Democratic Republic --
East Germany], there was coordination of specific measures for deepening the
cooperation in the area of science and techttology and, within the framework of

the Intergovernmental Comission on Economic and Scientific-Technical Cooperation,
agremnents were concluded and understandings were achieved. These include, in
particular, the further development and application of microelectronics, the de-
velopment of new technological schemes and installations for the production of
energy, for the chemical industry, in the creation of progressive production
technological schaes in the metal-processing industry. Proceeding from the large
importance of providing the national economy with fuel and raw materials, important
understandings have been reached with regard to the material-technical reinforce-
ment of the branches of industry, and for their production in both countries. For
these purposes large-scale reciprocal shipments of machinery, equipment, and

units have been coordinated. For example, the GDR will deliver to the USSR units
and equipment for the chemical and petroleum-refining industry, equipment for
open-pit mining, metallurgical equipment, transformer substations, and other elec-
trical-engineering equipment. In turn, the Soviet Union will deliver to the GDR
equipment for nuclear and thermal electric-power stations, for geological
prospecting operations, for the construction industry and the building-materials

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industry, and for metallurgy, and will simultaneously render technical assistance
in installing them.

In the process of coordinating the plans, a large amount of attention was devoted
to cooperation in the area of the fuel-and-energy and raw-materials branches of
industry, which are of great importance for the development of the economy of
the countries in the socialist comunity. The problas of fuel and raw materials
have taken on world importance in recent years. The can countries are resolving
them by relying chiefly upon their on resources. They have proved to be the
only industrially developed zone in the world to have avoided those serious blows
that were inflicted on :he capitalist economy by the energy crisis. By creating
a large-scale fuel and raw-materials industry, the countries in the socialist cm-
munity achieved a high level of energy conmption. At the present time those
countries consume energy resources. in per-cspita terms, which are approximately
the same as in the countries of the European Economic Commnity (5 tons of
conventional fuel). In 1980, by relying on reciprocal shipments, they covered
their import needs for hard coal and lumber by 96-95 percent; crude oil and

iron ore, by 68—70 percent; etc. The USSR provides for almost 90 percent of the
import needs of the CEHA countries for petroleum products and 99 percent of the
natural gas. In the current five-year period the Soviet Union is increasing by
more than one-third the shipments to the cam countries of electrical energy.
fuel and raw material commodities, and materials. l’aithful to its international
duty, the Soviet Union, despite the difficulties that have been linked with the
worsening conditions with regard to production, is increasing the shipments of
energy resources, in terms of conventional fuel, by 20 percent in the five-year
period that has begun, as compared with the previous five-year period. The

USSR delivers the fuel and raw materials to the fraternal countries at prices
that are considerably lower than the prices on the world market.

At the same time, the long-term economic development of the cm countries that

has been planned requires a corresponding increase in the production of the basic
types of raw materials, fuel, the production of energy, and thus the guaranteeing
of the further growth of the economic potential of the countries in the community.
According to preliminary estimates, the consumption of energy by 1990 will increase
in the cm countries by a factor of approximately 2.5 as compared with the present-
day level, and there will also be a considerable increase in the needs for all

types of raw materials and fuel, the requiring the corresponding expansion of

the sources to cover them.

All this is radically changing the scope of the economic ties and acts as one of
the factors influencing the need for a qualitatively new approach to the further
expansion of the economic cooperation with respect to the most important fuel
and raw—material commodities. At the same time, a question that arises with all
acuity is the question of using all types of fuel and raw materials, including
those with low calorie content, that exist in the other can countries; of
developing and producing energy—saving machinery and equipment; and of achieving
the accelerated development of nuclear power engineering.

A task that is becoming critically important is that of making the efficient
application of everything that the countries in the socialist cormunity already
have at their disposal, primarily the raw-material and energy resources. The

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'U. Ufl‘lsilﬂl. QI-‘l‘. ‘Il‘.a'

prcscnt stage of development of the socialist countries requires an increase

in production with a reduction of the amount of funds, materials, and energy
required for producing output. This is a faithful and reliable means of resolving
the very important economic and social probleas.

when coordinating the plans for the current five—year period, the Council's
countries and agencies specified the priority directions to be taken in resolving
the fuel and energy and raw materials problas. The needs of the cm member-
countries for electrical energy will be satisfied primarily by means of the
accelerated growth of nuclear power engineering. For these purposes, the fol-
lowing have been signed: a General Agreasent Governing Cooperation in the Devel-
opment of the United Electrical-Energy Systems of the CM Member-Countries for
the Period Unil 1990; and the Agreement Governing the mltilateral International
Specialization and Cooperation of Production and Reciprocal Shipments of Equip-
ment for unclear Electric-Power Stations for the Period 1981-1990. These very
important agreements laid the foundations for the construction, with the technical
assistance of the Soviet Union, on the territory of the European CEHA masher-
countries (excluding the USSR) and the Republic of Cuba, nuclear electric-power
stations with a total rated capacity of 37 million wilowatts. The implanenta-
tion of the program for the construction of the nuclear electric-power stations
will make it possible for the participating countries annually to receive 250
billion kilowatt-hours of electric energy and to save approximately 70-75 million
tons of conventional fuel, which is approximately comparable to the activation

of four Soyuz gas pipelines constructed by the cm countries during the P“?-
five-year period.

The cooperation in nuclear power engineering, which unites the work of approxi-
mately 50 large-scale associations and enterprises in seven can masher-countries
and SFRYu [Socialist Federated Republic of Yugoslavia], makes it possible on a
single technical basis to assimilate and produce equipment for nuclear electric-
pOwer stations. Associations and enterprises that are beaming the leaders in
nuclear machine-build ing are the Soviet Atomash, Czechoslovakian Skoda, the
Hagdeburg Heavy Machine-Building Combine, the Hungarian Ganz Hagsv Plant, etc.

In addition, for the more complete satisfaction of the needs of the national
economies of Bungary, Poland, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia for electrical
energy, and with a consideration of the readiness of the Soviet side to deliver
it to the other participating countries, in March 1979 those countries signed a
General Multilateral Agreement and a General Bilateral Agreement concerning
cooperation in constructing on the territory of the USSR the Kluel'nitskaya
nuclear Electric-Power Station, with a capacity of -’ million killowatts and an
Agreement between Hungary, East Germany, Poland, the USSR, and Czechoslovakia
concerning the construction of a high-tension electrical-transmission line
(750 kilovolts) from the USSR (Kl-mel'nitskays Nuclear Electric-Power Station) to
Poland (Rzeszow). The activation of the first unit in that nuclear power
station and the beginning of shipments of electrical energy have been planned
for 1984, and by 1985 those shipments have been coordinated in the volume of
7.6 billion kilowatt-hours. By 1990 they are supposed to reach 12 billion
kilowatt-hours. An agreement, signed in July 1981, concerning cooperation
between Romania and the USSR in constructing, on the territory of the Soviet.
Union. the South Ukrainian unclear Electric-Power Station provides for the
delivery from the USSR to Romania of electrical energy on a long-term basis.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The (II-m countries have begun to implement the program adopted by the CEHA
Committee on Cooperation in the Area of Planning Activity -- the program for
multilateral cooperation in the comprehensive and more intensive involvement

in economic circulation of new and additional sources of energy -- solar, wind,
geothermal, etc. In the course of the next three or four years it is planned to
carry out a series of measures involving the economically substantiated expansion
of the use of renewable sources of energy and additional resources of synthetic

hydrocarbon raw materials on the basis of cooperation among the interested
countries.

In the course of coordinating the plans, an agreement was worked out to create
and introduce improved processes in the secondary refinement of petroleum, for
which the specialization and cooperation of production of the appropriate units
and equipment will be carried out. For example, various units with an overall
refining capacity of approximately 190 million tons of petroleum a year will be
manufactured and delivered to the countries. The resolution of this problem will

make it possible to produce more than 15 million tons of fuel and lubricants a
year.

A considerable amount of work in the process of coordinating the plans has been
done in searching for ways to meet the growing needs of the CEHA countries for
ferrous metals. A large amonmt of attention here is devoted to working out the
questions linked with the resolution of the problem of meeting the needs for

iron-containing raw materials, which problem, in view of its scope, has become,
like the fuel and energy problem, an international one.

Measures have been planned in the USSR iron-ore industry to preserve the existing
shipments of iron-containing raw materials at the 1980 level. Projects are also
underway to coordinate the draft of the General Agreement governing the Organizing
of cooperation in constructing on the territory of the USSR the Krivoy Rog

Mining and Concentration Combine, both for the purpose of retaining the shipments
of iron-ore raw materials at the 1980 level, and for satisfying the needs of the
CDIA countries for iron-containing raw ssterials in access of the 1980 level.
however, the chief means of cooperation in the field of metallurgy, as was noted

at the 35th cm Session, is not only the further buildup of the volume of produc-
tion of metals, but primarily the fundamental improvenent of the quality and struc-
ture of the metal output and the reduction of the ammnt of metal needed, especial-
ly in machine-building.

In the chemical industry, in the course of the coordination of the plans, a number
of important problems were resolved. A General Agreement concerning specialization
and cooperation in the production of energy-consuming and less energy-consuming
chemical output was signed. On its basis, bilateral agreements were prepared and
signed. Those agreements provide for the volumes and deadlines for shipments fran
the USSR to the countries participating in the ogre-ent of energy-consuming output
(ammonia, methanol, polyvinylchloride, polyethylene, divinyl, etc.) and from those
countries to the USSR of less energy-consuming chaaical output (chemicals to

be used as additivies to polymer materials, synthetic dyes, subsidiary textile
substances, chemical means of protecting plants, plastics produced in relatively
small quantities, chemical semifinished products, etc.). The implementation of
the planned measures, with the tremendous saving in the import of hydrocarbons and

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

energy carriers, exerts a substantial influence upon the formation in the CBHA
countries of an economically substantiated structure in the chemical industry and
upon increasing the effectiveness of cooperation in that area, in which the
material basis for the chemicalization of the national economy of the countries
is being created.

When searching for ways to build up, by their joint efforts, the capacities of
the power-engineering and extractive branches of industry with the purpose of
carrying out reciprocal shipments. the can countries in the process of plan
coordination devoted a large amount of attention to questions of the efficient use
of the primary resources; the increase in production with a reduction in the

amount of assets, materials, and energy needed for the production of output;

the creation and production of new progressive technology and teclmological schemes
that assure the increase in the effectiveness of production and that save the
fuel—s a-energy and other material and labor resources.

The can masher countries are doing a lot for the joint development of the extrac-
tive industry. However, at the present time the factor that is taking on decisive
importance is the economical, efficient use of the primary resources. That is the
conclusion of all the past congresses of the communist and workers parties of the
cm countries. The reduction in the expenditure of primary resources per unit of
finished output requires, as a rule, fewer expenditures than the increase in their
extraction. Computations indicate that the carrying out of measures involv Lng the
economizing of fuel requires from two-fifths to one-half the expenditures of
producing an equivalent volume of energy resources. These tasks can be fundamen-
tally resolved, as was noted at the 35th CEHA Session, only as a result of the
reorganization of the structure of industrial production, the preferential develop-
ment of production entities requiring less energy and fewer materials, and the
introduction of technology and technological schemes that economize the resources.

"The key task today," N. A. Tikhonov said at the 35th cm Session, "is the raising
of the technical level of production and its qualitative indicators. There is

no other means of resolving the tasks of the 1980's other than the acceleration

of the scientific-technical progress. (hr opportunities here are especially
great, for one-third of the scientific workers in the world are working in the
cm countries. with this kind of scientific-technical potential at our disposal,

it is necessary to strive for the corresponding benefit. It is especially impor-
tant today to use all the opportunities of science and technology to reduce the

energy and material requirements of social production."

A brilliant example of the work being carried out in this direction is provided

by the cooperation between Czechoslovakia and the USSR in constructing and organ-
izing a comprehensive automated technological line for the production of amonia
and the manufacture of equipment for the comprehensive technological line for

the production of ethylene. The new lines with an optimal production capacity of
3000 tons of mania a day and 600,000 tons of ethylene a year will make it possi-
ble to double the labor productivity, to achieve a substantial reduction in the
expenditures, and to reduce the metal consumption by 100 percent. This example
also attests to the fact that a large-scale comprehensive increase in the effec-
tiveness of product ion can be achieved primarily by the resolution, by the efforts
of the cm countries, of the tasks in the area of scientific-technical cooperation.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the course of work to coordinate the plans in the field of machine-building

and the radio-engineering and electronic industry, a umber of agreements and recom-
mendat ions were prepared. They deal with the further expansion of economic and
scientific-technical cooperation. In addition, the products lists and tentative
volumes of the reciprocal shipments of machinery and equipment until 1985 were co-
ord inated. The approved and already signed agreements and amendments to previously
concluded agreeaents include the f irst-priority measures for the long-range target
programs for cooperation, which provide for the covering of the needs tint the CEHA
member-countries have for the basic types of machinery and equipment for the mining
industry, electric-power engineering, the chemical industry, the petroleum and
petrochemical industry, agriculture, the food and light industry, as well as for

the development of the machine-building branches which provide the base for its
efficient reorganization.

Certain agreements that were developed and signed in the course of the plan coordi-
nation provide for the creation of international production complexes which, from
the point of view of their scope and technical level, are unmatched elsewhere in
the world. These include the previously mentioned agreeaent dealing with the con-
struction of nuclear electric-power stations and the production of equipent for
than. At the 36th can Session in 1980 an agreement dealing with international
specialization and cooperation in developing and producing computer technology

was signed. That agreanent provides for the reciprocal shipments, during the cur-
rent five-year period alone. with a total value of more than 15 billion rubles.

The application in the national economy of new computer technology -— microcomputers
-- will considerable increase the labor productivity. and the return on invest-
ments and will reduce the manpower needs by several million persons.

A large amount of work has been done ‘0 “NW1“ the programs and to organize the
output of hydraulic and pneumatic component equipment, as a result of which, in
the USSR and other countries in the community, there will be an increase in the
production of of more progressive machinery and equipment for the mining industry,
machine tools, and road-building and other technology.

Despite, however, the existing achievements and positive results that were achieved
in the course of coordinating the plans for 1981-1985, as a whole the specializa-
tion and cooperation of production within the framework of the cm and in bilater—
al cooperation are still lagging behind the present-day requirements and the tasks
posed by the communist and workers parties of the CM masher countries. As a
result of the fact that the planned development of international specialization
and cooperation of production on a long-term basis is a very important direction

in increasing the effectiveness of the further cooperation among the cm member-
countries for the forthcoming decade, the cm agencies have planned steps to
raise this work to a qualitatively new level and to concentrate the cooperation

in the specialization and cooperation in the problmaa having great importance to
the national economy, to intensify the comprehensive nature of that cooperation

by means of the reciprocal coordination of research efforts, technical elabora-
tions, the creation and production of technology, the organizing of its technical
servicing, the upansion of the scope of international specialization involving
standardized units and parts for the purposes of optimizing the production of the
final output.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(UK WIWIAL UM UNI-I

Definite results in the process of plan coordination were achieved in the field

of agriculture and the food industry, and the production of mamfactured consumer
goods and transportation ties among the can countries. The resolved problems
represent very important measures in the long-rangetaJ‘eEb programs for cooperation,

which formed the basis of the coordination work for 1981-1985 and determined as a
whole their positive results.

The multilateral integrational measures, and primarily those linked with the
implementation of the long-range target programs for cooperation, found their reflec-
t1°ﬂ in the coordinated P an that was prepared by the cm Committee on Coopera-
tion in the Area of Planning Activity and that was approved by the cm Session ~-
the plan for multilateral integrational measures for 1981-1985, which provides for
the construction, by the joint efforts of those countries, of a number of economic
projects, the development of specialization and cooperation of production,
cooperation in the area of science and tectmology, and standardization, as well as

steps to promote the upsurge in the economy of Vietnam, Chiba, and the Mongolian
People's Republic.

For the successful carrying out of the measures that were agreed upon during the
coordination of the plans and reinforced by the appropriate agreements, the

national economic plans of the individual countries stipulate the necessary material,
labor, and financial resources.

As in the previous periods, the Soviet Union is doing everything possible to rein-
force the economy of the countrie 3 in the socialist com-unity. "With a large-scale
economic, technical, and scientific potential at its disposal," the Comnique of
the 35th cm Session states, "the Soviet Union carries out shipments of fuel.

raw materials, machinery and equipment, and otheroommodities, renders broad techni-
cal assistance to the cm member-countries in the construction of industrial
projects; and carries out the trsnmittal of advanced production and scientific-
technical experience. The extensive Soviet market guarantees most of the cm

masher-countries a stable area for the sale of a large part of the export of output
of machine-building and other commodities."

Proceeding from the socialist principles governing the cooperation, the CEHA member-
countries as early as 1975 agreed that, in their reciprocal trade, they would not
allow any arbitrary, sharp changes in the prices of raw materials, energy, fuel,

or other commodities. The prices in reciprocal trade, accordin to their decision,
are established annually on the basis of the worldwide prices 1'00 “hid! the
influences of speculation and the market situation have been removed, and on the
basis of their average level during the previous five years. The 1010”»? found
resolutions with regard to contract prices made it possible for the socialist
countries to avoid those difficulties that were caused to the capitalist world by
the energy crisis. As a result of Soviet shipments of petroleum alone, the
European CEMA m-berv-countries during the past five-year period obtained an advan-
tage of no less than $3 billion a year, as compared with the world prices. And

the existing procedure of establishing prices continues to prevail for the current
five-year plan. With that procedure the prices in the trade among the cm
countries are lower than the current vorld prices. Taking into consideration the
needs of the CM countries, the Soviet Union, despite the difficulties linked
with the worsening of the drilling conditions, is, in 1981-1985. keeping the ship-
ments of petroleum to those countries at the high level that was achieved in 1980.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the entire five-year period, Soviet shipments of petroleum will constitute
approximately 400 million tons. During the current five—year plan the export of
machinery and equipment from the USSR to the CEHA countries will reach 35 billion
rubles, which is 40 percent more than during the past five-year plan. Soviet ship-
ments of machinery and equipment cover the vitally important needs of the CEHA
member-countries. They will contribute to the expansion and renovation of the
fixed assets and the modernization of production.

Cooperation within the framework of the CEHA is yielding considerable advantages
also for the Soviet Union. Suffice it to state that during the past five-year
period the OSHA countries provided for as much as 60 percent of the new vessels in
the Soviet fleet; 35 percent of the new passenger cars; 12 percent of motor buses;
as much as 15 percent of the funds for our retail trade in ready-to-wear clothing,
footwear, furniture, and canned goods. During the new five-year period the Soviet
Union will import, in exchange for Soviet commodities, more than 60 billion rubles'
worth of modern machine equipment and more than 40 billion rubles' worth of consumer
goods. The shipments from the CEHA countries to the USSR of machinery and equip-
ment will contribute to the resolution of major tasks in individual branches of

the national economy and to the accelerated development of certain of the leading
branches of industry. Shipments which are of great importance are, for example,

the shipments of metallurgical equipment. equipment for the petrochemical and
chemical industry, electric locomotives, passenger and freight railroad cars, and
transport and fishing vessels. The increase in the import of furniture, knit goods.
garments, and other consumer goods will promote the expansion of the variety of
consumer commodities in the Soviet market.

The Basic Directions in the Economic and Social Development for 1981-1985 and for
the Period Until 1990 have stipulated the complete developmen: of mutually advanta-
geous trade, economic, and scientific—technical ties with the socialist countries;
the active participation in the further deepening of the socialist economic inte-
gration of the CEHA countries; and the consistent continuation of the implementation
of the long-range target programs for cooperation which are aimed at the resolution
of the most important problems in the development of power engineering, the fuel and
raw~materia1a branches, machine-building, agriculture, transport, and the production
of consumer goods, as well as the bilateral long-range programs for the specializa-
tion and cooperation of production.

0n the basis of the coordination which has been carried out for the plans, during
the five-year period that has begun there will be an expansion of the scope of the
reciprocal cooperation between the USSR and all the CEHA countries, as a result of
which the reciprocal shipments of commodities will grow by almost 60 percent as
compared with the previous five-year period and will exceed 260 billion rubles.
During the currentfive-year period the commodity turnover between the USSR and

Bulgaria and(h&a will grow by a factor of more than 1.4 as compared with the pre-

vious fiv.-y¢.r period; with ﬂungary, East Germany, and Mongolia, 9 factor of
1.5; with Czechoslovakia, 0 factor of 1.7; and with Romania, will almost double.

The planned scope of the reciprocal cooperation among the CEHA member—countries
during the current five-year period can be judged on the basis of volume of recipro-

cal commodity turnover that was agreed upon during the course of the plan coordina-
tion. That volume will grow in 1981-1985 by 36 percent as compared with the actual
reciprocal commodity turnover in 1976—1980. Moreover, the increase in reciprocal

13

FOI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- vn vooayanas vat. Utvul

commodity turnover that was planned for the current five—year plan outstrips,
as it did during the previous periods, the growth rates of national income and

industrial production, thus attesting to the further deepening of the international
socialist division of labor.

At the present time the CEHA member-countries are concluding the intergovernmental

long-range trade agreements governing reciprocal shipments for the current five-

year period and other agreements dealing with definite problems of economic coopera-
tion.

Thus, the course and results of the coordination of the nationaleconomic plans of
the CEHA member-countries for 1981-1985, as evolves from the materials of the 35th
CEHA Session, convicingly indicate that, on the basis_of economic mutual assistance,
the further development and deepening of the international socialist division of
labor, and the consistent carrying out of a course aimed at socialist economic
integration. the CEHA countries, working together, are finding the means to resolve
many of the complicated problems and are providing the conditions for stable and
dynamic development. At the same time, under the management conditions of the
1980's, in the process of the work of coordinating the plans also located real
reserves of materials, financial, and labor resources which the countries have at
their disposal for the resolution of the problems that have arisen. The national
planning agencies and the CEHA Committee on Cooperation in the Area of Planning
Activity are applying efforts to locate additional opportunities for the more com-
plete satisfying of the needs of the countries' national economies for fuel. raw
materials, energy, machinery, and equipment, and for expanding the reciprocal trade
in foodstuffs and manufactured consumer goods, which will contribute to the further

development of the economy and the rise in the standard of living in the countries
of the socialist community.

I COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981.

5075
C80: 1825/21

1h
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRADE HITH LDC'S

BOOK 0“ SOUTH YEMEN'S SOCIAL. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Moscow NARODNAYA DEHOKFATICHESKAYA RBSPUBLIKA YEMENA: EKONOHIKA I TORGOVO-
EKONOHICHESKIYE OTNOSHENIYA in Russian l98l(signed to press 26 Apr 81)pp 1-2. 175-176

[Table of contents and brief description of book by V.N. Burmistrov]

[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: NARODNAYA DEHDKRATICEBSKAXA RBSPUBLIKA YEMENA: EKONOHIKA l
TORGOVO-EKONOHICHBSKIYA OTNOSHENIYA (The People‘s Democratic
Republic of Yemen: the Economy and Economic Trade Relations)

Publisher: "Nauka"
Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1981

Signed to Press Date: 24 April 1981
Number of Copies Published: 2000
Number of Pages: 176

Brief Description:

The main directions in the development of South Yemen's economy in the colonial
period, after winning independence, and at the present stage of implementing reforms
in South Yemen are covered. The foreign trade policies, means of state control of
the republic's foreign trade, and basic trends in the development of foreign eco-

nomic trade ties are examined.

Table of Contents
Introduction.................................................................... 3

Chapter 1. Characteristics of the Social-Economic Development of the
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and the Role of Foreign

Trade in the Country's Economy...................................... 11

1. Characteristics of the social-economic development of South Yemen
in the period of colonial enslavement.................................. 11
2. Social-economic reforms in the period of South Yemen's independent

development............................................................ 22

15
roe OFFICIAL us; ONLY
3. General characteristics of South Yemen's present economic state.......
a. The role of foreign trade in the country's economy....,...............
Chapter 2. The Basic Principles of Foreign Trade Policies and the Means of
State Control of South Yemen's Foreign Trade.......................
1. The basic principles of South Yemen's foreign trade policy............
2. The role of the state in South Yemen's foreign trade..................
3. The means of state control of South Yemen's foreign trade.............
Chapter 3. Basic Trends in the Development of South Yemen's Economic
Trade Ties.........................................................
1. The dynamics. structure and geographic distribution of South
Yemen's foreign trade.................................................
2. Characteristics of South Yemen's economic trade ties with
capitalist countries..................................................
3. South Yemen's economic trade ties with developing countries...........
4. Scuth Yemen's economic trade cooperation with socialist countries.....
5. South Yemen's economic trade cooperation with the Soviet Union........
Conclusion.............. ....... ................................................
Appendixes...... ..... ..........................................................
Footnotes......................................................................
COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya redakteiya vostochnoy literatury izdatel'stva "Nauka". 1981
cso: 1807/11: END

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

39
60

65
65
71
78

89
89

113
122
128
136

141
152
172