FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10503

IO May 1982

USSR Report

ECONOMIC _A_FFA|RS
(FOUO 4/82)

I

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

l-‘OIOI'FIGALUSIONLY
nor:

ms publications contain information primarily fron foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

needlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by .1983. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how th original information was
processed. where no processing indi' tor is given, the infor-
nation was sunnrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion lurk and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea: originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

‘Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the [1.8. Government.

OOPYRIQ‘I' LAVS All!) W110” oovmmvc (”WHIP 0F
”TRIALS ”PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10503
10 my 1982

USSR REPORT
Ecouonlc AFFAIRS

(rooo 4/821

CONTENTS

PLANNING AND PLAN mutton
Mtiatage Wooden of Dutchmen“). Plans of Public

Production
(mum WA K mm W

PIANO? WNW I WWW RAZVITIIA 8883, 1980) 1

mm, PRICE, MET AND FINANCE

Improving the Mechanism for Planned amazement of Price:
(A. Iezh0V3 VOW Wu, J“ 82) ooooooooooooooooooo h

INTROIIIOTIO!‘ 01’ m MW!

Target Programing Urged for Scientiﬁc-Technical Progress
(ll. Fedorenko, D. L'vov; VOPROSI mom, Nov 81) ...... 16

- a - [III - USSR - 3 FOUG
FOR OFTTC1AI.IXSEICNULY

PLANNING AND PLAR IMPLEMENTATION

HULTISTAGE OPTIMIZATION OF DEVELOPHENTAL PLANS OF PUBLIC PRODUCTION

Moscow HEIODICRBSKIYE UKAZANIYA K RAZRABOTKB GOSUDARSTVENNYKH PLANOV BKONOHI-
CHESKOGO I SOTSIAL'NOGO RAZVITIYA SSSR in Russian 1980 pp 102-103

[Section from book "Methodological Instructions for working Out of State Plans
for the Economic and Social Development of the UbSR" published by Gosplan USSR,
Izdatel'stvo “Ekonomika"]

[Text] In order to improve the foundation of economic planning, it is
necessary to conduct complex economic mathematical computations for drafts of
long-range plans of economic and social development with the help of interre-
lated systems of economic mathematical models.

It is possible to do optimization of plans uith the help of a multistage (multi-
level) system of models. The bottom‘(base) level for the computations is pro~
vided by sectorial optimization models devrlopad in accordance with a methodol-
ogy of optimization of development and location of production presented in the
section "Planning of Industrial Production" of the present "Methodological In-

structions.“ The intersectorial optimization model, including the intersector-
ial balance of production and production distribution in the national economy
serves as the top (consolidated) level.

Models of different levels are are intercoordinated as to manufactured product
mix and expended resources. Product and resource designation used in making
sectorial calculations must permit the simple aggregation of indicators and
expenditures according to the nomenclature [nomenklatura] of the intersectorial
balance. The general listing of products and sectors on the basis of which
sectorial optimization calculations would have to be conducted are coordinated

with the nomenclature of the intersectorial balance.

Sectorizl calculations are organized and performed in accordance with the meth-
odology of optimization computations of the development and location of produc-

tion. Consolidated optimization developments are conducted on the basis of the.
results of alternative sectorial optimization calculations.

Optimization calculations-are conducted at all levels utilizing alternatives on
the basis of criteria of optimality with changing parameters (indicators).

1
me noun" use (IN! V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In sectoriai calculations, a determination of the sector's production demands
using a minimum of full adduced expenditures is the basic way to formulate

the problem. Calculations should be made for different values of need and
norm of effectiveness of capital investment. No less than two variants

of need are examined: minimum and maximum and also no less than two values

of the norm of effectiveness: minimum (15 percent) and maximum (25 percent).

A total of no fewer than four alternatives of the optimized plan is calculated.

0n the national-economic level, alternative optimization calculations are per-
formed for the maximum of thc_end product in the given structure with limita-
tions on the total volume of capital investment and labor resources. The pro-
portions of the end product and the limits of capital investment and labor re-
sources in this connection are changed within the limits of the real possibil-
ities of the national economy in the planned period. -A final decision on the
plan of development of public production is made on the basis of an analysis
and comparison of all computed optimized versions.

Optimized calculations and their coordination are carried out in ottordancc
with the adopted stages of development of long-range plans of economic and so-

cial development.

In five-year planning, optimization calculations are performed it the last
year of the planned period and in long-term planning-for the last year of
each five-year period.

As a result of preplan calculations on the national-economic level, the top and
bottom levels of proposed outputs oﬁﬁproduction (“brackets") are determined

for all sectors (in the nomenclature of the intersectorial balance). Guided by
these "brackets," scctorial administrative and planning organs develop hypotheses
of need for their products in a more detailed (sectorial) products,list for the

territory of the cauntry.

At the stage of basic guidelines for the long-range plan, alternative sectorial
optimization camputations are performed (in no less than four versions). The
results are discussed and corrected at ministries responsible for the develop-

ment of sectors and at sectorial departments of Gosplsn USSR.

In its final form, each version of the optimised sectorial plan must contain
the following data: volume of production output (in the nomenclature of the
sectorial balance); volume of capital investment; site of labor resources.

The data for all the versions are turned over to the Consolidated Department
of Long-Range Planning as well as to other consolidated and sectorial depart-

ments of Gosplan USSR.

At the national-economic level, the results of the alternative sectarial optim-
ization calculations serve as initial data for the intersectorial optimisation
model. Each sector is presented in it by means of calculated alternatives of
its development; Limitations relating to labor resources and capital invest-
ment and conditionsof the intersectorial balance are introduced into the

model.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculatione are perforesd for the naxinel end product in given alternative ver-
eions of its structure. The coqsrison and malnis oi the developed drafte in
coebination with supplanentary calculations on the basis or the nodel lake it

poesihle to select a final version of the national-econonic develop-total plan.

At the stage of. develop-ant of the full-acne State Plan of lcononic and Social
Development of the USSR. additional optimization calculations are periomd.
The only oonputed voreione of develop-nt of eectore ere introduced into the
intersectorisl optimisation nodel. which provides the possibility of rennin;
consolidated calculations adopted at the stage of basic guidelines.

Through the use of the intereectorial optinieation nodel, a balance tie-in is
carried out of oectoriel plane of development ad location of industry throng:
the redistribution of national-econoeic resources along the eectore for in-
creasing the output'of the end product.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'etvo "Ekonoeika", 1980

769 7
(:50: 81“] 1113

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nmsnmrr. PRICES. BUDGET AND I'MCB

WWII“: m W191 FOR mm mm 0! PRICES
Roscow VOPRDSY exam in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 91-100
[Article by A. Yeshov]

[Text] In the context of advanced socialist society. as was observed at the
26th CPSU Congress. there are important problems in the field of planned price
determination. The products list and assortment of products are increasing
rapidly. the amber of prices is growing as a consequence. and flows of price
data are swelling rapidly. There is a considerable speeding up of the rate at
which the processes take place with governed changes in the products list and
assortment of products. fashion. the balance betveen supply and demand. fac-
tors related to the internal consistency of the price system. and the corre-
spondence of that syst- to its objective fate. All of this sakes it neces-
sery to discover new methods. procedures and equipment for processing the rap-
idly growing flows of econonic infornetionccncerning prices. methods that
guarantee an improvement in the present nethod of managing prices.

It is an utremely conplicated task and one of great inortance to set and
neintain prices reflecting real econolic processes. But. as experience has
shown. the present mechanisn for price nanagemmt still does not always guar-
antee that scientifically sound prices are set and mintained. It is a very
cumbersone nechsnien. and the process of price revision novee rather slovly
and involves large expenditures of labor and money.‘ Ways of further inprov-
ing the mechanism of price management have been defined by the 26th CPSD Con-
gress. by the decree of the CPSU Cntral Co-ittee end USSR Council of Hinis-
ters entitled "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influmce of the
Economic liechaniss on Increasing Production Efficiency and Work Quality." and
by the All-Union Conference on Pricing Affairs (Moscow. April 1980) .- For in-
stance. the "Basic Directions for the Bconoeic and Social Development of the
USSR Over the Period of 1981-1985 and Up to the Year 1990" note: "To ilprove
the setting of prices in the sectors of the econony as an inportant instrummt
in planned management. To strengthen the effect of wholesale prices as an in-
centive for improvement of the quality of products. for speeding up the orga-
nisation of production of highly efficient new technology and replacing out-
dated technology. for sore optimal use of production resources and for reduc-
tion of products production cost. To strengthen state price discipline."

MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the promising directions for performing the tasks which have been set
is to apply the methods of mathematical economics and electronic computers in
the setting of prices; they open up broad opportunities for improving the man-
ageaent of prices of products in various sectors of the economy. Constructive
experience has already been gained in the use of counters in price setting
within the framework of the first and second phases of the automatic price
data processing system (A501 teen). '

Comprehensive use of computers in pricing for setting prices, price review and
for nonitoring observance of state price discipline faces scientists with new
tasks and makes it necessary to do further work on the foundations of pricing
theory and methodology. An important theoretical question, one which also has
great practical inportance. is the question of the criteria in the planned
management of prices which the entities setting prices might use to judge
whether they need to be revised. By the criteria of planned management of
prices we mean integrated indicators that representatively reflect change in
the set of objective factors that lie both on the side of the value basis of
the price and also in the field of the price proper. and which signal the need
to review the prices in effect and also indicate the direction in which they
should be changed.

It is important to distinguish the objective foundations (content) of the cri-
teria for planned management of prices fro- the forns they take. By the ob-
jective foundations of these criteria we mean the set of economic relations
which "unify" the price with its value basis and which influence the need for
review of the prices in effect. A study of the set of relations between the
value basis of the price and the price itself presupposes in turn that we dis-
tinguish between the terms "the price's relative independence" and "the
price's stability interval." which are close. but not identical. and reflect
economic processes in the formation of prices which differ in their depth and
breadth.

The price's relative independence refers to the relative independence of its
movement from the value basis. The deviations of the price from value which
occur in this result from the fact that the price, as a form of value. is sub-
ject to the effect of such specific factors as. say. the relation between sup-
ply and demand. fashion. etc. The price‘s relative independence has objec-
tively imposed limits which depmd on the extent to which the planned price
has developed as an economic form. The limits of the price's relative inde-
pendence also depend on the kind of price involved. For crawls. these lim-
its are considerably narrower for wholesale prices than for retail prices.

The reason for this is that the retail price experiences to a greater degree
than the wholesale price the influence of factors which lie outside the value
basis. since the product is brought through the retail price nechanisn to the
"final" consumer and by virtue of that fact experiences more the effect of the
conditions of consumption than the conditions of production. by contrast with
the wholesale price. Further. depending on what sphere in the process of re-
production the price serves. it will be influenced to a greater or lesser de-
gree by the value basis. If the price "serves” productive consunption. it
experiences a considerably greater influence of its value basis than does the
price which is "serving" personal consumption (for male. the retail price).

5
am omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This occurs because the wholesale price (as an "intermediate" price between
producers and final consullers) is less influenced by the conditions of con-
sumption and nonvalue factors (demand. fashion. etc.).

The price's stability interval characterizes the tine lilits of the price's
relative independence of its value basis and is a masure of the price's "au-
team." The price's stability interval is an internediate link in the es-
cending (fros abstract to concrete) chain of cognition ”value-price." It
characterizes the degree to which the concrete (t' e price) reflects the sore
abstract (the value). The greater the magnitude of the price‘s stability in-
terval. the nore rarely corrections need to be nude in the prices in effect.
And conversely. as this interval shrinks. the objective need arises to review
then nore often.

The size of the price's stability interval. which is a function of its rela-
tive independence (self-sufficiency). is deter-ined by the relations between
the value and the price. The sore highly developed these relations. the
sealler the magnitude of the price's stability interval. This is explained by
the circumstances which follow. As the noney form of value the price met in
the final analysis reflect its value content. A more highly developed content
(other conditions being equal) presupposes that it is reflected more straight-
forwardly in this or that fora. The state of the price's value basis is de-
termined. to be specific. by the extent to which directly social relations are
developed in it. As directly social relations becons stronger. encospassing
the "lower stages" of the essence of the price's value basis and of the price
itself as a category or directly social production in the socialist stage of
development. it increasingly takes on the traits of a planned valuation (for
the ties being still in the value forts) of the expenditures of social labor.
The nagnitude of the price's stability interval decreases as a result. Since
the process of development of directly social relations is irreversible. the
process of reduction of the price's stability interval. which brings about the
need to review the prices in effect nore frequently. is also irreversible.

By the form of the criteria we have been exasining we mean the set of indica-
tors which furnish evidence that a revision of prices has becone unavoidable.
In the econonics literature such forms are provisionally placed in two groups:
qualitative and quantitative.2 The first group includes: updating of the
product list.’ a change in the price's structural scheae (uthenstical nodel);
production of a higher-quality product which is in demand; an increase in the
output of a product which is not selling out at the present prices; revision
of standards. etc. The criteria in the first group do not take into account
all the basic factors in price formation. Their use is not always advisable;
this especially applies to products whose prices are calculated on a computer.
In addition. these criteria are not accurate enough. The second group is node
up of sectorwide profitability rates of a product of the ease kind.

The qualitative and quantitative criteria are closely interrelated. and the
need to revise or preserve the prices in effect is governed by the set of
then. The criteria in the second group are more general; a change in the cri-
teria in the first group ultimately causes a change in the criteria of the
second group and is registered by them. The practical application of criteria

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the second group is also limited. since they do not take into accomt a
amber of mortant objective factors (for maple, the degree of satisfaction
of society‘s need for the product. the balance between supply and demand.
etc.).

The criteria in the first and second groups have played a constructive role in
improving prices. They are being used successfully even at the present time.
But new objective indicators are needed when the computer is used in pricing
and as the processes of price management gradually ”go electronic." To be
specific. development of a universal emery criterion of the planned manage-
ment of prices is very promising. This emery criterion. as a synthetic in-
dicator. should if possible be one that considerably facilitates the work of
bodies setting prices at all levels. one which prepares more favorable soil
for use of up-to-date computers in pricing. one which makes it possible to
standardize the system of managing the prices of products of the various sec-
tors of the economy. and one which improves the quality of price monitoring.
At the same time, this criterion has to reflect the entire cycle of reproduc-
tion. which determines the formation of planned prices. What is needed first
of all in developing such a criterion is to determine the basic factors in
formation of the price's objective basis and the laws which are operative in
forming its magnitude.

The bases of the planned price are the socially necessary expenditures of la-
bor (NIT). which in the context of colnoditydmoney relations take on the form
of value. The ouzr and value are reflected in the socially necessary work
time (W). K. Marx remarked that "the work time socially necessary is that
required to produce an article under the normal conditions of production. and
with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time.” The
socially normal conditions of production (of reproduction) are determined by a
number of dynamic factors and are mobile themselves therefore. The variable
character of the socially normal conditions of reproduction imparts dynamic
behavior to the magnitude of the (NW. But not all economists acknowledge
this. Consequently. they treat the socially normal conditions of reproduction
. 3 stable conditions vhich do not depend on consuption. That accounts for
the static nature of conceptions of the quantitative determinacy of the mv.
For instance, some economists believe that the MV comes about as an average
quantity. while others regard it as a weighted average. Still others suppose
that the am tends toward the maxi-um actual level. yet others toward the
minimum actual level. yet another group that it tends toward a normative level
established in advance. and so on.

The question of the factors in formation of the (NW is also treated in dif—
ferent ways. For instance. some scientists point above all to the dependence
of the ONRV on the level of technology and manpower, denying the role of so-
cial need and social utility in the mechanism of their formation. Other econ-
omists. recognising that social need as a definite role in the process of
forming the WIN. denies social utility as a factor in this process. A third
group. on the contrary. recognizes social utility as a factor in the (NRV and
denies that the social need is such a factor. There are also scientists who
take into accent the definite role of each of these factors in the mechanism
for formation of the crew, but who represent it in different ways.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The idea of factor analysis of the (KEV occurred to the founders of Mar-sisal.
In "Kapital" K. Marx repeatedly touched upon the questions of the vigorous in-
fluence of the factors of social need and sthe social utility of labor (work
tine) on the process of forming the ounv.‘ This was pointed out by P. Engels
as well.‘ Their writings contain an abundant methodological legacy that helps
to elucidate may present-day problens in price formation.

A. Mendel'son was one of the first econowists to note the need for further de-
velopment of the ideas of It. Marx and T. angels in the field of factor analy-
sis of the category (NRV. He paid particular attention to the fact that

K. Marx and 1". Bagels attributed an active role to social need in the labor
theory of value.7 Later V. P. D'yachenko attempted to denonstrate the role of
various factors in the nechanism of forning the (NW under socialise. On the
basis of the classic works of Marxism and Leninian. he furnished the basis for
the active effect of social need on their formation under the conditions of
public ownership of the neans of production.” In particular.l V. P. D'yachsnko
examined how the degree of saturation of social need makes it possible to dis-
cover the socially normal conditions of reproduction, which quantitatively de-
termine the (NW.

But researchers into the category of the mm were unable to explain how every
factor in the (NRV "fits" into the labor theory of value. Yet the letter cir-
cumstance has fundamental importance. The principle of nonism, which holds
that social labor is the basis of value ((1121:. W). is a fundamental point
in the labor theory of value. All the other factors have to be derived from
labor as its constituent elenent.

The production of use values presupposes expenditures of work tine. which are
a function of the personal and material factors of production. since any work
process requires the presence of the subjects of labor (that is. the people
engaged in producing the use values needed by society) and means of produc-
tion. The unity of the personal and material factors. which ensure the normal
flow of the work process. is an indispensable condition for formation of the
ONRV. This characterizes the (NW from the standpoint of production itself
and expresses the social possibility of expaditures of work tine (labor).

The production of use values is always purposive; consequently, expenditures
of labor and work time are always purposive. The labor process is determined
by the basic economic law of socialism, which orients producers expending work
time toward satisfaction of social needs. Aggregate social needs correspond
to total expenditures of work time. and individual needs. as integral cowo-
nents of the aggregate social needs, correspond to individual expenditures of
work time. But in and of itself the need (aggregate. individual) is neutral
to the expenditures of labor. and only the degree of its satisfaction is in-
dicative of their need. Consequently. the level of satisfaction (saturation)
of the social need characterizes the ounv free the standpoint of consunption
proper and represents the social necessity of expenditures of work tine (la-
bor).

work tine, which ensures satisfaction of social needs. figures at the sane
time as socially useful work tine. The utility of work tine (labor) is social

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in nature and depends above all on which needs it is ained at satisfying.

work tine aimd at satisfying more important social needs will possess greater
utility. ‘rhus deciding the question of which actual expenditures of labor
will be recognized as necessary by society and which will not will also depend
on the greater or lesser utility of work tine (degree of utility of work tine).
The degree of utility of work tine characterizes the W from the standpoint
of the unity of production and consumption and represents the social signifi-
cance of work time.

All these factors operate as one and as a group deteraine the process whereby
the (NRV is for-ed. At the sane tine. each of then plays a strictly defined
role in this process. Social labor lies at the basis of the sun. In quanti-
tative term the ouxv will depend on which enterprises in the sector have the
conditions of reproduction which society recognises as necessary. It is so-
cial need. which determines the group of enterprises nanufacturing the bulk of
the products of the sector (within the limits of the given need) that makes it
possible to establish the socially necessary conditions of reproduction.

The social need also makes it possible to determine precisely which enter-
prises of the sector operating under the socially normal conditions (the given
enterprises differ in their individual expenditures of work time) have indi-
vidual work tine that coincides with the socially necessary work tine. For
instance. when the social need is saturated. the magnitude of the ONRV will be
formed as the weighted average of individual expenditures of work tine at en-
terprises operating under the socially normal conditions. "hen the social
need for the product has \not been saturated. the socially normal conditions of
reproduction will gravitate -toward worse conditions and correspondingly the
omzv will gravitate toward the maximum individual work time among the enter-
prises operating under the socially normal conditions. and when it is overeat-
urated. it will gravitate toward the ninimun work time anong such enterprises.’
Let us analyze a structural nodal of the wholesale price, which has not under-
gone serious changes since the twenties and at present takes this fora:

Diagram 1
Product's pro- hterprise's Sales Markup
duction cost profit Turnover
tax Expenses of the Profit of the
Enterprise wholesale price sales orﬂization sales ormisation

Industg wholesale price

The model of the wholesale price includes a number of factors which can be
broken down into two groups: variable and provisionally constant. The fac-
tors in the first group exert a vigorous influence on the price's stability
interval and therefore detenins the limits of the relative independence of
the price and its dynamic behavior. They include the value of the expended
means of production (c) imparted to the finished product and a sizable portion
of the newly created value. specifically that value created by the necessary

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

labor (b) and a portion of the surplus labor (mv). vhich is expressed in the
basic and supplemental wage. The factors in the second group are either rig-
idly fixed in the price (for ample. the turnover tax as a nodified fern of
a portion of the value of the surplus product) or are subject to slight fluc-
tuations as a function of changes in the factors in the first group (for exam-
ple, the portion of the value of the surplus product, expressed in the form of
transfers to econonic incentive funds or the unassigned remainder of profit).

The factors in the first group are identically reflected in the value and in
the production cost.” 'Ihe production cost takes up a sizable share (nore
than 70 percent) of the wholesale price and has a tendency to increase. An
analysis of the structure of an industrial product's production cost (see Ta-
ble 1) shows that the factors in the first group account for the najor "por-
tion."

Table 1. Structure of the Production Cost of Industrial Output in 1980 (in
current prices; relative to the total of all production costs. in

 

percentage)

Industrial Hachinebuilding

Sector as and Metal Hanu- Light
Factor a whole facturm lndustg
Raw materials and basic supplies 62.6 58.8 85.5
Auxiliary supplies 6.3 3.6 2.6
Fuel 3.6 1.1 0.3
Power 2.5 1.9 0.7
Depreciation 7 . 7 6.6 1.6
Wages and social insurance deduc-

tions 14.8 22.5 8.5

Miscellaneous 4.9 5.5 0.8

It follows from the table that the share of c (a factor in the first group) is
80.3 percent in the structure of the production cost of the entire industrial
output. In light industry it exceeds 90 percent. The production cost is a
sufficiently objective and reliable point of reference in setting and revising
prices. But as greater demands are made concerning their soundness. it has
become necessary to improve the processes of its determination. The relevant
measures were drafted at the All~0nion Conference on Pricing Affairs (April
1980). "In order to improve the economic soundness of prices and net output
standards and so that they correctly reflect the socially necessary expendi-
tures in a product's production. it is races-ended that ninistries and depart-
ments inprove their recordkeeping and official calculation of production cost.
tighten up their classification of costs and improve the methods of distribut-
ing indirect costs among products."n

Experience in the setting of prices makes it possible to trans the conclusion
that one of the most inportant indicators of the need to revise existing
prices and to set new once is profitability.” But a change in profitability
is in large part determined by a change in the production cost. The depen-
dence of the price on various factors characterising its stability interval is

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manifested basically as a tendency and lust be taken into account by the sun-
msry criterion for planned nanagenent of prices. It was discovered in the at-
tenpt to substantiate the sector profitability indicator. deter-ined according
to Formals (l). as such s sole criterion that this indicator does not take
into account a number of factors that lie outside the bounds of production
proper:

It - (pl?) - 100 percent. (1)

in which R—profitability of the product of the n-th sector. P—profit. 1?—
value of fixed productive capital and working capital subject to allowances of
enterprises in the n-th sector participating in production of the product.

Just like the value. the price is a category of reproduction. end the price's
stability interval is characterised by factors lying both in the field of pro-
duction and also in the field of consunption. For-ula (1) needs to be per-
fected to "capture" the relevant factors. For this formla to be capable of
use as a model of the sumsry criterion in planned management of prices. it
has to take into account the socially necessary production cost in the deter-
nination of profit. By the socially necessary production cost we seen that
production cost which characterizes the use value produced under the given so-
cially noml conditions of reproduction and at an average level of skill and
intensity of labor.

Formation of the socially necessary production cost is analogous to formation
of the ONRV previously enamined. Once again the socially norml conditions of
reproduction. which will always occur at enterprises manufacturing the bulk
(in the general case more than 50 percent) of the given product. are fundanen-
tal. In this case the socially nornal conditions of reproduction can be con-
cretely stated on the basis of the social demand and. more precisely. fron the
degree of saturation of social demand." If the social demand is satisfied
without a remainder (demand equal to supply). the socially norml conditions
of reproduction will correspond to enterprises where the individual expendi-
tures of labor coincide with the weighted average expenditures for the product
of the sector. If the social demand is not fully saturated. the socially poro-
nal conditions of reproduction would "shift" toward enterprises where the ex-
penditures of labor (production cost) are higher than the average for the sec-
tor. when the social demand is oversaturated. a "shift" occurs in the direc-
tion of the expenditures (production cost) which are lower than the average.

As a function of the real conditions of reproduction of the given product.
then. we should insert in the numerator of Formula (I) that magnitude of the
production cost which will correspond to the product produced under the so-
cially nor-s1 conditions of reproduction. that is. the socially necessary pro-
duction cost. The fornuls of the sector profitability indicator. when modi-
fied in this way. can in our view he applied in practice as a nodal of the
sumary criterion for planned manage-eat of wholesale prices. In this case it
is possible to stand free of the effect of fashion and the social factor on
the wholesale price. since they have a negligible influence on wholesale
prices.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He will explain the operation of the nodal of the cue-cry criterion for plan-
ned manage-ant of pricce with a hypothetical mle.

Table 2. Dependence of the Hholeeale Price on the Sui-nary Criterion

Profit of Enterprise Value of Fixed Productive Capital
Col-odity Price in actor (nillione and Working Capital Subject to

Sruhlee)3 ‘l'e of rublee), P Allovedcee Seillione of rubles). 8
II), 10 80
8 .
6
T8: 20 80
16
12
To: 30 80
24
18
Socially heceeeary Production Change of Price:
Cost of Product no a Function Profitability. a) Upward (-0»);
of Econoeic Conditions 3 - PIP h) Downward (-);
gainione of rubles). 8 {percentage} c No a 0
[1'91] a 60 12.5 0(+)
b 70 10.0 0(+)
c120 7.5 +
[T82] a 40 25.0 0
h 70 20.0 0
c120 15.0 0
[T33] e 40 37.5 0(-)
b 70 30.0 0(-)
c120 22.5 0

Let us auppoee tint et a price equal to re: the profit of mterprieee in the
sector in 16 nillion rubles. the value of fixed productive capital and working
capital euhject to ellovancee ueed in production of that product ie 80 eillion
rublee. We eeeuue that the co-odity'e unit production coet at mterprieee
nanufacturing the hulk of the output ie 100 rublee (uni-m). 70 rublee (aver-
age) and 120 rublea (next-n). we will determine theee eegnitudee on the
ecale of the sector by nultiplying each one by the nueher of conoditiee pro-
duced by the eector. which ie equal to 1 nillion unite. Aa a function of the
level of eatiefaction of eocial dud (social need) for the co-oditiee. we
insert in the numerator of the formula of the wry criterion the corre-
eponding value of the eocially neceeeery production coat (ve obtain the corre-
eponding profit and the magnitude of the eu-ery criterion).

Suppoee that demand for the co-oditiee in fully eatiafied; then under the
conditions which correspond to Variant 2 (lag) in Table 2. and at a socially
neceaeary production out of 70 million rublee (weighted average). the profit-
ability of the eector'e product ie 20 percent (base level). If on thoee cane

lawman“
premises the social denand (need) is ”oversaturated" or "not fully saturated."
this will give evidence of a change in the socially nornal conditions for re-
production of the product. and consequently. of a change in the magnitude of
the socially necessary production cost. than we insert into the nunerator of
the fornuls for the criterion the minim (60 nillion rubles) or maxim- (120
nillion rubles) nagnitude of the production cost, respectively. There will
then be a change in the magnitude of the criterion. which will be equal to 25
or 15 percent. respectively.

Now let us suppose that because of altered conditions of production in the
sector (while the price for the given product has ruined unchanged) there
has been a rise in the socially necessary production cost, and the profit of
enterprisecdtn the sector has dropped to 8 lillion rubles. Then the magnitude
of the criterion drops to half and goes to 10 percent. But if under those
same conditions there is a change in the level of saturation of social denand.
the nagnitude of the criterion will be equal to 7.5 percent. which will mine
it necessary to revise prices of this product (since the change in the nagni-
tude of the criterion exceeded 50 percent of the base level). In this case
the price should be raised. An analogous situation would be typical of Vari-
ant 3. only in this case (3a. 3b) the price would have to be lowered.

in the plane of consumption. This will in turn pronote nore effective use of
the systen of wholesale prices as an econonic lever for increasing the effi-
ciency of the socialist econoay."

should be revised once every 5 years, which is provided for in the decree of
the CPSU Central Conittee end 0889. Council of Ministers dated 12 July 1979.
In outlining the basic ways of iaproving the price nechanisn the decree.
first. is oriented toward the need to lake phoned prices nore flexible as an
important factor in strengthening their role as an incentive.13 Second. it
reflects the difficulties involved in organising and conducting price revi-
sions by the traditional methods. Third, it also records the fact that plan-
ning agencies are not always pro-pt in taking into account price changes that
occur within the period covered by the S~year plan.

Use of the sunny criterion for planned nanaganent of prices within a subsys-
ten of the auto-atic price data processing systen will be conducive to in-
provenent of price setting as an inortant instrument for planned nanagensnt
in accordance with the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

13
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

‘0

5.

6.
7.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M0138

For instance. the 1967 price reform wee in preparation for about 5 years.
and sizable funds were epent to prepare it and carry it out. A huge any
of engineere. technicians. econoniete. ecientiata end eddniatrative per-
sonnel were eqloyed in preparing it. the nevly introduced prices have
played a conatructive role. but they "hecene outdated" rather quickly:
that in. they ceeaed to reflect the conditions of reproduction with euffi-
cint eccuracy. Thia m nnifeeted in the divereity of product profit-
ability and in the decline of the incentive role of pricee. and it node it
neceeeary for euheequent partial chengee to he nude in then. Yet often
when ouch a revision wee taking place. the econo-ic conditiona of a prod-
uct‘e production end eele changed to euch a degree that the nu pricee
vorhed out. even before they took effect. ”hecane out of date" and there
was no point in introducing then. Revieiom of the pricee of particular
co-oditiee. as experience has ahovn. have cmequently "overfloved" to
hecone general revieione. The use of etepped prices in lindted. eince
they operate "blindly”«it is very difficult for thee to take into eccomt
poaeible chance in the economic conditione of a product's production and
eale. liar nethode need to he developed for the planned nenagnent of
pricee.

K. ll. Plotnikov end A. S. Guaaroy. "Sovr-cnnyye prohleay teorii i
prektiki teenoohrazovaniye pri aoteialiue" [Current Problem in the The-
ory and Practice of Price Pot-nation Under Socialian]. Izdatel'etvo
”Neuha." 1971, p 677.

According to data of the USSR State Co-ittee for Pricee. a riee in the
relative share of new producte to 25-35 percent nekee it neceeeary to re-
viae the pricee in effect.

K. Her: and P. hgele. "Soda.” [Horn]. Vol 23, p 67.

K. Marx and P. hgele. "80ch.." Vol 23. p 177: Vol 25. Part I. pp 199.
202, 203; Vol 25. Part II. p 186. etc.

K. Marx and P. Mela. "Soch.." Vol 20. p 321; Vol 21. p 19!. etc.

A. Hendel'eon. "The Concept of the 'Socially heceeaary Labor' at en 31e-
nent in harx' Theory of Value." POD mm mm. No 7-8. 1922.
pp 155-157; A. hendel'eon. "0n the Queetion of Different Vereione in
Treetnent of the Concept 'Socially Neceeaary Labor." P“) mm
mm, No 6-5. 1923. pp 230-2“.

"Neuchnyye oenovy planovogo taenoobraeoveniya" [Scientific .‘oundatione of
Planned Price retention]. Indetel'etvo "saute." 1968. PP l3~39.

For nore detail. eee A. R. Yethov. "Pattern. of Forention of the Socielly

Neceeeary hpendituree of Labor Under Socialiee." unsure Annual RAM
8883. SERRA BNWA. No l. 1981. pp 66-80.

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
10.

ll.

12.

13.

lb.

15.

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The variable factors are represnted in c. v and in part in n in the fore
of the supple-ental wage (bonus). which is added to v. the renainder is
expressed in the provisionally constant factors. The product's produc-
tion cost. just like its value. includes the meat (c + v). here-
over. a negligible portion of the wage (v) is deducted for social insur-
ance, and it therefore pertains to the factors in the second group. But

‘in the further analysis we can neglect this factor. since in quantitative

terns these deductions are negligible and apply equally to the value and
the production cost. In addition. the production cost includesr one other
portion n, which is nsnifested in the fore of deductions for social in-
surance. but it figures in the fore of factors in the second group. Va
should note that in quantitative terns the individual elenants c. v and
part of n. represented in the value and in the product-ion cost; nay coin-
cide (the special case). but they any differ slightly.

"Rekonandatsii Vsesoyuznogo soveahchaniya po voprosan tsenoobrasovaniya.
aostoysvshegoeys 7-8 aprelya 1980 g." [Race-andstions of the All-Union
Conference on Pricing Affairs. ﬁeld 7-8 April 1980]. Preiskurantiadat.
1930, p 5.

If the change in profitability (in the general case) exceeds 50-100 per-
cent. it beconss objectively necessary to revise the prices in effect
(see K. N. Plotnikov and A. s. Gusarov. "Sovrenennyye probleny teorii i
prsktiki tsenoobrazovaniye pri sotsislisne." p 678).

If the levels of the essence (G121) and the content (value) of the objec-
tive basis of the price correspond to the social need of one of the nest
inortsnt factors in deternining the socially nornsl conditions of a prod-
uct's reproduction, the level of the forn (production cost) will corre-
spond to the social duand. which here takes the far- of the social need.
But not every demnd will figure as a factor in daternining the socially
nornel conditions of reproduction which quantitatively determine the so-
cially necessary production cost.- but only that social demand which quan-
titatively expresses the social need. The social densnd, which deviates
quantitatively fron the social need it expresses. will figure as a factor
of the price to the extent that this deviation occurs.

In carrying out the proposed approach. attention should be paid that su-
tonstion effects not only the process of price nansgenent. but indeed all
processes related to drafting and adjusting mltiannual and current plans
for developnent of the country's national mono-y. in which possible
changes of prices within the Sayear period will be taken into accomt by
neans of indices of price changes over the nediun-tern period. Construc-
tive experience in the use of these indicee has already been gained in
the 9th and 10th Five-Year Plans.

Us enanined the flexibility of prices in the context of opti-na conbina-
tion of the stability and nobility of planned prices. Price stability is
an inportent advantage of socialise. At the sane tine stability has ob-
jectively conditioned linita which are rather nobile. Beyond those lin-
its the planned price begins to lose its advantages and is turned into a
brake inhibiting production.

cm: Isdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonodkif'. 1982

7065
080:

15
1310/ 126 ms m1. use. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MON“! 0? RBI W

TARGET We HIGH) 1'08 SCIENTIFIC-MIG“. P3063388
Koscow VOPIOSY mum in heeian No 11. Nov 81 pp 3-“

[Article by s. l’edorenho. new of the seed-y. and 0. PM: mono-u
Strategy and 8c:.entific-Technical Progress"]

[Text] The planned process of applying the advances of sciuce and technology
to the econow requires inprovenant of the entire systen whereby the econs-y
is naneged and consistent inplenentation of the party's scone-1c strategy.
Scientific-technical progress has a leading place in carrying out that strat-
egy and is a powerful neans of increasing the efficiency of social production
and of accoqlinhing the transition of industry. agriculture. construction and
other sectors to predoninsntly intensive nethods of conducting econonic activ-

ity.

The need for widespread application of scientific-technical advances to pro-
duction is determined in the present stage by the conditions of reproduction
that have cone about. The linited nature of the raw nteriale. supplies and
unpower which society possesses to pursue its socioeconomic goals is being
felt more and nore; ever greater resources are being drawn into developosnt of
the nonproductiou sphere. It is also necessary to take into account invest-
ncnt of capital in reconstruction of enterprises whose products are extr-ely
necessary to the national econoq as well as in other projects of the unified
national economic coqlex.

The only way out of the situation that has taken shape is to increase the ef-
fective yield free the ninerals and other raw eaterials ained and to seek out
additional potential for raising labor productivity that will offset the drop
in the growth rates of the able-bodied population. That is why speeding up
scintific-teclnical progress is still one of the lost inortent tasks in un-
aging the national scone-y during the llth Five-Year Plan and in the i-sdiate
future thereafter.

A nighty production and scientific-technical potential has been built in our
comtry so that basic research can be conducted along-all the-lines-o.‘ aci-
nce and techology. Bvery year about 6.000 nu nodels of aachinea. equip-
mt. pieces of apparatus and inatrunente are put into production in the na-
tional econony. Approxinetely the seas nunber of inventions and efficincy
proposals are used in production. In 1979 alone perfornsnce of neasures

16
FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

related to new technology in the industrial sector nade 592,000 workers avail-
able, and the resulting economic benefit snounted to 4.579 nillion rubles.

The sum total of the savings from using inventions and efficiency proposals in
1979 was 6.3 billion rubles.

Yet an analysis of the conditions for applying scientific-technical advances
indicates shortcomings in this field which are holding back technical progress
and the rates of development of production. The output-capital ratio in the
industrial sector was 17.5 percent lower in 1978 than it was in 1970.* The
average annual growth rate of the productivity of social labor was 5 percent
between 1966 and 1979, as against 7.9 percent over the period 1951-1965.“
The rates of reduction of production cost have been slowing don in a number
of sectors of the economy. According to available calculations. every per-
centage point of growth of the national income during the 9th and to acne ex—
tent the 10th Five-Year Plans required a Lia-percent growth of productive cap-
ital. a 1.2-percent growth of physical inputs and a 0.2-vpercent growth of la-
bor input.

There are several reasons for such a contradictory situation. Let us dwell on
sole of then. Scientific-technical development is usually approached from the
standpoint of the established practice of current planning of production on
the basis of the level already attained. Autonouous planning of the develop-
ment of science and technology predominate is not sufficiently linked to
the ultimate socioeconomic results.

Shortcomings in the organization of capital investments and capital construc-
tion. especially the lengthy periods of tine (on the order of 8-12 years) for
erecting new enterprises. sharply reduce the real return fro- scientific-tech-
nical progress. Not uncomnly a progressive design of a nu construction
project. one that nests the highest requirements of the world level, by the
time construction is completed and rated capacity is fully attained is already
"passe" when it begins to function. In renewing the fixed capital of the na-
tional econony by nearly 50 percent in a period of 8-10 years. we still are
not raising the efficiency of capital investmmts. It is precisely here. in
our opinion. that the principal cauaeis to be found for the inadequate return
from scientific-technical progress.

So far a unified cysts. of criteria has still not been built up for evaluating
the efficiency of economic measures and alternative versions of new technol-
ogy. The economic interests of developers. producers and consumers of new
technology are often at cross purposes. The existing organizational forms for
management of scientific-technical progress are not always appropriate to the
specific nature of the processes taking place.

Improvement of the economic sechanism for nsnaging scientific-technical prog-
ress is a couple: problem with many levels and will yield the expected ults
only under the conditions of unswerving implementation of a consistent st- °

* V. Krasovskiy. "Boone-tic Potential: The Unused Portion and the Return."
VOPROSY cream. No 2, 1981. p 92.

** B. Plyshevskiy. "Production Efficiency and the Price." VOPROSY mama.
no 2. 1981, p l9.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

synchronized measures to implement the principles governing the conduct of
economic activity which were set forth by the 8th CPSU Congress. as a body
and in their relationship to one another.

Strengthening the Orientation of Plans for Scientific-Technical Development
Toward Specific Objectives

The planning of science and technology draces two directions: the first is
related to the partial improvements of designs of nschinas. the creation of
new modification. of instruments and equipment. the improvensnt of the quali-
tative paraneters of a product. and so on; the second includes the transition
to fundamentally new technological system. qualitatively nu generations of
machines, and new models and types of products.

The first direction in scientific-technical progress is predoninant in project
planning practice: traditional technology long ago mastered is partially im-
proved and manufactured in larger quantities; equipnent which has become wide-
spread in other countries is purchased. There is no doubt that the potential
for economy to be achieved along this line of scientific-technical progress is
still far free exhausted. The nergence of new and more powerful models of
turbines. tractors. diesel engines. machine tools and other types of machines
and equipment considerably reduces the product's materials intensiveness and
capital intensiveness and raises labor productivity. But it must be taken
into account that this yields a benefit only in the first years of the im-
provement of the traditional technology. In the subsequent stages it drops.
and when a certain limit is reached. use of traditional technological princi-
ples not uncommonly results in an outright loss.*

This situation can be illustrated with the example of the increasing sire of
steam turbines and the rise of their parameters. The transition from turbines
with a capacity of 50.000 low and stean parameters of 90 atmospheres and 530° c
to turbines with a capacity of 500,000-800,000 kw and steam pareneters of 240
atnospheres and 580’ c makes it possible to decrease the consumption of stand-
ard fuel on the order of 80 grams per kilowatt-hour of electric power. But
this rise of fuel economy. as an analysis has shown. occurs extremely movenly.
0f the 80 grams of fuel saved. 72 gram. or 90 percent. are achieved in the
transition to turbines with a capacity of 300.000 kw. and only 10 percent
through the transition to larger turbines (500.000 and 800.000 kw). The econ-
oey from raising the steam parameters also has a tendency to dwindle. and this
results free the existence of a definite technological limit on the rise of
the efficiency of thermal machines. At the sane time the cost of the larger
unit increases in inverse proportion to the fuel economy achieved.“ Obvi-
ously a further rise in the efficiency of generating electric power can be
achieved not by increasing the unit capacities of the machines now in opera-
tion. but by asking the transition to a fundanentally nu technology for

 

* T. Khachaturov. member of the academy. and D. L'voy. “Speeding 0p Scien-
tific-Technical Progress and Raising the Efficiency of Social Production."
VOPROSY “Me No 8. 1966. P 13s

** a. A. Vilenskiy. "Po leninekonu puti sploshnoy elektrifihstsii" [0n Lenin's
Road to Complete Electrification]. Iadatel'stvo ”Nauka." 1969. pp 67-68.

18
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

direct energy conversion and to apparatus that is qualitatively new when com-
pared to the design of present-day thermal turbines.

When only the first direction of scientific-technical progress is used. the
rise in costs and prices of new technology created on the principle of nod-
ernization begins to exceed the increase in the effective benefit—productiv-
ity. capacity. and so on. For instance. for one of the recent nodels of a
grain combine this ratio was 1.10:1. for a new tomato-picking codine it was
1.8:1. for new Iodels of 25-ton trucks it was 1.621. and for a universal lathe
2:1. The price per unit capacity of power transforners has risen 29 percent.
that of steaa turbines 22 percent. and so on.

Finally, there is a certain potential for economy that can be need even within
the limits of the first direction of scientific-technical progress. since its
size is such that it cannot be altogether eahausted during one or two 5-year
periods. But at the same time this line of technical progress cannot be re-
garded as the strategic line, since the possibilities for further improvement
of a major portion of traditional equipment and technology are limited.

The basic potential for economy lies in organic coabination of both the first
and second lines of scientific-technical progress. From the moment it is put
into production in industry and replaces the old technology. the new technol-
ogy augaents the overall potential for efficiency in pursuing the first line
of progress. In this respect it possesses a kind of dual potential. It is a
question of a prior orientation toward creation of fundamentally new equipment
and processes and then subsequently improving then over a certain period of
tine. The second direction opens up possibilities for coqrehensive intensi-
fication of production. which is accompanied by a substantial rise of labor
productivity. economy of physical resources. improved use of productive capi-
tal and a rise of the econoaic benefit to the national "conomy.

If both lines of scientific-technical progress are to be pursued. the system
for planned guidance of the process of creating scientific-technical advances
and their use in production is in need of further improvement. This will
bring about a redistribution of resources. a change in the sectoral stmcture
of the economy. and the perfomnce of new measures to improve the economic
mechanism for management of production. It evidently will take one or two 5-
year periods to carry out this kind of restructuring of planning. In any
case, the real economic benefit free it will be obtained beyond the limits of
the 11th Five-Year Plan. But this is a strategic gain. one that grows in its
scale in econonic consequences. It cannot be compared at all to the current
saving that is achieved by increasing the size of the production run of exist-
ing technology. a saving that dwindles as time passes.

That is why even today we should define the possible outlines of changes in
the economy and also evaluate the socioecononic consequences and necessary
conditions of carrying out the state's long-range technical policy. The first
step on that road should be developing a qualitatively new conception of long-
range socioecononic and scientific-technical development. For instance. when
one of the versions of the long-range develop-eat of the economy over a 20-
yeer period was being worked out. a 2.5-fold increase in the size of the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national income used for consumption and accumulation was projected. Certain
changes were also outlined in the cowosition of the final product related to
redistribution of resources to the advantage of the nonproduction sphere: for
eeample. an increase in the share of fixed nonproductive capital to 37 percent
of the total anount of fixed capital. while the share of setters employed in
the nonproduction sphere rose from 26 to 36.3 percent. Over the 20 years un-
der consideration the volune of resources used for constnption was to increase
2.7-fold.

Such high growth rates of the final social product and the associated struc-
tural changes cannot be achieved solely on the basis of the first line of sci-
entific-technical progress. In large part they in fact dictate use of the
second direction. That is why the next step in carrying out technical policy
should be to select and substantiate fundamentally new technological proce-
dures. This problem can be solved uithin the framework of the comprehensive
program for scientific-technical progress provided that the aethodological ba-
sis for working it out is expanded. that qualitatively new elements are in-
cluded in it to guarantee the objective economic justification of the develop-
nent strategies which are chosen. It is a question of building a nodal of
scientific-technical progress aggregated at the level of the national economy
and of including it in all forecasting calculations.

The ultimate goals of long-range socioeconomic development and the projected
size and coapoaition of the final social product should be taken as the points
of departure in substantiating the requirements that must be met by the tech-
nical methods of achieving thu. Each of the possible tecl'mical methods not
guarantee a growth of the final product of the given magnitude. but with dif-
fering inputs of labor. physical resources and productive capital. that is.
they would be characterised by their particular indicators of efficiency: la-
bor intensiveness. capital intensiveness and Interials intensiveness from the
standpoint of the national economy. The future level of the specific indica-
tors depends on the one hand on the existing (forecast) dynamic behavior of
resources and changes in the material and technical base of production. while
on the other it depends on the possible discrepancy between the conditions to
be ensured by those methods and the final need of the national aconosy. The
degree of that discrepancy figures as a form of society's social assignment
concerning the development of science and technology (the second direction of
scientific-technical progress). In essence the social assignment results fro-
the fact that performance of a portion of the tasks of long-range develop-ant
is not guaranteed by the scientific and technical spadelvorh already done. not
by no means does this signify that that spadevork exhausts all the possibili-
ties for science and technology that exist. Reliance on the spadworh that
exists is detersined to a considerable extent by the inertial nature of the
technical policy of the sectors of the economy. As experience has shown. II-
jor dmlopaents not unto-only prove to be outside the limits of that policy.
and their practical realisation is held back because of the lack of backing
for what might be called the rear erperiaental echelons of academic science.

An equally isportant inpetus for the developaent of new ideas and for defining

possible ways of realising ch- in practice vould be to present to ”big sci-
ence" requiruents imposed on the level of indicators of labor intmivensss.

II'OIOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capital intensiveness and materials intensiveneas from the standpoint of the
national economy insoCar as that level is not assured by the scientific-tech-
nical spadevork. Unless that level is attained. no way can be found to full
realization of the socioeconomic goals. It has to be taken into account that
an interrelationship mats between the objectives and the means of realizing
them. The goals do not energe in and of themselves. but under the imact of a
large nunber of factors. among which a substantial role is played by the ex-
isting level of social technology and by a reckoning of the potential which
science realistically possesses. Changes in the system of goal-oriented de-
velopment exert in turn an influence on the technological aethods in the sec-
tors of the econony. speed up or slow down the output of resources. and so on.
The existence of this interrelationship between objectives and means does not
vacate the general proposition of the purposive orientation of scientific-
technical progress.

As a practical matter it follows from that proposition that the initial compo-
nent of the long-range plan for development of science and technology must be
not the spadework development that already exists. but pronising alternatives
for changing specific indicators of efficiency (labor intensivenese from the
standpoint of the national economy or productivity. capital intensiveness or
the output-capital ratio. and the materials intensiveness of the social prod-
uct). which furnish the economy access to achieving the socioecononic goals _
and which meet the forecast restrictions on resources. But the whole point is
that the dynamic behavior of those indicators is not as a rule all in the sane
direction. Improve-ent of one indicator of social technology is usually ac-
companied by a worsening of some other indicator. For instance. productivity
might rise. and the output-capital ratio drop. or the latter's increase could
in turn be acconpanied by a rise in materials intensivensss. and so on. What
is needed, then. is a kind of economic resultant. which would indicate how

the sun-nary indicator of production efficiency would behave given a particular
uynanic behavior of the indicator of social technology. Total expenditures of
labor (live and embodied) required to achieve a given production result are
naturally taken as such a resultant. But appropriate weighting factors are
necessary to the transition from specific efficiency indicators to a sunny
indicator or to their economic resultant.

There are various methods for this kind of weighting. For example. it has
been proposed that inputs of past labor be converted to live labor by means of
appropriate work equivalents. A method of imputed costs has become widespread
in our project planning practice in which the rate of efficiency of capital
investments figures as the coefficient for reducing heterogeneous cost ele-
nents (current and capital) to a couon denominator. In the theory of optimum
planning a nodified form of imputed costs is in use which relies on eo-called
objectively conditioned assessments of heterogeneous economic resources.

without entering into an analysis of methods of imputing costs. we will note
what they have in comm—heterogeneous cost elaents are reduced to a cannon
denominator. for which purpose total labor expenditures are used. To deter-
mine the latter it is expedient to use rates of efficiency in the employment

21
FOR 0mm]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of resources (labor resources. capital investments. etc.) which can be ob-
tained from the structure of relevant macroeconomic models.“I

Specific indicators of efficiency are converted by means of these rates to a
single culinary indicator--the benefit of scientific-technical progress to the
national economy. In general form this indicator represents the growth of the
economy of resources over two comparable periods (one year compared to an-
other taken as the base. or the first year of the 5-year plan compared to the
last. and so on). The economy itself achieved in a particular year of the
planning frame is determined by the difference in the net output and imputed
inputs of resources (labor investments in fixed productive capital). The ps-
culiarity of this indicator is that the economy of resources related to use of
the version for retooling production that is under consideration is compared
to the economy which would be obtained if the planned amplitude of the final
output were produced under conditions of an unchanged technical base. that is.
if the level of the specific indicators of the efficiency of utilisation of
economic resources did not change. We regard the indicator of the economic
benefit to the national economy. then. as a emery indicator of scientific-
technical progress.

Wherever the benefit is higher. other conditions being equal. the level of
scientific~technical progress is also higher. If the level of the specific
indicators does not change. the benefit of scientific-tedmical progress will
be zero; that is, there is in fact no progress in economic terms. But this
does not mean, of course. that scientific-technical progress ceases to exist
as a process of refinement of knowledge and of its materialization in the torn
of improved implements and subjects of labor and improved forum for organiza-
tion and management of production. In this case we are talking about economi-
cally progressive new technology that reduces inputs of resources for a given
volume of production. It is this task that scientific-technical progress is
expected to perform for social production as a whole. for its sectors. or for
major regional industrial complexes. And it does not count here that certain
measures in the creation and use of nu technology for a specialized or some
other particular purpose may not yield a direct economic benefit.

Society cannot allow a drop in the ultimate efficiency as a whole for the sum
total of measures pertaining to new technology. This means that the require-
ments imposed on the bulk of the new technology realized in the national econ-
osy must be higher so that the economic benefit obtained from it appreciably
exceeds the losses from use of specialized equipment which does not yield a
direct economic return. These higher requirements are reflected in the stand-
ard rates of efficiency of utilization of economic resources. vhich are uni-
form for all sectors of the national economy . in the sectoral differentiation
of the indicators of social teclmology, in the differing rates of development
of sectors which determine that sectoral structure of the economy which is
best from the standpoint of the criterion selected (maximum benefit of scien-
tific-technical progress).

* S. H. Hovahovich and Yu. V. Ovsiyenlto. "0n Definitions and Use of the Rate
of Efficiency of Capital Investments." mmmm I HAMTICBESKIYB mom.
Vol XIII. No b. 1977.

22
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when the problen is stated in this way, at the level of a model the iterative
procedure can be performed to select the best variant of social technology.
including a unit devoted to expert evaluation in order to settle questions
pertaining to possible reconciliation of the indicators of goal-oriented de-
Velopnent should they improve by cospsrison with the social standards. norm
and indicators of econosdc efficiency. The indicators and norms of the effi-
cient utilization of productive resources in the best alternative are taken as
the reference figures or the social assignment for development of science and
technology in the relevant sectors of the scone-y. Their level and rate of
development determine proportions in the distribution of resources among the
sectors of the economy. So, in assigning values to them in the plan. we are
thereby determining as well the total volume of appropriations required to
achieve the goals that have been set on the new organizational and technical
foundation. Uithin the limits of those appropriations it would seen advisable
to create an all-union fund for scientific-technical progress. The special-
purpose orientation of that fund presupposes unity in carrying out teclmical
and investnent policy and a splicing of the plan for scientific-technical de-
velopment with the capital construction plan.

The transition to goal-oriented development of science and technology also ne-
cessitates a nee approach to methods in drafting long-range and medium-term
normative planning documents in the form of a smriution of target prograns
for scientific-technical progress. In such a schene the following mechanisn
might be adopted in composing than. Once they receive the reference figures.
the sectors would draft alternative versions of programs for scientific-tech-
nical and organizational development of production. indicating deadlines. the
volume of capital investments, their distribution in tins and among partici-
pants. and also the volune of other resources which are in short supply. Each
such program should ultimately guarantee the creation of integral technologi-
cal system coco-passing an entire production process and based on an interre-
lated system of machines. '

The justification of the alternative versions of the programs would take into
account the requiranents of the target-program method in such a way that the
assigtmsnts concerning the volune and mix of products and services produced by
the sector would take the form of fixed resultant figures. The efficiency
criterion would be the minimum standard costs for attainment of the final fig-
ures. in which the relevant standard efficiencies in utilization of productive
resources are taken as constraints. The indicators of the sector's capital
intensiveness and labor intensiveness. determined by the reference figures.
would reflect only the lower boundary for the sectors. This means that if a
version can be proposed which within the limits of the given constraints en-
sures lower lsbor intensiveneas and capital intensiveness (than was envisaged
by the reference figures and also by other possible alternative versions of
the programs). then preference must be given to that version.

The figures of the best version must be subjected to analysis from the stand-
point of the interrelationship it ensures between sectoral and regional pro-

duction tasks and also with respect to their fit with its other indicators
(important from the standpoint of the sector). Once the differmt versions of
the sector's programs have been worked up. the best of them are submitted to

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the directive planning authorities—USSR Gosplan and the State Conittee for
Science and Technology. which analyse. reconcile and balance the sectoral pro-
grams for scientific-technical development with respect to resources. stages
and deadlines. lntersector target programs of scientific-technical progress
are consequently composed, and their culinary coqrises the national-economic
level of the plan for development of science and technology. This allows for
iteration in working out the program section: in case of a clash with respect
to resources or deadlines. the sectors receive corrected reference figures.
This continues mtil complete internal consistency is obtained with respect to
resources. deadlines and the physical mix. in accordance with the system of
socioeconomic goals of the long-range plan.

The resources required to carry out the program section of the plan for devel-
opnent of science and technology must be reconciled with the resources of the‘
all-union fund for scientific-technical progress. If balance with respect to
physical resources and personnel is to be maintained within that fund. it is
obviously advisable to work out those resources in a breakdown by sectors and
also a breakdown by regional industrial complexes. From the very outset.
then, each sector and major regional industrial complex is assigned that por-
tion of the resources of the all-union fund which can be used for development
of that sector or complex in the context of the interests of the national
economy. It is that portion which figures as the first restriction in selec-
tion of the best alternative version of the program for scientific-technical
development of the sector or regional industrial complex.

The transition to target-program methods of planning scientific-technical
progress makes it possible to solve still another urgent problem with the ap-
propriete method. This is the comprehensive development of systems of ma-
chines that cut across sectors and guarantee that an entire production cycle.
including not only the basic processes. but also auxiliary processes. is
placed on a new technical basis. To that and it is advisable to plan creation
of systems of interrelated machines for integral technological processes than
the creation of individual machines or types of equipment. In this case as-
signments for new technology will at best have an impact on the performance
indicators of the enterprise applying that technology. Of course. every fin-
ished set of machines that is developed mat be introduced at an industrial
facility. It is only under production conditions that it is possible to de-
termine what gain in productivity. specific investments. the output-capital
ratio. consumption of materials and energy. and so on. will come from use of
the new couple: of machines or the system of those machines and that one can
make a comprehensive evaluation of the ultimate efficiency of the new technol-

ogy.
Improvement of Economic Methods of Managing Scientific-Technical Progress

The prerequisites have now come about for the shaping and further improvement
of the economic mechanism for managing scientific-technical progress as the
basis for performing long-range socioeconomic tasks. kperiance has been ac-
quired and ausmarised in carrying out complex and large-scale scientific-tech-
nical programs. and many progressive conceptions for improvement of the eco-
nomic mechanism of management have been discovered and defined. kperiments

21;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have been conducted and serious steps have been taken toward a radical im-
provement of theecononic nsnagement of the economy as a whole.

But the reorientation of the economic mechanism in the direction of scien-
tific-technical progress is an extremely complicated task. lts accomplith
calls for a set of interrelated measures to he carried out in stages. In car-
rying out the CPSU's economic strategy each of these stages is a link deter-
mining the directions of the state's economic and technical policy in the cor-
responding time interval. Carrying out the measures envisaged by the decree
of the CPSU Central Comittee and USSR Council of Ministers entitled "0n Im-
proving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic ﬂechanisa

on Increasing Production Efficiency and Work Quality" is an iqortant link in
that chain.

Now the task is stated this way: The economic mechanism in all its parts must
function according to uniforn methodological principles of increasing ultimate
production efficiency from the standpoint of the national economy. Perfor-
nance of that task will require creation of certain conditions. the first of
which are these: correlating the plan for development of science and technol-
ogy with the capital construction plan. making the transition to nomtive
methods of resource allocation. strengthening the relationship between prices
and the plan. orienting all levels of managmant toward increasing the effec-
tiveness of scientific-technical progress. making the transition to an incen-
tive system based on the final results for the national economy. gradually
broadening the forms of financing that have been adopted. and guaranteeing a
balanced linkage between financial plans and production plans. He will exam-
ine some of these conditions.

Correlating the Plan for Development of Science and Technology With the Capi~
tal Construction Plan. The scientific-technical progress which 'will determine
the technical level of production and its material and technical bass in 10-15
years is taking aaterial form in the capital investments being carried out to-
day. Unless the correct orientation of capital investments is ensured. and
the entire investment process bent to the task of raising production effi~
ciency. it will be hardly possible to expect an appreciable iaprovement of the
final indicators of economic growth in the future.

At present 70 percent of capital investments are assigaed to reconstruction
and retooling of production. At the same time the share of output that meets
the requirements of the superior quality category is still disproportionately
law. me plan for development of science and technology has to become the
initial base of the capital construction plan. The bull: of capital invest-
ments should be set aside to carry out scientific-technical programs as the
vehicles of new scientific-technical develop-eats. The total value of those
inveetnents night even serve as the principal source for formation of the all-
union fund for scientific-technical progress. It would be best to use the re-
sources of that fund to work on the most iaportant scientific-technical prob-
lens. to carry out target scientific-technical programs. to create integral
technological systems and to apply especially important and efficient inven-
tions and engineering developments.

25
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

research (including basic science as well), applied projects and application
of new technology. At the present tine one of the stages of the cycle has un~
dergone the greatest develop-ant. that stage in which a disproportionately
large technical backlog of innovations is being created for subsequent appli-
cation. But because the plant and equip-eat of pilot plants is inadeqmte.
they have been unable to cope with this flow of technical innovations being
created. Not meet-noun the result is inefficient expenditure of funds for
development of lore and nore new designs on the one hand. while on the other

series production. That means nunerous adjustments and finishing touches dur-
ing the stage of initial application. which takes the men-ants). prototypes
and first production runs more enpensive. Often. noreover. troubleshooting
and elimination of deficiencies in this stage are loo-fold or 1.000-fold lore
expensive than it would be to refine the design nore thoroughly in the second
stage.

Nor are the necessary rates of dwelopnent being altogether guaranteed even in
the first stage. Meanwhile it is here that work is being done on the nost in-
portant key proble-s of science, whose solution is most crucial to develop-ant
of technology. of the scone-y. of production and of science itself. In es-
sence it is here that the long-range strategic spadework of scientific-techni-
cal progress is built up. Equipping this stage of the cycle. then, yields a
sizable benefit. one which is not defined by a reduction in expenditures of
labor. but by a reduction in the conpletion tins of scientific research proj-

used without taking into accent the requirements of scientific-technical
progress. "are that the case. a tremendous nu-ber of neasures for no! tech-
nology and for improve-ant of organization and Ianagenent would not be in-

ﬂating the Transition to Nor-ative Methods of Resource Allocation. The (land
for capital investnents exceeds the real capabilities of capital construction.
FOR OfﬂC'IAL USE ONLY

standard allowances. All of this causes inconsistency between the physical
and value aspects of the plan. The situation can be changed essentially if
the assigned rate of efficiency of investnents is set forth in the plan. In
this case the standard rate of efficiency will reflect the optimum balance be-
tween supply and denand for a generic resource like capital investnents. At
the sane tine this standard sakes it possible to deter-nine the scale of esche-
nisation of laborious processes and introduction of highly productive nan
technological systems. In this sense the standard efficiency of capital in-
vesteents is a kind of "vehicle" of technical progress. That is why the ori—
entation toward the level of this standard signifies an orientation toward in-
creasing the effectiveness of scientific-tecImicel progress and toward en-
forcensnt of the balance with respect to resources and finances achieved in
the plan. Pursuing the course of raising production efficiency presume“
that allocation of the relevant resources to the particular production unit
unfailingly takes into account the greatest efficiency of their utilisation
from the standpoint of the national econony. To that and capital investmts
must be assigned in accordance with the standard efficimcy of capital invest-
nents set forth in the plan.

The following nust be correlated to the level of the standard coefficient of
investnent efficiency: the level of the rate of interest on credit. the
charge for newly added capacities. wholesale prices, rate schedqu and other
econonic norns which are now established indep‘endently of the plan. It is
evident that the charge on assets col-prising construction work unfinished be-
yond the assigned deadlines nust be set at the sane level as the standard rate
of efficiency. Proceeding froe there. the estinsted construction cost ought
to be deternined so as to take into account the charge on unfinished construc-
tion.

The proposed procedure for resource allocation would in our view ensure uni-
forn requirenents as to the efficiency of their utilisation regardless of
sources of financing. The allocation of resources under the progrsns and out-
side then would be approached fron the standpoint of the contribution which
the measures sake. either under the progran or outside it. to the growth of
the benefit of scientific-technical progress. All of this will sake it possi-
ble to raise substantially the level of internal consistency of plans and to
dininish the problen of the shortage of resources.

Orienting the Econonic Mechanis- Towsrd Final Results. A main rise of pro-
duction efficiency cannot be achieved unless we know in specific terns what
that growth expresses and what kind of indicators describe it. The official
nethods for evaluation of the efficiency of scone-1c nsesures not moo-only
contain contradictory reconsndstions. At present for all practical purposes
there do not exist even two nethods docunsnts that are altogether identical in
the netth of conputing the econonic benefit fron the standpoint of the na-
tional seem. in the systen of norms used. in the list of indicators to be
taken into account, and so on. The efficiency of capital invest-unto and of
new technology is evaluated in different ways. as though they were different
factors unrelated to one another. The problen is wounded by the fact that
yet another systen of evaluations is used in cost accounting: such criteria
as profit. production cost. profitability, etc.

27
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All of this acts as a serious drag on carrying out measures to raise the level
of planning work in the national econony envisaged by the decree on imme-
ment of the econouic mechanism. The economic mechanisn must function in all
its parts on uniforn nethods principles reflecting the requirements of raising
the ultimate efficiency of production fron the standpoint of the national
economy. To that end a unifore nethodology for calculating the benefit of
scientific-technical progress should be applied in planning. in price setting
and in economic production incentives. This indicator should figure as a
start-to-finish indicator extending over all levels when decisions are being
nude on creation and application of nev technology. But nodification of the
indicator of the benefit of scintific-technical progress is necessary to en-
suring that calculations of the benefit to be determined at different levels
can be compared and sunariaed.

when specific neasures to apply new technology are being cornered. this indi-
cator is modified to take the for: of the well-known formula of the difference
betveen the upper linit of the price and the annual imputel costs of produc-
tion of the new technology. In the special case when the product raisins un-
changed in its use characteristics and quality. the general fornule of the
benefit of performing the specific measures concerning new technology is modi-
fied to becone the formula of the difference between annual imputed costs. In
the more general case when there is a change not only in the quality. but also
the assortment of the product Ianufactured. one euet deal with a different
type of criterion-the growth of net profit to the national econoqy. At the
level of sectors and the national economy as a whole the indicator of the
growth of nornative net output figures as the criterion that i-plenmnts the
principle of maximizing the benefit of scientific-technical progress.

A large nueber of problens have to be solved to inplelent unifora principles
of econonic coqmtationa based on the benefit of scientific-technical prog-
ress. First of all a direct relation has to be established betwem laterial
incentives and the final results of econonic activity. This applies both to
the wage and also to all forms of material incentives. This approach lust en-
sure a decisive eradication of all forns of leveling in remuneration and the
awarding of bonuses.

The question of broader use of the standard wage deserves attention in this
connection. It would seen to be worthwhile to also discuss the question of
introducing two levels of wager-the guaranteed wage. reflecting occupational.
sectoral and social peculiarities in remuneration of labor. and one that would
not be guaranteed and would be created free the portion of the econoaic bane-
fit of scientific-technical progress and would figure as a supplusntal wage
paid specifically for the final result of production. It is inortant that in
this procedure for for-ring a supplemental fund for remuneration of labor that
its size depend directly on the econony of all types of econonic reamces:
physical and labor resources and capital investnents.

It is inortant to resolve the question of shares in the distribution of in-
come. The standard charge on economic resources eqloyed should be collected
fro. the enterprise. and everything it realises beyond that (net profit)

should be divided by shares between the enterprise and the budget. Foreation

28
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of econonic production incentive funds ought to be made directly and ill-edi-
ately dependent upon the size of the benefit (the growth of net profit).

A number of other problem also need to be solved to introduce a uniform
nethodology for calculating the benefit of scientific-technical progress; the
following. to be specific. are indispensable: gradual reorientation in the
encouragement of quality fron volume indicators (the share of output in the
superior-quality category) to the benefit of technical progress. which re-
flects the econoeic gain of the coast-er of the new product; expansion of the
rights of all-union industrial. production and scientific-production associa-
tions in determination of financial resources. in introduction of specific
forms of remuneration of labor. in the distribution of resources along eco-
no'eic incentive funds. and in conclusion of direct long-tern business con-
tracts: formation of centralized economic incentive funds and cospensation
reserves within entities for administration of the progrens (the size of these
funds night be subject to a norn stated in the percentage of the total value

of projects under the progran. and the deductions to then night he ends from
the resources of consumers or from the state budget).

Acconplishment of these measures is bound up with overcoming a umber of dif-
ficulties. and tins and resources will have to be spent. But their perfor-

mance is in our view an inportant condition for raising the efficiency of so-
cial production and for performing the fundanental task of organically conbin-

ing the advances of the scientific-technical revolution with the advantages of
socialism.

COPYRIGHT: ledatel'stvo ”Pravda". "Voproey ekonomihi". 198!

7065
CSO: 1820 END

29
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY