FOR (ll-‘l-‘K'MI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10579
10 June 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

ms publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials froa foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
smtion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Govern-eat.

COPYRIGH‘ LAWS AND REGUIATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
HUMAN Resouaces

(POUO 6/82)
CONTENTS

LABOR

New Labor Productivity Indicators for Current Plan
(R. Gawilov; VOW EKONCHIKI, m 82) 0000.0 oooooooooo

Coordination of Work Places with Manpower Resources
(V. Cherevan'; VOPRWY EXONCHIKI, Feb 82) ...............

- a - [III - USSR - 38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Full ()l-‘I-‘K 1M. “SI" "NI \

LABOR

NEH LABOR PRODUCTIVITY INDICATORS FOR CURRHIT PIAN
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp'23-32

Latticlg by R. Gavrilov: "Rates. Factors and New Indicators of Labor Productivity
Crowth_'_'/

[react] labor productivity has always been in the center of attention of the Con-

‘ nunist Party and the Soviet Government. which follow V. I. lenin's directive to the
effect that "rise in labor productivity forms one of the fundamental tasks. because
without this a final transition to comnism is impossible."1 Lenin considered la-
bor productivity growth the key prerequisite for social progress and the main con-
dition for the victory of socialism. "Basic Directions in the Economic and Social
Development of the USSR for 1981—1985 and for the Period Until 1990" state the fol-
lowing: "To increase the productivity of national labor by 17 to 20 percent and.
as a result, to obtain no less than 85 to 90 percent of the increase in the nation-
al income."

Rates of Growth and Increase

The planned rates of growth and increase in labor productivity. volumes of output
and number of workers in key sectors of material production in the USSR for 1981-
1985 are higher as compared with the actual rates during the 10th Five-Year Plan
(see table 1).

Labor productivity in material production during the 10th Five-Year Plan grew less
than envisaged. This was one of the reasons for the fact that the planned increase
in the national income was not attained. Unfortunately. it was not possible to
fully avoid the effect of a nurber of objective and subjective factors hampering
production growth, that is. movement of mining and fuel sectors to relatively more
inaccessible and expensive deposits of natural raw materials; incomplete loading
of fixed capital; higher scale of incomplete construction and so forth. it should
also be noted that many industrial. agricultural. construction and transport enter-
prises did not cope with the planned assignments for an increase in labor productiv-
ity owing to work time losses. labor turnover. a slow introduction of new methods
of labor organization and a tardy metering of the planned capacities of new equip-
ment. A nunber of enterprises permit mismanagement. wastefully use raw materials
and violate the policy of economy and thrift. Obsolete gross indicators. which
aimed at increased expenditures of means of production and did not lake it possible
to commensurate the results of management with expenditures and resources with suf-
ficient accuracy. were not last among the factors negatively affecting the level of
labor productivity.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070025-2

2007102109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llllllllllclllllllllllll'

3.? “and.

nn.OINn.O
he.ul "On.HI
o<.OInm.o
OO.OI¢m.O
0H.OIhH.O
00.0InH.O
nu.0lcn.d
o¢.olun.o
~n.0|on.o

Nu.nleh.o
oo.°ncn.o

m~¢.03ac.o

33.55
«0 nouuu

 

o~.co Ian.na

mw.~0n|vo.noH
em.na Iow.uo
QcJNOHImo.HoH
oo.ooHINn.HoH
nw.oodloo.OOH

oo.ooHIoQ.ooH
On.nOHIhw.OOA
HM.NOAIon.H0u
no.~0ulah.aoH
ow.¢OHIoh.nOH
nn.noHIOn.HoH
oc.~oHlee.NoH

      

:28»
mo noun..—

ouoxuo: no woe—52

whoa—no: mo non-52 was 2.38 .auwzuosvouh .393 ca 230qu van 5395 we «3.3 @0533

oa.nucm.~

o~.~lnm.n
O¢.¢Ioo.c
n~.cuaw.m
o~.nnHO.M
hn.nnuo.m
cn.nlao.n
on.onmn.n
on.n|oo.n
oo.~no~.~
mm.oloo.n
O~.nlun.n
on.aan~.c

023.35
we can on

  

NHHInHH

NAHIOnH
«NHINNH

nwaluwﬁ
O~HaoHH
maulouu

oHHIcHH
nnHIHnH
OnuleH
caulwnd
nnulmnd
ONHIwHH

m~aIn~H

5:0.—
uo acuwu

333.68.. .323

     

cw.~lm~.~

«w.~uoo.~
oo.~uo~.~
mn.ctn~.c
05.nlnn.n
en.nuou.n

cm.nno~.n
oo.o
00.nlon.n
oa.nloo.~
oo.wlno.o
Oe.¢loh.n
oo.nlnn.c

   

on 3.35
we «on a»

     

nunluau

nHHAQ—H
anINAH

wNHIMNH
ONHIwHH
onnunnﬂ

oHHINHa
oca
nnHIOMH
haulcau
nemlonu
QNHIONH

wNHIoNH

538
no money

as 26

Anucuauno>cu
.3333 no .533
luddu: uo oaauo> :«v
couuoauuacou .3325 .3
uuonauauu vacuauam .HHH
unauusouuw< .HH
Dunes" coon
ﬂags 2»:
huumavaw wcuxuo: coo:
can Manon-lads. Jun—i...
auumav:u
ouuauouus coauoauuncoo
mauxuoa ”nuns
E... 9:325 2:5!
anuuavua Houusoso
Iouuon van ”wouaozo
amuaaauuua usouu0m
bums—Eu can
~030n ouuuuona
65335
“38:53.5 .H

       

8.30.63 :3»qu .uo
whOuuonn—am VG“ MHOUUOW

«A» :C 32:82 you «mm: 9: 5 83268.. 3238“ we 2838. 3. 5

.u wanna

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CIA-RDP82-00860R000500070025-2

2007/02109:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
FOR (DH-1ft“. “SI“ (DNI \'

The actual rates of labor productivity growth calculated according to the national
income and volumes of output in the sphere of material production were lowered dur-
ing the last three five-year plans (see table 2).

Table 2. Labor Productivity Growth During 8th. 9th and 10th Five-Year Plans in
the USSR National acmomy (in 1 during a 5-year period)*

Labor Productivity 1966-1970 1971-1975 1976-1980
In industry 132 136 117

In agriculture (average annual

calculation for a five-year plan) 137 ' 122 115

la railroad transport 127 12!. 100.5
In construction 122 129 111
National labor productivity 139 125 117

*See "Narodnoye Khozyaystvo SSSR v 1975" [USSR National Economy in 1975/. Statis-
tical Yearbook Izdatel' stvo Statistika. 1976. pp 50. 52 and 54; "8858- v Tsifrakh
v 1980 Codu" _/_ussa in Figures in 19807, Short Statistical Collection, Izdatel'-
stvo Pinansyi Statistika. 1981, pp 27, 33 and 35.

with the purposeful intent of acceleration of the rates of increase in labor pro-
ductivity and their actual reduction the following question arises: How should
the rates of labor productivity growth change objectively at the present stage of
intensification of public reproduction? Economic theory and economic practice an-
swer .it in different ways.

First, as a result of the sharp growth of industrial output. construction work and
freight transport, in which their planned amounts are correlated with the vast at-
tained base and the rates of enlistment of additional workers are not lowered. the
annual rates of increase in output will be reduced. Despite the fact that the in-
creasing amount is added each time, the rates of increase are lowered. Under these
conditions the economic significance of increases rises. Non the economic yield
of 1 percent of increase in the productivity of national labor increases steadily.
Its national economic evaluation in billions of rubles of the national income and
in the form of the relative saving of the amber of workers becomes weightier: 1
percent of increase in the productivity of national labor is now equivalent to the
saving of 1 million annual workers.

Second, the level of labor productivity is calculated in the form of a fraction
in which the numerator is output and the denominator is the nunber of workers.
Now it is more advantageous to raise the rates of increase in the productivity of
national labor and labor productivity in key material production sectors as a re-
sult of the disengagement of the superfluous number of workers with their redis-
tribution in the nonproduction sphere.

Increase in mtput Created as a Result of Rise in Labor Productivity

An increase in the volume of output of the national economy and its individual
sectors and subsectors is attained as a result of the growth of output and the
number of workers (except for agriculture. where the nuwer of employees decreases
constantly). At many associations and enterprises most connonly their simultaneous

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

growth occurs and less comnly output increases only as a result of a rise in la-
bor productivity (primrily at enterprises operating by the Shchekino method or
successfully applying brigade forms of labor organization). “the following pattern
is inherent in the entire national economy and its main sectors: The rates of 1a-
hor productivity growth are higher than the rates of enlistment of additional
groups of workers.

0. Sorokin. corresponding melber of the USSR Academy of Sciences, writes the fol-
lowing with good reason: "Intensive factors in expanded reproduction (production
growth) can be measured reliably with output obtained as a result of labor produc-
tivity growth."2 In fact. the increase in output is the decisive criterion of ex-
panded reproduction and the part that is obtained through an increase in the pro-
ductivity of labor of material production workers. within it. At the same time.
it is necessary to strive for a decrease in the capital-output ratio. According
to our calculations. during the current fivedyear plan note than 90 percent of the
increase in industrial output. lore than 73.5 percent of the increase in railroad
transport and 100 percent of the increase in the output of capital construction
and agriculture is to be obtained as a result of labor productivity. 111s construc-
tion materials. structures and parts industry. light industry. coal industry. non-
ferrous metallurgy and fish industry. when the upper "fork" of national econonic
directives is fulfilled, will ensure increasing volumes of output primarily as a
result of labor productivity growth.

At present the theory and practice of economic measurements. in particular the cal-
culations of the proportions of increase in industrial output. construction work
and freight transport, are improved constantly. In our opinion. it is advisable to
refine the formla of calculation recomended in "liethodological Directives for
the Preparation of State Plans."3 ‘lhe point is that the formla (AIL-increase in
output; A‘lpuincrease in the nunber of workers)

An-Allp mp
. ,-_____-(l-_)
”'pr An All

"worked" quite accurately as long as in most sectors .mﬁid not exceed 75 to
80 percent. Now this proportion has risen to 90 or 95 percent and an inaccuracy
of even 0.3 to 0.8 percent obtained during its use leads to an error in the cal-
culations of the saving of workers from 1 to 1.5 million people.“

A rise in labor productivity plays a decisive role in the formation of increases
in industrial output in the USSR. During the years of the Seventh. Eighth and
Ninth Five-Year Plans the proportion of the increase in industrial output created
as a result of a rise in labor productivity increased to 85 percent. The 26th
party congress again adopted the policy of further increase in the proportion of
the increase in output as a result of labor productivity. By the end of 1985 it
will reach 90.1 to 91.4 percent. In the last year of the current five-year plan
the gross output of USSR industry will exceed its volume at the end of the 10th
Five-Year Plan by [63 to 175 billion rubles. At the same time. 146 to 158 billion
rubles will be created asaresult of labor productivity growth (see table 3).

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1.“ Us!” UNI \

Table 3. Dynamics of Output. Labor Productivity. Nunber of Workers and Proportion
of Increase in Industrial Output as a Result of Rise in Labor Productivity
(1913-1)
Indicators 1928 1932 1937 1950 1960 1970 1975 1980 1985

————————————————-<&21
Gross industrial

output 1.32 2.67 5.88 13.3 60.32 91.5 130.85 162.25 206.6-
Labor productiv- 207.7
ity in industry 1.2 1.7 3.0 5.5 11.10 18.5 26.8 29.02 35.7-
Size of indus- 36.3
trial produc- '
tion personnel 1.1 1.571 1.960 2.618 3.632 6.966 5.277 5.592 5.72-
Proportion of 5.73

increase in out-

put created as

a result of rise

in labor produc-

tivity (in 2) 67.2 69.9 67.0 67.2 71.8 71.9 86.3 75.2 90.1-
91.6

allculated according to the following: "Sotsialisticheskoye Stroitel'stvo SSSR"
isocialist Construction of the 0885/, Central Administration of the Statistical
Survey of the National Economy of the USSR State Planning Comittee. Moscow 1935,
p XL; "Narodnoye Khozysystvo SSSR v 1956 g." 1035!! National Economy in 1956 . Gos-
statizdat, 1957, pp (.0 and s1; "Pronyshlennost' sssn" [Essa lndustr¥’/._Gosstatiz-
dat. 1957. p 9; "Dostizheniya Sovetskoy Vlasti as 60 Let v Tsifrakh LAchieveuents
of Soviet Government_in 60 Years in Figureg7. Gosstatizdat, 1957, pp 26-28; "Strana
Sovetov as 50 Let" 1mm of the Soviets in 50 Yang]. Izdatgl'stvo Statistika. 1967.
pp 2§. 51 and 112; "Nsrodnoye Khozyaystvo SSSR v 1970 3." 111881! National Economy in
1279/. lzdatel'atvo Statistilta, 1971; pp 55 and 65; 'liaterialy XXV s'yezda KPSS"
lusterigls of the 25th CPSU Congresgl, Politizdat, 1976; 'lhterialy XXVI s'yezda
KPSS" Lusterials of the 26th CPSU Congresg7, Politizdat. 1981.

The change in gross industrial output is presented in the prices and according to
the methodology of calculation of the corresponding years: for 1913-1950 in the
prices of 1926/27; for l950~1955 in the wholesale prices of enterprises on 1 Jamsry
l952; for 1955-1967 in the wholesale prices of enterprises on 1 January l955;after
1967 in the wholesale prices of enterprises on 1.lanuary 1967; for l9l 3-1937 ulthin the
hunt-rs of the territory until 17 Noveuber 1939 and for 1960-1980 within the present
borders of the USSR.

A big relative saving of mnpower will be attained throughout the national economy
during the Current five-year plan. Without labor productivity growth nterial pro-
ductlon sectors would additionally need 17 to 19 million workers. including 8.7 to
9.6 million people in industry. All this has as its ultimate goal a rise in labor
productivity to a level in which it is not only not necessary to enlist additional
workers in mterial production. but it becomes possible to lower their absolute
hunter.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fm: tors in labor Productivity Growth

me USSR State Planning Col-sittee modified the single classification of factors in
the dynamics of labor productivity. putting the factor "atmctural shifts in pro-
duction" in the first place. For the llth Five-Year Plan in contrast to previous
f ive-year plans the change in the proportion of individual types of products and
industries in the grand total of mnagement is taken into account in the plan and
the report as the basic factor in labor productivity growth at ministries. asso-
ciations and enterprises.

Ministries plan and report on structural shifts in subsectors and associations.
associations. on structural shifts among enterprises and the latter plan them among
individual types of products and operations. The relative saving of the nuaber of
workers is the final characteristic of this factor. In calculations of the labor
intensiveness of the production program the saving of nnpower is recalculated in
terms of the saving of work-hours or Inn-hours.

'lhe concept "structural shifts" used in labor economics is derivative from the
broader concept of "rates and proportions of reproduction." Ultimately. structural
shifts in the gross national product lead to the regrouping of labor resources in
favor of the nonproduction sphere. hiring the preceding five-year plan the factor
of structural shifts in production did not give a full return. The output of econ-
omical products was not accelerated properly. Sectors developing economical rolled
netal products, quality cement and nonmterial-intensive metallurgical equipment
retained indebted to the national economy. he advancenent during this five-year
plan of the factor of structural shifts as determining as conpared with such fac-
tors as rise in the technical level of production and inrovement in the management
and organization of production and labor is the consequence of progressive changes
of key national economic proportions (increase in the share of the consumption fund
in the national income, more rapid growth of group "B" in industry and change in
territorial proportions and in the structure of the fuel balance). ‘lhe reorienta-
tion of the economic significance of factors in labor productivity growth as a re-
sult of the advancement of structural shifts to the first place aims at a prefer-
ential increase in the volumes of output for which there are the most favorable
possibilities of lowering labor expenditures.

Technical progress is the basis for labor productivity growth. At the same time.
the method of calculating the share of scientific and technical progress in an in-
crease in labor productivity needs to be further developed. because. according to
the calculations of various researchers. it ranges from 30 to 60 percent. In part-
icular. in our opinion. the view that the determination of this share at the level
of 30 percent is obviously understated is substantiated. About 60 percent of the
increase in labor productivity in the national ec only was attained as a result of
the rise in the nachine-uorker ratio in 1966-1970. No less than 60 percent of the
increase in the productivity of national labor is to be obtained as a result of
scientific and technical progress and the introduction of labor-saving equipment
and technology during the llth Five-Year Plan.“

Planning the effect of technical progress on labor productivity growth. it is not
enough to limit ourselves only to its labor-saving function. The full national
economic return of scientific and technical progress is manifested not only and

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-l ONLY

not so much in labor productivity growth understood in the narrow sense of the
word (saving of live labor) as in a rise in labor productivity in the broad sense
of the word (saving of total expenditures of live and embodied labor). The dynam-
ics of this indicator during 3 years of the past five-year plan in the RSFSR in-
dustry can be judged from the data in table 6 (in 1).

Table 4*

Indicators 1976 1977 1978 1976-1978

Share of increase in labor productivity in
RSFSR industry as a result of introduction
of all new technology measures 58.8 50.2 59.0 55.6
including as a result of measures:
increasing the productivity of live
labor 47.1 39.1 48.1 44.6
ensuring the saving of embodied labor 11.7 11.1 10.9 11.2

*PLANOVOYB KHOZYAYSTVO. No 3. 1981, p 110.

The correlation of the expenditure of live and embodied labor per unit of output

under the effect of technical progress changes differently at different times and
in different sectors, but a simultaneous reduction in both (with a more rapid re-
duction in the expenditures of live labor) remains the general trend.

Two stages in the development of expanded reproduction of the intensive type are
distinguished in the economic literature.8 The second occurs on the basis of the
aspects of technical progress in which full expenditures per unit of output are
reduced. From the point of view of the theory and practice of labor productivity
growth this presupposes that an increase in output per worker is necessarily accom-
panied by an absolute or relative reduction in production costs. An absolute re-
duction in production costs occurs primarily in new types of products for produc-
tion or personal consumption. A relative reduction in production costs occurs in
all types of products and, primarily, those whose price rise is due to natural and
climatic conditions. Without such a relative reduction in full expenditures, which
is the consequence of labor productivity growth on the basis of technical progress.
most traditional and new types of products would cost much more as compared with
actual costs.

The rates of growth of the capital-labor ratio at the first stage of expanded re-
production of the intensive type are much higher than the rates of growth of out-
put per worker at the second stage. The same pattern is also characteristic of

the dynamics of the output-capital ratio. that is. the capital intensiveness of
output grows more slowly during the introduction of technical facilities increasing
labor productivity not only as a result of the saving of live labor. but also as a
result of the reduction in full expenditures of live and past labor per unit of
output.

The beginning of the five-year plan shows that many enterprises again fulfill the
planned volumes of output. construction work and transport operations with non-
observance of the planned rates of labor productivity growth and this means that

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-1"“ 1:". USE ONI.\

the number of workers at them is higher than planned. A hidden surplus of person-
nel or ID to 15 percent of all the employees was formed at mny enterprises.9 Ba-
sically, this occurs at enterprises where there is no brigade form of labor organi-
zation and the Shela-lino method of work and the Aksay experience in labor standardi-
ization are not introduced. The long-condemned practice of correction of plans

for labor productivity growth toward a reduction is revived at such enterprises.

At the same time. it is characteristic that cases of a simltaneous correction of
plans for products and output are much less frequent than cases of corrections of
the planned assignment for the growth of output alone. In practice. this leads to
the output of the necessary volumes of products at "any price."

nu.- experience of the country's advanced enterprises indicates that a full util i-
sation of the potentials for labor productivity growth is attained where the intro-
duction of new equipment. technologies and materials is accompanied by a parallel
improvement in the organization of production. labor and management. At the same
time. not only an improvement in the forms and methods of labor, but also an ob-
servance of elementary discipline and personal responsibility. is important. In
their absence mismnagement and a lack of initiative arise. Labor intensity lags
behind the normal level. On the average. about 1 million workers are idle at work
places in industry and construction every day.” As a result. new equipment, ad-
vanced technological processes and progressive materials do not give the proper ef-
fect owing to the different types of violations of labor organization. 'lhe min
potential for labor productivity growth is connected with a group of social and e-
conomic factors and with an elimination of the lack of coordination in work.

It is advisable to solve another problem. that is. to enable the administrations

of enterprises and associations to establish the nuuber of workers in accordance
with changing production conditions and within the limits of the planned wage fund
or standard of wage expenditures per ruble of output (comodity and standard net
output). Now the mnagement of enterprises cannot change the correlation of the
nuuber of workers in basic and auxiliary shops, lathe operators and repairmen, time
and piece—rate workers. engineers. technologists and workers owing to rigid tables
of organization. he management of enterprises has no freedom of uncovering posi-
tions. Hence the cases of employment of workers in operations not corresponding

to their positions and salaries. when it is impossible to increase the number of
workers of one category at the expense of another, enterprises seek additional
rates in the scarce category, maintaining the surplus in other categories of
workers.

New labor Indicators

me. directive assignments for an increase in labor productivity for the 11th Five-
Year Plan are higher than the actual rates of increase in this indicator during the
lmh Five-Year Plan. Therefore. it is necessary to utilize all the existing poten-
tials and to improve the mechanism of labor management. First of all. this applies
to planning according to the new indicators determined by the decree of the CPSU
Central Comittee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Improving Planning and
Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism on Increasing Production Ef-

ficiency and work Quality" (1979).
During the 11th Five-Year Plan the economic activity of processing industry enter-

prises will be evaluated not according to "gross output," but according to stand-
ard net output. In its economic nature it represents a standard evaluation of the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I-‘N'IAI. liSl-i ONLY

labor intensiveness of the production program. It fully reflects the necessary
product, because standards take into account the entire wage fund and a significant
part of the surplus product, since the profitability established in standards, in
practice, does not reflect only the turnover tax on articles of group "B." With
such an approach the effect of the value of means of production transferred to the
output of enterprises is leveled. Not the labor of supplier enterprises. but in-
ternal labor, is put in the forefront. In 1981 more than 2,500 enterprises used
this new indicator“- and in 1982 a total of 42 Union ministries will adopt it.12

The methodological directivsfor the procedure of development and application of
standards of net output are now nude more specific and sectorial methods are pre-
pared on their basis. Average sectorial standards are developed in most of the in-
dustrial sectors transferred to the use of the new indicator. A creative approach
to standard net output presupposes an observance of the basic principles of calcu-
lation of standards on the basis of average sectorial expenditures of live labor
for the same articles. At the same time, it is advisable to use different methods
of calculation of individual standard elements. Experience shows that the devel-
opment of standards in mchine building has its differences from their development
in the chemical and petrochemical industry. Distinctive characteristics are also
noted in metal working and at pharmaceutical enterprises. The sizes of cooperated
deliveries and the nature of production (custom, series and was production) greatly
affect the methods of calculation.

The introduction of the new economic indicator. on the basis of which several deri-
vatives are calculated, into the practice of management is connected with certain
methodological and organizational difficulties. Now in the course of the mass
transfer of enterprises to planning according to standard net output it is neces-
sary to maximally approximte standards to socially necessary expenditures of live
labor, to correctly determine the amount of wages of personnel for the masgemen:
and servicing of production in standards of net output per article and to recalcu-
late the amount of profit on articles for which its amount is established accord-
ing to the level of profitability with respect to full production costs. 'll'le es-
tablishment of standards of net output for consumer goods not having approved whole-
sale prices requires special attention.

'ihe task of realization of the overall object program for a reduction of annual
labor, whose amount in industrial sectors and construction still remains within 30
to 50 percent, is forwlated in the decree on an iwrovement in the economic mech-
anism. A reduction in the share of annual labor occurs slowly. Its imperfect cal-
culation is one of the reasons. With the growth of mechanization and automation
(increase in the capital-labor ratio) the number of highly skilled workers servic-
ing modern machine tools, machines and equipment grows. However, according to the
existing classification of occupations and jobs this category of workers belongs
to workers in annual labor with machines. Therefore, when labor mechanization is
objectively accoupanied by an increase in workers in such positions, a reduction
in the share of manual labor does not occur.

In the plan for economic and social development long-term (for 5 years with an an-
nual breakdown) standards of wages per ruble of output are approved for industrial
ministries, associations and enterprises. The more output is created with a

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USF. ONLY

smaller nutter of workers, the higher the average wages will be, because the wage
fund is determined through this standard with respect to the value of output. The
saving on the wage fund remains at the disposal of the enterprise. It can be spent
on incentives for a high occupational skill at the rate of lo, 8 and 12 percent of
the wage rate. ﬂirty-percent increments for the quality of work were introduced
for engineering and technical personnel. For holding two jobs and fulfilling the
volume of work with a smaller nunber of people the amount of the increment for wor-
kers was increased from 30 to 50 percent of the wage rate.

The industry's wage fund, being the main source of wages, now also predetermines
the dynamics of average wages. The planning of the wage fund on the basis .of the
level attained during preceding periods did not interest enterprises in reducing
the nunber of workers, because the increase in average wages was planned with due
regard for the increase in workers. However, the standard planning of this fund
nukes it possible to more closely connect it with the end results of mnagement
and promotes a reduction in the nutter of workers. By the beginning of the current
five-year plan the standard planning of the wage fund was introduced at the enter-
prises of the Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural Machine Building. the Ministry
of Chemical and Petroleum Machine Building, the Ministry of Instrument Making, Autom-
tion Equipment and Control Systems, the Ministry of Titer and Hood Working Indus—
try and the Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Building. The experiment pro-
duced positive results. The use of standard net output with averaged profit in
coubination with the standard planning of the wage fund nukes it possible to nore
fully take into account the change in the labor intensivmess of output.

"Basic Statutes on the Formation and Expenditure of the Material Incentive Fund
and the Fund for Social-Cultural Measures and Housing Construction (Incentive
Funds) in 1981-1985" approved by the USSR State Planning Comittee. the USSR Min-
istry of Finance, the USSR State Comittee for Labor and Social Problems and the
All-Union Central Trade-Union Council stipulate that the total nunber of fund form-
ing indicators for each individual association and enterprise should not exceed
two or three. They include the assignment for labor productivity growth. for whose
stimlation no less than 50 percent of the annual incentive fund will be assigned.
The Interdepartmental Commission under the USSR State Planning Comittee approved
as fund forming indicators labor productivity growth and the proportion of output
in the superior-quality category for 18 ministries (the Ministry of Machine Tool
and Tool Building Industry, the Ministry of Power Machine Building, the Ministry
of Heavy and Transport Machine Building, the Ministry of Machine Building for
Light and Food Industry and Household Appliances, the Ministry of hactor and Ag-
ricultural Machine Building and so forth) and labor productivity growth and in-
crease in the volume of output for seven ministries (the Ministry of Gas Industry.
the Ministry of Maritime Fleet, the Ministry of Food Industry, the Ministry of
Fish Industry, the Ministry of Railways and so forth). Ministries and depart-ants
can also establish other fund forning indicators, that is, saving of material re-
sources. increase in the output-capual ratio, reduction in production costs and
increase in the shift coefficient. for individual subsectors, associations and en-
terprises with due regard for the characteristics of their work.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Polnoye Sobraniye Sochineniy" LEomplete Works], Vol 38, p 97.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

ll.

12.

FOR OFFN’IAI USE ONLY

u. Sorokin, “Intensive Factors in Economic Growth" (PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO No
10, 1981, p 12).

See "Hetodicheskiye Ukszaniya k Razrabotke Gosudarstvennykh Planov Ekononiches-
kogo i Sotsisl'nogo Razvitiya SSSR" luethodological Directives for the Prepara-
tion of State Plans for the Economic and Social Development of the US$37, Iz-
datel'stvo Ekonomika, 1980. pp 515-516.

See "Voprosy lzLuereniya Proizvoditel'nosti Trude v Otraslyakh Nsrodnogo Khoz-
yaystva SSSR" lProblems of Meamrenent of Labor Productivity in the Sectors of
the USSR National Econou17, Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences, Moscow, 1976, pp 61-66.

See VOPROSY DQCNOMIKI, No 7, 1975. p 82.

See SOTSIALISTICRESKAYA INDUSTRIYA, 17 my 1981.

See "Obshchestvennaya Proizvoditel'nost' Truda. Hetodglogiys Izmereniya" [ja-
tional Labor Productivity. Methodology of Measurement], Minsk, Nauka i Tekh-
nika, 1980, pp 22-24; C. Sorokin, "Intensive Factors in Economic Growth" (PLA-
NOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO. No ’0, 1981, p 11).

See A. Notkin, "hype of Expanded Reproduction Under Developed Socialism" (V0?-
ROSY EKONOHIKI. No 8, 1975. Pp 10-11).

See P. Shumenkov. "Labor Resources Must Be Utilized nationally and Econouic-
ally" (SO‘I‘SIALISTICHESKIY TRUD. No lo. 1981. p 109).

SOTSIALISTICHESKAYA INDUSTRIYA, 17 May 1981.

See V. lvanchenko, "Place of Control Figures in the Organization of Planning"
(VOPROSY HCONOHIKI. No 3, 1981, p 66).

See D. Karpukhin. "Economic Mechanism and Labor" (VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 3,
1981, p 133); EKONOMICHESKAYA GAZETA. No 32, 1981, p 11.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki". 1982

11 .439

C80:

1828/75

11
FOR OFFK 1.“. USE ONLY
FOR OFHFIAL USE ONLY

LABOR

COORDINATIW OF WORK PLACES WITH MANPOWER RBSOURCBS
Moscow VOPROSY mean in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 51-61

lirticle by .V. Cherevan', Leningrad: "Coordination of Reproduction of work Places
Hith Labor Resourcesi7

[text] the economic and social program for the further developmsntofthe national
economy worked out by the party for the 11th Five-Year Plan envisages a dynamic
and balanced development of the econosu and a proportional growth of all sectors.
every Union republic and region. At the same time. such attention is paid to the
attainment of a balance of existing and newly created work places with labor re-
sources and the provision of newly counisaioned enterprises with personnel.

A planned maintenance of the correspondence between labor resources and means of
labor is one of the most important conditions for the proportionality of socialist
reproduction and the economic basis for an increase in the effectiveness of capital
investments. fixed capital and new equipment and for the accomplish-ant of urgent
social and political tasks. '

An organic connection of means of labor and mnpoweruphysical and personal factors
in production--is characteristic of every stage in economic development and each
social and historical structure. K. Marx noted that "no utter what the social
foras of production may be. workers and means of production always remain its fac-
tors."1 However. the nature and method of establishment of the correspondence bet-
ween private and physical factors in production are determined in each social and
economic structure by its characteristics and the operation of specific economic
laws.

In unity with the basic economic law and the law of planned and proportionate de-
velopment under socialism a change in the correlation of personal and physical fac-
tors is affected, among others, by the laws of population, accumlation and change
of labor. These laws are called upon to ensure a quantitative and qualitative cor-
respondence between personal and physical factors in production.2

(bjectively, under socialism economic laws make it possible to ensure a proportion-
ality between means of labor and mnpower. However. the possibilities for aplanned
utilization of these laws for a balance of personal and physical factors in pro-
duction in economic practice are not realized quite fully. In particular, the data
on the aveilabilityof experfluous work places notprovided'with labor resources in the
national economy indicate this. More than 2 million new work places were created
in industry during the Ninth Five-Year Plan and more than 1 million. during the
10th Five-Year Plan. 'lhese places were not fully provided with labor resources.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll-'IV'IAI, USE ONLY

The problem of noncorrespondence between mnpower and places of application of la-
bor is especially acute in large industrial centers--Moacw. Lullhmrml. chv. ﬁvuru
dlovsk. Novosibirsk and so forth. Investigations show that the lack of provision

of work places with cadres of workers in cities with a population exceeding 1 mil-

lion is approximately 60 percent higher than in cities with a population of up to
500.000.

A violation of the proportionality between means of labor and mnpower hampers a
normal functioning of the national economy. lowers the effectiveness of capital in-
vestments and leads to intolerable losses. For example. an analysis of the planned
and actual effectiveness of capital investments in the moat iuportant directions

of scientific and technical progress in machine building in Leningrad during the
10th Five-Year Plan disclosed that. as a result of an incorplete utilization of
new equipment due to the lack of provision of cadres of workers. on the average.
annual output worth 15 million rubles was not obtained.

me noncorrespondence of the nuwer of work places to the number of workers does
damage not only to the economy. but to the social development of the individual as
well and has a negative effect on the socialist nature of labor. 0n the one hand.
confidence in the "scarcity" of their occupations promptssone workers to break la-
bor discipline and intensifies personnel turnover. On the other hand, it forces
enterprise mnagers. in order to compensate for this "scarcity." to give unsubstan-
tiated rewards for labor, that is. to increase bonuses and to grant other privileges.

The reduction in the shift coefficient of equipment operation is the direct reflec-
tion of the availability of work places. At present in our country this indicator
is one of the lowest among economically developed countries throughout the world.

In the economic literature in the last few years serious attempts have been made'
to uncover the reasons for the formation of the noncorrespondence between the num-
ber of work places and the size of manpower. Often. however. the problem of a bal-
ance of personal and physical factors in production is connected with the reduction
in the increase in the able-bodied population. decline in the birth rate and so
forth. Not belittling the importance of and need for the control of demographic
processes. primarily through the stimlation of the population's reproduction.
nevertheless it does not seen possible to ensure a full occupation of existing and
newly created work places at the expense of this factor at present and. moreover,
in the very near future. 'lhe min reasons for such a noncorrespondence are econ-
omic and.primarily. the slow reorganization of the reproduction of fixed productive
capital. weak coordination between sectorial and territorial planning and insuffi-
cient control of this process on the part of planning and party bodies.

The insufficient consideration of the territorial characteristics of formation of
labor resources during the substantiation of sectorial plans for industrial produc-
tion and the development of production capacities is a concrete mnifestation of
the poor coordination. As a rule, the planned rates of growth of output outstrip
the real possibilities for a rise in labor productivity through measures of scien-
tific and technical progress (development of production capacities) and the real
increase in the number of labor resources in a region. The need for manpower.

like the balance of labor resources. is calculated on the basis of the indicators
of the sectorial plan for output and the development of production capacities. For

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

example. for industrial enterprises in Leningrad the nuuber of workers and eaplay-
ees planned by ministries and departments exceeded their expected increase by

52,000 people in 1977, by 41,000 people in 1978 and by 39,000 people in 1979.

here is a similar situation in the country's other industrial centers. Taking ad-
vantage of their high prestige, they attract additional contingents of manpower.
which hampers the possibilities for a restriction of the growth of big cities and
greatly impedes the solution of social problems. that is. it creates tension in
housing construction. the service sphere. transport and so forth. For example,

the population growth envisaged by the master plan for the economic and social de-
velopment of Leningrad until 1980 was exceeded in 1971. The master plan for the
economic and social development of Moscow env saged a population of 8 million by
1990. but in 1978 it was already 7.9 million. During the 9th and 10th Five-Year

Plans the rates of population growth in 21 of the biggegt cities in the country
were 2.5 times as high as the average Union indicators. Whereas throughout the
country in 1970-1980 the population increased by 10.3 percent. in Moscow. by 15.6
percent. in Kiev, by 37.7 percent, in Leningrad. by 16.2 percent and so forth. The
significant percent of enlistment of additional contingents of mnpower "elsewhere"
in cities in Central Asia and the Transcaucasus. which have labor resources not in-
volved in the public sector, cannot fail to evoke concern.

The tasks of economic development for the 11th Five-Year Plan set by the 26th CPSU
Congress place new demnds on a planned management of a balanced reproduction of
fixed capital and labor resources. An outstripping growth of final national econ-
omic results as coapared with an increase in labor and Interial expenditures is en-
visaged during the new five-year plan. Special tasks are set for industry in Hos-
cow and Leningrad. where outstripping rates of labor productivity growth as com-
pared with the growth of the production volume are envisaged. It is a utter of
fulfillment of planned assignments with a samller number of workers. A solution
of this complex problem requires the development of a set of measures to overcome
the lack of departmental coordination, to more fully coatine sectorial and terri-
torial principles of planning. to inrove the coordination of the activity of sec-
torial and local management bodies and to eliminate the shortage of manpower in
order to ensure the correspondence between the existing number of labor resources
and places of application of labor.

The mintenance of a correspondence between personal and physical factors in pro-
duction is connected with the solution of a wide range of regional and intersec-
torial problems of formation of new and closure (reduction) of inefficient super-
fluous work places and of provision of a proportionate reproduction of fixed pro-
ductive capital in accordance with the expected nuuber of labor resources and the
development of iamroved indicators and standards making it possible to strengthen
the effect of the economic plan on a balance of the reproduction of fixed capital
with manpower.

The development of indicators and standards characterizing the change in the tech-
nical structure of production and its personal and physical factors plays a fun-
damental role in the attainment of a balance of the plans for the reproduction of
fixed capital and mnpower. At present such indicators and standards are absent.
The applied aspects of the social and economic essence of the concept "work place"
have not been developed. work places are not taken into account or planned. This

14
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dues nut make it possible to substantiate the need for mnlumer. calm.” luwuh
ments and material resources with sufficient accuracy in sectorial plans, to sf-
fect in a planned manner the processes of creation of new and reduction of obsolete
work places and an absolute disengagement and redistribution of mnpower among the
country's sectors and regions and to form occupational-skill structures. Moreover.
it is complicated to connect the need for mnpower with sectorial plans for the de-
velopment of production capacities and territorial balances of labor resources. In
our opinion, an underestimate of physical—mterial proportions during the solution
of the problem of balancing fixed capital with labor resources is unjustified. A
direct link of workers with means of production occurs at the work place. In our
view. a cost evaluation of the change in the technical structure of production on
the basis of a comparison of the dynamics of fixed capital and the nunber of wor-
kers. as well as an evaluation of the efficiency of interchangeability of live and
elbodied labor by means of indicators of the capital—labor ratio and of labor pro-
ductivity. does not give a true idea of the balance of work places with the size
of mnpower. This often leads to incorrect conclusions when the rates of growth
of the volume of industrial production. labor productivity, the capital-output ra-
tio and so forth are substantiated.

It is well known that the higher the capital-labor ratio. the higher labor productiv-
ity and the output-capital ratio should be. However, as data indicate, in the last
few years the capital—labor ratio has begun to increase more rapidly than labor
productivity. while the output-capital ratio has declined. For example. whereas

in Leningrad's machine building during the Eighth Five-Year Plan the increase in
labor productivity per percent of the increase in the capital-labor ratio was I.“
and during the Ninth Five-Year Plan, 1.21. during the 10th Five-Year Plan it was
0.96. ‘ihe rates of increase in the output-capital ratio were lowered respectively
from 13 percent in 1965-1970 to 0.6 percent in 1976-1980. '

The decline in labor productivity and the output-capital ratio at existing enter-
prises should be connected not with the insufficiently high rates of increase in
the capita1~1abor output, but with the fact that, on the one hand, its increase is
attained at high rates of accumulation of fixed capital and slow rates of withdraw-
al of obsolete and inefficient means of labor and production and. on the other.
fixed productive capital is replaced without regard for the need for working per-

sonnel .

An analysis of sectorial industrial plans at 76 enterprises in Leningrad in 4 years
of the 10th Five-Year Plan showed that. as a result of the implementation of tech-
nical progress measures connected with the replace-lent of production capacities
owing to the reconstruction and new construction of enterprises. the Inchine tool
pool of metal cutting equipment increased by 8,900 units. A total of 1.870 machine
tools were eliminated during this period. The nutter of workers with machine tool
specialties at these enterprises increased by only 0.7 percent. With such propor-
tions of replacement of the production capacity the nutter of workers disengaged
as a result of the elimination of obsolete equipment along with the mhanical in-
crease in working personnel could not meet the need for full euployment. which led
to the formation of more than 6.000 superfluous work places.

In order to change over to a direct assessuem and coordination of the resources
of live and embodied labor in the physical-material form. first of all, it is nec-
essary to introduce a recording of the number of work places at enterprises, in a

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sector and in a region and to develop standards of the shift coefficient of equip-
ment utilization as applied to various national economic levels. Essentially. in
the economic literature there is no generally accepted clear definition of the in-
dicator "work place." For example. it is suggested that scientists measure work
places quantitatively by means of indicators of labor intensiveness and the avail-
able work time, through indicators of the volume of net output. labor productivity
and the nutter of employed individuals with a correction for the shift coefficient6
and so forth. Not rejecting the proposed approaches as a whole. it is necessary to
note their ruin shortcoming, which lies in the fact that the indicator "work place"
is identified with the indicator "need for workers." In their form these indica-
tors are close. but not identical. the difference is that the need for unpower is
always a value derivative from the nui>er of work places. Furthermore, whereas the
shift coefficient has an effect on the need for manpower. the magnitude of this in-
dicator is not reflected in an increase in the nuwer of work places. Moreover.

a quantitative evaluation of the nuubsr of work places by neans of production ca-
pacities is impossible. because this indicator is planned not for all the installed
equipment. but only for the part that is at key sections and production facilities.
For example. in 1977. when the production capacity was calculated. only 60 percent
of the equipment installed in basic production was taken into accent in the heavy
mchine building sector. 66 percent. in ligh; and food industry and 70 percent. in
transport and agricultural mchine building. If we take into consideration that

a significant part of the implements of labor is still in auxiliary production. it
is obvious that with such a method of calculation of work places they will be taken
into account and planned only for the part of equipment installed at enterprises.

In our view,ncr does aoast evaluation ofwork places by means of indicators of labor
productivity and the volume of net output reflect the actual situation with regard
to the installed nutter of work places. because the price policy, structural
changes in the assortment of output. overtime work and so forth can have a great
effect on these indicators. as well as on the dynamics of work places.

Thus. errors committed in the calculation of work places can give rise to shortcom-
ings when the need for manpower. mterial resources, production areas, capital in-
vestments and so forth is substantiated.

In our opinion. a work place should mean the sphere of employment in public pro-
duction, or. in K. Marx's expression. the "arena of labor," which in accordance
with the established norm of equipment servicing and the work regime requires the
application of labor of a worker with the appropriate skill and education for the
production of a product (or performnce of a certain type of operation) of the es-
tablished quality with the planned productivity or economic effect. In our view.
such a definition of a work place makes it possible to evaluate the need for man-
power for an efficient utilization of material-physical elements of production.

with all the diversity of material-physical forms and differences among work
places of individual sectors and administrative regions the sphere of employment
of workers in public production is characterized by a certain mass of means of
production (their nulber). by a cost evaluation—the capital-labor ratio--by the
degree of mechanization and automtion. by the level of labor organization and by
social. economic. physiological. hygienic and other criteria. Accumulating these

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF“ 1:“. “SI-I ONLY

changes. the "work place" is of special significance lot the saint Inn ol such rau-
clal and economic problems as a rise in the level of the meaningful content and
improvement in the conditions of work. refinement of the training of personnel and
formation of their occupational-skill structures and elimination of intersectorial
and interregional differences in the level of technical equipment. the age struc-
ture of fixed capital and efficiency of utilization of live and eliaodied labor.

In the practice of recording, analysis and planning it is advisable to differen-
tiate work places according to two classification criteria, that is. social-econ-
omic and technological. 1he social and economic criterion of the structure of
work places is determined by the type and nature of production. the degree of di-
vision and cooperation of labor. the regime of work. the level of mechanization
and automation. working conditions and so forth. The technological criteria of a
work place are determined by the structure of equipment. the nature of output or
operations. the functions of servicing of production facilities and the degree of
utilization of comnication and control equipment.

Quantitatively. the totality of work places as applied to the pool of equipment of
any national economic level can be determined as the ratio of the amount of in-
stalled equipment (Y) to the norms (zones) of servicing of inplements of labor (H0)
with a correction for the coefficient characterizing the part of equipment for
whose servicing the attachment of a worker (K3) is required, that is, according
to the formla:

" yIX Kai
P. = (El ”0‘

where 4', are the types of equipment in the corresponding equipment pool.

Depending on the structure of equipment and the level of mechanization work places
can be subdivided into nonautomted. automted. special-purpose. specialized and
so forth and depending on service norms. into individual, mltimchine-tool and
collective. If in accordance with the planned service norms there are three ma-
chine-tools per worker or one machine-tool for three workers. this is one work
place. Nor does the operation of a machine tool in two or three shifts affect an
increase in the nutter of work places. ‘lhe work place as an integral part of fixed
productive capital is a dynamic concept and under the conditions of inprovement in
the technical base of production constantly undergoes changes. The use of machine
tools with numerical program control, automted equipment and so forth is accom-
panied by progressive changes in the quantitative and qualitative structure of
work places manifested in an increase in aultimchine-tool and collective work
places. In turn, this expands the possibilities for the development of brigade
forms of labor organization.

‘lhe coordination of personal and physical factors in the process of reproduction of
workplaces is alsoof great importance for the attainment of a balance of fixed ca-
pital and manpower in the physical-mterial form. It is a question of the coordi-
nation of the processes of for-tion of the additional need for and the absolute
disengagement of mnpower with the transformation of obsolete and creation of new
work places on the basis of the physical replacement of equipment and production

expansion .

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effect of the physical factor on the movement of manpower la the material pre-
requisite on the basis of which the law of change of labor operates.

At the preceding stages of socialist construction the high rates of population
growth led to an increase in labor resources. which had to be rapidly involved in
production. Under these conditions the predominant part of new equipment was as-
signed for an increase in the total water of work places, while obsolete implements
of labor. which served their standard time, remained in operation. Such a practice
of expanded reproduction of work places, which was necessary and effective for pre-
ceding periods. came in conflict with the new demographic situation. At present

the possibilities for involvement of individuals not employed in public production
in production have been almost fully exhausted. ‘i‘he territorial redistribution of
labor resources from large industrial centers for the development of new construc-
tion projects in the country's eastern and northern regions is the characteristic

of the forthcoming period. With the full employment and comaratively low rates of
population growth there is a need for a radical turn to an intensive reproduction

of fixed capital. ‘Ihe replacement of equipment under the conditions of production
intensification is not only to contribute to an increase in the volumes of produc-
tion. but also to serve as the material basis for an absolute disengagement of san-
power, which makes it possible to ensure a two-shift operation of all work places
at existing enterprises and to fully meet the need for additional workers in var-
ious spheres of esployment. ally under this condition are the possibilities of sci-
entific and technical progress realized in full measure.

Planning bodies have accumulated a wealth of experience in the area of a quantita-
tive evaluation of the effect of scientific and technical progress on the relative
saving of labor. At present almost all industrial enterprises report on the con-
ventionaily disengaged size of unpower to superior organizations. Labor produc-
tivity growth, or a reduction in the labor intensivenesa of output. is the basic
factor in the potential disengagement of workers. At the same time. as a rule. an
increase in the volumes of output is envisaged without an additional nud>er of wor-
kers. However, methods of a quantitative evaluation of the additional need for and

the absolute disengagement of manpower depending on the qualitative improvement in
work places in the process of their reproduction are not used in economic practice.

The disengagement of manpower or the additional need for it are due to the change
in proportions, in accordance with which new equipment is used for the formation

of new and elimination of obsolete work places. For example. a physical replace-
ment of nonautomated equipment with mchine tools with numerical program control,
which have a higher service norm, denotes a qualitative refinement of work places
leading to an absolute disengagement of workers. However, the creation of new work
places as a result of the expansion of production capacities and the reconstruction
and new construction of enterprises is accomnied by the emergence of an additional
need for them.

These factors, as well as the standards of the shift coefficient of equipment uti-
lization, have an effect on the additional need for and the absolute disengagement
of mnpower. when this indicator rises. the need for manpower increases and, when
it drops, the need for it decreases. Therefore. it is necessary to know what the

socially normal length of equipment utilization should be with due regard for econ-
omic and social factors and how the shift coefficient will change during the inne-
diate and long-term period. Without a solution of these problems it is difficult

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to control migratory processes. to form new and to close obsolete work places and
so forth. This problem is not only of theoretical. but mainly practical. impuri-
ance. An increase in the shift coefficient will play an ever greater role during
the 11th Five-Year Plan. Factors determining mltishift work are dictated by the
patterns of scientific and technical progress. The vast all~increasing expendi~
tures on research and development lead to the appearance of expensive automated and
mechanized lines. electronic equipment. machine tools with program control. manip-
ulating robots and so forth. which increase labor productivity both at industrial
enterprises and in the sphere of management. ﬁne new theoretical developments and
technical discoveries, as well as the growing scarcity of capital investments. ob-

jectively require an increase in the time of productive utilization of fixed
capital. .

The standards of the shift coefficient can be different with respect to individual
types of equipment. enterprises and administrative regions. Such a difference is
due to the nature of production (individual. series and so forth), to the regulated
idle time of equipment (planned repairs, modernization and so forth) and to the
regime of work of enterprises. For example. a four-shift regime of work is planned
for coal and metallurgical industry enterprises. a two-shift regime of work. fo:
machine building enterprises and a one-shift regime of work. for experimental l-ro-
duction enterprises. Therefore. the greater the share of enterprises or equipment
in a given administrative region or city in which the three- or four-shift regime
of work is established, the higher the average standard value of the shift coeffi-
cient and. thereby. the need for additional workers increases to a greater extent.
For example. for nonautomnted metal-cutting equipment the standard of the shift co-
efficient is 1.89 and for special-purpose and expensive equipment and machine tools
with numerical program control. 2.61. Standards determined with respect to indi-
vidual sectors and regions in the country are differentiated. In heavy mchine
building the standard of the shift coefficient in the pool of metal-cutting equip-
ment is 1.97. in instrument linking. 1.89. in the machine-tool industry. 1.95 and
so forth. For industry in Moscow this standard is 1.86. in Leningrad. 1.72. in
Sverdlovsk, 1.82, in Donetsk. 1.96 and so forth.

Thus. the additional need for and the absolute disengagement of manpower in the
process of expanded reproduction of fixed capital are formed under the effect of
three factors, that is. creation of new work places by means of new capital con-
struction and reconstruction of enterprises; qualitative transformation of work
places on the basis of a physical replacement of obsolete implements of labor with
new equipment; rise in the norms of servicing and the shift coefficient of utiliza-
tion of equipment.

The number of workers disengaged owing to the installation of new equipment at old
work places (‘13) and the additional need for them generated by the formation of
new work places as a result of the expansion. reconstruction and new construction
of enterprises (ﬁn) can be calculated according to the following formulas:

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. "NLY

where 113 and up are the total amount of equipment received during the planned pe-
riod for the replacement of obsolete and the forention of new work places; “c and
I!" are the norms of servicing of the equipment reaoved fron operation and newly
received for the reproduction of work places; RC“ is the standard (planned) shift
coefficient of equipment utilization.

The country's different regions require differentiated approaches to the coordina-
tion of personal and physical factors in the process of reproduction of work places.
Such a differentiation is determined. first, by the regional characteristics of the
reproduction and utilization of fixed capital. Investigations show that the inten-
sity of replacenent of means of labor in big cities should be 15 to 20 percent high-
er than, on the average, in the sector and the country as a whole. This is dic-
tated not only by the fact that the shortage of working personnel is IIICI'I more acute
here, but also by the fact that. owing to historical circunstances. in big cities
the capital-labor ratio is low and the age structure of productive capital is un-
favorable. Hhereas in the country's industry about 15 percent of the equipment is
more than 20 years old. in Hoscow. Leningrad, Kiev and a nudaer of other cities its
proportion is Iuch higher.

Second. local characteristics of the formation of labor resources have a great ef-
fect on the scale and rates of reproduction of work places. The study of the ten-
dencies in the development and distribution of the population throughout the coun-
try's territory is due to the significant regional differentation of the processes
of reproduction of labor resources. Statistical data indicate that in Moscow dur-
ing the 10th Five-Year Plan the average annual natural population growth was 0.15
percent, in Leningrad, 0.28 percent, in Kiev and Chelyabinsk, 0.8 percent, in Khar-
kov. 0.5 percent, in Odeasg. 0.75 percent, in Tashkent. 1.19 percent, in Yerevan,
1.53 percent and so forth.

With a balanced reproduction of work places for the coordination of personal and
physical factors in production the size of the manpower disengaged as a result of

a physical replacement of obsolete implements of labor with new equipment and the
natural growth of the able-bodied population in a region should be sufficient for
the provision at the standard (planned) level of the shift coefficient of work
places newly created as a result of the expansion, reconstruction ,and new construc-
tion of enterprises. This dependence can be expressed as follows:

I I I ‘I -”c
"a'K'("ﬁ;--—IT;‘ —---'-;(;I—= ,

where Ll" is the natural growth of labor resources in a region.

in the process of reproduction of work places it is inortant that the volumes of
new equipment assigned for a qualitative refinement of obsolete means of labor en-
sure an absolute disengageaent of the nutter of workers necessary not only for the
provision of newly. but also previously. created work places if socially norml
levels of the shift coefficient are not attained during the base period. as well
as for the purpose of disengagement of manpower for its utilization in other units

of the national economy.

20
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-1i ’IAI. llSl-Z ONLY

in this case the size of the manpower disengaged as a result of a physical replace-
ment of work places should be higher than the additional need for it in connection

with the creation of new work places at enterprises in a region. that is, itshould
meet the following condition:

I
”..K"(-I1—c_—)_——q.=o b

where “A is the planned size of manpower in relation to an absolute disengagement
beyond the linits of a region (city) for the purpose of its productive utilization
in other units of the national econoay.

The process of reproduction of work places presupposes its coordination with the
development of production capacities and indicators characterizing final production
results so that, along with the establishment of planned assignments for the rates
of growth of the volumes of production and labor productivity for enterprises and
regions. assignments for an absolute reduction in the nulber of industrial and pro-
duction workers are established.

Since, in our opinion. the work place should be the first object when personal and
physical factors are coordinated. the cost (capital-labor ratio) of a work place.
as well as an evaluation of the efficiency of interchangeability of live labor with
embodied labor in the process of reproduction of fixed capital. should be differ-
entiated depending on the creation of work places as a result of new capital con-
struction, the expansion of production, reconstruction of enterprises and qualita-
tive transformation of work places as a consequence of their physical replacement.

With such an approach in big cities characterized by an unfavorable age structure
of capital and a low shift coefficient of equipment utilization the growth of la-
bnr productivity and of the capital-output ratio should not always be connected
with a rise in the capital-labor ratio. High production results can also be at-
tained here at relatively low and even declining rates of growth of the capital-
lsbor ratio. The data of surveys of a group of industrial enterprises in Leningrad
indicate this.

Increase in

Rise in Indicators in 1979 in 2 of 1976 labor produc-
tivity per
labor percent of
capital- produc- shift capital. growth of ca-
labor tivity coef- output pital-labor

ratio growth ficient ratio ratio
" ma umrw. usn-z ONLY

it follows from the data in the table that at the relatively low rates of growth
of the capital-labor ratio. which at the examined enterprises. on the average. were
20 to 25 percent lower than the rates of growth of this indicator throughout the
city industry. a significant rise in labor productivity and in the 0'.I'-P‘dc-capital
ratio was observed. The rates of labor productivity growth greatly outstripped
the rates of growth of the capital-labor ratio. High production results were en-
sured as a result of an intensive replacement of obsolete implements of labor with
a total reduction in the nuuber of work places and a rise in the shift coefficient
at existing. more productive equipment. which did notrequire additional capital
investments for the development of the passive part of fixed capital and the pro-

duction infrastructure and was accompanied by a reduction in expenditures on capi-
tal and current repairs of equipment.

Naturally, the problem of coordination of work places with labor resources arises
not only .in the sphere of reproduction of fixed productive capital and depends not
only on the possibilities of scientific and technical progress. The saving of man-
power both through intraproduction and intersectorial sources of production inten-
sification is another important means of providing all work places with personnel
under intensification conditions. Reduction in unproductive work time losses. ex—
pansion of equipment service zones, development of brigade forms of organization
and stimlation of labor and so forth are such sources. At the same time. it is
important to take into consideration such a major source of the saving of manpower.
which has not yet been activated, as intersectorial cooperation of the utilization
of production capacities. Industry in big cities is noted for the nultispeciali~
zation of production. For example. enterprises subordinated to more than 100 min-
istries and departments are located in Leningrad. Owing to different reasons con-
nected primarily with the growing volumes of work on the mastering of new types

of products. shifts in the assortment of output. the accelerated frequency of com-
missioning of new equipment and so forth. there is a signifiant nudner of work
places. which my not alnmys be fully loaded with the production assignments of
their ministry and department. Therefore. temporary reserve work places system-
atically appear at the enterprises of one department. while there is an acute short-
age nf them at enterprises of another departmental subordination. In our opinion.
it is advisable to form the production program not only for the production capac-
ities subordinate to the sector's enterprises, but also for the entire totality of
work places in various sectors in the city-~the regional capacity. The functions
of inclusion of these types of reserves in sectorial plans should be entrusted to
territorial planning bodies.

The further improvement in the balance method of reproduction and utilization of
fixed productive capital should become an important tool of solution of the prob-
lem of coordination of personal and physical production factors. It is necessary
to introduce into practice a systematic development of current and long-term re-
gional balances, that is. reproduction of work places and their withdrawal and in-
crease; utilisation of work places according to productivity and time.

The long-term program for the formtion. reproduction and utilization of work
places will nuke it possible to mximlly combine sectorial and territorial inter-
ests during the coordination of work places with labor resources. on the one hand,
and the substantiation of the rates of growth of industrial production and labor
productivity. on the other. to make more competent decisions in the area of capi-
tal construction and the organization of the cooperation of production capacities.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tn concretize the solution of social problems connected with a rise in the lcvvl or
the meaningful content and improvement in the conditions of work and to ensure an
optimal occupational-skill training of working personnel.

5.

6.

8.

9.

FOOTNOTES
K. Marx and F. mgels, "Soch." iiorkg7, Vol 26. p 43.

of course, such an approach does not belittle the role and significance of
other laws in the process of planned management of a balanced reproduction of
fixed productive capital and labor resources.

See KOHHUNIST. No 18. 1980, p 32.

See "Krupneyshiye Goroda--Ikh Nastoyashcheye i Budushcheye" _/_§iggest Cities—-
'meir Present and Futurg7, Izdatel'stvo Statistika. 1979, p 5.

Cities with a population of more than 1 million are examined.

See V. Ya. Churakov. "Problemy Regional'nogo Balansa Trudovykh Resursov" Afro!)-
lems of the Regional Balance of Labor Resourceg7, Izdatel'stvo Nauka. 1977, p
50; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 10, 1979, p 45.

See "Effektivnost' Ispol'zovaniya Osnovnykh Fondov i Kapital'nykh Vlozheniy v
Regional'nom Aspekte" iEfficienc of Utilization of Fixed Capital and Capital In-
vestments in the Regional Aspect . Hoscov. 1979, p 50. -

See "Machine Tools in Vacancies." (PRAVDA. 16 June 1981).

See VBSTNIK STAIISTIKI, No 12, 1977, p 81; No 11, 1978, p 87; No 11. 1979, p
70; No 12, 1980. p 67.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekononiki", 1982

11 .439

C80:

.1 828/ M END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY