FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10447

13 April 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE

(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LIVESTOLK

Feed Additives for Increased Poultry Production Discussed
(I. Martynov; prrrssvonsrvo, Feb 82) ...............

AGRO-ECONOMICS AND ORGANIZATION

Capital Investment Plans for Rural Construction During

Eleventh Five-Year Plan
(A. A. Sergeyev; PLANIROVANIYE I ucnnr v SBL'-
SKOKHOZYAYSTVENNYKH PREDPRIYATIYAKH, Jan 82) . . . . . . .

Improving Structure of Regional Agroinduatrial Complex
(G. Rusu; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Jan 82) ...............

Efficiency of Kolkhoz Economic Operations Discussed
(A. M. Siukov; PLANIROVANIYB I UCHET V SEL'
SKOKHOZYAYSTVENNYKH PREDPRIYATIYAKH, Nov 81) . . . . . . ‘
i-‘e-ZrID ADDI‘l'lVdS FOR INCRrIASL’D POULTRY PRODUCTION DISCUSS.
Moscow PTITSEVODSTVO in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 19-20

L7rticle by l. Nartynov, candidate of agricultural sciences and chief of the {eed
Department of USSR Ptitseprom: "Chemical and Microbiological Peed Additivesﬂ/

[Eexg7 Our country's poultry farming workers are confronted by great tasks for the
Eleventh Five-Year Plan. The plans call for the annual yield of eggs to be raised
to 72 billion during this period.

An increase in the production of poultry products requires an expansion in the
production capabilities of the mixed feed industry and those enterprises engaged in
producing the many types of feed additives and preparations. Simultaneously with
increasing the production of mixed feed for poultry and employing new feed agents,
improvements must also be realized in the quality of the feed.

The animal husoandry technology must ensure a rational biochemical process for
transforming the feed agents, in the organisms of animals. into food and raw
material products. Feed constitutes the initial and basic element of this
technology. The feed proportion of the overall production costs for animal
husbandry products amounts to approximately 70 percent. Thus the economic nature
and profitability of pOultry raising farms are determined mainly based upon the
full value of the rations and the degree of feed consumption for the production of
a unit of output. If use is made of rations which are not balanced in terms of the
most important nutrients and particularly protein and vitamins. it will be

impassible to carry our poultry farming in an intensive and highly productive
manner.

The feed ration for poultry must consist of 90-92 percent plant protein and 8-10
percent of high value protein of animal origin. However, the raw material resources
for producing feed that contains adequate amounts of animal protein are limited in
our country just as they are throughout the world. In the case of plant feeds.
shortages are being experienced in such irreplaceable amino acids as lysine,
methionine and tiyptophan. According to data mad; available by VASKhNIL [All-Union
Academy of Agricultural Sciences imeni v.1. Lenin], of the 12 percent protein
contained in wheat and 10 percent in barley, efficient use is being made of only

6 percent and of the 23 percent protein in peas -- 10 percent. Thus the plant feeds
must be supplemented by additives and preparations which will lake it possible to
increase the use of their protein in the organisms of poultry.

1
FORtOFFKJAl.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL l-SL UhLY

Unc means for covering the deficit in high quality pretein and for ensuring that
thv animals are Supplied with complete-ration feed mixtures is that of organizing,
on :in adequate scale, the production of yeasts, amino acids (mainly lysine),
vitamins and antibiotics. The successes achieved in molecular biology and

biochemistry are opening up real prospects for the industrial production of these
additives .

sxperience has convincingly proven that industrial microbiological synthesis is the
most reliable source, independent of the caprices of nature, for obtaining high
value protein and other biologically active substances. Nutrient yeasts produced by
the microbiological industry based upon the processing of wood and other types of
rgw materials appear as a concentrate of protein, vitamins and amino acids (BVK
_/_protein-vltamin concentrate]. One ton of nutrient yeasts contains 530-580
kilograms of crude protein and this is five times more than 1 ton of grain from the
principal forage creps (barley, oats) and 2.5 times more than from the grain of
,was. This protein is balanced in terms of the group of amino acids and it is rich
in terms or those amino acids which are lacking in the protein of grain crops.

Thus there is 10 times more lysine in nutrient yeasts than in barley and oats,

methionine -- 2-3 times, triptophan -- 2-0 times and arginine, hiatidine, leucine
and threonine -- 3-6 times.

Nutrient yeasts contain a large number of the Group B vitamins.

ibwever, experience reveals that the introduction into a ration of yeasts from
microbe synthesis, produced with a violation of the technology or in raised
dosages, lowers the productivity of the poultry.

ﬂ negative property of nutrient yeasts is their pulverized state. In conformity
with the OST lall-union standargl, they appear as a finely dispersed mass which is
blown away during the pneumatic conveying of mixed feed and separated during

rail and mocor vehicle transport operations and also during issuing to the paultiy.

Owing to the increased formation of dust during the preparation and issuing of feed
mixtures containing yeasts obtained from microbe synthesis, anti-sanitary conditions
are created in the production facilities. Thu: it is deemed advisable to produce
this valuable feed additive in micro-granulated form, with the particles measuring
1.0-1.5 gillimeters. Glavmikrobioprom LMain administration of the Microbiological
industry/ must undertake efficient measures aimed at improving the quality of the
yeasts and their technological form.

in recent years the livestock breeders have been able to test in actual practice,
during the enrichment of rations, the most scarce amino acid in plant feeds --
I;sine, prepared using the industrial method. Preliminary scientific experiments
have revealed that the inclusion of feed preparations of lysine (up to the norm) in
mixed feed lacking in lysine, for laying hens of egg and meat lines, turkeys and
replacement young chicken stock and broilers produces an increase in the
productivity of adult poultry of 10 percent, a reduction of feed expenditures per
unit of Output of 10-14 percent, an increase in the hatchability of the eggs of
9-14 perCCnt, an increase in the live weight of young stock of 10 percent against
an expenditure of 2.4 kilograms of mixed feed per kilogram of weight and a savings
of 50-60 percent in the consumption of animal feed.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lysine in the dorm of a feed concentrate is presently being produced by enterprises
in the Latvian 53R. Belorussia, Armenia and some other republics. However, its
pyoduction is by no means meeting the requirements of poultry production for this
amino acid (approximately 30 percent). The principal shortcomings of the domestic
iced preparations of lysine are its hygroscopicity, which promotes the formation of
lumps, and low activity (10-12 percent). The complete satisfaction of the branch's
requirements for lysine requires a further increase in the domestic capabilities for
producing ieed preparations and raising their quality.

The plans for the current five-year period also call for an expansion in the
production of chemical feed additives. Among these additives, special importance
is attached to those preparations which are employed for stabilizing individual
components and feed mixtures. Interest in the problem of stabilizing feed agents
arose in connection with the industrial production of mixed feeds. the prescription
(or which includes numerous additives, particularly microelements, vitamins,
technical fats and other substances capable of oxidizing. Moreover, substances
which protect feed additives from oxidation (anti-oxidants) exert a positive effect
an the organisms of animals. Santochin (etoxykhin) is included among the more
effective anti-oxidants. It is used for stabilizing fats, fat-soluble vitamins,
premises and mixed feeds and also as a preventive and medicinal means for combating
alimentary encephalomalyatsiya in young poultry, especially broilers. The use of
suntochin ensures a high degree of preservation for the poultry and for the
nutritional value of the products. The plans call for a considerable increase in
the production of santochin for satisfying the requirements of poultry farming.
This will be accomplished by expanding the capabilities of enterprises of the
chemical industry. improvements are presently being carried out in a new and dry
form of santochin (quinol EDK sulphate), which is more suitable for inclusion in
mixed feed and which is not inferior to the former type in terms of activity.

Workers in the chemical and microbiological industry, in collaboration with the
agricultural specialists, must still accomplish a great deal towards satisfying the
requirements of animal husbandry for feed additives and they must constantly search
for additional resources and reserves for realizing this goal.

CUPYKPHUE izdatei'xtvo "Kolos", "Ptitsevodstvo", 1982

7040
cut»: 1824/21)

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PUK UI'PILIAL Ubl'. ONLY

AGRO-dCONDﬂlCS AND ORGANIZATION

CAPITAL INVESTMENT PLANS FOR RURAL CONSTRUCTION DURING ELEVENTH FIVE-YEAR PLAN

Moscow PLANIRDVANIYE I UCHET V SEL'SKDKBOZYAYSTVENNYKN PREDPRIYATIYAKH in Russian
No 1, Jan 82 pp 2-6

[Krilcle by A.A. Sergeyev. deputy chief of the Agricultural Department of USSR

Gosplan: "Principal Trends for Capital Investments During the Eleventh Five-Year
Plng/

[icxg] The 26th CPSU Congress and the Sixth Session of the tenth Convocation of the
USSR Supreme Soviet have clearly defined the priority tasks for the economic and

social development of Soviet society and the means for solving these tasks during
the coming years.

Since the time of the March (1965) Plenum of the CC CPS“, our agriculture has made
considerable advances, the logistical base has been recreated substantially,
improvements have been realized in the organisation of labor and production and

the intensity of land usage has been raised. This has made it possible, despite

the unfavorable conditions experienced over a number of years, to increase
considerably the production of agricultural products. However, definite difficulties
are still being experienced in the sphere of food supply for the population.

In this regard, the task of improving the supply of food goods for the population
is listed first and foremost in the party's agrarian policies. In the Summary
Report by the CC CPSU to the 26th party congress, the need for developing a special
food program as a constituent part of the five-year plan was thoroughly validated.
in it, the plans call for strengthening the bindsng elements of agriculture: the
production of grain, feed, animal husbandry produe'a, their processing,
preservation and sale.

The Basic Directions for the Economic and Social Development of the USSR During the
1981-1985 Period and for the Period Up To l990 call for an average annual gross
yield of grain during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan of 238-263 million tons, for

meat production in 1985 to reach 18.2 million tens, or 3 million more tons than the
figure for 1980, for increases in the production of milk, eggs, raw cotton. sugar
beets. vegetables and other agricultural products and for labor productivity at
kolkhozes and sovkhozes to be raised by 22-24 percent.

The implementation of the indicated tasks is based upon a powerful logistical base
for agriculture. In fulfillment of the party's long-term program. adopted during
the March (1965) Plenum of the CC CPSU, largevscsle measures were carried out

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
aimed at further s:rengtnnn:ug th:5 prcg:am. ﬂy the end of 1980; the branch's
fired prodthl“r capstal 0; an agricultural nature had increased to almost 21/

lliun rubles, compared to only ,Qb ;-l:iun :ublus n: the cnd of 1975. The pool of
conplicated and highly productive aqui tent at koihhozes and sovkhozes had grown
immeasurably and the urea cf :cClalmc: lane had increased to 30 million hectares.

In the report d3;ivereu to tn- 2&2? parry tonnress, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev stated:
"in the future, we will vllocntu tonsidn:eb1e financial and material resources to
the rural clean and corhinut the sirnnri conversion of this branch over to an
industrial basis. but the center bi gravity today -- and this is a distinctive
feature of our agrarian policy during the 1980's —- is shifting over to the return
from capital investments. :0 grouth in ng:icultural productivity and to
strengthening and improving its relationships with all branches of the
agroindustrial complex."

The plan for the l981-l935 period calls for capital investments in the amount of
190 billion rubles. compared to Only 172 billion rubles during the Tenth Five-Year
Elan, to be made available for the development of agriculture in accordance with
an overall complex of operations. The task today consists of ensuring that the
resources allocated are utilized in a nkilfu) manner and with the greatest degree
of effectiveness.

During the Eleventh Five~Ycar Plan, further growth in agricultural production will
be achieved mainly on the basis of intensive factors associated with land
utilization, the produczion potential already created and the material resources
allocated.

An improvement in the new a“ the vcteuzinl for agricultural productiOn is directly
associated with Julvinx t" social ptntlens of the rural areas. Over the past

13 years, much has been June towards solving these problems. The material welfare
of rural residents has in roved considerably and continues to improve. Their
standard of living is d:n~ihg closer to that of city-dwellers. Improvements are
being achieved in the nevuing and cultural'domestic conditions of kolkhoz members
anu sovkhoz talker“. More -han 500 mi.lion square meters of housing space were
bui.t in the Cu:?l areas during this P"”iuﬁ. One out of every two families held
NOUSE'Ndrmtbﬁa- ﬂora and mozs childrene' n.c-s;nool institutes and cultural-
dcmestic facilities becaue available. Nevertheltsn, improvements in living
conditions in the rural areas are taking piste very slowly. Insufficient capital
investments for non-productive constta~tlcn in the countryside and non-fulfilllent
of the plans for the :cnstructiun of hddalﬂé, schools and childrens' pre-school
and cultural-nomeaiic institutions are intansliying migration among the rural
population nnn adversely affecting the retention of personnel and the creation of
stable labor collectives. The departure at considerable numbers of people from the
rural areas is bringire about n ;uraonncl shortage and. it follows, the need for
attracting wanpovor flow the cities in urcer to carry out the harvesting and a
number of other agricultural Operations.

During the dleventh Five-Year Plcn, large-scale measures must be carried Out in
connection with the social development of the rural areas. In particular, the plans
call for the rapid construction at koikhozus and sovkhozes of well organized
dwellings, simultaneously with farm buildings for the maintenance of livestock and
poultry and in accordance with a single estimate. childrens' pre-school institutes,
clubs and other installations of a cultural-domestic nature. Compared to the

Tenth FiVe'Year Plan, the capital investments to be used in agriculture for this
purpose will be increased from 26 billion to 37.9 billion rubles. or by as percent.

3
FOR OFFICIAL l'SF. lI‘NLY
FOR (ll-T“ HI |-\l- ONLY

The plans call for the placing in operation of FZb million square meters of housing
space, Jl million more square meters than during the last five-year plan and
childrens' pre-school institutes for 1.18 million children, an increase of 196,000
above the figure for the previous five-year plan. Increases will take place in
connection with the placing in operation of engineering lines of communication in
the rural areas (water, sewerage, heating and gas lines and so forth).

During the October (1980) Plenum of the CC CPSU, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev pointed out
that the "pr0blems associated with reorganization of the rural areas must be solved
in an energetic and thorough manner. with a search being made for the necessary
resources both on an all-grate scale and in the republics, kraya and oblasts and at
each kolkhoz and sovkhoz" . However, work associated with carrying out the plans
for non-productive construction in the rural areas has not as yet been developed
fully in a number of republics and oblasts. Thus, during the Tenth Five-Year Plan.
only 63 percent of the capital investments allocated for this purpose were

utilized and Sl percent of the dwellings and «a percent of the childrens' pro-school
institutes placed in Operation; in the Kirghiz SSR -- 78 and 90 percent placed in
operation respectiVely. During the first year of the current five-year plan, the
measures required for intensifying this construction were not undertaken.

Han) dwellings are still being built in cities and rayon centers and this is
resulting in additional labor turnover at the sovkhotes.

; basic feature of capital investments for production purposes during the Eleventh
Five-Year Plan -- the trend towards considerable appropriations for satisfying the
requirements of feed production and feed preparation (growth by a factor of more
than 1.6) and field crop husbandry. In the process, a preference is being shown
for those objects required for ensuring preservation of the products.

According to data supplied by scientific-research institutes, the losses in silage
and haylsge when stored in mounds and unlined trenches anount to 30 percent or more.
At the same time. there is a great shortage of coarse and succulent feed in

animal husbandry. Practical conclusions have been drawn in a majority of the
republic». During the present five-year plan. facilities for storing 197 million
cubic meters of silage and haylage must be created, compared to only ll? million
cubic meters during the past five-year plan. The country's requirements for these
facilities will reach 85 percent. compared to only 55 percent in 1980. The plans
call tor a great amount of work to be carried out in this regard in the RSFSR and
this will make it possible to raise the availability of storehouses from 53 to

v2 percent and in the Turkmen SSR -- from 30 to 83 percent. A sufficient number of
these facilities have been built in the Georgian and Estonian republics and yet the
plans cell for the placing in operation of additional ones to satisfy the raised
requirement for feed.

In the Moldavian 358, large capital investments are to be used for the construction
of animal husbandry facilities. However, they are being utilized in a poor manner.
At the same time. the agricultural and planning organs are devoting very little
attention to preserving and improving the quality of the feed. Throughout the
republic. the plans call for the placing in operation of silage and haylege
facilities for only 120,000 tons, with the availability of such facilites being

 

;-L.I. Brezhnev. 'Leninskim kursom" [Following Lenin's Courag7, Moscow,
Politlzdat, 1981, Vol 8. p “69.

6
FOR OFFICIAL l SF, ONLY
-duced to as percent by the end of the five-year plan, compared to 66 percent at
av beginning of l981. By no meana ia thia aame phenomenon juetiiied in the
.eerbaijan SSR, Armenian 88R, Lithuanian 88! or the Latvian $83. The plane for
.uilding eilage and haylage inatelletione in the Kazakh 383 are clearly below the

:xiating potential.

In many republice, the plane call for the conetruction at a large number of
.torehouaea for hay, briquetted ieeda and grace meal. devertheleaa, additional
ark must be carried out aimed at finding reeervee for reiaing the preeervation of
'he feed that baa been grown and procured.

Large quantitiea of vegetablea and fruit are being loat owing to an abaence of
:torehoueea end proceaaing capabilitiee for them. During the current iivecyear
plan, vegetable end fruit atorehouaea (or 7.22 million tone are to be built,
compared to only 5.33 million tone during the Tenth Five-Year Plan. Thia will make
it poeeible to aetiefy the country'e overall requiremente for fruit atorehoueea
almost completely and for vegetable and potato atorehoueea -- by 66 percent,
compared to 34 percent in 1979. The plane call for 1.4 billion rublea to be made
available for their conatruction, almoat l.6 timea more than during the Tenth Pive-
Year Plan. Moreover, one cannot conaider aa correct the actione taken by the
agricultural and planning orgene in the leloruaeian SSR, Uzbek SSI, Moldavian 883
and the Armenian 858, which are allocating only lilited reeourcee for the
preservation of fruit and vegetable producta.

For the construction of inetallatione for the proceeaing and atorege of grain, the
plane call for approximately 2.9 billion rublea to be made available -- #3 percent

more than waa ueed during the peat five-year plan. Ae a reeult, the majority of
the republic: will have adequate capebilitiee for the atorage of read and grain at
the kolkhozea and eovkhozea. In the future. work muat be directed towarde the

modernization of exiating graneriea, mechanization of their operatione and the
automation of control over etorage.

in the computations for the five-year plan, the plane call for more than 1.7
billion rublee to be made available for the conatruction of warehoueea, or 2.3
times more than during the laat five-year plan, with the facilitiea capable of
uontaining 13.7 million tone of mineral fertilizere and 11.3 million tone of toxic
vhemicale. The requirements for euch warehoueea in the Uzbek SSR, Kazakh SSR,
Georgian SSR and Latvian ssn will be fully aatiafied by 1985. Conaiderable
feprovemente will take place in connection with the preeervation of mineral
lartilizere in the RSPSR, the Ukrainian SS! and a number of other republice. At
\e some time, the plane for the Kirghiz 583 call for the conatruction of euch
urehOusee for unly 83,000 tone, againet a requirement for 335,000 tone and for the
naenien SSK the figures are reepectively -- 58,000 and l27,000 tone. Certainly,
rheee republice require mineral fertilizere. But it there ia no place to etore
hem and they epoil. then there can be only one concluaion: give them to there who
ill make use of each kilogram.

me kolkhozee and eovkhozee etill lack adequate intre-farm hard eurface roada.
:cording to computatione by epecialiate, of the overall volume of ahipmenta of
zricultural freight by all typea of tranaport. intre-iarm ehipmenta conatitutc
lmoet 75 percent. At the preaent time, of $6,000 farme. laae than 20 percent

eve hare aurface roada. According to data aupplied by the Inatitute of Complex
ai- ' "JIY‘ms, the loeeea in agricultural producte ceuaad by poor roede amount
"" "" ‘ billion rublea annually. To thie we must add that freight ahipmente

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘:
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0\I.\'

carried out within farms over such roads involve excessive fuel expenditures and
raised costs for the shipments themselves. In addition, as a result of bad roads
the schedules for the carrying out of agricultural operations are often disrupted
and wear and tear on the motor vehicle and tractor pool accelerated.

In rayons served by good motor vehicle roads, the gross agricultural Output per 100
hectares of agricultural land is higher and production costs lower. Thus, there is
every reason to believe that the development of a road network in the rural areas

is one of the most important factors for achieving growth in production efficiency.

Roads play a great role in the solving of social problems in the countryside.
Thus a solution must be found for this problem.

Since 1976, the national economic plans have provided an indicator for the placing
in operation of intra-farm hard surface roads. During the past five-year plan,
approximately 3.2 billion rubles were expended for the construction 01 such roads.
More than 47,000 kilometers of road surface were placed in operation. The extent
of such hard surface roads on farms increased by 40 percent. But this is not
enougn. Thus, during the current five-year plan these expenditures must be
increased to 6.7 billion rubles, or 42 percent more than those for the past five-
year plan. Taking into account the increase in expenditures, it is expected that
57,400 kilometers of intra-farm road surface will be placed in operation.

In the process, attention must be focused on the fact that the construction of
general purpose roads is being carried out by the "Road Economy" branch and that
capital investments for this purpose are being allocated to road organisations
rather than to agricultural organizations.

One of the chief trends in the intensification of agricultural production is that
of its further mechanization and electrification. Tremendous progress has been
achieved in this regard over the past 15 years. The power-worker ratio has

increased by a factor of 3.2 and today it amounts to 26 horsepower per worker.
The plans call for it to be raised to 38-h0 horsepower by 1985.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, the kolkhoses and sovkhozes will be supplied
with better and more powerful items of equipment and also with a complex of
working machines which will make it possible to raise labor productivity, improve
the quality and reduce the amount of time required for the carrying out of

agricultural operations and ensure the extensive use of industrial technologies in
farming and animal husbandry.

During the five-year plan, sufficient capital investments will be made available
for measures aimed at increasing the active portion of the fixed productive
capital. Compared to the Tenth Five-Year Plan, appropriations for acquiring
machines and equipment will be increased by almost 9 billion rubles, or by 17
percent. Their proportion of the volume of capital investments for production

purposes will increase from 36 percent during the Tenth Five-Year Plan to 61
percent during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan.

During the 1981-1985 period, a considerable increase will take place in capital
investments for the construction of rural electrification installations, repair
workshops and facilities for the storage of equipment.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The plan for the Eleventh Five-Year Plan calls for the placing in operation of
1,770 hectares of hothouse combine space, compared to 1,180 hectares during the
Tenth Five-Year Plan, and for 2.2 billion rubles, or 500 million rubles more than
were used during the preceeding 5 years, to be made available for this purpose.
ﬂoreover, their construction will be based mainly upon secondary sources for heat
and thermal water.

Capital investments for perennial plantings and soil improvement work will increase
at an accelerated rate. however, notwithstanding the fact that 700-800 million
rubles are being invested annually in perennial plantings, the areas of fruit-
producing orchards are not only not increasing but in fact they are decreasing in
size and the effectiveness of the appropriations is not increasing.

Among the problems concerned with raising the effectiveness of capital investments
in agriculture. special importance is attached to those associated with land
reclamation work. As a result of the consistent implementation of an extensive
land reclamation program. adopted during the Hay (1966) Plenum of the CC CPSU. the
volumes of state capital investments for this purpose have increased from 6.7
billion rubles during the 1961-1965 period to 38 billion rubles during the Tenth
Five-Year Plan and the area of reclaimed agricultural land throughout the country
increased from 16.9 million hectares in 1965 to 30 million hectares in 1980.

Land reclamation is one of the chief factors associated with the intensification of
agricultural production. Occupying approximately 10 percent of the overall area of
arable land and plantings, they furnished one third of all gross farming output
during 1980 and minus technical crops -- 25 percent.

Cotton production is developing in a stable manner on reclaimed lands and a base
has been created for domestic rice production. The production of vegetables, feed
and other products on these areas has increased. 0n the average for the country as
a whole. the productivity of a hectare of irrigated land is 6-5 times higher and
that for drained land 1.5-2 times higher than the productivity for non-reclaimed
lands.

During the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan. grain production on irrigated lands
increased to 11 million tons, or by a factor of 1.5. raw cotton -- to 9.9 million
tons, vegetables -- to 12 million tons. potatoes -- to 2 million tone, or by a
factor of 1.3 and perennial grasses -- by a factor of 1.5. The gross yield of
agricultural crOps on drained lands also increased, but to a negligible degree.

There are many farms in all oblasts and republics which are utilizing their
reclaimed lands in an efficient manner. In Uzbekistan, for example, in addition to
high cotton yields, 68 quintals of corn grain per hectare were obtained during

1980 from an area of 179,000 hectares and the harvest of alfalfa for hay reached
135 quintals per hectare. in Krymskaya Oblast, averages of 46.8 quintala of grain,
216 quintals of vegetables and 773 quintals of fodder root crops were obtained

from irrigated hectares of land. Prom 60 to 65 quintals of feed units per hectare
are being obtained from irrigated tracts in Stavropol'skiy Kray.

ﬂaweVer, by no means is this in keeping with the large-scale financi.. and
material resources being employed for land reclamation work. Substantial
shortcomings are being observed in connection with the utilization of reclaimed

9
FOR OFFICIAL [SI-Z ONLY
FOR OH‘ICIAL UM: ONLY

areas. First of all, the cropping power of the agricultural crops is increasing
only slowly. Compared to the 1971-1975 period when the average cropping power for
rice on irrigated land was 38.5 quintals per hectare, during the 1976-1980 period
it amounted to 39.9 quintsls per hectare, for perennial grasses the figures were
respectively -- 50.7 and 51.3 quintala per hectare, corn for silage -- 201 and 237
quintals per hectare and sugar beets dropped tron 313 to 309 quintels per hectare.

In 1979, the cropping power of grain crops on irrigated land, for the country as a
whole, amounted to 48.é quintals per hectare, while at the same time more than
1.000 kolkhosss and sovkhozes obtained yields lower than 15 quintals per hectare
from an area of 231,000 irrigated hectares and 264 farms obtained yields of corn
from grain lower than 25 quintals per hectare from an area of 29,600 hectares.

In many areas the reclaimed lands are not being utilized to their maximum
capability and the cropping power of the agricultural crops on this land is lower
than that called for. The principal cause of insufficient productivity for these
areas is a low culture of farming, violations of the agricultural practices and
production technology and limited applications of mineral and organic fertilizers.
in behalf of the 1980 harvest, 2.1 quintels of mineral fertilizer were applied to a
hectare of irrigated land and 1.7 quintals to a hectare of drained land (in a
conversion for active agent); this was 1.5-2 times lower than the required norms.
As a result, maximum use is not being made of the reclaimed fields.

At many kolkhozes and sovkhozes, the planting structure has not been worked out
and the crop rotation plans are being mastered very slowly (especially cotton-
alfalfa plans in the republics of Central Asia). Considerable irrigated areas are
still being used for annual grasses and other low-productivity crops. In 1980, for
example, such crops were grown on 683,000 hectares, with the cropping power of the
hay reaching only 27.3 quintals per hectare, or two times lower than the cropping
power of perennial grasses. In the planting structure for forage crops in the
Georgian SSR, annual grasses occupied 28 percent, in the Ukrainian SSR and
Azerbaijan 853 -- l7 and in the RSFSR -- 15 percent. At the sear time, the amount
of corn for grain being cultivated on irrigated land throughout the country is
unjustifiably low.

Insufficient use is being made of another important reserve -- secondary sowinga --
the areas of which can be increased to 1 million hectares and produce 3-4 million
additional tons of feed units.

An equally important reason for the slow growth in the cropping power of
agricultural crops on irrigated and drained land is the expansion that has taken
place in the areas requiring land reclamation improvement and restoration.
Compared to 1975 when there were 4.8 aillion hectares of irrigated land throughout
the country as a whole requiring improvement. by 1980 this area had increased to
5.6 million hectares, or 32 percent of the overall area. In particular, a large
proportion of unsatisfactorily reclaimed land, compared to the overall area, is
feund in the Iurkmen SSR -- more than 60 percent, Azerbaijan SSR -- 49 percent,
Kirghiz SSR -- 44 percent, Kazakh SSR -- 37 percent, Uzbek SSR -- 32 percent and
the ‘ISR -- 26 percent. To a considerable degree, this is the result of
incorrect operation of irrigated land and the untimely fulfillment or non-
fulfillment of land levelling and other required operations.

10
FOR OFl-‘ICZAL USE ONLY
One of the more urgent problems is that of organizing a reliable operational
service capable of carrying out, on the basis of definite schedules. an entire
complex of operations concerned with the repair and maintenance, in good working
order, of the land reclmation network, installations and mechanisms and ensuring
that waterings are carried out during the best periods.

A difficult situation has developed with regard to ensuring that the kolkhoaea and
sovknozes are supplied with adequate numbers of personnel in the Volga region, the
north Caucasus, the Central Chernozem Zone and in some other regions. There is a

shortage of machine operators, especially operators of sprinkling units and pumping
stations. During the current five-year plan, it will be necessary to train no less

than 300,000 individuals for work and to do everything possible to ensure that they
remain on the farms.

Considerable areas of reclaimed land are being utilized for purposes other than
those originally intended. During the 1971-1980 period, 208,000 hectares,
including 13,000 hectares of irrigated land, were made available throughout the
country as a whole for intraefarm construction and for satisfying various
non-agricultural needs. During the period mentioned, 604,000 hectares of reclaimed
land, including 313,000 hectares of irrigated land, were written off based upon
inventory results. In the RSPSR, for example, 306,000 hectares of reclaimed land
were written off and of this amount 33,000 hectares rad been allocated for the
mentioned purposes. Large areas of reclaimed land have been removed from use in
the Belorussian SSR, Uzbek SSR, Armenian SSR and the Georgian SSR.

The party has established the task of bringing about a radical change in the use of

reclaimed lands and raising to a considerable degree the effectiveness of the
investments employed.

The plan for the Eleventh Five-Year Plan calls for the placing in operation of
approximately 3.6 million hectares of irrigated land and 3.8 million hectares of
drained land, for the watering of more than 27 million hectares of pasture land,

for the carrying out of soil improvement work on 8.3 million hectares of
agricultural land that does not require drainage and so forth. More than 00 billion
rubles of capital investments, or 19 percent more than during the past five-year
plan, are using allocated for these purposes.

Fewer capital investments will be allocated for animal husbandry and poultry raising
projects than was the case during the past five-year plan (roughly 80 percent).

Here a preference is being shown for meat poultry factories, reproduction farms and
breed ing plants .

The plans call for the placing in operation during the 1981-1985 period of meat
poultry factories for 545 willion head, compared to only 362 million head during the
pest five-year plan. An increase in the capabilities of egg poultry factories of
26.6 million laying hens will be achieved mainly through the technical re-equipping,
modernization and expansion of existing installations. New poultry factories will
be built only in those areas where there are egg shortages and where no

possibility exists of obtaining eggs eased upon more effective solutions.

The conversion of pig farming over to an industrial basis will be carried out
through the construction of swine complexes having an overall capability of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Ul UI'I'ILOHI. e .)|'. \II‘LI

approximately 6 million head; this corresponds to the level for the past five-year
plan. in all. the pig farming capabilities to be built will be two times less than
the figure for the 1976-1980 period.

Sheep raising capabilities will be created at the former rates (26 million
billets). with the exception of Kazakhstan, where this construction will be
increased twofold and in Kirghisia -- an increase of 1.5 times.

The large-horned cattle facilities to he placed in operation during the 1981-1985
period will be two tines less than that for the previous five-year plan. since
sufficient facilities are almost available for the animals now and the only
requirement remaining is to ensure that they are utilized completely and
efficiently. Capital investments must be directed towards the technical
re-equipping, modernisation and expansion of existing farms.

During the Eleventh Pive-Year Plan, 23.8 billion rubles must be appropriated for
the technical re-equipp'ng and modernisation of existing enterprises in
agriculture. This figure is 6 billion rubles more than the amount used during the
1976-1980 period.

The republic's agricultural organs, together with the planning organs, when
preparing the annual plans. should continue the work of defining more precisely the
most effective direction for capital investments, with consideration being given to
the balance and use of production capabilities and to their technical re-equipping
and modernization.

The dispersion of capital investments among numerous construction projects and
installations is causing great harm to the national economy. This alone, coupled
with the absence of systematic and purposeful work concerned with the concentration
of resources, can explain the growth that has taken place in the volume of
unfinished construction at agricultural projects. Exhaustive measures must be
undertaken aimed at concentrating capital investments on projects, with
consideration being given to placing them in operation in accordance with the
established schedules and reducing the volumes of unfinished construction to the
established norms during l9"2 and 1983.

The effectiveness of capital investments in agriculture is dependent to a great
degree upon stable farm specialization, an economically sound distribution for
production operations and for the erection of auxiliary installations, construction
schedules and quality and upon many other factors. The timely solving of these
problems in a high quality manner will serve to guarantee fulfill-ant of the tasks
assigned to agriculture by the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Koloa", "Planirovaniye i uchet v sel'skokhosysystvennykh
predpriyatiyakh“, 1982

7026
C50: 1824/223

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IMPROVING STRUCTURd OF REGIONAL AGRDINDUSTRIAL COMPLEX
Moscow VOPRDSY EKDNDHIKI in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 59-69

lgrticle by G. Rusu, candidate of economic sciences and assistant professor at
the Kishinev Polytechnical Institute,_Kishinev: "Improvements in the Structure
of a Regional Agroindustrial Complexﬂl

irexgl The tasks associated with satisfying more completely the country's
requirements for food goods and other agricultural products and with the
socio-economic development of the ruzal areas are conditioned by the need for
implementing a unified approach for solving inter-branch and inter-farm
problems, within the framework of the agroindustrial complex, and for balancing
the principal elements of production throughout the entire technological

chain, commencing with the production of the means of production and ending
aith the sale of the finished products of the complex. In the "Basic
Directions for the sconomic and Social Development of the USSR During the
1981-1985 Period and for the Period Up To 1990," emphasis is placed upon the
foll0uing: "In the interest of achieving successful realization of the food
program, it will be necessary to ensure unified planning and proportional and
balanced deve10pment for the branches of the agroindustrial complex, a
considerable strengthening of its logistical base, improvements in the economic
relationships between branches, the organization of efficient interaction among
them in intensifying the production of agricultural products and improvements
in the preservation, transporting.and processing of the products and also in
delivering them to the consumer." The implementation of the instructions
handed down during the goth CPSU Congress assumes the formation of an APR
[agroindustrial complegl at various levels and the administration of it as a
unified structural subunit of the national economy.

The essence of the economic problems associated with organizing the work of a
national economic APK, when the task is assigned of creating organs for
administering groups of similar branches, consists of developing and converting
the system of production associations into new structural elements -- food
agrolndustrial units of a regional APR, based upon the need for achieving
technological and economic unity throughout the entire production-technological
chain.

Distinct from branch administration, the administration of a national economic
APK creates the conditions required for the development of inter-branch
production subunits and for the formation of a system of mutually related

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
economic elements within the framework of the complex, the single final goal of
which is to satisfy the country's requirements for food goods and agricultural
raw materials and to solve the socio-economic problems. Thus, instead of a
relatively detached branch of economics -- agriculture -- an agroindustrial
complex that is complete in its structural and economic relationships develops.
In the process, not only do the inter-branch balance relationships become
stronger, but in fact qualitatively new structural subunits develop based upon
these relationships and these subunits form the system of economic elements of
the APK. Thus the most important structural element at the lower level, in our
opinion, must be that of the food agroindustrisl unit (association). It is
here that production units associated with the servicing, production,
processing and sale of agricultural products c00perate with one another.

The need for forming such structural units in an agroindustriai complex derives
from the absence of a unified approach for developing all of its spheres and
branches. The existing organizational forms for the production of agricultural
products, for processing them, for the marketing infrastructure and for the means
of production used for producing them, being technologically and directly
associated with one another, are not associated from an organi.ationsl-economic
standpoint and cannot exert an active influence on mutual development. The
organizations and enterprises of the APK lack an effective system of stimuli
aimed at achieving complete and high quality use of the agricultural output and
coordinating their activities with the final results of agroindustrial
production. This explains the lack of development of the logistical base of the
branches which service agricultre and which process its products and the
imperfections in the structure of the industrial means of production being
supplied to agriculture and also in the internal structure of the branches. All
of this l.ads to a duplication of production functions and to a dispersion and
irrational use of resources.

The formation of agroindustrial units as lower elements of the APK makes it
possible to intensify coordination of the work of agricultural, agroindustrial,
transport, service and processing enterprises and org .izations and also those
which sell the finished products; to achieve greater coordination for varioas
aspects of production -- equipment, technology. labor organization and
incentives, the mechanism for management and administration in the
agroindustrial sphere and the elimination on this basis of departmental
barriers; to subordinate departmental interests to achieving the final results;
to accelerate the industrialization of procurements and the transporting and
sale of agricultural products. The gradual conversion over to direct
production and economic relationships between agriculture and its service
branches is accompanied by the development in Goskomsel‘khoztekhnika and other

departments of a number of specialized services-for providing logistical
services.

The singling out of a number of agroindustrial units within the structure of
regional APK'a will make it possible to convert over from controlling
individual branches and subunits to all-round control over all regional APK's.
Each agroindustrial unit appears as a totality of mutually related production
efforts of all spheres of the APK and the elements of the infrastructure, the
goal of which is that of obtaining a definite type of product and supplying it
to the consumer in the apprOpriste assortment and quality and with minimal

la
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
expenditures of labor. "We need not just any associations" stated L.I.
Brezhnev during the July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU, "but rather those which
truly raise the socialist collectivization of production and labor to s new
stage, are based upon the latest scientific, engineering and technological
achievements, ensure a high level of productivity and furnish naXimum
quantities of inexpensive products.” Thus one of the chief tasks is that of
selecting the best paths of development and the organizational forms for food
agroindustrial units within the framework of regional APK's and administering
them while taking into account their branch structure and the trends in
agricultural development.

Under modern conditions, various trends in the formation of agroindustrial

units within the structure of republic APK's have already appeared in Moldavia,
Estonia and some other republics. . oasic consideration in organizing such units
in dstonia is that of forming processing and service enterprises of rayon
production associations, which will be common to the kolkhozes and sovkhozes and
in the framework of which production specialization and concentration will be
intensified based upon inter-farm and intra-farm specialization. Cooperation
between kolkhoz and state enterprises is being achieved based upon the
develOpment of rayon associations. in the process, the economic integrity of
the kolkhozes and sovkhozes and their economic and legal independence are
retained. At the same time, the well known levelling off of the conditions of
management is achieved by organizing the centralized funds of the association.
The formation of rayon associations calls for further deve10pment of the
organizational-economic structure of the APK -- the conversion over to the
formation of a republic APK.

Substantial peculiarities are attached to the formation of agroindustrial units
in Moldavia. During the 1970's, c.uperating farms singled out 1-2 branches
(animal husbandry, capital construction, feed production) which had obtained
independence from a production standpoint, especially in connection with the
creation of inter-farm enterprises of the industrial type having closed
production cycles. This method opened up broad opportunities for specialized
production by the branches, but it promoted to a lesser degree cooperation
among the kolkhozes and sovkhozes in the principal production activity. Since
the 1970's, the process of cooperation and integration of all kolkhoz-sovkhor
production, within the framework of the territorial-production branch
associations, has been strengthened throughout the republic. However, this has
been accomplished not on the basis of farm or intrs-fsrn specialization, but
rather based upon inter-farm coOperstion between the production branches and
inter-branch sgroindustrial integration. The specifics of this method provide
for the gradual formation of a system of specialized branch associations, based
upon a reorganization of the pro€\ction structure of the kolkhozes and
sovkhozes themselves. The rates of development for inter-farm enterprises,

based upon the kolkhoz sector, are reflected in the data furnished in the table
on the following page.

The slower rates for raising the proportion of the gross output of inter-farm
enterprises in the gross output of the kolkhoz sector, compared to the rates of
growth for the fixed capital of inter-farm enterprises in the fixed capital of
the kolkhoz sector, derive from the fact that during the 1970's associations
were created for the mechanization and electrification of agricultural

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Development of Inter-Farm Enterprises in the Moldavian SSR

Unit of
Measurement 1965 1970 1975

All inter-farm enterprises on an 113 176 301
independent balance 222 365 590
Gross output of inter-farm . 16.8 30.5 36.
enterprises in gross output
of the kolkhoz sector
Fixed capital of inter-farm Millions of . 154.8 802.3 1536.2
enterprises Rubles
I 5 times 26 times 50 times
Their prOportion in fixed 1 10.7 30.6 64.1
capital of the kolkhoz sector
Number of workers engaged at Thousands . 44.3 99.4 139.8
inter-farm enterprises of persons
7. 175 393 552
Their preportion of the number of I 6.5 15.8 25.3
workers in the kolkhos sector
Profit realized by inter-farm 7. 19.1 30.0 25.1

enterprises, of total amount of
profit in the kolkhos sector

 

production and the equipment of farms was transferred over to their balance.
More than 90 percent of the tractors and other equipment of the republic's
kolkhozes are to be found within associations. This has brought about a sharp
increase in the number of workers engaged at inter-farm enterprises. During the
1971-1978 period, their proportion of the number of workers in the kolkhoz
sector increased by more than a factor of seven.

An analysis of the practice of inter-farm cooperation at the primary levels
makes it possible to single out several principal methods for developing it:
the creation of a system of inter-farm enterprises of the industrial type; the
formation of territorial-production associations which cooperate and specialize
in the principal activities of kolkhozes and sovkhozes; the development of
cooperation among agricultural enterprises of the industrial type. cooperation
which creates the prerequisites for intra-branch specialization of production.

All of these trends are promoting structural improvements in the production
elements of regional APK's

The cooperation of farms and the creation of a broad network of specialized
enterprises of the industrial type are considered to be very important conditions
for the development of agroindustrial integration, based upon the formation of

a system of agroindustrial enterprises and associations. The development of a
structure for the production elements of the Moldavian APR is being carried out
along the following lines: merging at the republic level of the agricultural

and industrial branches; creation at the primary levels of a system of

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
agroindustrial enterprises and associations of the industrial type; merging of
specialized enterprises and transport-marketing organizations for the purpose
of subordinating the various aspects of the single process to achieving the
final goal; the production and processing of field crop husbandry and animal
husbandry products on an industrial basis, directly at inter-farm enterprises
and associations; expanding the geography of development of the agroindustrial
forms. Overall, these changes have brought about new features in the
deVelopment of specialization and also in the integrated forms of production,

forms which are transforming the structure of the production elements of the
APK.

The agroindustrial complex of the Moldavian SSR includes a system of
specialized economic agroindustrisl elements having central republic and
branch organs of administration: Moldvinprom, Ministry of the Fruit and
Vegetable Industry, Moldtabakprom, Ministry of the Food Industry.
Moldsakharprom, an agroindustrial association for the production of essential
oils and perfume-cosmetic products, a system of specialized scientific-
proauction associations and so forth.

During the 1971-1979 period, the number of sovkhoz-plants and sovkhozes
belonging to agroindustrial associations increased by a factor of 1.6. Their
proportion of land compared to the republic's agricultural land increased from
15 to 20 percent. The fixed production capital of an agricultural nature, of
enterprises belonging to agroindustris1 associations, increased by a factor of
3.25 during the 1971-1978 period and amounted to approximately one fourth of
all of the republic's capital in the public agricultural sector. During this
period the volume of gross agricultural output from agroindustrial production
increased by a factor of more than 1.7. Its proportion of gross output in the
public sector increased from 16.8 to 20 percent. The number of agricultural
workers engaged in associations increased by a factor of 1.5 and their
proportion of the overall number of agricultural workers in the republic
increased frOm 15 to 23.6 percent.

During the 1971-1978 period, the fixed industrial production capital of
agroindustrial formations increased by threefold and exceeded 760 billion
rubles. The gross output volume of industry at agroindustrial associations
increased by a factor of 1.7 and amounted to approximately two thirds of all
output produced by the republic's food industry. The number of industrial-
praluction personnel at agroindustrial associations increased by 7 percent and

reached 39.500. This number constituted 10.5 percent of all industrial workers
in the republic.

The Holcvinprom agroindustrial Association is one of the more developed
structural subunits of the republic'a APK. It includes 200 sovkhoz-plants and
$0 industrial enterprises -- 264 economic units in all. One hundred and ninety
tive sovkhoz-plants belong to 21 agroindustrial associations and one scientific-

production egroindustrial association and five sovkhoz-plants are directly
subordinate to Moldvinprom.

In 1179, the assOclation produced 2.5 times more grapes than were produced in
19/1. The vineyard areas have increased by a factor of 1.9. Increased
production was achieved as a result of concentration of the grape production

17 _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
areas, the prOportion of which has increased from 20.4 to 33.9 percent of the
agricultural lands (at other farms it equals 4.9 percent). The increase in the
proportion of vineyard areas of the agroindustrial association, with regard to
the overall vineyard area of the kolkhoz and state sectors, from 25.4 to 47.4
nercent and the gross yield of grapes from 21.8 to 46.1 percent, has made it
possible to ensure an interrelationship between the production, transporting
and processing of the products and to reduce product losses.

within the framework of the Holdvinprom territorial subunit, the best solutions
are being found for those problems associated with the all-round development of
the viniculture and wine-making microregions, which more often than not

embrace the lands of several farms and industrial production is properly

merged with the raw material base and associated branches (field crop husbandry).
aniual husbandry) and with auxiliary services, through the creation of inter-
farm production efforts. Logistical supply and the marketing of products,
accounting and technical-economic planning involving the use of electronic
computers are all centralized in the association and an operational dispatcher
service, automatic control system and others have been created. Increased
production specialization has made it possible to introduce a progressive
technology for the cultivation of grapes, increase the level of mechanization,
raise cropping power, improve the quality of the grapes and increase the
earnings from their sales.

The agroindustrial-trade association of the Ministry of the Fruit and Vegetable
Industry is extremely efficient. The production, procurement, processing and
sale of fruit and vegetables are concentrated in this association.
Approximately 70 percent of the enterprises attached to 12 agroindustrial
associations have forfeited their economic independence. A unified production
structure has been created in the association and unified policies are being
implemented in the areas of capital investments, legistical supply and
marketing. An increase in the areas of fruit plantings from 5.3 to 8.3
percent, with regard to the overall area of agricultural land, and vegetable
crops from 13.0 to 19.1 percent, compared to the overall area under craps,
increased production specialization, the introduction of leading agricultural
practices and raising the level of mechanization have made it possible to
increase the cropping power of fruit crops by a factor of 1.5 and that for
vegetables by more than a factor of 1.6. In addition, they have made it
possible to subordinate the interests of each element to achieving the final
goals, reducing losses and on the whole raising the economic efficiency of the
association's operations. Efficient work is being performed by agroindustrial
associations for the production of essential oils and perfume-cosmetic
products, Holdsakharprom, Holdtabakprom and others.

On the whole, the raised level of production concentration and increased
production specialization are creating opportunities for converting over to a
new stage in the formation of subunits of the republic's APK, which consists
of transforming the production associations into specialized branch
ngroindustrial units of the complex. The existing food agroindustrial units:
Moldvinprom, Kblkhozzhivprom, Holdtabakprom and Moldefirmaaloprom of the
Ministry of the Fruit and Vegetable Industry have still not become true units
of the complex, since the component parts of each unit in the republic do not
ensure elimination of the separate nature of the production process or further

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
movement of the agricultural output. 0n the one hand, this is associated with
the fact that the existing organizational forms (agrarian, agroindustrial,
scientific-production associations) are isolated subsystems of different and
separate ministries and departments aid, on the other. each of these forms was
created taking into account the need ror retaining unity in the technological
and economic chain, couencing with production and ending with the sale of the
agricultural products. For example. despite the fact that Moldavian
viniculture includes the operation of two scientific-production associations of
the Moldavian Ministry of Agriculture and the state union-republic APO
[agropromyshlennoye proizvodstvennoye ob"yedineniye; agroindustrial production
associatiogl, nevertheless associations of Vinogradprom of the Kolkhoz Council
for the HSSR are being created simultaneously in the republic. Today
approximately one half of the republic'a grapes are being produced within the
Kolkhoz Council system, which does not have a processing base.

Under these conditions. it is not always possible to organize efficient work

in connectiOn with the deliveries and processing of grapes or supplying the
farms with grape seedlings produced within another department's system. Thus
the enterprises which process the grapes. being technologically associated with
agriculture, are dissociated from an organizational-economic standpoint. They
lack the stimuli aimed at ensuring complete and high quality use of the
products produced by the agricultural enterprises. At the same time, the
material interests of subunits in Sphere III of the AP! are not adequately
oriented toward the final results of Holdvinprom. Unity of technological.
economic and social relationships is found to be lacking within the framework of
such a unit .

The organizational-economic coordination of new economic units of a regional
APK can be ensured based upon cooperation between state APO'a and mutually
related subunits of the kolkhoz sector. In such a case, the structure for a

viniculture-wine making state agroindustrial unit of a regional APK could be as
£0110ws.

Chart 1

Production Relationships in an Agroindustrial Uhit for the Production of
Viniculture and wine Making Products

      
 
   
 
   

len-ns-nea-o “:0
(I) Abun- u-v - II as mu inﬂame-I

    
  

AIIII
,, 'I-l nah-nae...- I-(nlﬁf
I nu- user, 1...". g“ ..
--, .3... paw-ea nu ....
g”... _'.”l4.ls( unﬂgslll

 
  
  
 
   

hauls ups-~-
unv - sup-v

 

 

Key:
1. Territorial APO (association or 3. Trade-marketing organizations
system of associations) 4. APO (inter-farm, state-kolkhoz, sovkhoz

z. Scientific-production association vineyards, enterprises for the primary
for the raising of vineyard seedlings processing of grapes)
and the breeding of new varieties of 5. Primary and secondary viniculture plants
grapes; industrialization of the 6. Consumer cooperation
cultivation process 7. Procurement, production services and
logistical supply organizations

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0 UR Us I skins. u. u. \I.\a.l

The development of inter-farm cooperation and the creation of agroindustrial
units in fruit growing are associated with achieving solutions for a number of
proolems. For example, horticulture in Moldavia is concentrated mainly in the
kolkhoz sector and the processing enterprises are under the jurisdiction of the
state APO, that is. production and processing are separated from a departmental
standpoint. The same situation prevails in vegetable growing. It is typical not
only of Moldavia but also the Ukraine, the RSFSR and other republics. This is
reflected in the quality of the products being supplied and it results in great
losses when the vegetables are shipped using non-specialized transport equipment.

Thus the existing union republic APO's should not be considered as complete
units of regional APK's.

The creation of single state-kolkhoz agroindustrial units on a republic scale
would make it possible to unite inter-farm, state-kolkhoz, kolkhoz and sovkhoz
orchards, crop rotation plans for the production of vegetables and also
scientific-production associations for the breeding of new varieties of fruit
and the industrialization of their cultivation process, consumer cooperation,
trade, procurement organizations and organizations for production services and
logistical supply. These agroindustrial units within the framework of APK's
can be formed based upon specialized territorial agroindustrisl enterprises and
associations. Within the framework of the latter, departments for the primary
processing of fruit should ideally be created at the inter-farm specialized
enterprises. When a high level of concentration is achieved, cooperation should
ideally take place between the APO and the canning plants according to the
territorial criterion.

Branch production specialization at kolkhozes and sovkhozes and the creation of
inter-branch enterprises and associations are promoting the formation of
agroindustrial units for various types of field crop husbandry products,
particularly for the production, procurement and processing of grain crops,
sugar beets and sunflowers.

With the intensive conversion of animal husbandry over to an industrial basis,
based upon the develOpment of agroindustrial relationships, conditions are
created for the formation of agroindustrial units even in this branch. At the
present time, unity has been violated in the process of producing animal
husbandry products, in the reproduction of pedigree livestock, in maturing and
fattening the livestock and in the processing of mast, since these technological
stages are under the jurisdiction of various ministries and departments.

Production services and logistical supply for the branch have also been
isolated. The same holds true for the planning, procurement. storage and
primary processing of livestock pelts, operations which are carried out on
farms and at enterprises which are subordinate to different departments. The
complexes, kolkhozes and sovkhosss are not always interested in the final
operational results of meat combines and especially leather raw materials
enterprises and they do not always meet their requirements for high quality
pelts. As a result, up to 30 percent of the pelts received from complexes and
approximately 50 percent of the pelts received from kolkhozes and sovkhozes are
lower than lst grade quality owing to poor livestock maintenance, physical and
planning defects and imprOper storage. At the same time, the leather raw
materials plants lack efficient stimuli for improving the quality of the raw

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
materials. The structure of a state kolkhoz agroindustrial unit in animal
husbandry is furnished below (see Chart 2).

Chart 2

Production Relationships in an Agroindustrial Unit for the Production of
Heat and Dairy Products on an Industrial Basis

  
   
    

   

aha—a. p... a nu; ow",
emu-nu- . mass-soc."

. . .l... .. ,...-. ..... —(7)
w"

nan l‘llwlh- - mobs-pa
saunas-1M” mv-Mlb

      
 
   
   

(10)
Key :
l. Territorial APO's 5. APO: reproduction farms which
2. Organization of procurements, produce milk, young large-horned cattle
production services and logistical stock, young pigs and raise and fatten
supply young large-horned cattle stock and
3. Scientific-production associations young pigs; primary processing of meat
for the breeding of new strains of and dairy products and livestock pelts;
livestock, reorganization of state-kolkhoz mixed feed industry.
selection-breeding and veterinary 6. State-kolkhoz mixed feed industry
work. study of the process of 7. Heat combines
preserving leather raw materials and 8. Freezer combines
its processing 9. Dairy plants
a. Trade-marketing organizations 10. Leather plants

Food agroindustrial units must appear as individual cost accounting systems.
However, the organizational-economic interrelationships in the activities of
kolkhozes, sovkhozes, specialized enterprises and organizations, engaged in
servicing agriculture and processing its products within the framework of
agroindustrial associations, should ideally be carried out on the basis of
combining the cost accounting and administrative functions and retaining the
operational-economic and legal independence of the subunits belonging to an
association. If this were not done, the conversion of enterprises and

associations within units over to intrs-farm accounts would weaken their
interest in the final produCtion results.

Territorial agroindustrial associations may become the principal cost accounting
elements within the framework of agroindustrial units. Primary cost accounting,
inter-farm and agroindustrial production enterprises and associations (sovkhozes,
kolkhozes, inter-farm orchards, vineyards and processing departments.

enterprises for feed production, specialized kolkhozea, sovkhozes, service
enterprises) form within the latter and these are the initial installations of
inter-farm cooperation and agroindustrial integration. For the purpose of
raising the efficiency and quality of work in the agroindustrial units,
organizations engaged in procurement work, production services and logistical
supply should ideally also be converted over to cost accounting.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run Uri-ILL“. has. \INIJ

as the agroindustrial units form and become stronger, relationships should be
developed between the production associations of the first sphere and those
agrolndustrial units which embrace the second and third spheres of the complex
and the existing system for selling the means of production thrOugh
Goskomsel'khoztekhnika should be reorganized. The development of agroindustrial
units in this direction will lead to improvements not only in the administration
of production but also in economic relationships, since opportunities will
appear at the unit level and for their production associations for concentrating
the planning of procurements, determining the trends for production
Specialization and concentration and the volumes for output sales, credit and
logistical supply and for creating a reserve specialized association for the
mechanization, improvement and electrification of production. The withdrawal

of differential rent and its use for stimulating the work of subunits of the
agroindustrial unit, in the interest of increasing their interest in the
production of the final products of the complex, are centralized at the some
time. The primary enterprises can solve the problems concerned with the
objective organization of production, its detailed structure. the distribution
of the funds remaining at their disposal and so forth.

within the framework of the agroindustrisl units. conditions are being created
for converting over to the development of continuous plans (commencing with
production services for agriculture and ending with the sale of finished
products, with the trends for their use being singled out) and for making firm
procurement plans available not to individual enterprises but to the
associations and to the agroindustrial units on the whole. In the process, the
role played by production inter-farm and agroindustrial associations with
regard to intensifying specialization and raising production concentration is
strengthened. The prerequisites are created for developing uniform criteria
for establishing the procurement plans, with all of the production factors
being taken into account (economic evaluation of the land, status of production
funds and so forth).

The development of state-kolkhoz agroindustrial units assumes a conversion
over to a unified system of stimulation for the kolkhozes, sovkhozes and
inter-farm enterprises, based upon improvements in the ratios for the
procurement prices for variOus types of products and the use of rental payments
in conformity with the quality of the land.

The formation of new agroindustrial units must be accompanied by improvements in
the system of control over production, at both the regiOnal and national
economic levels. At the present time, subunits which can be included in
agroindustrial units are subordinate to various departments. For example, six
relatively independent republic organs are directly associated with the
organization of control over agricultural production in the Moldavian SSR:
Ministry of Agriculture, Kolkhoz Council, Ministry of the Fruit and Vegetable
industry, Holdvinprom, Holdtabekprom and Holdefirmaaloprom. These departments
and associations are characterized by a scattered structure of planned control
and ly the absence of operational and all-round control by them, based upon a
uniiied approach for developing all branches of the APK (with the exception of
planned control by the republic's Gosplan). This disrupts the integrity of

the technological, economic and social relationships within the framework of
the complex and it lowers the effectiveness of investments for its development.
In order to eliminate these and other shortcomings, a single republic organ is
needed for achieving all-round mutual agreement and coordination of the
activities of all subunits entering the complex.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0n the one hand, the state-kolkhoz agroindustrial units should be brought
together in the organizationsl-departmental structure of a regional APK, in
particular: viniculture-wine making, fruit and vegetable, food grain, meat and
dairy, sugar beets and others, and on the other hand -- the corresponding
branch ministries and departments of a region: Ministry of Agriculture,
Ministry of Procurements, Ministry of the Light and Textile Industry, hinistry
of the Heat and Dairy Industry, the system of logistical supply, rural
construction, Ministry of Trade, consumer cooperation and so forth. In the
process, control over all of the agrziudustrial units and their associated
ministries and departments must be carried out through the organ that controls
the agroindustrial complex, which must resolve such problems as the
organization of inter-branch relationships, distribution of capital investments
and resources and so forth.

The principal functions of the particular organ could be: solving inter-
branch and inter-departmental problems; accelerating the processes of inter-
farm cooperation and agroindustrial integration; achieving a rational
structure and maintaining the proportions between the spheres and branches of
the complex; carryin; out a unified technical and economic program within the
APK; developing direc. relationships within and between units of the complex
and improving the cost accounting relationships; creating more effective
stimuli fcr the purpose of orienting all elements towards achieving the final
results of the APK.

The organization of unified control for regional APK's, combined with the
formation of production agroindustrial units within their frameworks, will
lead to the development of direct relationships between the units and within
their production associations and this will create the prerequisites for
further intensification of specialization and improvements in the level of
production concentration, based upon improved inter-branch relationships. For
the formation of a rational structure for the production associations and
agroindustrial units, great importance is attached to coordinating the
distribution and use of a portion of the net income, within the framework of
the units and their subunits and with a real contribution being made by each
one of them towards achieving the final operational results.

The development and transformation of the system of production associations
into a new structural element of a regional APR and the organizational-
economic appearance of the latter are creating the conditions required for
implementing a unified economic and technical program, for solving inter-
branch and inter-farm problems based upon the creation of a single
organizational-economic and program-special purpose system and for achieving a
more clear definition of the economic and functional tasks of the component
parts of the complex.

With the formation of a regional APK that is complete from a structural
standpoint, favorable conditions can be created for the further development of
inter—farm cooperation and agroindustrial integration, since the solutions for
problems associated with these processes are directly dependent upon how
completely changes are implemented in the production conditions in agriculture
and in all of its associated national economic branches. Thus the conversion
of field crop husbandry over to an industrial basis turns out to be more

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Uh Us a china. s-do. q. ...a

effective than the creation of inter-farm orchards, vineyards and so forth, to
the extent that the conditions for cultivation and those for the introduction

of industrial technologies for the harvesting. transporting and processing of

agricultural raw materials conform to the requirements.

The same can be said regarding animal husbandry. For example, the functioning
of animal husbandry complexes of the industrial type turns out to be more
etfective only when the feed productioa. selection-breeding and veterinary
work and construction industry systems are industrialized,.uhen the livestock
and poultry are raised in a specialized manner, when improvements are carried
out in the processing base and, on the whole, when the natural and biological
factors are utilized and regulated in a more efficient manner. The successful
functioning of the system of specialized enterprises, associations and the
units themselves is possible only when there is increased specialization in
field crop husbandry, greater development in selection work, seed production and
in the systems for providing technical, agrochemical and land reclamation
services and increased capabilities and industrialization of those branches
associated with the transporting, storage and processing of agricultural
output.

The development of agroindustrial units and the organizational-economic
formation of APK's are creating opportunities for ensuring conformity among the
levels of industrialization and in the changes in the various elements of the
technologically unified agroindustrial production. At the same time, socio-
economic changes are taking place in the rural areas, since agriculture in the
agroindustrial units is gradually being transformed from a relatively isolated
branch into an organic sphere of the APK. The kolkhoz and state agricultural
enterprises and associations are included in the overall system of production
subunits. This exerts a substantial influence on the further drawing

together of the two forms of ownership, from the standpoint of smoothing out
the economic condtions for production management and organization. The kolkhoz
and state sectors are more organically united as elements of the agroindustrial
units. As a result. an increase takes place in the interrelated use of kolkhoz
and state resources, for the purpose of converting agriculture over to an
industrial basis. Within the framework of the state-kolkhoz agroindustrial
units, in the kolkhoz and state sectors, similar type enterprises are formed
which serve as the basis for mutual enrichment of the principles and methods
for production management. As a result, the forms of economic relationships
draw closer together, the methods of control are unified and a single

economic mechanism and an overall system of social security are created.

At the present time, the development and reorganization of specialized agrarian
and agroindustrial enterprises and associations into food agroindustrial units
has only just begun. The establishment of new economic units and their
transformation into structural subunits of regional APK's must pass through
several stages in conformity with the level of agricultural industrialization
and the degree to which solutions have been found for the social problems in
the rural areas. A mandatory condition for such a transformation is that of
observance of the proper proportions between the rates for inter-farm
cooperation and agroindustrial integration and the rates for development of the
logistical base and the formation of organizational~economic conditions for
production.

24
FOR 0Fl-1CIAL USE ONLY
Moreover, the establishment of new state-kolkhoz agroindustrial units must be
accompanied by a smoothing out of the levels of development for the logistical
base of kolkhozes. sovkhozes, production services enterprises and the processing
base on a new qualitative basis. We have in mind considerable growth in the
capital-labor ratio, in the power-worker ratio and in labor productivity and a

drawing together of the management conditions in kolkhoz and sovkhoz
production.

As these processes develop further, combined with comprehensive industrialization
of agriculture, the agroindustrial units will exert greater influence on the
production structure of enterprises belonging to these units. This will bring
about changes in the production-economic relationships between the principal
subunits of the agroindustrial unit.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", 'Woprosy ekonomiki", 1982

7026
CSO: 1824/190

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OFLY

AGRO- ECOWICS All) ORGANIZATION

UDC 338.109.J

EFFICIENCY OF KDLKIDZ ECOMMIC OPERATIONS DISCUSSED

Moscow PLANIROVANIYE l UCﬂET V SEL'BKDKHDZYAYSTVBNNYKH PREDPRIYATIYAKH in
Russian No ll, Nov 81 pp 2-5

LXrticle by A.H. Sinakov, chief of Department of Economics of Kolkhoz Production
of the USS; Ministry of Agriculture: "Efficiency of Economic Work at
Kolkhozesﬂ/

[Text/ The principal sources for growth in social production are improvements
in its efficiency and in the quality indicators. Agricultural production must
grow not so much as a result of placing additional capabilities in operation
and developing new lands, but rather through improvements in the operation of
each kolkhoz, sovkhoz and enterprise and in the use of equipment, each unit
and each hectare of land. In the Basic Directions for the Economic and Social
Development of the USSR During the 1981-1985 Period and for the Period Up To
1995. special emphasis is placed upon: 'mchieving dynamic development for all
branches of agriculture, increasing production and improving the quality of

output ."

The development of agricultural production requires correct and economically
sound solutions for the practical tasks concerned with increasing output yield
with minimal expenditures of labor and resources. A considerable role in this
regard must be played by the economic service, which includes all specialists
working at a farm, the leaders of brigades, animal husbandry farms and other
intra-farm subunits and also leading production workers. The effectiveness of
economic research being carried out in all sectors and all branches, including
in the sphere of production control, is dependent to a considerable degree upon

the work of this service.

in carrying out the decisions of the party and government with regard to further
agricultural development. the Ministry of Agriculture for the Estonian $88 and
its organs in the various areas and the republic and rayon kolkhos councils
performed a definite amount of work aimed at increasing the production of
farming and animal husbandry products. strengthening their economies and
improving social-domestic living conditions for the agricultural workers.

During the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, output production per 100 hectares
of agricultural land at kolkhozes increased by 27 percent above the level for
the 1971-l975 period. This was achieved as a result of having raised the
crOpping power of crops and the productivity of animal husbandry. The grain

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
yields per hectare increased from 25.9 to 27 quintals, perennial grass hay --
from 36.5 to 61 quintals and milk yield per cow -- from 3,335 to 3.623 kilograms
annually.

ﬁs a result of measures undertaken to improve the use of equipment, the daily
output of a standard tractor was raised by 5 percent during the years of the
Tenth Five-Year Plan and reached 8.9 conventional standard hectares and the
volume of mechanized operations was increased by 22 percent. Labor expenditures
for the production of a quintal of milk decreased by 13 percent, for an
incsease in weight in large-horned cattle -- by 18 and for an increase in the
weight of swine -- by 22 percent. 0n the whole, labor productivity at
kolkhozes during this period was raised by 14.6 percent and gross output yield
per average annual worker engaged in agriculture reached 8,400 rubles in 1979.
As labor productivity continues to increase, further improvements will be
realized from year to year in the material well-being of kolkhc: members
(their average monthly wage in 1979 was 198 rubles). The profitability of
kolkhoz production was 21 percent.

More complete use of the increasing agricultural potential, for achieving
further improvements in production and raising its efficiency, will promote to
a considerable degree the organization of economic work in the republic that
will actively influence the production-financial activities of the kolkhozes
and the development of their branches and farm subunits.

Special importance is being attached to the development of plans for economic
and social development and to the proper distribution of the republic'a
established plans for agricultural product procurements and for the delivery
volumes for equipment, fertilizers and other logistical resources. This will
ensure that the farms and their subunits enjoy the same opportunities for
develOping production and fulfilling their plans for selling products to the
state.

The republic and rayon kolkhoz councils are devoting special attention to
developing production and strengthening the economies of backward farms.
specific measures have been developed and are being implemented by each of
them aimed at raising the culture of farming and animal husbandry and
increasing the cropping power of the agricultural crops and the productivity
of the livestock; the volumes of soil improvement and land reclamation work
have been defined; the construction of production and cultural-domestic
prOJects has been outlined; the plans call for an increase in the deliveries
of equipment and mineral fertilizers.

1n the interest of achieving more efficient planning for agricultural
production, the economic service, jointly with the republic'a scientific
institutes, developed long-range questions concerned wirn kolkhoz development,
particularly the structure of the areas under crops, thelnlwer of livestock,
the balance in the production and sale of products and feed production and
consumption; an optimum structure for the machine-tractoF pool was calculated.
Recommendations are being issued in a systematic manner on such matters as
economics, labor organization and wages and control over agricultural
production, with the experience of leading farms being taken into account.

Production agricultural associations have been created in a number of rayons
throughOut the republic which, in addition to solving the problems associated

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
with coordinating the activities of the agroinduatrial complex, have provided
broader opportunities for smoothing out the economic conditions of management
and improving social-economic development in the rural areas. The associations
have centralized funds which are used for creating inter-farm installations,
furnishing assistance for strengthening the economies of backwerd farms.
financing capital investments, augmenting the material incentive funds of
enterprises having low profitability levels and providing reimbursenent for
damage caused by natural calamities. Such measures made it possible to avert
partial backwardness caused by objective factors and to ensure improvements in
the production efficiency of the associations. As a result, during the years
of the Tenth Five-Year Plan and compared to the average annual level during the
Ninth Five-Year Plan, the cropping power of grain crops at kolkhczea increased
from 17.4 to 31.1 quintals per hectare, perennial grass for hay -- from 38 to
66.2 quintals per hectare and the milk yield per forage cow increased from
3,579 to 3,968 kilograms.

Using the centralized funds of associations, it is possible to distribute in a
more rational manner the logistical resources among the agricultural
enterprises and to carry out practical measures aimed at strengthening the
logistical base of backward farms. Thus, last year, at economically weak
kolkhozes in Pyarnuskiy Rayon, the technical equipping per hectare of
agricultural land was increased by 20 percent, they were allocated 10 percent
more mineral fertilizer than other farms and assistance was also furnished in
acquiring seed for perennial grasses. As a result, the efficiency of land
utilization was raised at such kolkhOzes as Khalinga and imeni V.I. Lenin.
During the past 2 years alone, the actual crop yields per hectare of
agricultural land at these kolkhozes increased by factors of 1.6 and 1.7
respectively and the average milk yield per cow for a year's time increased by
655 kilograms at the first farm and by 350 kilograms at the second one.

Economic operations at a majority of the republic's kolkhozes is directed
towards uncovering and making maximum use of existing reserves in farming and
animal husbandry and also employing progressive technologies, scientific
achievements and leading experience on an extensive scale. Cost accounting
tasks are being prepared on this basis, with the participation of a large group
of kolkhoz members, and prior to the end of next year they will be made
available to the subunits. with constant control to be exercised over their
fulfillment. The operational results are reviewed each month. quarter and

once every 6 months in the collectives of production subunits and at brigade
councils and production meetings. Here measures are defined for eliminating
existing shortcomings, compensating for a shortfall in individual types of
products and ensuring complete utilization of the favorable opportunities

which appear throughout the year for over-fulfilling the plans. when necessary,
operational analysis promotes a timely effect on production-financial
activities directed towards the fulfillment of plans and the achievement of
improved results.

Economic operations are well organized at the Kolkhoz imeni Y. Lauristin in
Khar'yuskiy Rayon. Here the activities of the subunits are analyzed on a
monthly basis, unused production reserves are brought to light and timely
measures are undertaken to correct shortcomings in the management of the
branches. As a result, constant improvements are realized in the production
and economic indicators. Thus, in 1979 and compared to 1970, the cropping

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

power of the grain crops on the farm increased from 19.2 to 31.7 quintals per

hectare, milk production per 100 hectares of agricultural land -- from 511 to

601 quintals and meat .- from 95 to 1&7 quintals. Production profitability on
the average for a years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan was 31 percent.

The annual results of the production-financial activities of the kolkhozes are
discussed at general meetings of the kolkhoz members and in the balance
committees of rayon agricultural administrations. with interested organizations
and departments participating in the discussions.

Special attention is being given to organizing the establishment of norms and
to improving the system of material and moral incentives. These questions are
consL. .‘y the_objects of attention by the economic services and they are
directed towards increasing the interest of kolkhoa members in raising the
efficiency of output production and the quality of work.

Material incehtive measures for kolkhoz members, for having increased output
yield. are developed both for individual categories of workers and also for
subunits on the whole. Special importance is attached to stimulating the work
of kolkhoz members with regard to performing their work during the best
agrotechnical periods and raising the quality of the products being produced.
This is promoting annual growth in the sale of high quality products to the
state. Thus, in 1979, the kolkhozes produced the following: milk of let

grade quality -- 97 percent. large-horned cattle in a high state of nourishment
and of heavy weight -- 83, swine of the lat and 2d categories -- 68. chicken
and broilers of the [st category -- 67 percent of the overall volume of
procurements. Additional earnings from the sale of high quality products
amounted to 33.3 million rubles. An improvement was realized in the quality of
the feed being procured. Compared to 1979, when the requirements for let and
2d grade hay amounted to 51 percent, in 1980 -- 85 and for haylage -- 75 and

96 respectively and silage -- 65 and 86 percent.

The republic's economic service devotes dailv attention to the problems
concerned with improving labor organization and production control. At the
present time, 36 kolkhozes. or one fourth of their overall number, are
operating on the basis of a departmental control structure. work is being
carried out towards creating a dispatcher service and on one half of the farms
such a system has already been introduced into operations. This has raised the
level of control, problems are now being solved in a more efficient manner and
improvements have been realized in the activities of production subunits and in
the use of tractors. motor vehicles and agricultural machines. Unproductive
runs by tractors have been reduced by 30 percent, idle time of sowing units --
by 10 percent and their productivity has increased by 8 percent. The lpstovo
method for organizing labor in field crop husbandry has been introduced into
operatioas on an extensive scale. Thus, in 1980, 309 harvesting-transport
complexes were employed for the harvesting of grain crops. 240 for potatoes and
380 for harvesting root crops. This made it possible to carry out the
principal field Operations rapidly. in a high quality manner and with minimal
expenditures of labor and resources. As a result of the introduction into
animal husbandry of scientific labor organization and an advanced technology,
the workload for a milkmaid in 1979 was raised 21 percent above the figure for
1975, for a worker in swine breeding -- raised 67 percent and labor productivity

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the branch on the whole -- raised 18 percent. Compared to 1970 when a
milkmaid obtained an average milk yield of 82.6 tons of milk. in 1979 -- 168
tons or a twofold increase.

Jointly with the agricultural specialists, the economic service is constantly
working to strengthen breeding work, improve the technology for meat and dairy
cattle husbandry, realize a more efficient division of labor on the farms and
achieve further intro-farm Specialization and concentration of the animal
husbandry branches in the farm subunits.

it bears mentioning that the construction of new farms is making cattle yards
available so that they can be modernized for the maintenance of young stock and
dry cows and for the organization of delivery sections. Thus the cost of a
cattle billet costs 1-3 times less than at newly built installations.

Great importance is being attached to the work of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, which examines the operational indicators of subunits and the
carrying Out of cost accounting tasks, it summarizes leading experience for
introduction into production operations on an extensive scale and it deveIOps
and introduces for discussion by the kolkhoz administrations measures aimed at
eliminating shortcomings and raising operational efficiency.

The Bureau of Economic Analysis created at the Put' Kommunizna Kolkhoz in
Novoodesskiy Rayon, Nikolayevskaya Oblast in the Ukrainian SSR can share its
operational experience. Its structure includes farm leaders and specialists,
heads of farms, chiefs of mechanized detachments and the best machine operators
and animal husbandrymen. The work is directed by the chairman of the kolkhoz
and the chief economist is his deputy. At a meeting of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, attention is given first of all to the reports delivered by the
leaders of cost accounting subunits which tolerated overexpenditures of
resources; subsequently measures are developed aimed at eliminating the
shortcomings and raising operational efficiency and the measures are then
submitted LU the kolkhoz administration for review.

During the past 10 years, the farm achieved considerable success in raising

the efficiency of kolkhoz production and strengthening its economy. Net profit
increased from 175,000 to 1.1 million rubles and gross output production --
from 2.1 million to 5 million rubles. Profitability and gross income increased
by more than twofold.

The kolkhoz councils and agricultural organs in the Estonian SSR attach great
importance to ensuring that kolkhoz production is supplied with skilled cadres
of leading workers and middle echelon specialists. Raised requirements are
imposed upon them for mastering the methods of economic analysis and
management, utilizing the latest achievements of scientific labor organization
and production control, employing modern computer equipment, observing the
principles of socialist management in a strict and consistent manner and other
considerations which promote improved effectiveness in the organizational and
agrotechnical measures being carried out on the farms. At the kolkhozes, 93
percent of the chairmen possess higher or secondary specialized educations,
chief economists -- 95, other specialists -- 74 and middle echelon

specialists -- 61 percent. 0n the average, there are 69 specialists at a

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
kolkhoz, with 12 of them possessing higher educations. 0f the overall number of
tractor operator-machinists. 56 percent are classified as 1st or 2d class
specialists and 50 percent of the milkmaids are masters of machine milking 1st
or 2d class.

A considerable amount of attention is being given to the training of chief
economists for the farms. Such training is being provided in the various
regions in the economics departments of national universities and at republic
and rayon seminar-conferences. The students attend lectures on vital aspects
of agricultural economics. delivered by the republic's leading scientist-
economists and specialists from the ministry and the rayon agricultural
administrations. The economists of leading farms share their operational
experience. Republic and rayon competitions are conducted on a regular basis
for the farm economists.

The economic training of middle echelon specialists and leaders is being
conducted at kolkhozes on the basis of a three year program. Thus, at the
kolkhozes Syprus in Khaapsaluskiy Rayon, Edssi in Pyarnuskiy Rayon and
Orissaare in Kingiseppskiy Rayon, specialized groups have been organized which
have appropriate subject exercises and which are headed by the leaders and
chief specialists of the farms. This is promoting more active participation by
them in solving the production tasks and uncovering reserves for increasing
output production and further lowering expenses.

The rcpublic's kolkhoz council and the Ministry of Agriculture for the Estonian
SSR are constantly devoting attention to improving economic work, intensifying
its effect on production-financial activities and raising the role it plays in
strengthening the kolkhoz economies. At their meetings, systematic discussions
are held on the status of the economic work and training, on observance of the
Model Regulations for a Kolkhoz, on the results of the production-financial
activities of farms and on other subjects associated with raising the efficiency
and quality of work.

COPYRIGHT: lzdetel'stvo "Kolos", "Planirovsniye i uchet v sel'skokhozyaystvennykh
predpriystiyakh", 1981

7026
C50: 1824/189 END

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY