FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10247

11 January 1982

USSR Report

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(FOUO 1/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain informtion primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sunnrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HERE V REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE‘ONLN

JPRS L/1oz

11 January

USSR REPORT
CONTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT

(F000 1/82)

CONTENTS

CONSTRUCTION

Book Excerpts: Construction Tasks of 11th Five-Year Plan
(K NOVYH RUBEZHAH V STROITBL'STVE (ITOOI DBSYAIOY I
ZADACRI ODINNADTSAJOY PYAIILETKI V SVBTB RBSHBNIY
m15'nzo‘nss)’ 1981) OI.0O00.0..00.05.000.000000000000

CONSTRUCTION MACHINERY

Principles for Revs-ping Nachinery-Overhsul System Postulated
(A. Nemchinskiy; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Sep 81) ...............

HETALHORKING EQUIPMENT

Hachinebuilding Equipnent Repair Centralizaticn Effectiveness

Substantiated
(T. Ben', Yu. Kostin; EKONOHIlA SOVETSIOY UKRAINY. Oct 81).

Optimizing Effectiveness of Machinery and Equipment

Overhaul Schedules
(n. ll'yenchenko; txomu somsm ummr, Oct 81)

Improving Metalworking-Equipment Inventory Structure
in Machine Building
(STARK! I INSTﬂﬂﬂﬁﬂT, Aug 81) .............................

- a - [III - USSR - 36s
FOI‘OFFICJAI.[ENE(MVLY

CONSTRUCTION

BOOK EXCERPTS: CONSTRUCTION TASKS 0? 11th FIVE-YEAR PLAN

Moscow h NOVYI RUBEZHAM V STROITEL'STVE (ITOGI DBSYATOY I ZADACHI ODINNADTSATOY
PYATILBTKI V SVBTE RESHENIY XXVI S"YEZDA RPSS) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 29
Oct 8!) pp 1, 9-19. 64

(Annotation, table of contents and one chapter of the book. "To New Frontiers in
Construction (Results of the 10th and Tasks of the 11th Five-Year Plan in Light of
the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress)" by Deputy Chairman of USSR Gosstroy Ivan
Ivanovich Ishchenko, candidate of engineering sciences. RSFSR Distinguished Build-
er and USSR State Prize winner. Znaniye, 25,240 copies. 64 pages]

[Text] Raising the effectiveness and the technical level is one of the main tasks
set for the builders by the 26th CPSU Congress during the 11th Five-Year Plan. The
brochure examines the path of further development of the industrialization of con-
struction-improvement of design solutions. expansion of the use of progressive
structure and materials. and an increase in the mechanization of operations. Much
attention has been given to reducing the material and labor resources used and to
improving technology. organization and management in construction.

The brochure is intended for engineers and technicians of design and construction
organizations and construction-industry enterprises, as well as for lecturers and
propagandists.

Table of Contents Page
introduction................................................................ 3
Results of the 10th Five-Year Plan.......................................... 5
Tasks for Capital Construction During the 11th Five-Year Plan..........9?... 9
Technical Progress in Design.........-o...............o.......-.....-....... 20
strengthening the Industrialization Base for Construction................... 28
The Improvement of Technology. organization and Control in Conatruction..... 52

Bibliogrﬁphy.o.............o.c...............o.oo............c.a............ 63

Tasks for Capital Construction During the 11th Five-Year Plan

'The Main Directions for Social and Economic Development of the USSR's National
Economy During 1981-1985 and During the Period up to 1990," which was adopted by
the 26th CPSU Congress, set the total amount of capital investment that will be
ained at developing and strengthening the country's economy during the 11th Five-
Year Plan. This capital investment is aimed at speeding up the development of all

1
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

types of transport and communications. at assimilating the natural resources of new
regions, and at regularizing the siting of productive forces. and also at carrying
out the program for further raising the material and cultural living conditions of
the Soviet people for improving the sanitary conditions of the environment. and

for building housing and all other facilities of the nonproduction sphere.
During the 11th Five-Year Plan capital investment will rise by 12-15 percent. Con-
struction and installing work will be 350 billion rubles higher. which is much
more than during the 10th Five-Year Plan.

A most important task of capital construction is that of using capital investment
effectively-improving fixed capital qualitatively. introducing production capacity
into operation quickly. and speeding up the rebuilding of existing enterprises.

The reconstruction and reequipping of existing enterprises is one of the main ways
to further the progress of industry during the 11th Five-Year Plan. The "Main Di-
rections" emphasize: "Direct capital investment primarily to the reconstruction
and technical reequipping of enterprises and to completing previously started con-
struction projects. start the erection of new enterprises and the expansion of ex-
isting ones in cases where the national economy's requirements for a given type of
product cannot be met by improving the use of production capacity. takingtherecon-
struction and reequipping thereof into account.

This trend was born back in the 1970's. in the Central Urals. During the five-year
plan. 1.1 billion rubles' worth of industrial output was produced at Sverdlovskaya
oblast enterprises that had been subjected to modernization and reconstruction. In
so doing. 600 million rubles of capital investment were saved over what would have
been required for new construction. The annual economic benefit was 110 million
rubles. and the average period for recouping the costs was less than 2 years. The
experience of the Sverdlovskaya Oblast enterprises was approved by the CPSU Central
Committee and recommended for dissemination.

Much was done in this field during the 10th Five-Year Plan. Thus. at the Hagnito-
gorsk Metallurgical Combine blast furnace No 2 was completely renovated in a short
time and annual pig-iron production here increased 200.000 tons. The production of
automotive sheet steel rose by 300.000 tons. thanks to the rebuilding of the "2:00"
hot rolling mill. Modernization of the equipment at the slabbing mill and the
second blooming mill brought still greater effectiveness. The updating of plants
and factories in Moscow. Leningrad. Ivanovskaya. Zaporozhskaya. Vostochno-Kazakh-
stanskuya. Kemerovskaya. Kuybyshevskaya and other oblasts proved convincingly that
reequipping existing enterprises with machinery is extraordinarily suitable. since
it provides greater effectiveness per unit of expenditures for output and rapid
reeoupment of funds.

Technical reequipping and reconstruction will be developed further. Many enter-
prises of ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy. machinebuilding and the coal. chemical
and petrochemical industries will be renovated on that basis. The Kolomna and
Voroshilovgrad Diesel-Locomotivebuilding Plants. the Bryansk lachinebuilding Plant.
the Penza Diesel-Engine Plant. the Pavlodar Tractor Plant and a number of other
plants are to be rebuilt. Enterprises of light industry and the construction in-
dustry are to be subjected to reequipping. The Urals. the Ukraine. Belorusaia and
the industrialized Central Economic Region of the USSR will become the main regions
where rebuilding will receive preferential development and new construction will be
restricted.

2
INDR‘OFIWCJAI.lﬁSEI(HVLY
It is planned to erect new enterprises primarily in branches of the economy and at
production facilities that will support progressive shifts in the structure of so-
cial production and involvement of the fuel-and-power and mineral raw-material
resources of the country's eastern and northern regions in the economic turnover.
Based upon this. capital investment for new construction will be aimed, as a rule.

- at implementing huge national economic programs, such as establishing regional pro-
duction complexes (Kansk-Achinsk, South Yakutia. Pavlodar—Ekibastuz. Sayany. Nest
Siberia and Timan-Pechora). the creation of energy-intensive production facilities
in Siberia and Kazakhstan and the erection of new hydraulic-engineering and thermal
and nuclear electric-power stations. In particular. thenmal electric-pcwer ata-
tions that use the inexpensive coals of the Nyurengri. Ekibastuz and Kansk-Achinsk
Coal Basins. as well as the natural gas and casing-head gas of Nest Siberia'a
fields,will be built at an accelerated pace. In order to transmit energy to the
country's central zones, power transmission lines that are unique in length and
voltage will be built: the first phase of the Ekibastuz-Central Economic Region
power line of 1,500 kilovolts Dc and the Ekibastuz-Urals power line of 1.150 kilo-
volts AC. The construction of nuclear power stations in the country's European
portion will receive priority: 24-25 million kilowatts of new capacity will be
introduced.

Diring the 11th Five-Year Plan production facilities will be built with an eye to
improving the siting of productive forces and use of the productive potential
and the natural and labor resources of the various economic regions in the coun-
try's unified national economic complex.

In the RSFSR's Nonchernozem Zone, new capacity will go into operation at the Chero-
povets Metallurgical Plant, additional capacity for making paper will be created at
the Syktyvkar forestry Industry Complex. and capacity will go into operation at the
Smolenskaya, Kalininskaya and Kurskaya AES's.

In the Central Chernozem Region, the forming of a regional production complex based
on the Kursk Magnetic Anomaly will continue, and the first phase of the Oskol Elec-
trometallurgy Combine will go into operation.

In the Volga region, the forming of an industrial cluster for recovering and pro-
cessing gas and gas condensate and for producing sulfur based on the Astrakhan gas-
condensate field. will be started. Capacity at the Cheboksarskaya and Nizhne-
Kamskaya GEs's and also at the Balakovskaya ABS will be put into operation.

In the North Caucasus. capacity at the Atommash plant. the Novochcrkaask flec-
tric-Locomotivebuilding Plant and the Rostovskaya ASS will go into operation.

In the Urals. as before, the main efforts of the builders will be aimed at rebuild-
ing and reequipping industrial enterprises. and. in Siberia, at establishing re-
gional production complexes. A new stage is beginning-the buildup of an entire
complex of branches of industry and of production-servicing facilities. The intro-
duction into operation of the first capacity at the Tobol'sk and Tomsk plants will
lay the groundwork for the West-Siberian petrochemical base. which will become the
country's largest. In this region, enterprises will be erected for processing
casing-head gas and for producing equipment for the oil, gas and chemical indus-
tries and for other facilities.

3
FOR OFFHJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFNJAI.lKﬂE(MULY

In Krasnoyarskiy Kray the machinebuilding base will be strengthened thanks to the
introduction into operation of large capacity at the Krasnoyarsk Heavy Excavator
Plant, the Abaknn Railroad-Carbuilding Plant and electrical-equipment enterprises
of ainusinsk. New capacity at the Sayany Aluminum Plant will be introduced.

In the Far East the construction of production facilities will provide for furtht-
development of nonferrous metallurgy and the oil-refining. fishing. lumber, wood
processing and pulp-and-paper industries. Erection of the Primorskaya GRBS and the
Kolymskaya 625 will be completed, and a metallurgical conversion plant will be
built.

In the Ukrainian ssu, along with the rebuilding and technical reequipping of en-
terprises of the coal industry, metallurgy, aachinebuilding and other branches, new
capacity will go into operation at by-product coke plants and enterprises that pro-
duce mineral fertilizer and automotive tires and at the electric-motor plant in
Uzhgorod.

In the Belorussian SSR. expansion of the agricultural machinery plant in Gonel',
the Brest carpet-and-cloth combine will be completed. and a metallurgical conver-
sion plant will be built. New capacity will go into operation at Novopolotsk's
Polimer production association.

In the Uzbek SSR, capacity for producing copper and for mining lead-and-zinc ores
at the Almalyk Mining and Metallurgical Combine and for producing steel and rolled
products at the Bekabad plant will rise. Capacity will be put into operation at
the Tashkent Tractor Plant and the Angrenskaya GEES-2. at cotton coabines in the
cities of Andizhan and Nukus. and at knitwear and other enterprises of light indus-
try and the food industry.

In the Kazakh SSR, a large amount of construction is to be done to strengthen the
raw-materials base and to develop ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy and the coal,
chemical and petrochemical industries. Capacity will go into operation at the
Krchnr Mining and Concentrating Coabine for mining iron ore and in the Karatau
lein and in Aktyubinskaya oblast for mining phosphate. and for the production of
30110" phosphorus and mineral fertilizer. Construction of the Chimkent Oil Refin-
ery will be completed.

In the Georgian SSR, a plant for making equipment for cableways will be built, and
new capacity for processing tea leaves and wine and for bottling mineral water

will be put into operation. Erection of the Zhinval'skiy hydraulic-engineering com-
plex will be completed, construction of the Khudonskaya ass will continue, and con-
struction of the Namakhvanskaya GES will start.

In the Azerbaijan 588, plants of the Azerelektroterl Association, plants of spe-
cialized motor vehicles and deepwater foundations will go into operation. also the
Shamkhorskaya CBS and the Azerbaidzhanskaya anus and new chemicgl-enterprise capa-
city in Sumgait.

In the Lithuanian SSR. construction of the second phase of the lazheykyay oil Re-
finery, the Vil'nyusskaya TETs and the first phase of the Ignalinskaya AES is to be
completed, and enterprises for processing flax are to be rebuilt.

6
FOR(MHWCIALIEEIONLY
In the Moldavian SSR, construction of a plant for colored television sets and the
Rezin Cement Plant will be completed, the erection of plants for producing machines
for gathering tomatoesamd for mechanizing work in orchards and vineyards will be
promoted.

In the Latvian 55R. construction of the Daugavpilsskaya ass and the development of
seaports will be promoted, and light industry will be reequipped with machinery.

In the Kirghiz SSR, a gold-ore combine and capacity at the Tash-Kumyrskaya ass will
go into operation, erection of the Kurpsayskaya 688 will be completed, and the con-
struction of a tin—ore enterprise will be started. -..

In the Tsjik ssa. the erection of the Yavan Electrochemical Plant will be contin-
ued. construction of the Rogunskaya 685 will be promoted, the Baypazinskaya 658
will be put into operation. and the cotton combine in Dushanbe and the silk combine
in Leninabad will be reequipped with machinery.

In the Armenian SSR. capacity at the Razdan ﬂachinebuilding Plant. the lift-truck
plant and the perfume factory will be put into operation. and nonferrous-metallurgy
and chemical-industry enterprises will be rebuilt.

In the Turkmen SSE. the construction of a carpet combine in Bezmein and of a fac-
tory for nonwoven materials in Chardzhou will be completed, and the cotton combine
in Ashkhabad will be modernized.

In the Estonian SSR, the shale-processing industry will be reequipped, and the
Krengol'mskaya Manufaktura cotton combine. as well as other light-industry and
food-industry enterprises will be rebuilt.

As before, the construction of housing and facilities for cultural and personal-
amenity purptses will be developed at a rapid pace. The social program calls for
the introduction into use of new housing with a total area of 530-540 million
square meters, improvement of the comfort and amenities of the apartments, and the
construction of a substantial number of facilities for public health and cultural
purposes. It is planned to complete conversion to the construction of housing
built from standard designs with improved layout and finish work of the apartments.

Rural builders are to do a large amount of work. During the 11th Five-Year Plan
the share of resources allocated to agricultural development will be no less than
during the 10th Five—Year Plan. and capital investment for building housing. chil-
dren's preschool institutions, clubs and so on will be increased by 39 percent.

The erection of district-heating and centralized gas-supply grids and of water sup-
ply and sewerage systems. and also of on-farm roads, will be expanded. Systems for
irrigating 3.4-3.6 million hectares of land. for draining 3.7-3.9 million hectares
and for flooding 26-28 million hectares of pasture will be created through state
funding. work on land reclamation and the agricultural development of land will be
continued in integrated fashion. Large water-resources construction is planned for
the North Caucasus and the Kulunda. Dzhizak and Karshi steppes and also for devel-
opment of the Dunay-Dniester and Kakhovka irrigation systems and the erection
of the second phase of the Dnepr-Donbass [Donets Coal Basin] Canal. a third phase
of the North Crimean canal and of the Azov irrigation system.

5
INHICHHWCJAI.US£IDNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the 11th Five-Year Plan branches of the production infrastructure will be
further developed. Investment for strengthening rail transport will grow 1.3-fold.
During this five-year plan the builders of the BA! [Baykal-Amur Mainline] will pro-
vide for through train traffic for the whole length of the mainline. and then the
potential will be opened up for involving the most rich resources found in this
zone in the economic turnover. It is planned to erect 112 kilometers of subway
lines. To the existing 7 lines. subways in Ninsk, Yerevan, Gor'kiy and Novosibirs.
will be added. Almost 12,000 kilometers of petroleum-product pipeline will be
built. 5-fold more than during the 10th Five-Year Plan. Construction of the hard-
topped highway network will be continued, primarily in Siberia. the Far East and
the Nonchernozem Zone of the RSFSR. In regions of Siberia and the Far East it is
planned to strengthen river-fleet port activities. High goals have been estab-
lished also for the development of communications.

Construction programs will be implemented during a continuous growth in the effec-
tiveness of construction work itself. During the fiveﬁyear plan labor productivity
should rise 15—17 percent, and the entire amount of construction and installing
work is planned to be carried out without an increase in the industry's worker man-
ning. This task is lower than for the last five-year plrz, but each percent of
labor productivity has become substantially more meaningful.

The fact is that the main source of growth in labor productivity will, as in previ-
ous years, be a further rise in the level of industrialization and in the degree
of factory preparation of constructional structure and building materials. Al-
though the potential here has not decreased in comparison with the previous period.
realizing it is becoming increasingly complicated. For example, it is hardly
possible to solve the task of complete prefabrication of construction with rein-
forced-concrete structure alone, with which "boxes" of buildings are already being
erected now at a high engineering level; the cost of such a box, as a rule, does
not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of construction ofthatpart of the build-
ing. The "stuffing" and decoration of a building (erection of the interior
structure. the installation of utilities equipment. and so on) are still being car—
ried out, as a rule. by traditional, nonindustrialized methods. In most cases

OVcn partitions are made out of piece-type materials and then plastered. net pro-
ucsses are still practically the only method for doing finishing work.

Further industrialization of construction means not only growth and improvement in
the production of traditional prefabricated structure for the boxes of buildings,
but primarily the conversion to progressive methods for all types of work. such as
the installation of partitions, floors, suspended ceilings and roof coverings,
thermal and sound insulation, the installation of the building's utility systems,
surface finish work. and so on. All this should be carried out with materials and
articles fully fabricated at the factory so that at the construction site. con-
struction processes will be reduced down to the simplest operations of assembly,
installation. glueing, spreading out, and so on. The essence of it consists. con-
sequently. in further intensifying the integrated industrialization of construc-
tion, primarily in work with a high level of labor expenditure. In order to solve
this problem, the variety of factory-made items produced for construction needs
should be expanded, and they should be shipped to the construction sites in fin-
ishedtbrm and in complete sets. with all the necessary materials and articles.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan construction should be accomplished on a higher or-
ganizational and technical level than during the past five-year plan, with more
effective use of supply, equipment, financial and labor resources. For this-

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
purpose it is necessary to concentrate capital investment and the efforts of con-
struction and installing organizations at the most important construction projects
and on a limited number of facilities being erected simultaneously and to develop
and execute the practical measures for improving capital investment contemplated by
the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers decree of 12 July 1979,
"On the Improvement of Planning and Strengthening of the Influence of the Economic
mechanism on Increasing Production Efficiency and Work Quality." Active realiza-
tion of the indicated measures will lead to a reduction in construction time, ac-
celerate the introduction of facilities into operation and reduce the amounts of
uncompleted construction (right now it is almost 90 percent of the annual capital
investment volume).

One of the important tasks of construction during the 11th Five-Year Plan is a re-
duction in the amounts of material resources used. It is known that construction
consumes enormous amounts of various types of material. Therefore. a reduction in
the materials intensiveness of capital construction is. very likely. of paramount
importance among measures for increasing its effectiveness. And this means not
only a reduction in the amounts of resources consumad but also a reduction in the
labor intensiveness. construction time and cost of Jrecting buildings and struc-
tures. Given the current amounts of construction. a reduction in consumption of
material rcsources by an average of even 1 percent would yield a saving of 450 mil-
lion rubles. That is why the "Main Directions" for the national economy's develop-
ment during the 11th Five-Year Plan calls for a reduction in the consumption of
rolled ferrous metal and of lumber by 7-9 percent and of cement by 5-7 percent dur-
ing construction work as a most important task.

Persistent and universal improvement of construction on the basis of industrializa-
tion. the effective use of capital investment. impro‘ement in the organization of
construction work and of the labor of wage we rkers, the wide introduction of pro-
gressive technologies and construction methods. a rise in the level of the mechani-
zation of construction and installing work. an improvement of design solutions and
the economical use of material resources-these are the paths that should enable
the fulfillment of the 11th Five-Year Plan capital-construction tasks at a high
technical and economic level.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatsl'stvo "Znaniye", 1981

[1409
C50: 1821/031

7

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FIHROFFKJA1.USE(NNLY

CONSTRUCTION MACHINERY

PRINCIPLES FOR REVAHPING MACHINERY-OVERHAUL SYSTEM POSTULAIED

Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMINI in Russian No 9, Sep 81 (signed to press 2 Sep 81) pp 44-
54

[Article by A. Nemehinskiy: "Overhaul of the Machinery Pool"]

[Text] The necessity for maintaining machinery, equipment and transport in operat-
ing readiness lends national economic importance to improvement of the system for
repairing them. The disrepair of just 1 percent of the country's machinery pool
freezes an active portion of fixed production capital that costs 5.5 billion ru-
bles. Considering that the share of equipment out of commission in various bran-
ches of material production ranges from 3-5 percent to 10-15 percent or more, the
yield on capital for the machinery pool is reduced considerably. However, the na-
tional economy's losses are not confined to this. since the normal operation of
many industrial lines and of whole production facilities is disturbed because vari-
ous units break down. The rapid equipping of the national economy with compli-
cated and expensive equipment intensifies the urgency of the problem with each
year, since a reduction of the operational readiness factor of the machinery pool
increasingly affects the effectiveness level of social production.

Technical servicing and current overhaul are required for most equipment. Inter-
mediate repair of certain types of equipment is, in essence, a variety of current
repair. But, while the complex of repair work, which includes technical servi-
cing and current repair. has been aimed mainly at maintaining the users' value of
the machinery, overhaul is designed for partial restoration of 'it; As K. Marx
pointed out: "Repair work is divided, further, into current repair and overhaul.
The latter is partially a restoration of fixed capital in its natural form...."‘

Consequently, overhaul occupies an important place in the process of reproduction
of machines, and, in essence, is one of its forms. It is desirable to examine the
machinery overhaul problem in integrated fashion, its interdependency with other
forms of reproduction, as a functions? the retirement of obsolete machines and the
arrival of new ones, and the technical and economic indicators and the reliability
and durability of the machines. It is apparent that only a systems approach to
solving the problem will enable the path for raising overhaul effectiveness to be

determined.
The lodern Status of Overhaul

For many types of equipment. expenditures for repairing machines exceed substan-
tially the costs for producing them. Thus. according to USSR linsel'khoz [Ministry
of Agriculture], expenditures for repairing tractors used in agriculture is 2.5-
fold that of the costs of manufacturing them. Total expenditures for heepingigithe
efficiency of the 3-652 excavator, which is used in construction,havereached
22,000 rubles, or 250 percent of the original cost. In this case metal consumption
during repair of the excavator during its service life is 21-22 tons, or more than
100 percent of its weight. Such a situation engenders extremely questionable opin-
ions about the desirability of overhaul.

Meanwhile, the high cost of overhaul results from economically ineffective organi-
zation. Different ministries and agencies overhaul like types of equipment (motor
vehicles, machine-tool equipment and construction and road machines, as well as
certain other types), breeding a multitude of dwarf semicottage-industry repair
enterprises that have the very same purpose and are often located next to each
other. The quality of their repair work is low, and operating costs are intolera-
bly high.

Motor-vehicle overhaul is performed, for example, at 2,000 enterprises which are
subordinate to more than 40 ministries and agencies, and agricultural machinery is
repaired at more than 2,000 enterprises, construction and road machinery at 36!
plants and 1,850 departments and shops. Machine-tool equipment (metal-cutting and
woodworking machines and so on) are repaired in the departments and shops of 70,000
industrial enterprises.

The degree of support of machinery with spare parts and articles is assessed at 30
to 75 percent, for construction and road machinery 40-50 percent, of the total re-
quirement therefor. Under these circumstances, enterprises are compelled to manu-
facture parts independently, at higher cost and with lower quality. For example, a
spur gear that costs 20 rubles and 40 kopecks, according to the price lists, costs
102 rubles and 22 kopecks when fabricated at Dneproekskavatsiya Trust plants, or

5 times as much. Moreover, the repair capacity is used to produce noncharacteris-
tic output that should come from machinebuilding enterprises.

The lack of specialization of repair enterprises and the primitive repair technolo-
gy promote the preservation of obsolete individual. or so-called sidetrack, re-
pair. Technological specialization is practically absent and only for automotive
transport is it evaluated at 5 percent of the total amount of repair work, and
parts specialization does not exceed 10-11 percent, while object repair is 88-95
percent. For a number of reasons, progressive methods for machinery repair (compo-
nent-and-assemblyand periodic replacement of repair sets—PZRK) still occupy a small
share in the overall repair-work volume, reducing the effectiveness of measures for
maintaining machines in operating condition.

At the same time, overhaul of a major portion of the equipment remains an economi-
cally rational way for reproducing machines. This is occasioned by the nonuniform-
ity of durability of equipment components and parts, and by the necessity for re-
placing them periodically to preserve the efficiency of the machine as a whole.
Mainly material deterioration is eliminated during overhaul. However, it must be
considered that "material deterioration of a machine is dual in nature. One kind
arises from its use-as a coin is worn from being circulated-theothercomes from

9

FOI‘OFFKJA1.US£(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nonuse of it-as a sword mats in a scabbard from disuse. . ..Deterioration of the

first type is more or less directly proportional to the amount of use of the ma-
chine, while deterioration of the second kind is to a known degree inversely pro-
portional to use."I This situation is of grsat importance when solving questions
of the interdependence of the degree of use of equipment and the amount of over-
haul. In order to increase overhaul effectiveness, it must be kept in mind that
"in addition to material depreciation a machine is also subject, so to speak. to
obsolescence. It loses exchange value to the extent that machines of the same de-
sign become cheaper :o reproduce or better machines enter into competition-:iith
it. In both cases. regardless of how new and viable a machine may be, its value is
determined no longer by the worktime that has actually been invested in its produc-

tion. but by what is necessary now for reproduction of the very same machine or for
the reproduction of a better machine.”

During overhaul it is possible to reduce somewhat a machine's obsolescence by re-
placing key components with ones that are better perfected or by combining overhaul
with modernization as one of the forms of reproduction of the machine, the main
task of which is to be a countermeasure to obsolescence.

Industry peculiarities and the specifics of the equipment (for example. maritime
ships. agricultural machinery, railroad rolling stock and others) require a dif-
ferentiated approach to solution of the overhaul problem. At the same time it

is necessary to examine ways for raising effectiveness in supporting the life cycle
of mechanization equipment and transport that are common to all (or to most)
industries.

These include: the conduct of a unified technical policy for the creation and re-
pair of machines; the determination of economically desirable service lives for
equipment and the relationships of amortization deductions to renovation and over-
haul: the establishment of economically rational limits to overhaul. taking into ac-
count industry and regional peculiarities of operation of the machines, as well as
the potential for providing new equipment; optimization of the proportions between
current repair and overhaul of the equipment; the selection of effective methods
(in technological and economic plans) for overhaul; the industrialization of repair,
based upon the specialization of enterprises and of technological repair lines; the
organization of a unified interagency system of repair enterprises; and the crea—
tion of reserves for replacing equipment that is being repaired (an exchange inven-
tory of machines).

Despite specific peculiarities in the repair of different machines, certain groups
of them are close with respect to technology and organization of repair. These
are, primarily, mobile equipment (the motor-vehicle fleet, agricultural machines,
mechanized-construction, road and land-reclamation equipment) and stationary ma-
chine-tool equipment (metal-cutting tools. and the equipment of light industry and
certain other branches of industry).

The economic essence of overhaul can be examined in terms of renewal of the user's
value of the machines, if a reduction in their value precludes further functioning
of them as implements of labor and interrupts the process of transferring a
portion of their value into output. Repair is occasioned by the need for partial

’Marx, Kari and Engels, F., Soch., Vol 23. page 415.
Want. Karl and Engels. l-‘.. Soch.. Vol 23, page 415.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
replacement for deterioration of the machinery. Overhaul (as distinguished

from restoration) does not restore completely the equipment's potential. Thus, the
productivity of construction machinery after overhaul is 7-12 percent less, while
maintenance expenditures are 8-12 percent higher than is the case with new machinbm

Where there is economic justification for long-term repair volume. it should be
considered that the overhaul requirement is reduced as a machine's various compo-
nents approach each other in uniformity of durability. In the ideal case, when the
service lives of the assemblies and components of a machine are equal or very near-
ly alike, the requirement for overhaul disappears, and it is desirable to replace
the machine with a new one. along with the common tendency to reduce the amount of
repair for certain types of complicated and high-capacity machines (where an ap-
proximation of uniformity in component durability is difficult to achieve), over-

haul remains an economically effective form of reproduction of fixed production
capital for the foreseeable future.

Modeling of a Subsystem of Overhaul within the System for Reproduction of the
Machinery Pool

Increasing overhaul effectiveness has necessitated that it be modeled as a process
for the reproduction of machinery. It is natural that the pace of delivery of new
machines and the total requirement therefor will affect the amount of overhaul. If
shipments of machines cannot provide for the replacement of those falling into
disuse. then a definite and frequently unjustified increase in repair volume oc-
curs. A dilemma therefore arises: either write off the worn machines or extend
their service lives by one more overhaul or even a poorly effective restoration re-

pair but save expenditures of live labor and support fulfillment of the production
tasks.

The choice of a rational technology and organization for repair greatly affects the
effectiveness of equipment overhaul and repair-enterprise capacity. The assembly-
and-eomponent method is effective at present in the planned preventive-maintenance
system. However, its wide application is being held back by the lack of a reserve
of assemblies and components for establishing an exchange inventory. and also by

an insufficiency of high-capacity specialized plants for repairing these components.
Introduction of the aaaembly-and-component method will enable a reduction of repair
time to one-half to one-third. as well as of time and costs for transporting the
machines to and from repair. since the overhaul is done directly at the mechaniza-
tionccntexu with this method, the labor intensiveness of repair is reduced by 40-
50 percent, operating costs by 8-12 percent. and transport expenses by an average
of 30-40 percent.

The overhaul of machinery is transformed into a planned system of replacing assem-
blies and components that have short working lives where the residual value of the
assemblies (or components) that have exhausted their service lives is minimal. In

the long term it will be possible to convert tea system of diagnosing the operat-

ing condition of each machine in order to determine the degree of its actual ma-

terial deterioriation and to regulate measures for repair of the equipment.

In determining the economically rational limits for overhauling equipment,the ratio
of a machine '3 residual value and overhaul costs to the benefit of operating the equip-
ment after the overhaul can be used. Obviously, economically rational limits for
repair are established differentially for different machines.

11
INJRGDFFKJM1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The interdependence of the ways toreproduce machines with alternative solutions for
the structure of the pool thereof can be presented in the form of a balance-sheet
model for the reproduction of machines. When economically justifying a process for
reproducing machines. it is desirable to consider the following factors: the cost
of replacing machines that are falling into disuse. expansion of the machinery
pool. depending upon growth in the amounts and change in the structure of opera-
tions, and the creation of a reserve of machines. The total value of the machinery

pool will be determined by the total of the attributed-cost indicators, by model
and by group of machines.

The total value of a pool of machines at a given period of their reproduction is
characterized by the sum of the indicated constituents. taking into account correc-
tion factors for change in the structure of operation in the industry and regional
plans. as well as the level of intensification of the use of mechanized equipment.
A machine pool can be reproduced through overhaul, modernization or the arrival of
new machines. Each of these forms of reproduction has its own share in the repro-
duction process at different stages. depending upon specific conditions.

A balance-sheet equality of requirements and reproduction of the machinery pool in
accordance with a consolidated model is dynamic and that. in turn. requires a fore-
casting for each of the indicators. by period of anticipation. of the estimated
requirements for machines and for amounts of overhaul. since the replacement of
old by new fixed capital does notresultin equality of their production potential.
it becomes necessary to make a comparative assessment.

It is desirable that the comparative analysis be made by set of indicators. Spe-
cific indicators (or indices) that refer to unit capacity can be used for this pur-
pose. For instance. one progressive type of equipment is the new 30-3332 excavav
tor-planer with replaceable equipment, which. in comparison with the 8-4010 plan-
ing machine that it replaces, is characterized as follows per unit of power:

a 41-perccnt reduction in capital intensiveness; a 40-percent reduction in metals
intensiveness for manufacture of the machine, a 10-peroent rise in the operator's
labor productivity. and a 51-percent reduction in prime cost per 1,000 square me-
ters of soil leveling.

A set of particular indices enables a comparative variant analysis of progres-
sive and standardized equipment to be carried out. This approach to evaluating the
effect of technical progress enables its quantitative characteristics to be estab-
lished in terms of cost and physical factors. However. an analysis by indicator

is difficult where there are substantial deviations. In such situations it is
necessary to apply a multiple-criteria approach. examining not just one but sever—
al indiccs successively'fora comparison of the progressive and the standard equip-
ment. Thc.indices will also enable different variants of progressive equipment to
be compared with each other. In consolidated estimates the economic potential of
fixed capital is determined by the ratio of capital intensiveness per unit of
capacity or output of the standard progressive equipment. In the model of repro-
duction of the machinery fleet, the "reation of a reserve for unforeseen circum-
stances and for replacing machines that are sent for repair is called for.

The dynamicity of the whole system for reproducing fixed capital exerts an influ-
ence. on the one hand. on the probable deviations in the influence of various fac-
tors. which can be mutually canceling. and the system as a whole maintains its
equilibrium and consistency of direction. and.on the other hand. a potential for

12
FOR(MWHCLALIHHEONL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unidirectional deviations in the influence of the indicated factors is not ex-
cluded. which can lead to a stratification of errors in the forecast computations.
Such deviations create a risky situation in economic forecasts. It is desirable
to a certain extent to counter the risk with an equipment reserve. However, the
creation of reserve fixed production capital not only requires large capital

It is important to solve the question of reserves in systems fashion. The fact is
that the types of reserves examined can scarcely be used simultaneously. Conse-

the technical level of machines is raised and maintenance and repair bases are

for repair work with optimization of the proportions among plants that overhaul
machinery. assemblies and components, mechanization centers, and mobile facilities
for the technical upkeep of machinery. It is considered. when the model is be-
ing constructed. that a portion of overhaul is accomplished (using assemblies and
components that are repaired at the plants) at mechanization centers, motor
pools. and so on. In turn, a portion of the technical servicing and current repair

enterprises of the maintenance and repair base for mechanization equipment, to
start with the repair coefficients that characterize the cost of current repair
and overhaul. The requirement for fixed capital at mechanization centers and
plants as a function of the cost of the machinery pool can be established in ac-
cordance with the standards for capital intensiveness of technical servicing. cur-
rent repair and overhaul. '

The dynamics of the composition of the mechanization equipment by size, type and
group of machines complicate justification efforts in which change in the struc-
ture of enterprises and facilities of the maintenance and repair base in indus-
try and regional plans and the level of intensification of the use of fixed capi-
tal are considered. Reproduction of the fixed capital of the maintenance and re~
pair base is performed at overhaul plants and centers for the technical servicing
and repair of machinery through reequipping, rebuilding, expansion and new
construction.

‘This concerns expenditures connected with the necessity to keep the reserve ma-
chinery in working condition during preservation operations. removal from long-

term storage, storage, technical servicing and upkeep of servicing personnel.

13
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Taking into account the proportions of the various forms of reproduction and the
corresponding indicators of the economic potential of the fixed production capital,
a balance is reached of the requirements for and the reproduction of fixed capital
for enterprises and facilities of the maintenance and repair base. Turing model-

ing, questions of siting the productive capacity of the repair enterprises are
resolved.

Unified Policy for the Production and Repair of Machinery

The conduct of a unified technical and economic policy for creating and repairing
equipment helps the rational redistribution of capital investment among the repair
base and the machinebuilding branches of industry.

The volume of production of new machines and spare parts for them and the amounts
of overhaul of these machines and their assemblies and components are closely in-
terlinked and depend upon the overall life cycle of the given type of machine.
However, existing practice, wherein machinery makers find themselves associated
with only one portion of the machine's life cycle (engineering design, design de-
velopment. production and the short maintenance guarantee period) and are complete-
ly isolated from the other portion (maintenance. overhaul and writeoff), does not
meet modern requirements.

The potential for overhauling machines should be specified when they are designed
and produced. The artificial gap between the production and the maintenance of ma-
chines leads to a lack of producer interest in the effective repair and servicing
of machines, and it also inevitably engenders a shortage of spare parts and the ne-
cessity to produce them by scmieottage-industry methods. A unified policy for pro—
ducing and repairing machinery will enable a more rational technological scheme for
overhauling the various groups of machines to be created, taking into account their
construction characteristics, the system for diagnosing the degree of reliability
of machines, assemblies and components, and unified norms and regulations for
planned preventive maintenance that consider the industry‘s specifics.

Tic experience of developed capitalist countries testifies to a striving to reduce
and even eliminate disruptions of a machine's life cycle. This has enabled the
operational readiness factor of construction-machinery fleets in the USA, PR6 and
Japan to reach 0.9-0.91. Maehinebuilding companies are motivated to see to it that
the equipment they deliver does not stand idle because of a lack of spare parts,
the manufacture of which in the USA, for example, amounts to about 30 percent of
the output of new construction machinery, exceeding our output 2-fold to 3-fold.
Technical servicing and repair are performed in accordance with a planned preven-
tive maintenance system which in the USA is provided by dealer companies. The
basic method of repair is the assembly-and—eomponent method.

The dealers are the connecting link between maehinebuilding enterprises and equip-
ment users. They do technical servicing and repair, deliver spare parts (in 24
hours) and pick up machines that are unusable and require restoration. In Japan,
for example, the servicing of Mitsubishi Jyukogyo excavators is entrusted to the
dealer Simmitsu Jyuki. which has a ramified network of technical servicing centers.
The Aburadani Jyukogyo and Kate Seysakusyo companies have organized their own tech-
nical servicing and repair centers, locating them in areas of the greatest concen-
tration of machines (excavators) that have been purchased from these companies.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Much attention is devoted in the PRC to full-fledged, responsive technical servi-
cing and repair. For these purposes, special subunits of the manufacturing com-
panies and the dealers have been established. The Abbau company, for example.
has huge spare-parts warehouses and technical servicing centers at which mechan-
ics are constantly on duty and have facilities for the transport and repair of
equipment. The company guarantees the delivery of spare parts to a machine's re-
pair site in 24 hours. Neimar Mashinenfabrik services and repairs machines in
centralized fashion and through intermediaries and representatives, also in a day.

In the USA the Caterpillar company‘s machines are serviced and repaired centrally
and through dealers. with use of the newest facilities for cleaning and washing,
automatic installations for the deposition buildup of the rollers and frame of

the crawler undercarriage, and automated reporting of the repair operations by com-
puter. as well as automated delivery of the required spare parts.5 For diagnosing
malfunctions of Caterpillar Tractor Company engines. a portable computer has been
created which determines their effective power in a few seconds, by means of
sensors.

Experience in the maintenance of machinery with company servicing and repair (by
the manufacturer or dealers, or their representatives) has shown high responsive-
ness and the economic desirability of this form of organization for keeping ma-
chinery in constant operating readiness. A main factor in repair effectiveness
is minimal duration; this enables a high level of operational readiness to be pro-
vided for and idle time of the machinery pool to be reduced to a minumum.

idle equipment time for repair in our country reaches 40-61 days. Relative to the
planned annual service time in construction. which is 256 days. machinery time
spent in repair is more than 20 percent for excavators and bulldozers, about 24
percent for scrapers. and 15 percent for booa cranes. Thus, an average of almost
20 percent of construction's basic machinery is frozen because of the idle time
spent in repair. It is obvious that a rise in their repairabilityuand reliability
and an increase in service time and of the time between repair cycles are

basic principlescafa unified technical policy for the production and repair of
machinery.

An experimental calculation of comparable progressive (new) and standard (old)
equipment as to labor and capital intensiveness and of attributable expenses per
unit of work performed indicated that the labor-intensiveness indicators of the
new machines demonstrate their growing effectiveness in the range of 1.5 (Ks-5363
and K-255 cranes) to 4.3 (KB-674 and KB-300 tower cranes). Capital intensive-
ness indicators for comparable machines vary from 0.1 to 1.8, testifying to an in-
crease in capital intensity bf a portion of the new machines).‘

For many brands of machines, not only an overall increase in expensiveness but also
an increase in cost per unit of capacity is characteristic at present. For exam-
ple. the KS-6362 crane costs 2.080 rubles per unit of capacity, the standard 3-2508

ICON‘I‘RAC‘I‘OR "PETROL“ AND EQUIPMENT, Nos 4 and 10. 1971.

‘Computations were carried out for 17 pairs of machines of comparable size models,
based upon the baseline indicators of VNIIstroydormash [All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute for Construction and Road Machine Building] of USSR Minstroydor—
mash [Ministry of Construction. Road and Municipal Machine Building]. relative to
1980.

15
FKMRIJFFICJAL.USEZ(NMLY
FOR(Mﬂﬂ(1ALlﬂE§0NlY

machine 1,570 rubles. However, this can be justified in some cases by an improve-
ment of other indicators, mainly reductions in labor intensiveness and prime costs
per unit of work performed (as occurs with the KS-6362 crane). In economic justi-
fications for the process of reproducing machinery, it is desirable to consider the
increase in mobility, reliability and completeness of “equipping of the machinery
pool. Mobility of machinery enables a reduction in the time (and also in the lab(r
and material resources) spent on redeploying the machinery3 provides for better use
of time, and enables the total requirement for the corresponding groups of machines
to be reduced. The reliability of machinery is manifested in reduced techni-
cal servicing, current repair and overhaul and less labor intensiveness and

time spent in performing them. Completeness in equipping the pool of machines re-
sults in mutual coordination of their parameters for the subsequent fulfillment of
the technological production processes. All these present substantial reserves for
reducing the cost of the machinery pool and expenditures on repair.

Unfortunately, an unfavorable trend toward growth in total expenditures for the op-
eration and repair of comparable "new" and "old" equipment is observed. An anal-
ysis of the total expenditures on technical servicing, current repair and overhaul
that are attributable anone year indicates a growth thereof for a number of new-
ly produced machines. For example. expenditures for the technical servicing of the
hS-6362 rubber—tired erecting boom crane is, over its service life, in comparison

with the 5-2508 crane, 42 percent reater (14'9 thousand rubles),for current repair
3 T1 .'5'

74.4
35.2
thousand rubles). Expenditures attributable for one year, tak-

it is 210 percent greater (
75.6
38.5
ing service life into account, are, respectively, 5,600 rubles (3-2508) and 11,000
rubles (KS-6362), that is, 5,400 rubles more per year for the new machine.

 

thousand rubles), and for overhaul it is 196 per-

 

cent greater (

The producers of machinery understate the repair-intensiveness indicators of equip-
ment. At the same time, a reduction in repair-intensiveness of construction as-
chinery is economically desirable in many cases, even despite an increase in costs
in the sphere of mechanization equipment production.

In practice, the limits for equipment overhaul have to be expanded, because of
failure to provide enterprises and organizations completely with mechanization and
transport equipment. Because of shortfalls in deliveries of machinery to construc-
tion organizations, a portion of the equipment subject to writcoff has to be oper-
ated. Therefore, obsolete and physically worn machines make up as much as 20 per-
cent of overhaul (relative to total overhaul volume).’

Increasing the Effectiveness of Machinery Overhaul by Industrializing It
The industrialization of machinery overhaul calls for reducing the repair pro—
cess to the replacement of assemblies and components with new ones or with ones

that have been overhauled at specialized enterprises. This will enable the effec-
tiveness of overhauling equipment to be raised greatly.

’Computations show a definite (or arbitrary) effectiveness of this repair where it
is impossible to replace the obsolete machinery with new machinery.

16

FOR‘0PFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICLA1.USEIDNLY

Concentrating construction-machinery repair. for example. will enable specific cap-
ital investment to be reduced by 12-15 percent. prime costs for repair by 8-10 per-
cent. and labor intensiveness by 20-30 percent, and will enable repair time to be
shortened. In turn. the specialization of repair enterprises will lead to a cer-
tain rise in specific capital investment (5-12 percent). but it will reduce. in so
doing. labor intensiveness of repair work by 35-40 percent and prime operating
costs for repairs by 3-7 percent. and it will cut repair time 20-25 percent.

However, the prevailing practice of organizing construction-machinery overhaul does
not meet modern management requirements. and it is a brake on raising the effcen-
tiveness of repair-production facilities. The total number of enterprises engaged
in overhauling basic construction machinery and their assemblies and components ex-
ceeds 2.200. and about 10-12 percent of them are specialized. In this case. the
level of specialization by groups of machines is no more than 4-5 percent.

Right now the overhaul sphere is marked by bureaucratic isolation and lack of a
unified system for subordinating plants. This does not permit concentration to be
raised much. and. because of that. the specialization of repair facilities to be
organized. In the construction field. the concentration of production facilities
for the centralized repair of construction machinery has been characterized by an
average capacity of about 1 million rubles' worth of repair output per year per en-
terprise. At the same time. there are some enterprises within the repair base with
a capacity of 1 million rubles' worth. The low level of assembly-line operation
in overhaul leads to an increase in the prime operating costs thereof,’ and the
time taken for repairs leads to above-standard idle time of machines in repair or
awaiting repair (1. -fold to 3-fold in comparison with the standards). Thus. seri-
ous contradictionshavearisen between the high pace of development of the machinery
pool and the potential of the existing repair base to maintain the efficiency of
the machinery.

Studies conducted by NIIES [Scientific-Research Institute for Construction Econom-
ics] of USSR Gosstroy have indicated that in a number of regions the capacity of
enterprises for overhauling construction and road machinery must be brought up to
8-10 million rubles' worth (taking into account the rational radius for haulage).
with further expansion of the centralized repair of assemblies and components. it
will be desirable to increase capacity to 15-17 million rubles. As yet. the devel-
opment of specialization is being held back by bureaucratic isolation and the low
level of assembly-line repair of like type items.

In the long term there is to be a conversion from specialization by groups of ma-
chinery to specialization by size models (or brands). which will enable industri-
alized repair lines to be used and repair effectiveness to be increased. The sub-
contracting of repair work operations among various production subdivisions and fa-
cilities of other construction-industry enterprises, especially for relatively
small repair enterprises. is an important method of raising their effectiveness:
a reduction of 2-3 percent in prime repair operating costs and of as much as

6-8 percent in the capital intensiveness of operations.

'The cost of repairing one 8-302 excavator at the Uglezavodsk Rlz [Iachinery Repair
Plant] is 4.634 rubles. while for a series of 96 machines at Nariyskiy's Remstroy-
dormash plant of USSR Minsel'strey [Ministry of Rural Construction]. it is 2,403
rubles.or little more than half as much.

17

FOR OIIHCIAl.lEﬂi(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considering that construction machines are being operated not only in construction
(where they comprise 45-60 percent of the total number of machines). but also in
other branches of material production--the extractive branches of industry, agri-
culture, transport (for loading and unloading). and so on, it is desirable to solve
the problem of creating a single system of overhaul enterprises for the whole
national economy.

In order to increase the effectiveness of equipment overhaul at enterprises, the
following are necessary: conversion to the organization of an interagency overhaul
system, which will enable the level of concentration and specialization of repair
work to be raised greatly and inefficient repair at nonspecialized enterprises of
ministries and agencies to be eliminated; and organization of the repair of new.
highly productive equipment within the system of machinebuilding enterprises.

This will enable construction and other ministries to be gradually freed of func-
tions not characteristic of them-management of the process of overhauling compli-
cated machinery.’ Repair by the manufacturer will provide for quality'and increased
effectiveness; the maximal possible and economically rational use of existing re-
pair entcrprises; the freeing of such enterprises from producing nonrepair output;
and an appropriate specialization by type of repair. According to computations by
Niles of USSR Gosstloy. about one-third of the enterprises (of the 365 considered
plants of the construction ministries and agencies) must be left in the base for
centralized repair, after they are rebuilt and expanded. In so doing. it is pro-
posed to increase the average level of concentration of their output about 5-fold
to 7-fold. and also to raise greatly the level of their specialization. The plants
must organize the overhaul of basic construction machinery that is used in all
branches of the national economy, except for new, highly productive machines.

Large specialized enterprises that are being built should be restricted to the new.
developing regions or to a major concentration of the repair inventory where
it 13 impOssible or economically irrational for existing enterprises to cover a
shortage of capacity. or it is desirable to take a portion of the existing repair
plants from the repair complex so they can produce nonrepair,output that is re-
quired by construction and other ministries and agencies.

Studies indicate that construction-equipment overhaul will remain a necessary form
ur reproduction of fixed capital for a long time yet. In this case. it is consid-
ered that. as machines increase in reliability and their assemblies and components
come to approximate each other in durability, the share of overhaul will be re-
duced gradually and then intensely. At the same time, according to the forecast,
the total overhaul Volume will tend to stabilize during the next decade because
or the growth of the equipment pool.

The ellect of implementing a unified technical policy in the area of repair and of
raising the assembly—line nature of it consists primarily in an improvement of the
quality of machines that are repaired and an increase in service life between re-

pairs from 50-60 percent to 80 percent of the corresponding service-life indicators
established for new machines. At the same time. the machines will spend much less
time in repair. This will make possible the use ofatleastanadditional 1 billion

'Excavators with hydraulic drive of the operating implement; earthmoving machines

of the continuous-action type; self-propelled scrapers; bulldozers of more than
200 horsepower, based upon industrial-type tractors; and rubber-tired cranes,
truck cranes, and certain other machines.

18

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
rubles' worth of the active part of fixed capital in construction operations alone,
and, correspondingly, a reduction in capital investment in development of the pool
of new construction machinery.

It is desirable to use the experience in developing recommendations for creating a
unified system of enterprises for overhauling construction and road machines also
for certain other types of equipment. This concerns primarily automotive trans-
port, since motor vehicles are being operated in practically all ministries and_
agencies throughout the whole Soviet Union. In so doing, the degree of concentra-
tion of motor vehicles in the economic regions exceeds considerably the concentra-

tion of other types of equipment, creating the prerequisites for high effectiveness
in centralizing the overhaul of vehicles.

In accordance with the crsu Central Committee and USSR Council of uinisters decree,
“0n Strengthening the Work to Save and to Make Rational Use of Raw-Material. Fuel-
und-Power and Other Naterial Resources," it is necessary to use in every possible
way the large reserve for savings that exist in overhauling the machinery pool.
This refers primarily to the problem of the centralized output of spare parts and
of items for vehicles. which will enable metal consumption to be reduced about 1.5-
fold to 1.8-fold, fuel and power resources almost 2-fold. and labor expenditures
2-fold to 3-fold in comparison with the manufacture thereof by semieottage-indus-
try methods at small repair enterprises.

Another area for saving material resources is, in our opinion. the restoration of
worn parts of machines by the automatic deposition method; the strength of the
working layer here is in no way inferior to that of new parts. This method will
enable as much as 65-80 percent of the metal of old parts to be saved. It is be-
ing used widely abroad (by the Caterpillar company and others). Our country also
has similar experience. In particular. at the Pankovskiy Experimental Machinery
Repair Plant. where a small section restores expensive and rapidly wearing parts of
5—80 and 8-100 tractors and E-652 excavators, savings on the order of tens of
thousands of rubles have been achieved. The restoration of parts does not exceed
50 percent of the cost of new ones. Obviously, it is desirable to create special-
ized enterprises and departments for the centralized restoration of machine parts

by the deposition method, which will enable labor intensiveness and the prime costs
of these 'operations to be greatly reduced.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvu “Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki". 1981

11409
650: 1821/021

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

METALUORKING WUIPHENT

MACHINEBUILDING EQUIPMENT REPAIR CENTRALIZAIION EFFECTIVENESS SUBSTANTIATED

Kiev EKONOHIKA SOVETSKOY UKRAINY in Russian No 10, Oct 81 (signed to press 12 Oct 81)
pp 34-38

[Article by Doctor of Economic Sciences T. Ben' (Dnepropetrovsk) and Candidate of
Economic Sciences Yu. Kostin (Khar'kov): ”Territorial Organization of Interbranch
Repair Production"!

[Text] Among the tasks put forward by the 26th CPSU Congress is that of increasing
the effectiveness of nazhinery and equipment repair. This task can be solved in se-
veral resolution stages.

1. Increase repair centralization, concentration and specialization. including the
production of repair items in branches of economic region specialization. This
stage can be described as temporary (transitional), its implementation to be con-
cluded in the llth and 12th Five-Year Plans.

2. Inasmuch as about half of the equipment being repaired is for general industrial
and interbranch application. it is appropriate to carry out within the framework of
specific territories an organizational-economic restructuring whose purpose is to
create regional repair organizations servicing all enterprises, independent of de-
partmental affiliation.

3. Development of a system of regional interbranch repair production management and
linking it to higher-level management systems.

Let us examine the type structure and distribution of production equipment in USSR
metallurgical industry using data from the last interbranch balance (HOD) of fixed
assets published by the USSR Central Statistical Administration.a

Technological equipment of metallurgical industry occupies the highest proportion in
the type structure of production equipment (66.76 percent). The metallurgical industry

‘Ue examined the basic types of general machinebuilding itena (casting blanks. forg-
ings and etampings. welded metal components and machined items) as applicable to the
requirements of metallurgical industry.

2"Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1973 g." [USSR National Economy in 1973]. hoscow._Izd-
vo Statistiks. 1974, pp 67-115.

20

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technological equipment group includes: blast furnaces, steel smelters. mills for
cold- and hot-rolling metal. including rolled steel and iron pipe and other equip-
ment.

A significant portion (8.63 percent) is accounted for by mine-shaft. ore-mining and
ore-enrichment equipment; 9.52 percent is accounted for by pover engineering and
electrical engineering equipment. 7.65 percent by lift-transport equipment. 6.76
percent by means of transport. and 5.85 percent by pump-compressor. refrigeration

and oxygen equipment .

Total metallurgical industry equipment includes 3.32 percent construction and road-
building equipment. 1.21 percent equipment for building materials industry. 0.16 per-
cent tractors and agricultural machinery. 0.05 percent equipment for light. food.
nixed feed. timber. pulp-paper and printing-publishing industry. 3.26 machine and
wood-processing tools. 2.83 percent forging-pressing equipment. 0.69 percent foundry
equipment and other types of equipment.

Metallurgical equipment is extremely metals-intensive. Its diversity. high cost and
distribution by subbranch of metallurgical industry have a substantial influence on
the organization of branch repair services.

It is expedient to divide the available production equipment of each branch into
four classification groups (see Table 1. following page):

1. general industrial equipment;

2. interbranch equipment;

3. technological equipment of a corresponding (specific) branch;

lo. technological equipment of other branches.

Let's note that any classification. including that being proposed here. is in a cer-
tain sense hypothetical. First. it is prompted by the goals of concrete research.
Second. intensification of the social division of labor predetermined the process of
production differentiation in the branches. uhich complicated interbranch ties and.
consequently, a precise delimitation of production equipment classification groups.
Third. its formation is influenced by the existing classification of USSR national
economic branches.

We used the folloving criteria as the basis for setting up our production equipment

classification groups:
1. how multipurpose the equipment application is (its breadth):
2. the role of the equipment in the production process;
3. the branch affiliation of the equipment.

Equipment in the first group includes power and electrical engineering equipment.
pump-compressor equipment. production apparatus. lift-transport equipment. equipment
for construction and roadbuilding. and other equipment. The second group could in-
clude machine tools. wood-processing tools. forging-pressing equipment. foundry
equipment. refrigeration and oxygen equipment. means of transport and other types
of equipment. The third group includes specific equipnent of the appropriate (spe-
cific) branch being examined. The fourth group is equipment of other branches which
is used to resolve technological tasks in the branch using the given types of equip-
ment.

In metallurgical industry. general industrial equipment accounts for 23.52 percent of
the total. interbranch equipment for 20.67 percent. equipment of a specific branch

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR 0F'1C1AI.USE10NLN

Production Equipment Classification Groups and Dynamics of Their Relationships in
Terms of Branch Affiliation (calculated from fixed assets interbranch balances data
for 1966 and 1972 (see: "Narodnoye khoayaystvo SSSR v 1968 i 1973 gg." [USSR Na-
tional Economy in 1968 and 1973]. Moscow. Isd-vo Statistika. 1968, 1976))

branches of material production

all USSR metallurgical
industry industry
all production equipment 100.0 100.0
including groups by affiliation branch:
general industrial application
1966 Hon 18.88 20.78
1972 H03 22.05 23.52
interbranch application
1966 H03 6.07 13.63
1972 H08 9.08 20.67
corresponding-branch technological
1966 HDB 73.16 66.37
1972 H03 67.66 56.39
technological equipment of other branches
1966 H08 1.91 1.61
1972 M08 1.63 1.62

56.39 and equipment of other branches 1.62 percent. For USSR industry as a whole.
however, these relationships are: 20.05. 9.08. 67.66 and 1.63 percent.1 This means
that. given the existing level of branch differentiation. the necessity arises for

an interbranch criterial evaluation of the mschaniss for shaping optimum relationships
among these groups over the long range. It is that very knowledge of the indicators
(levels) of the relationships of various equipment groups in a five-year plan cross-
section that opens up a way to find optimum relationships of branch and interbranch
ties and opportunities for inproving the effectiveness of repairs and permits a cor-
rect distribution of capital investments.

Let's analyze the relationships given in Table l for various equipment groups for the
period between the two interbrench fixed assets balances of 1966 and 1972 free the
viewpoint of determining the status of the equipment being repaired. 0n the one hand.
inasmuch as the proportion of production equipment of a specific branch remains rela-
tively high (67.66 percent for industry). repair organisation is consequently also

of the branch type. including the manufacture of repair items. This level will pro-
bably be retained over the next two or three five-year plans. with slight changes to-
wards a reductict. 0n the other hand. there is obvious growth in the first and se-

cond production tquipuent groups during the five-year period: 16.79 and 69.58 per-
cent for industry as a whole and for metallurgical industry. respectively (13.18;

52.61 percent).

The presence of these two trends in the production equipment structure indicates a
definite connection between the relationships of the various classification groups

and the level of repair centralization and specialization. As the proportion of

1Estimated from the 1972 interbranch balance.

22
FOR OFFICJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special equipment (that for a specific branch) decreases and the proportion of gen-
eral industrial and interbranch equipment increases, expenditures for these groups
grow, which lowers the overall level of repair centralization and specialization by
increasing their decentralization in the specific branch. This becomes possible in
connection with the fact that branches producing general industrial and interbranch
output do not ensure deliveries of the needed amount of repair items or the central-
ized repair of their own equipment.

Thus. given growth of 2.76 and 7.34 percent, respectively. in the first and second
groups in USSR metallurgical industry (in 1966 relative to 1972) and a 10 percent
reduction in the proportion of the third group. the proportion of expenditures on
repairs for these groups of equipment has increased correspondingly: five percent
for the first group, two percent for the second. and expenditures on repairs for spe-
cialized branch equipment have decreased by seven percent.

Actualization of the scientific-technical progress programs in industry over the next
20-30 years will make its own adjustments in the relationships of the various equip-
ment groups. We can assume growth in the proportions of the first and second equip-
ment groups. If that growth is 1-2 percent per year. given the existing repair or-
ganization, the increased decentralisation will be 3-6 percent per year. This cir-
cumstance will naturally force the specific branch to divert even more considerable
resources into repairing and servicing these groups of equipment, thus causing con-
siderable harm to efforts to raise the level of technological equipment repair spe-
cialization and centralization in the corresponding branch, which will lead to losses
in basic production.1

The data in Table 2 [following page] testify to the level of repair centralization
in USSR industry. The highest proportion of centralized repair (interbranch balance
data for 1966 and 1972) is for machine tools (index of 3.30; 3.15), forging-pressing
equipment (2.13; 2.05). foundry equipment (2.53; 2.69) and others. we have adopted
as the unit the USSR industry average level of repair centralization. which is cur-
rently less than 10 percent. This situation testifies to insufficient attention by
the USSR Gosplan and the union republic planning organizations to repair problems in
the country. The efforts of planning organizations have thus far been aimed at or-
ganizing centralized repairs in machinebuilding branches.

Hachinebuilders are successfully developing the centralized repair of machine tools
and wood-processing equipment. foundry and forging-pressing equipment. To these
ends. specialized repair associations of the all-union "Soyuzstankoremont" associa-
tion type have been created in machine and tool manufacturing industry. The associa-
tion includes a number of specialised repair plants. It is the task of the associa-
tion to specialize and centralize as much as possible the repair of widely used mo-
dels of machine tools and to improve the quality and reduce the cost of repairs.

ENIMS calculations confirm the advantages of organizing plants specialized for over-
hauling machine tools as compared with existing methods of repair at industrial

---.~——---—-_-—.

1PRAVDA, 1 October 1979. 13 November 1979 and 3 March 1980; EKONOHICHBSKAXA GAZBTA,

No 65, 1979; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 8, 1978. p 8; EKONOHIKA SOVBTSKOY UKRAINY, No 8,
1979. pp 51-63. and others.

23
INIR OFFIC1A1.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Production Equipment hype Structure and Centralized Repair Production In-
dexes in Individual Branches (calculated using interbranch fixed assets
balances data for 1966 and 1972 (see: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo 3881! v 1968
i 1972 gg.")‘)

proportion of proportion of

equipment of corresponding repair producti "n

index. group 4 to

type of equipment this type. in specialized re-
percent of pair production grgup 2 and 8:0“?
total branch, percent to group
1966 1972 1966 1972 1966 1972
M08 1108 son 1108 1108 1408
machine tools and wood-
processing equipment 11.64 11.22 38.42 35.36 3.30 3.15
forging-pressing equipment 3.07 2.75 6.54 7.70 2.13 2.05
foundry equipment 0.86 0.86 2.18 2.32 2.53 2.69
technological equipment for
metallurgical industry 7.75 6.82 0.49 0.22 0.06 0.03
equipment and apparatus for
chemical industry 5.10 5.50 0.47 0.26 0.09 0.04
technological equipment for '
light industry 4.98 4.23 0.03 0.05 0.006 0.01
total of 20 types of equipment 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0

Note: The average level of centralized repair for 11888 industry was adopted as the
unit in columns 6 and 7. That is, if the level of repair centralization for
industry as a whole equalled, let's say, 10 percent. but was 30 percent for
machine tools. the index of repair centralization would be 1.0 in the first
instance and 3.0 in the second.

 

emerprises. Thus. for example, the labor-intensiveness of overhauling one machine
tool in a centralized manner is 2.5 times less than the labor-intensiveness of manu-
facturing a new machine of the same type.’

At the same time. the data in Table 2 testify to an inadequate level of repair cen-
tralization in metallurgical industry (indexes of 0.06; 0.03), chemical industry
(0.09; 0.04), light industry (0.006; 0.01) and other branches. This situation is to
be explained, on the one hand, by the actually low level of repair centralization and
specialization in these branches and, on the other, by the fact that the 08811 Central
Statistical Administration defines a specialized branch as an aggregate of special-
ized enterprises performing a given type of work. which very much narrovs the limits
of the repair branch.

Obviously, not all equipment manufacturing branches (enterprises) can efficiently re-
pair their own equipment. This is a complex task, both technically and organization-
ally. In our opinion. having recognized the equipment grouping described above. based

‘A. I. Kostin and D. I. Polyakov. "Spetsializirovannyy remont metallorazhushchilth
- stankov" [Specialized Machine Tool Repair]. Hoecow. Izd-vo Heahinostroyeniye. 1978,
p 117.

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on classification criteria. we can recommend that work be intensified on centraliz-
ing and specializing repair in specialization branches of an economic region. Reso-

lution of these problems could be done following the proposed plan for 'errous metal-
lurgy.

Ferrous metallurgy enterprises use all three forms of repair organization: central-
ized. decentralized and nixed. The mixed form is used most. wherein all types of
repairs are done by shop repair services. the repair-machine shops of the enterprise
chief machinist. sponsoring installation-repair facilities and specialized re air or-
ganizations (trusts) of the "Domnaremont." "Metallurgrenont" or "Energocherme " type.
Major overhauls comprise 28-32 percent of the total work volumes of these organiza-
tions, and 68-72 percent is accounted for by routine repairs.1 Bovever. the depart-
mental nature of the subordination of these organizations to the Ministry of Ferrous
Metallurgy leads to enornous unjustified expenditures. A metallurgics' plan is to-
tally uninterested in lowering the cost of repairs done by contractor organisations.
since such reduction is not reflected in any way in the metallurgical plant's bal-
ance. 0n the other hand. a repair trust has no practical interest in reducing repair
time. inasmuch as an increase in profit is not always expressed in lower repair costs.
Evaluating the activity of repair trusts in terms of volume indicators and the forma-
tion of incentive funds based on them does not ensure a proper combination of con-
tractor and client interests. Departmentally subordinated. the trusts are not in a
position to create a strong material-technical base. The level of machinery avail-
ability per worker at "Energochermet" trust is one-third lower than for power repair
organizations of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering and Electrification.2

It has become necessary to improve the branch equipment repair system in ferrous me-
tallurgy. In our opinion. it is appropriate in the 11th and 12th Pivedfear Plans to
transfer repair trusts to the subordination of machinebuilding ministries producing
technological equipment for ferrous metallurgy. Such a reorganization will permit

a maximum concentration of the efforts of these ministries at all stages of produc-
tion. beginning with designing. planning and producing the machines and ending with
their operation and repair. Under such a system. the equipment producer takes on all
repair obligations. Our calculations show that the use of sponsorship installation-
repair by Elektrostal'skiy heavy Machinebuilding Plant (BZTM)’ at Ukrainian SSR plants
provides an opportunity for eliminating bottlenecks in equipment operation by improv-
ing equipment design and increasing durability. which as a whole permitted an 11-
percent reduction in repair expenditures in pipe industry in the 10th Five—Year Plan.

It is appropriate for repairs to be done on equipment groups 1. 2 and 4 (general in-
dustrial. interbranch and other branches) by specialized rayon repair associations
formed on the principle of territorial-branch affiliation.

The problem of producing conmonly used repair items has been discussed repeatedly in
the economic and special literature. The ineffectiveness of producing items in shops

—---.--.----

 

1S. S. Aptekar'. "Sovershenstvovaniye khozrascheta v chernoy metallurgii" [Perfecting
Cost Accounting in Ferrous Metallurgy], Moscow. Izd-vo Metallurgiya. 1978, p 119.

2"Razvitiye form upravleniya ekonomikoy" [Development Forms of Economic Management].
Moscow, Izd-vo Mysl'. 1978. p 126.

3821M produces pipe-rolling equipment.

25
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USIZONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Territorial-Branch Repair Organization Plan for A Specialization Branch (using ferrous
metallurgy as an example)

HEPHAﬂ METMMP r‘uﬂ
Imam. Cumin" ammun-
uecnu‘o more]

A mm»:
MO ACM m1-

nmm “mum mew (4)

«lanthanum-l otMovﬂ

«noun-coco W-
m «that mramw

mWnnu DIMM
“WM MOW
AWN mac’glmmouwun -

 

Key:

Ferrous metallurgy (economic region specialization branch)

Leading metallurgical subbranch

Subhranchea (production facilities) producing complete sets of itm
Production of repair items

Plants manufacturing netallurgical equipment

Parts-specialized branch enterprises

Shops of the chief machinist‘s service/large repair centers

Repair production

Specialized repair of ferrous metallurgy technological equipment
Specialized repair of general industrial and interbranch equipment
Specialized repair of technological equipment for other branches of industry

see.

,—
ocoowauéun—

_
a—s
e

of the chief nachinist's service (SCH) at metallurgical enterprises as compared with
parts-specialized machinebuilding enterprises has been noted every time.1 However.
the demand for repair items is currently being 90-percent met by SCH shops. about

"'Organizatsiya i planirovaniye remntnogo khozyeyetve netsllurgicheokogo zavoda"
[Organizing and Planning A Metallurgical Plant Repair Service]. Roscoe. lad-yo He-
tallurgiya. 1969; Kb. P. Zaytsev et al.. "Ekonomika renontnogo khozyaystva metallur~
gicheskikh zavodov" [Metallurgical Plant Repair Service Economy]. Kiev. Izd-vo Teth-
nika. 1974; I. H. Denisenko and K. K. Kapustin. "Ekononika, organizatsiya i planiro-
vaniye remonta metallurgicheskikh pechey" [Scone-y. Organization and Planning Re-
pairs on Metallurgical Furnaces]. Moscow, Izd-vo Metallurgiya. 1977; "Proizvoditel'-
nost' trude v chernoy uetallurgii" [Labor Productivity in Ferrous “etallurgyl, Kiev.
Izd-vo Tekhnika, 1977. pp 73-88; "Razvitiye form upravleniye ekonomikoy." pp 116-130

and others.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

seven percent by parts-specialized branch enterprises and only slightly more than two
percent by plants nenufacturing technological equipment.

It is apparently time to re-examine the ineffective system of providing rayon metal-
lurgicsl conplexes with repair items. In accordance with the plan presented above.
repair items are being produced by plants manufacturing metallurgical equipment. by
parts-specialized branch enterprises and by shops of the chief nechinist's service at
metallurgical enterprises (large repair centers). Under the given structure for pro-
ducing repair itens in the transition period, plants manufacturing metallurgical
equipment should be instructed to manufacture large. unique and specific base parts.

Parts-specializedmachinebuildingenterprises must serve as the basis of the branch
production of repair items. with the rights of affiliates of machinebuilding com-
plexes. whose number continues to grow in ferrous metallurgy, the large repair cen-
ters of metallurgical enterprises and. in part, the enterprises of multipurpose aub-
branches, which correspond to average-sized machinebuilding enterprises in terms of
level of organization and volume of output produced. ‘

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radyans'ka Ukraine". "Bkonomika Sovetskoy Ukrainy", 1981

11052
cso: 1821/025

27
ROI(HHHC1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

METALUORKING BQUIPHENT

OPTIMIZING EFFECTIVENESS 0F MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT OVERHAUL SCHEDULES

Kiev EKONOHIKA SOVETSKOY UKRAINY in Russian No 10. Oct 81 (signed to press 12 Oct 81)
pp 39-42

[Article by Candidate of Economic Sciences H. Il'yenchenko: “Methods Questions of.
Determining the Economic Effectiveness of Equipment Overhaul and Hbdernisation"]

[Text] The large and ever-increasing expenditures on machinery and equipment repair
demand that their economic limits be established. A comparison of minimally possible
major overhaul expenditures and the established economically expedient size of those
expenditures enables us to reveal the degree of effectiveness of the repairs.

A number of economists have proposed various methods whose advantages and shortcom-
ings have been analyzed by Ye. K. Smirnitskiy and R. Z. Akberdin. Based on that
analysis. the authors worked out a method which most fully takes into account the
influence of various factors on the economic effectiveness of machinery and equip-
ment overhaul. However. in spite of the great advantages of the latter. it cannot
be used in practice due to a lack of needed information and to the great labor-inten-
siveness of the calculations, which the authors themselves note.

The problem of scientifically determining the economic effectiveness of najor over-
heels must be solved with a view towards optimising the annual machinery and equip-
ment major overhaul plan at the production association and enterprise level in ac-
cord with the following method: planned major overhaul expenditures for a particu-
lar machine should be compared with the carry-over depreciation fund available for
major overhaul of that machine.

Equipment major overhaul annual plan optimization must reduce the amount of ineffec-
tive major overhaul and expenditures on this type of work by establishing the limits
of appropriate expenditures on overhauling and modernising worn-out equipment.

The question of the appropriateness of a major overhaul must be resolved in the
course of working out the association and enterprise annual equipment overhaul
plans.

—--..—-..——...---

‘Ye. x. Smirnitskiy and a. 2. AR rdin. "Povysheniye effektivnosti remotnogo prola-
vodstva" [Increasing the Effect;aenese of Repair Production}, Izd-vo Hashinostro-
yeniye, Moscow. 1970, pp 13-18.

20p. cit.. pp 18-27.

28

FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USB(NVLY
Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.lﬂﬂE(NULY

. II.
A major overhaul should be considered effective when expenditures planned for it will
be less than or equal to the carry-over depreciation fund available for overhauling
that machine. that is. when an adequate source of own financing is available for do-
ing this work. This method of determining the economic effectiveness of equipment
overhaul flows from the existing method of financing it. so its practical introduc-
tion does not cause any difficulties.

The legitimacy of this method results from the fact that major overhaul depreciation

funds become socially necessary and economically permissible. that is. an appropriate
amount of expenditure for this type of machinery and equipment repair service; more-

over. that amount is always known.

If this condition is not met. that is. when carry-over depreciation funds are absent
or less than actual expenditures when it is time to do the overhaul. it will conse-
quently be ineffective. since such repairs will lead to additional expenditures.

This method is very simple to use. since the accounting section of each enterprise
records the movement of fixed assets. calculating for them the amortization of ac~
tual expenditures on both renovation and major overhauls. which will he added to
carry-over value. There is for each stocked item a stock card. on which this is re-
corded. Using these documents. we can analyze the dynamics of depreciation fund use
for overhauling a particular item. that is. we can trace how our own major overhaul
depreciation fund is used for each year of operation of a machine. Carry-over major
overhaul depreciation fund should be taken to mean the difference between the calcu-
lated depreciation for major overhaul for all preceding years of machine operation
and actual outlays on major overhauls and modernization done during that period.

Using PPR [planned preventive maintenance] system normatives and depreciation norms,
as well as actual equipment stock cards. the Kiev Relays and Automatic Machines Plant
has worked out descriptions of the value rotation process for 10 of the most cannon
models of nachinebuilding equipment. The results of their analysis of the character-
istics of value rotation of the machinebuilding equipment studied are given in the
table [following page].

The proposed method demonstrates that major overhauls are economically effective for
the 3l7l surface grinder only up to the eighth year of operation. It is economically
ineffective to overhaul this machine after the eighth year of its operation since the
carry-over major overhaul depreciation fund will only be 178 + 184 I 362 rubles by
the end of that year. and major overhaul expenditures will be 1.100 rubles. For

that same reason, it would be economically ineffective to overhaul the model 6l8l
universal milling machine in the llth year of operation. the model K1166 eccentric
presses in the seventh year of operation and the model PD~£76 hydraulic presses in
the seventh year of operation (see table).

At the same time. the calculations show that a comprehensive form of repair services
organization ensures a reduction of major overhaul expenditures to a level at which
the economic effectiveness of major overhauls on all equipment is ensured and a rav-
ings in depreciation funds is even achieved, which represents net income and -onfirms
the legitinacy of the proposed method of determining the economic effectiveness of
machinery overhaul. ~

According to this method. overhauling a specific machine will become ineffective at
a given level of outlays in the l-th year of operation. In this instance.
h

29

INJI:(HHH(JAI.1EHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

canon aw .ouaa mawunuono opuuoouuo Mnuoouloaoou .o~
nounau .0
any wooooa no vaau nowunwoounov u0>onmuuao .A+v noun-u oaaouoou .o
Anousuuvaunxn ooouaooou new 2
33...!- vua cognac: 33.23.93 non: gauuuuakuo page... on! Boulez—35:39.60 .8 @0026 Q .n
noo>uuuluoa unocu>uououawnouowuvuaa vac uuoauu an“ no voooav luau». an» .0
3.35.2 5 89:52:39.0 Has—.33 non-l ~33. .m
003?.— u« 31.3103 no?! you was 6.0330398 .e
swoon a“ .vowuom acquqaoouaoa .n

 

 

 

 

 

Honor .N
3553 9333» .2
:98
2 a 3+ 2.. q 8.:1 8:1 82 8.... 88 9.2 2.5.
2 e 0.8+ 23+ 3.7 s... z: 88 92 .2 .35. Sea 02:81;
2 o. :3 :1 3.. . 8.. a: 23 8a a: .23 2.8; 3383»
I . 2:59!-
2 2 9.8+ 88+ 3: 5: :a at 88 .... ES .32.?» 3&2.»
uovnwuu "caucuuu
2 2 9.8+ 82+ 3: 82+ 5. 33 . 88 .2 .25 .532» 38
2 2 2.5+ 3+ 5+ 8+ 2.. 8: . 22 a... 8:: $9-333?
32.. H33»?
2 2 53 8:. 5+ 5+ 28 :3 2: 0... 2E. 05:
. aways» unudiOuaq
2 2 2: 82+ «2+ 2+ :2 :2 E 2. :2
Op—uﬂd UOhH-au
2 2 an: a? 2+ . 8; 82 as 2; a... 9:: 2:3
acﬁuaoaammua
so.” .
00.! — strut..." ' O 9:. 3. O .8 on {unabar cup”. :Q
2. Jun”... 9...: “Hal N. o .amwuﬁ: in”... 5...: £95.34
.I O .IIIIIIII C: =. .
'x: p 2|. In .13.... . .056 . o 5.2.
. 382a...“ .autzh... hut! .. .0. ”ﬁat-cycle...” alsiqmustaﬂlz:uﬂuuu . I. 3 < M N H —

..I.I.'I||llll|lllll I I... .IIII

Awake: coauauoouamv.numm co voann van vozuoa vauVQOua on» moan: oouonsoaaOV voauum
83309309 05 no 09:60 05 .55 32335 93330553: $33526 no 330.3335 382.com

30

'FOR‘DFFKJA1.USE{NVLY
FOR1QFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

.‘d '
the enterprise administration must take the steps necessary to organize equipment
repair more efficiently, resulting in a decrease in outlays on it. But it is not
always correct to think that. inasmuch as it is ineffective to overhaul a machine in
the l-th year (prior to expiration of the normal service life). the machine should be
written off and scrapped. Thus. for exaeple. if a surface grinder model 3171 iev
written off and scrapped in the eighth year of its operation due to the ineffective-
ness of overhauling it and is replaced with a new one. given an initial machine cost
of 3.600 rubles and expenditures of 1.100 rubles on routine major overhaul in the
eighth year of its operation. society incurs losses of 2.300 rubles. This gonnot

be permitted, of course. but at the same time. the national economy need not incur
570 rubles of the losses resulting from a major overhaul. since it is precisely this
sum which we are short in financing a major overhaul of this machine from our own
major overhaul depreciation fund. To this sum. we need to add the growth (or sub-
tract the reduction) in operating expenses.

One condition of the economic necessity for a major overhaul and permissible maximum
expenditures on it is that the difference between the cost of a new machine and ex-
penditures on the planned overhaul be greater than the total depreciation funds defi-
cit for overhauling the old machine and the growth or reduction in operating expendi-
tures after that overhaul. that is.

C:—(C:vHuI>H.':trI' (1.000 rubles)
where C: is the initial cost of a new machine; c; is the normative cost of the

planned major overhaul or midpoint repair whose effectiveness we are verifying; "u
are expenditures on transporting equipment from the l-th customer to the l-th over-
hauler and back (if the major overhaul is being done at the enterprise operating the

machine. then 'hl- 0): H: is the shortfall in funds from the enterprise's own major

overhaul depreciation fund for overhauling this machine in this year of operation; ﬂ’
is the growth or reduction in operating expenses and the resultant profits after over-
hauling the old machine as compared with the operating expenses for a new machine for
the duration of the repair cycle.

It must be noted here that there is general acknowledgement in our economic litera-
ture that operating expenses will increase after overhauling an old machine as com-
pared with a new machine of the exact same type. This growth in operating expenses

is a consequence of objective factors of scientific and technical progress in creat-
ing tools of labor. However. along with objective factors, subjective ones also in-
fluence the development of new machines. It therefore happens that operating expenses
for existing machines are higher than the same expenses for new machines.

Thus. for example. the Odessa Forging-Pressing Equipment Plant imeni 16th Party Con-
gress began series-producing the A-1216 automatic cold upsetter in 1970. The old

AB 120 model was withdrawn from production. A simple comparison of the technical-
economic characteristics of these two models testifies to a significant reduction in
productivity and growth in operating expenses for the new machine. but not for the
old one. Output in the very same shops decreased 27 percent. repair expenditures
increased 11 percent and other operating expenditures also increased. Unfortunately.
such examples are not isolated and we cannot fail to take them into account.

Possible losses from change in machinery productivity and in their operating expenses
(:ﬂﬂhave therefore been introduced into the mathematical formulas reflecting the

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quantitative evaluations of major overhaul effectiveness. If they are positive (+),
these losses represent a decrease in profit if we continue operating the old machine
as compared with the profit which could be ensured by operating a new one. But if

this value is negative (-), it represents a decrease in profit. but now when operat-
ing a new machine as compared with the profit ensured by operating the old one.

The following restrictions testify to the economic effectiveness of major overhaul:
the carry-over major overhaul depreciation fund for a given machine will be greater
than the total normative cost of a routine major overhaul and transport expenses
(if the repairs are done by the direct-labor method, then Ph/- 0). that is:

0:>C: +Hu-

However. the economic effectiveness of equipment major overhaul can be compared and
determined using the above function only if this equipment (each specific machine) is
not obsolescent. If a machine is obsolescent. it must be modernised. The only na-
tural source of modernization funds is the major overhaul depreciation fund, inas-

much as a certain portion of this fund is planned for eliminating obsolescence by
the depreciation deductions horns.

A sufficient condition of the economic effectiveness of major overhaul with needed
modernization will have the form:

r-I
a; .1375! (c.,+c,'+nm)>c: +c: H40.

where C7 is the actual net cost of previous general technical modernisation of this
machine, in rubles. whose costs were covered by the major overhaul depreciation fund;

C: is the normative net cost of a planned modernization being done simultaneously
with a routine overhaul, in rubles.

It should be noted that if a sufficient condition exists when calculating the econo-
mic effectiveness of a major overhaul, it means the overhaul is actually effective
with or without (in the absence of obsolescence) modernisation, inasmuch as in this
instance, expenditures are fully covered by the anterprise's own sources of financ-
ing. In this instance, there is no necessity of checking the economic necessity of
the repairs. But if a sufficient condition is absent. such a comparison is mandatory.

If modernization is necessary. the condition of economic necessity for repair and mo-
dernization will be expressed by the following functions: first variant. when the mo-
dernization eliminates only some of the obsolescence. that is. when the productivity
achieved is still less than the productivity of a new model of the machine:

I’

q-(C:+C:+liu)> E (C-:+C,"+ldm)-A:l‘.:n’:
1-]
second variant. when the planned modernization eliminates the obsolescence completely:

' r
cg—(c:+c: +u.,)> 2 (c... +c7+nm)-A; ~r. +0.1 2 C",
III l-l.

where r>zo years.

Having solved both of the above conditions. we have objective indicators of the effec~
tiveness of major overhauls and the appropriate limits of expenditures on them and
optimum periods for the machinery to operate. The sufficient condition is an objective

32
FOR OFFICIAI.USI§(NNLY
FINI(NHNC1AI.USE(NVLY

.-..

criterion of the actual effectiveness of a major overhaul. The necessary condition
is an objective criterion of the limit on econonicelly expedient major overhaul ex-
penditures. Both conditions also determine the optimum service life of the nachine.

It should he added that a sufficient condition is a criterion of the effectiveness
of a major overhaul (including modernization. when necessary) foremost because addi-
tional expenditures are not required to finance it and. given appropriate repair or-

ganization. we even ensure a savings in depreciation funds which represents a net in-
come. - n

It goes without saying that. given a sufficient condition. the depreciation period
will serve as the limit of nachine operation and nornative outlays on najor overhaul
for that period uill always be less than the depreciation fund for that particular
type of repair and will generally be less than the cost of a new machine in those
instances when the depreciation norn for major overhaul is less that the depreciation

norn for renovation, which testifies to rather rigid, but nonetheless entirely fea-
sible. restrictions.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radyans'ka Ukraine". "Ekonouika Sovetshoy Ukrainy". 1981

11052
CSO: 1821/025

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFINCJAI.US£1DNLY

HBTALHORKING EQUIPMENT

IMPROVING HETALUORKING-EQUIPHBNT INVENTORY STRUCTURE IN MACHINE BUILDING
Moscow STINKI I INSTRUMENT in Russian No 8. Aug 81 (signed to press 21 Aug 81) pp [-2

[Text] An important role in the resolutions adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress regar-
ding acceleration of scientific-technical progress and improvement of the efficiency
of consumer-goods production is assigned to the various branches of the machine-
building industry. which provide the basis for technical re-equipping of the national
economy.

"Basic Directions to Be Taken By the Economic and Social Development of the 0888 in
1981-1985 and over the Period Through 1990," a document approved by the 26th CPSU
Congress. calls for the output of machine-building and metalworking products to in-
crease by a factor of no less than 1.6 during the 11th Five-Year Plan. The machine-
building industry is to improve production efficiency by development of advanced
technology, increased specialization, improvemnt of the structure of the metalworking-
machine inventory, an increase in labor productivity. and rational utilisation of
basic manufacturing stocks and other material resources.

Any further increase in labor productivity in machine building will in large measure
be determined by the level of mechanization and the qualitative and quantitative in-
dices of the metalworking-equipment inventory. Systematic renovation of the equip-
ment inventory and its supplementation with modern automated and precision metalwor-
king machine tools and machinery is an important governmental goal in whose achieve-
ment all organizations and enterprises concerned with various aspects of the technical
te-equipping of the national economy should take an active part.

"Basic Directions to Be Taken by the Economic and Social Development of the 088! in
1981-1985 and over the Period Through 1990" sets the following goals: 'Tb improve
the structure of the metalworking-equipment inventory in machine building by in-
creasing the output of heavy-duty special and multifunction machine tools, advanced
forging and pressing equipment. and automated production lines and machine groups.

To provide for the priority refitting of machine-building enterprises with new metal-
working equipment."

Producers' associations. enterprises, and organisations in the machine-tool industry
achieved definite results in outfitting machine-building facilities with modern equip-
ment during the 10th Five-Year Plan. The output of single-purpose. specialized. and
multifunction machine tools (in terms of market value) rose by 762. while that of
machine tools with digital process control increased by a factor of 2.4.

3‘
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

More than 80! automated production lines were manufactured for factories in the auto-
mobile. tractor. and agricultural-machinery industries. A total of 550 automated and
semiautomated lines were built for machine-building plants.

Over the last five-year plan. 2150 new equipment models were manufactured and tested
and S90 obsolete models were taken out of production. The proportion of products

of the highest quality grade (with respect to total commercial output) rose from

7.61 in 1975 to 41.21 in 1980; for metal-cutting machines. this index amounted to
09.81 in 1980. as against 11.51 in 1975. This made it possible to outfit new machine-
building plants with modern metal-cutting equipment and to overhaul existing plants.

Improvement of production efficiency in machine building requires a substantial in-
crease in the output of automated equipment. primarily automated and semiautomated
metal-cutting machines and automated production lines for machine building and metal-
working (including reorganizable lines), special and single-function equipment. mach-
ine tools with DPC (especially multifunctional machines with automatic tool exchange).
equipment complexes controlled from a central computer, and equipment fitted with
automatic program-controlled manipulators.

The llth Five-Year Plan provides for an increase in the proportion (in terms of
market value) of automated machine tools to 75! of total machine-tool output. The
output (in terms of market value) of automatic and semiautomatic metal-cutting mach-
ines will be increased by a factor of approximately 2. that of automated and semi-
automated machine-tool lines for machine building and metalworking by a factor of 1.5.
and that of metal-cutting machines with DPC by a factor of 3. The proportion of spe-
cial. single-function. and multifunction machine tools will amount to 24.11 of total
machine-tool production.

The most important goal to be achieved in the manufacture of this equipment is a
substantial improvement in its technical level and quality. The llth Five-Year Plan
calls for raising the throughput of metal-cutting. forging. and pressing machines and
of casting and woodworking equipment by a factor of 1.5-1.6. improving their reli-
ability and service life. and increasing the precision of metal-cutting machines
by no less than 20-30%.

In accordance with the scientific-technical and production goals that have been set.
the Ministry of the Machine-Tool Industry has worked out the variety of equipment
models to be available for the period 1981-1985. Among machine tools that will be
produced over this period, automated and aemiautomated machines belonging to all
technological groups will account for more than 601 of the total number of models.
During the current five-year plan. 300 machine-tool models are to be introduced
(replacing models manufactured earlier) and 305 models are to be taken out of pro-
duction. Production is to be begun for 627 machine-tool models (not previously
manufactured), including 297 models of automated machines. The new machine tools are
to be characterized by a high degree of automation and higher precision levels; it
will be possible to use them for implementation of new technological processes.

New machine tools will be designed so as to provide standardised model-size series.

Design of more than 200 machine-tool models with DTC, including 55 models of multi-

function machines with automatic tool exchange. is planned for the 11th Five-Year
Plan. The technological level of precision machine tools is to be improved by

35

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OF?1C1AL.USE¢3NLY

automation, enhancement of machining precision, and expansion of the range of high-
precision and extra-high-precision available. There is to be a qualitative change
in the variety of heavy and custom-designed machine tools produced.

The following technical solutions must be implemented in order to achieve the planned
increase in the throughput of metal-cutting machines: an increase in drive power,

use of new types of tools and intensified cutting regimes. performance of a greate.
number of technological operations by a single machine. an increase in the degree

of automation of machine-mechanism control. use of automatic manipulators. outfitting
of machines with devices and attachments that give them greater technological capa-

bilities, etc.

The output structure for machine tools will see an increase in the proportion of
precision machines. particularly high-precision and extra-high-preciaion units
(grinding. jig-boring. and fine-boring machines). It is proposed to bring 155 models
of high-precision machine tools into production over the course of the five-year
plan. New DPC systems (built-in and adaptive) are to be developed for this group of
machine tools. Precision norms for machine tools are to be made more stringent by
improving the quality of bearings and ball~bearing screw couples and employing real-
time monitoring and fine-adjustment systems. Hider use will be made of tools fab-
ricated from cermets and new synthetic materials in the finish machining of com-

ponents.

The production of automatic machine-tool lines for branches of the machine-building
industry engaged in mass and large-scale serial production will be increased and
multipurpose lines and line groups will dominate total output.

Together with improvement of line throughput and reliability. reduction of the
number of personnel required for equipment Operation is also of great importance.
Machine-tool fabricators in Minsk have taken effective steps in this direction. The
Minsk Special Design Bureau for Automated Production Lines has developed automated
machine clusters that combine individual equipment types. including automated lines.

All the machine tools and machines within a cluster are linked by asynchronous
transport and storage systems that make it possible to virtually eliminate manual
labor in loading. unloading. transporting. and storing articles to be machined.

For example. the complex for machining of connecting rods and rod covers built by
the Minsk Industrial Association for Manufacture of Automated Lines imeni 60-Letiya

Velikogo Oktyabrya includes five automated lines, seven continuous surface-broaching
machines, six rotary grinders. six fine-boring machines,five honing machines. an
electrochemical unit. and other types of equipment. Use of this complex freed 375
workers and permitted an annual savings of 800 thousand rubles.

The Moscow Machine-Tool Plant imeni Sergo 0rdzhonikidze manufactures a fast-
switchover automated line with DPC intended for machining of shafts having different
configurations (more than ten types). The line switchover time is 1.5 h).

Automatic manipulators are an important tool for raising the automation level in the

machine-building industry. The llth Five-Year Plan provides for accelerated expan-
sion of the production of metalworking-equipment groups fitted with automatic man-

ipulators.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The autonated line designed by the Experimental Scientific-Research Institute of
Metal-Cutting Machines for machining of electric-motor shafts. which consists of
three machine tools with DPC and an automatic manipulator with a lifting capacity
of 160 kg. makes it possible to increase labor productivity by a factor of 3'(with
two-shift operation). Scientific-technical work conducted at the Institute will
provide the basis for the future range of automatic manipulators to be produced.

Forty organizations and enterprises subsumed by the Ministry of the Machine-Tool
Industry are participating in work on further expansion of the manufacture of
automtic manipulators. Special attention must therefore be paid to the creation
of standard types. units. and specifications in designing manipulators and auxi- ‘
liary components for them. About 160 models of metal-cutting machines have now
been selected for outfitting with automatic manipulators. Research and design

on the new generation of manipulators, which will have better technical-econoaic
indices. must be expanded.

A great deal of work is to be done in improving the effectiveness of develOpment
work at production facilities with a view to introduction of new metalworking
equipment. 3

Current organizational practices pertaining to development and introduction of

new technology mat be reviewed and modified. with different stages (design.
development of technology. fabrication of equipment and special tools, etc.)

being carried out in sequence. Interesting experience in this area has been
amassedby the Ivanovo Machine—Building Industrial Association imeni SO-Letiya SSSR,
which switched to a parallel flowscheme for development work and introduction of
new technology; this made it possible to reduce the time required for introduction
of multifunction machine tools with automatic tool exchange by a factor of 3-4.

The experience of Odessa machine builders in the design and comercial introduc-
tion of a series of multifunction “chine tools with DPC and automatic tool ex-
change is noteworthy; their throughput is 3-4 times that of the analogous machine
tools produced previously and 8-10 times that of general-purpose machine tools.

The horizontal and vertical machines in this series consist of standardized'units
and are constructed on the modular principle. In order to reduce development time,
special engineering-technical groups were set up and carried out all the various
phases of their work in parallel with the designing of the machine tools. Planning
of the new series was begun in 1978 and two prototypes. models 220“!!!“ and 225M011?!“
were built and tested under industrial conditions in the first quarter of 1979.

Improvement of the industry's technical level will in large measure be associated
with technical rte-equipping of existing plants. an increase in the extent to which
labor is mechanized, and improvement of inventory structure for metalworking equip-
ment. Some work on outfitting of new and existing plants with the latest machine
tools and machines. technological support equipment. and nonstandard equipment we-
conducted during the 10th Five-Year Plan. Any further increase in production effi-
ciency in the machine tool and tool industry will to a great extent be the result
of purposive work directed at improvement of inventory structure for metal-cutting
machines and other types of equipment.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All industrial associations and enterprises must fulfill their assigned quotas for
elimination of obsolete equipment. The large ammmts of funds allocated to techni-
cal re-equipping of plants must be used for acquisition of heavy-duty automated
equipment. By the end of the 11th l’ive-Year Plan. the inventory structure of metal-
cutting machine tools is to include 10-112 machine tools with DPC. up to 26X specir'l-
izcd. single-purpose, and nodular machine tools. up to 9.32 high- and extra-high-

precision machine tools. and up to 18.22 automatic and semiautomatic equipmt
belonging to all technological groups.

Special attention must be paid to rational utilization technological equipment.
Reduction of idle time, improvement of the interchangeability factor, and rational

utilization of equipment resources will provide the basis for a further rise in
production efficiency.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Wlashinostroyeniye". "Stanki i instrument", 1981

2678
050: 1821/012 END

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY