APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 200mm: ClA-RDPOZMOOROOMOOOMM-‘I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030033-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

JPRS L/8330
12 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030033-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I. II- - Nu. 1. II... . '. Ann “I. u 3...
satisfanumc mu r w- .1935 148330 _ .mu ..

A : .ﬁTJ 'rpuu ou-
'I'MNSM‘I‘iONS on ussu acummu: M‘i-‘MRS , (F000 3/79) 12 March 1979

     
 

 

I. \-nl:-1'.I
O. l'. vl-‘mn, "mummif- Nun. uni AdJu es lo. I’wwu/Tuh’lmh inn 3».
Joint Publications Research Service
l000 North Globe Rood ll. Convert/Gnu No.
Arlington. Virginia 22201
i). Nuns-nu. Inga-num- Km and Addie“ II. Type oi Repou l1 Paul
.0"‘

As above

q
1

I). ~ .n-i- .. nun 3-4“
M. \l-uuu»

The report contains information on recent aduinistrative plans, changes, and
policy trends. items on the state of the national econony. significant and
representative con-cuts and statistics on principal industrial sectors.

 
   
   
 
  
  
   
    
     
     

I]. k. . I.«.l~ uni ih- not" Anny-u. lh. "cu-mo"

USSR
Economics

"5. H. mm. u up. n Invini i’rnlu

   
    

III. I "All I .1 tilt-hm,- 5C

  

ll h "Lu-mu Vnrm Id

Fur "fl icini Use Only. Limited
Number of Copies Available From JPRS

. mu 0. ---.

. Sn muy( Ia“ (Thu
WW .

 

-\ .... . o In

'IIIIS FOIII “AV "E IEPIODUCED V’CWU-OC 1.an
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB Ll
12 Marc

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR ECMOHIC AFFAIRS
(rouo 3/79)
CONTENTS

Theoretical Problem or Socialist Reproduction Diseased
(c. Sorokin; vomosr mama, Jen 79)

Capital Investment Efficiency in Nonproduction Sector Discussed
(1'. lunchepurov; vomosr mama, Jan 79)

Intersector capital Investment Complex Mined
(v0 m0V3k1y; vomm mm, Jan 79) 000.000.00.000...

Balance Sheet Method of Planning
(P. Krylov; vomosr mm, Jan 79)

Final Product Accounting um Improve Agriculture's Efficiency
(v. Tikhonov, u. Iczinn; vows! mama, Jan 79)
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEORETICAL PROBLEMS OF SOCIALIST REPRODUCTION DISCUSSED
Moscow VOPROSY momma in Russian No 1, Jan 79 pp 25-36

[Article by Corresponding Henbar of the USSR Acadely of Sciences
G. Sorokin: "Problens in the. Theory of Socialist Reproduction"]

[Text] Reproduction during the period of nature socialisn is character-
ized, first, by an increasingly couplets unifestation of the features
which are characteristic of reproduction during the first phase of the
col-unist tornation. and, secondly, by a broad workfront for the construc-
tion of the material and technical base of co-sunisa and the evolution of
socialist reproduction as a whole into comnist reproduction. Both of
these processes occur at the sane tins and are deter-ined by one another;
the latter are based on the successes of the for-er. and the develop-cut
of the conunist features of reproduction pronote a fuller nanifestation
of the advantages of socialise. The tenpos of co-unist transforntions
gradually accelerate.

At the stage of nature socialisn reproduction is increasingly oriented
toward the solution of najor social problens. Increasing resources make
it possible, in addition to an expansion of the naterial and technical
base and a thorough strengthening and develop-ant of socialist production
relations. to carry out ever wider transformations of all socialist
relations. During the course of this transformation the essential differ-
ences between town and country and intellectual and physical labor are over-
come, the social homogeneity of labor becones stronger. the well-being of
the workers increases at rapid rates. the conprehensive develop-eat of
every individual is ensured, and relationships of conradely cooperation
become stronger in the world socialist systsn. Socialist reproduction
beconea richer in content. its results batons directly connected with a
rise in the naterial and cultural levels of the population, and a new way
of life is for-ed.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF -Nho

At one time there was wide recognition for the point of view in accordance
with which "expanded co<:ia1ist reproduction nouns above all an increase in.
the gross social product; then...en increase in the existing means of
production (the implements of labor and the subjects of labor); then...the
growth of the working class and of its wage fund; and. finally. it means
the allotment of a certain part of the ;uciu3 product (profits) for the
needs of socialist accumulation and capital construction."1 An analysis
of reproduction in developed socialist society and the growing role of
social problems require that there be included in this formula the
reproduction of lsLor power in the economy as a whole (and not only in
industry). and also the reproduction of public wealth. the environment, and
the world socialist economy.

Under developed socialism the expanded reproduction of the first productive
force of society-—labor power-~nnd the hormonious development of the indi-
vidual become a very important socto-ecnnonic task. In addition to an
increase in current consumption. society is in need of an accumulation of
wealth, in particular those of its component parts like basic non-produc-
tion capital and the property of the population, and of a renewal of the
normal natural conditions for labor and life. Reproduction in any given
socialist country is closely interwoven with reproduction in other socialist
countries, and an isolated consideration of it proves to be invalid.

During the process of the gradual transition to communise and as a single
communist ownership is formed reproduction becomes socially completely
homogeneous. class differences are eliminated in the production and
consumption of the social product, national income, public wealth. and

so forth. Gradually, the mechanism of reproduction is also transformed:
state control over the measure of labor and production and state planning
are replaced by public control and planning; wages. prices. profits. and
other value forms and levers die away and cost accounting also changes its
forms. Labor becomes a prime vital need and moral stimuli and an endeavor
to create increasingly become the chief means of motivation to highly
productive labor. All this presupposes an improvement of the socialist
econoaic mechanism and a fuller use of its possibilities.

The social thrust of socialist reproduction is very vividly illustrated by
V. l. Lenin's schemes which were published in the Lenin Collection. 38.
These schemes contain a great deal in cannon with the schemes in "Capital"
and with the schemes in V. I. Lenin's work, "About the So-Called Markets
Question." However, in the schemes being considered here the emphasis is
put on discovering the results of socialist reproduction. while in the
previous schemes the abstract theory of realization was chiefly illustrated.
Before analyzing the new scheme.2 it has to be noted that a terminology is
used in it which is common for capitalism and socialism ("constant capital,"
"variable capital,” and so forth). This, of course, is a conventional use
of identical terms: each of them has a fundamentally different content
under socialism and capitalism. The scheme singles out the sorkers'

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consumption whose magnitude, as follows from the calculations which are
cited, embraces the consumption of all of the workers of socialist society.
finally, the inclusion in the scheme of the coluan "100 years of socialism"
presupposes, in our opinion, an examination of socialise not at its
initial, but at its nature stage when it is transformed into communism,

and the disclosure of the typical features of socialist (largely conmun-
ist) reproduction in general, and not of its initial period.

V. I. Lenin's ache-es are based on the following chief laws of socialist
reproduction: higher econonic developsent rates than under capitalism;
the subordination of production to the tasks of raising public well being
and of the expanded reproduction of labor power; the development of the
technical organization of production: the preferential development of
subdivision 1 compared to subdivision II with the gradual equalization
of their growth rates; and an increase in production efficiency which,
even with a lowered accumulations horn, ensures an increase in economic
growth rates.

3
ton orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U53 ONLY

38
3am .
6.8. .

«.8

7...... <8
25.” <n

       

 

non!— ucuzozou so as:

I #8. .82 28s as 38 3: «.8. «as ... 32
I. «8. to.“ v.8... as in: 43. .62 «8. . c 2.2
I 38. :3 as. 3... S». 9.8 as“ 3.3.. . . . . .. 8a.
I *8. to; «a 3... . 38 a8 9.; ed: .. Se.

.6: map... .538. "5895.53 5 .t whﬂlog. 3 L000 - gangs; 0 van-«I aggra-O .: 2.5

. asses...
_ cagkdonuoc SHV
950.
on. u . . . 13:322....3. 9 3:3:
on. u. 3". _ no" _ . an: 3.". 8. ”a in? o: 2.2.32.2... 2... nuts andv
<3: I s
2.5.2. +
I nEb “ <22 <89. .33 : I <8... + 5.8 + 5.8 a. 2.2.35.8 2:8. 3.3
<2 <2 <3. I <2. ... s... + <8. 2.5.3.5.... 31.8 .23
1.. z 5 + S. + <« 2.5...

$2.359. .. .282. .8: 88 Audv

any

pun.
.0... callu-
.§ 03:

    

5
303.320

.189

   
    

outrun-n .-¢.l--
(algae—ho 03:33:33.7

 

25.3.38 1.. 35330.8.- ..85 03

[4

FOR OFFICIAL USE WLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

{Continuation of key]

Key:
1. Scheme of reproduction under Vol. 38, pp. 90-91)
socialism 12. 2000 years of slavery and
2. "Constant Capital” serfdom
3. "Variable Capital" 13. 200 years of capitalism
b. "Super-value" 14. 100 years of socialism
5. Total social product 15. Growth under socialism
6. Accumulated part compared to capitalism
7. Consumption of workers 16. Total consumption of
8. Proportion of workers in Vent workers
(in new value) 17. Actual date in reproduction
9. Consumption of the exploiters in USSR: 1959-1975 (in
10. All personal consumption actual prices, billions of
11. Fundamental scheme composed by rubles).

V. I. Lenin (Lenin Collection.

As can be seen from the above scheme, socialist reproduction is character-
ized by a fundamental. change in the cowosition and distribution of the
social product and of national income. V. I. Lenin supposed that compared
to capitalism, under socialism within the social product the proportion

of transfer value would be 13 percent higher, of "variable capital"—almost
two times lower, and of "super-value"--Uo percent lower. The proportion
of consumption in national income is 19 percent higher, while that of
accumulations is 60 percent lower. The consumption of the exploiting
classes is eliminated, and all of national income belongs to the workers.
In the changing composition of national income there is a tendency toward
an increased proportion of consumer goods. In the production of the
social product there is an increase in the proportion of the means of
production as a result of the growth of the technical (organic) structure
of production. Compared with capitalism, it doubles.

In comparing the conventional magnitudes which are contained in Lenin's
scheme with the concrete reproduction magnitudes it is only possible. of
course, to compare tendencies. In addition, it must not be forgotten
that our society reached the stage of mature socialism less than two
decades ago. The assumption concerning the elimination of the property
and consumption of the exploiters has been fully validated. within the
social product the proportion of the means of production is increasing;
in national income the proportion of consumption is increasing, and so
forth. The positive tendencies in socialist reproduction will show up in
full force later, when the technical level of production and the level of
labor productivity reach their highest. As of now this has not been
achieved, and the technical structure of our production is lower than
what was supposed by V. I. Lenin. The value of Lenin's conception of
reproduction under complete socialism is in that it points out the ways

5
roe orrrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of future development and the strategic goal of socialist reproduction
during the period of its development into cot-waist reproduction.

In using the dynamic indicators of the development of the econony of the
USSR it has to be kept in mind that the years 1972 and 1975 were unfavorable
for agriculture. For this reason. the amounts of production. consueption.
and sccuulstions are somewhat lower than the usual ones. Nevertheless.
during a period of 16 years the gross product increased by 3.1 times in
actual prices. and national income increaud by 2.7 times. Until recent
years the surplus product nore increased. but then it fluctuated somewhat
in both directions. The technical (organic) structure of production rose.
and the proportion of subdivision .1 output increased.

ﬂow were the general conditions of realization observed during these 16
years? Usually. the following three conditions of the realisation of the
social product under expanded reproduction are considered. The newly

created value of subdivision 1 is greater than the replace-ant fund in
subdivision II [1(U+l")>|lcl The output of subdivision 1 is

greater than the replacenent fund in both subdivisions "(Cd-0+0!) > (l¢+ "0]-
All of newly created value is greater than the output of subdivision II

"(V + m) + ll(u+m)]> Il(r-i-v+m).

In analyzing the social problems of reproduction it would be useful. in our
view, to distinguish one other condition: the output of subdivision 1!
exceeds the consumption of the workers of the sphere of material production
[Mr 4- u + In) > (v. + 03)]. This excess ensures the attraction of new
workers into the sphere of eaterial production, an increase in their
consumption, and the naintencnce of the workers of the non-eaterial sphere.
An excess in the production of the means of production over their replace-
nent fund. of newly created value over the output of subdivision [1. and
of the production of consumer goods over current consumption which is
expressed in the creation of additional consumer goods for new workers

and for increasing the constnption of existing workers comprises the
potential of expanded reproduction.

In 1959 the newly created output of subdivision -.1 exceeded the replace-1
nent fund of subdivision 11 by 22.7 billion rubles. in 1966-by 25
billion. in 1972--by 50.7 billion. and in l975—by 51.8 billion rubles.
Such is the preponderance of the total output of subdivision I over the
overall replacenent fund. and also of national incoee over the output of
subdivision 11. The output of subdivision two exceeded total personal
consumption in the sphere of production by 61.2 billion rubles in 1959.
73 billion in 1966, 104.8 billion in 1972. and 127.7 billion rubles in
1975.

In examining the data on expanded reproduction in the USSR during the years
1959-1975 it is necessary to pay attention to the following. The output
of subdivision 1 exceeds the replacement fund and also the output of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subdivision II to a sealler degree than it exceeds accumulations. The

is explained by the fact that the replacement fund is computed not as of
the beginning of the reproduction period (year), but as of its end (that
is, including the expansion of production which has already occurred).

The amount of the excess is the remnant which goes over to the expanded
reproduction fund of the following year. "hat has been said also applies
to the preponderance of the output of subdivision 11 over consumption

in the sphere of material production. This contribution to the expansion
of production during the following period plays an important role and
coaprises around one-half of total accumulations. If the carry-over
remnant proves to be insufficient, then in order not to lower the reproduc-
tion rates it has to be compensated for on the basis of the output of the
future period, which, however, is not always possible; for example, in the
production of complex equipment.

The figures show that the average annual "contributions" to the future
expansion of the production of consumer goods have been systematically
increasing. This is the effect of the orientation of socialist reproduction
toward improving the well-being of the population. 0n the other hand,
relatively speaking. the "contributions" to the future expansion of the
production of the means of production have been decreasing somewhat. This
decrease is most noticeable with respect to the anount of capital. which
testifies to shortcomings in its use.

The above-cited analysis of the most general conditions of realization has
to be supplemented by 'sn analysis of the realisation of the means of
production, including the means of labor. the implements of labor. and the
subjects of labor, of the distribution of consuner goods for the expanded
reproduction of labor. power and for the maintenance of the non-production
sphere. of the distribution of the product between industry snd agriculture,
and so forth. For expanded socialist reproduction it is important that
the surplus of the scans of production over the replacement fund makes it
possible to increase production in both subdivisions I and II and to
ensure during necessary periods the gradual equalization of their develop-
nent rates. It is also ieportant that the neans of livelihood fund exceed
the costs of the expanded reproduction of labor power in the sphere of
material production. and that the resources for the development of the non-
production sphere increase.

within the total amount of the industrial means of production the proportion
of the means of labor during the years 1960-1972 came to an arerage of 22-23
percent. declining somewhat toward the and of this period. Around 72
percent of the means of production were produced for subdivision 1. and
around 28 percent for subdivision n. In 1959 an expansion of production
had assigned to it 75.6 percent of the value of the surplus product (of a
subdivision), while in 1972 the figure was 60.9 percent (for the non-pro-
duction sphere—26.6 and 39.1 percent. respectively). A certain shortage
of equipment for the mechanization of labor and for reequipping the light

7
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and food industry is being felt. Of great importance for an analysis of
reproduction is a study of the distribution of labor resources and of labor
power and other more concrete proportions: for example, a :elative analysis
of the turnover of the product and of monetary turnover. and of the monetary
income of the population and retail trade turnover and fee services. This
requires an improvement of the corresponding statistical reporting.

The increased role of social factors and the expansion of the range of
production problems makes it necessary to deepen research on economic
development rates and socio-economic proportions which are different in

the degree to which they can be studied and controlled. At the stage of
the development of socialism into covmuniam the relationships between the
productive forces and the environment. the productive forces and production
relations. and material productive forces and labor power become very
important.

The movement to develop socialist and, especially, conunist production.

a rapid development of the non-production sphere. the drawing into
circulation of new sources of energy and raw materials along with the old
ones. a rise in soil fertility, the productivity of agricultural livestock,
and the useful biological properties of plants, an improvement of the envir-
onment, and so forth require enormous accu-dations. 0f great importance
here is the development of new sources of capital. the replacement of
extensive sources of growth with intensive ones. a sharp increase in the
effectiveness of the use of national income (of accumulation and consump-
tion), and the redistribution of national income between industry and
agriculture. Social reproduction is entirely subordinate to the law of

an economy of time and an economy of live and past labor. An improvement
of efficiency and quality has to become the chief economic criterion of
rational reproduction. Already at the stage of socialism the resources
which are formed as a result of increased efficiency have to exceed the
resources which are obtained with an extensive expansion of production.

The more rapidly socialist society moves to the highest phase of the
socialist formation. the more important will be the role of the intensive
factors of forming accumulations. This requires the development of new
methods of increasing efficiency. As was pointed out at the 25th Congress
of the crsu, it is essential to improve the quality of output and the
quality of work, to accelerate scientific and technological progress, to
achieve a substantial new upsurge in labor productivity. to reduce materials
intensiveness, and to increase yield from capital.

In order to determine the growth tendencies of the sources of economic
development it is important to correctly evaluate the role of intensive and
extensive sources in modern reproduction. however. the evaluations which
we have differ from one another by two and more times. At the basis of

the differences are different concepts of intensive and extensive factors.
Some writers identify intensiveness with a rise in the productivity of

live labor, while other identify it with an economy of live and past labor.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
M 0”“:th 08! OI“

in our view, only a celculation of the total economy of labor (live and
past) correctly reflects on intensification of reproduction.

*-

* i
The problem of rates is one of the most iaportant ones in the theory of
socialist reproduction whose central task is the study of the conditions
which ensure high economic growth rates. This problem can be solved in
two ways: by means either of retaining present growth rates. or of
increasing them. Some econonists are putting forth the problem of
“substantiating the necessity for maintaining high economic growth rates."3
In our opinion. it is necessary to study the possibilities of accelerating
the present development rates of the Soviet economy.

historically. the growth rates of the socialist ecunosy have been set by

the competition with capitalism. Socialims and co-unism are victorious
over capitalism on the basis of more developed productive forces. Therefore,
the socialist economy has to grow more rapidly than the capitalist economy.
The necessity for competing with the capitalist world will continue through-
out the entire period of cos-unist construction. And for this reason the
necessity for higher econoaic growth rates than in the capitalist countries
will also continue. Lenin's schemes of socialist reproduction set higher
glowth rates under socialism than under capitalism, namely: over a period
of 200 years capitalism increases the social product by 21.7 times, while
socialism increases it by more than 80 times in l00 years.

Growth rates depend upon many circumstances and express diverse phenoaens.
The growth rates of production and accumulations are one thing, and the
growth rates of consumption and of the people's cultural level are another.
The problems of the growth rates of industry and agriculture are also

solved in various ways; within industry-~heavy and light; within accumla-
tionsuproduction and non-production. At the same time. the growth rates
are interconnected in the process of the functioning of the economic couples
and comprise a single system whose elements depend upon one another.

The development rates of the economy of the USSR have been different during
different periods. During the pre-war years the development of industry.
especially heavy industry, was accomplished. During the second half of the
1960's and in the 1950's the economy was rapidly restored and there was a
preferential development for the branches of industry upon which the
scientific and technical base of socialism was based. The 1960's and 1970's
have been years of large structural changes in the steamy. The construction
of the material and technical base of co-miam is taking place. the rise
in public well-being is intensifying. and more and more resources are being
switched to the industrialization of agriculture. The population's income
is growing at stable high rates. the development rates of agricultural

production are increasing, while the growth rates of industry are decreasing
somewhat compared with the previous period.

9
m OFFICIAL US! MY
POI OIYICIAL US! ONLY

The structural changes which have occurred, the increase in the dimensions
of production and its reequipping, the intensification of the econony,

major work to create a stable and highly productive agriculture, and a rise
in the cultural and technical level of the workers make it possible, in our
view. to pose the question of increasing economic growth rates in the 1980's.

Hulti-hranch heavy industry is the basis for high development rates in the
Soviet economy during the forthcoaing decade. During the years 1961-1977
the output of group "A" increased by 3.9 percent and came to three-fourths
of total industrial output. in order to characterize the progressive
movement of heavy industry let us examine the growth of the metallurgical,
machine building, and fuel and enery complexes. in 1960 the USSR snelted
65 million tons of steel and in 1977--167 million tons. In 1960 steel
smelting in the USSR came to 71 percent of the level which had been reached
in the United States. In 1977 the USSR exceeded the United States in

this respect by 26 percent During the years 1961-1977 machine building
output increased by 6.6 times. The Soviet Union occupies first place in
the world for the number of metal-cutting machine tools. The Soviet machine
tool pool is younger than that of the United States of Anerica. The inter-
national specialization and cooperation in production of the socialist
countries is promoting the develop-eat of machine building. However, the
worlds largest complex of leading heavy industry branches possesses even
greater unutilized reserves. above all, through a better operation of
production capacities and a rise in the technical level of production.

During the 1960's and 1970's a great increase occurred in the productive
capital and Output of the fuel and energy complex of the USSR. During these
17 years petroleum extraction increased from 148 to $46 billion tons, coal
extraction~-froa 510 million to 722 million tons; and the production of ele
electric energy increased from 292 billion to 1 trillion 150 billion kilo-
watt-hours. Total fuel and energy resources (in terms of conventional fuel)
increased from 836.5 million tons in 1960 to 1,989,300,000

tons in 1977 and come to 7.7 tons per capita. The USSR extracts more coal
and petroleun than the United States. As is known, the Soviet fuel industry
has uninterruptedly supplied the economy, including during those years when
the capitalist countries were seized by an energy crisis.

The above exaaples show what heights have been attained under socialism by
the production of the means of production. Soviet heavy industry and the
natural resources of the USSR are capable of satisfying all of the basic
needs of a rapidly developing economy.

The transformation of agricultural production into a variety of industrial
production should lead to an increase in the growth rates of the economy,
especially of the light and food industries. During the years 1961-1976

10
POI OPYICIAL US! OlLY
M OFFICIAL 08! our

investments in agricultural production came to more than 220 billion rubles,
which is almost 12 times more than the appropriations for the industriali-
zation of the country during the entire post-war period. And. as follows
from the decisions of the July (1978) Plenum of the cc CPSU, during the
Eleventh Five-Year Plan capital investnents in agriculture will remain on

a high level. All of this will ensure an increase in agricultural develop-
ment rates. In 1981-1985 it is planned to bring the average annual grain
harvest to 238-263 million tons. and in l990~to 1 ton per person.

"hen the main line of connection between agriculture and industrial produc-
tion (group "3”) is era-ined it is usually rightly pointed out that an
increase of agricultural raw materials entails an increase in the production
of consuler goods. l'ut agriculture's influence on economic growth rates

is wider. In particular, its uynalica has an important influence on the
dynamics of economic sccmlation. which is witnessed by the data cited
below (in blllions of rubles):

 

Cease-u M I»

assas- rna- sonata-a a
rave unh- aapnaI-w so
(1) «assure» ukvaa so (2)
seas» e ser- tum-u r
amylase re- Q's-anus
It. nae-

 

1972 r ...... - . 4.4 —l£

I914 r ....... as 0
I915 r ....... 6.3 I it:
Key:
1. Decrease in gross agricultural 2. Decrease (increase) in accumula-
output compared to previous year tions in the economy compared to

previous year

A decrease in agricultural output almost simultaneously leads to a decrease
in economic accumulations. A rise in the standard of living occurs under
socialism even during unfavorable bar-lest years. During these years only
accumulations are affected. while the increase in the consuption part of
national incose remains unchanged. A stable and high level of agricultural
production ensures stability in the dynamics of accumulations.

Scientific and technical potential is of great importance for increasing
economic growth rates. As is known. during the 1960's and 1970's there

was a rapid growth in the USSR of the number of scientific workers, engineers.
and of appropriations for science. Our economy is supplied with many more
scientific and technical cadres than in the capitalist countries. A new
system of polytechnical training for skilled workers has been introduced—-
through the vocational and technical schools on the basis of ten-year

ma 0,7101". 08! on!
I03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

education. The efficient use of our gigantic scientific and technical
cadres in order to accelerate scientific and technical progress is a
state task of paranount inportance. Its accomplishment presupposes an
intensification of the use of these cadres. An increase in the return
fron scientific and engineering work will promote both an improve-ant
of equipment-~the basic reserve for accelerating rates-~and an improve-
nent of the organization of production. construction, planning. and so
forth.

An improvement of the nanagenent of the econony and increased participa-
tion by the masses in deciding on production issues play an important

role in accelerating econonic developnent rates. At the current stage
there are nuch greater possibilities for materially stimulating a rise

in labor productivity. During the 1960's and 1970's major neasures were
carried out in our country to raise the standard of living of the broad
strata of the population. These measure were carried out in accordance
with the party‘s Progran to improve public well-being and they have helped
to equalize the living standards of the population.

During the 1980's not only a further increase in our resources. but also
an improve-eat of distribution policy will probably nakc it possible to
strengthen material stinulation for highly productive skilled work. Hhile
bringing living standards and incone from labor closer together. socialisn
also presupposes their differentiation in relation to labor contribution.
Initiative. skill, and discipline in work have to be rewarded. Material
stinulation cannot be reduced to monetary incone. The conditions for

the realisation of this incone have to be inprovad. Growing intone and
needs and the latter's diversity have to find diverse and high quality
goods and services. Hith a rise in the standard of living there is a
greater role for services which have to be used widely for nsterial
stinulation. however, sone economists underestinate the role of the
sphere of services, believing that "the housing fund and the network of
institutions in the service sphere are an insufficiently flexible instru-
nent with the help of which to scconplish tasks in the field of stinuls-
tion...ln all cases their development has to be oriented not toward the
creation of advantages for certain groups of the population, but toward
an equalization of the level at which these needs are satisfied in all
groups of the population."‘ in our opinion. an acceleration of economic
developnent rates and of the growth of labor productivity and scientific
and technical progress will depend upon a preferential and not a leveling
distribution of the housing fund, of tickets to sanitoriuma and rest holes.
tourist services. and so forth.

Social reproduction presupposes the unity of the continuous process of
production in time and space and the unity of rates and proportions. the
problens of rates and proportions have an independent significance. but.
at the sane tine, they are interconnected and, in addition, each of them
has primacy during one or another period. The interaction of high rates

12
'0! OFFICIAL USE BIB!
M omcm. I183 M!

and optimal proportions is an important factor in achieving high rates

of movement from socialism to co-unism. As a rule. such rates ensure

the most rapid balancing of the econoey. although excessive strain may

be the reason for disproportions. During the Teeth and Eleventh Five-Year
Plans. primarily on the basis of high growth rates for agriculture and labor
productivity. it will be possible to substantially improve the balance of
the economy. which. in its turn. will make it possible to accelerate the
development of many branches of the economy.

Thus. in their aggregate. the decisive factors of economic growth may.

in our opinion, en'sure increased development rates for our socialist
economy during the 1980's. however, this will require that considerable
difficulties be overcome. that an effective introduction of new equipment
be ensured. that there be a more rational organisation of production, an

increase in the effectiveness of scientific development work and its use
in the economy, and so forth.

19‘s

Throughout the entire period of the development of socialism into couunism
the law of the growth of the technical and organic structure of production
and of the preferential development of the production of the means of
production is in operation. Expressing the relationship between labor
forces and the mass of material productive forces which are put into move-
ment by then during the course of historical progress. technical structure
grows; or. to put it differently. every unit of labor power uses increasingly
greater masses of the means of production. This is one of the important
indicators of labor productivity whicn connects a relative decrease in

labor power with its capitdl-lebor ratio. Kara believed that the law of

a more rapid increase in the constant part of capital compared to its
variable part is coafimd at every step regardless of whether different
economic epochs for the same nation are compared, or different nations during
the same epoch are compared.5 At the same time, along with technical struc-
ture, the organic structure of production is examined in "Capital.” Organic
structure is based on technical structure. but for a number of reasons they
cannot coincide. The necessity for a special examination of the organic
structure of capital arises, in our opinion, from the fact that the practi-
cal solution of the problems of the composition of production is based on
existing prices; value structure also makes it possible to perceive the
influence of the surplus value norm on organic composition. By increasing
the surplus value norm. a capitalist is able to increase the organic ano
technical compositions of production. and make production more profitable
and the working population surplus.

Since co-odity-money relationships are used in a socialist economy. in
addition to technical structure, it is probably right to examine the organic

13
M orncnt ass all
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure of production. Technical structure can be expressed in value
indicators. but as a result of the lack of correspondence between values
and prices and the physical amounts of the means of production and the
various surplus product norms. technical and organic structure may differ
substantially. Of course, under socialism the surplus product norm cannot
be increased by means of decreasing the standard of living of the workers.
or by means of creating a reserve army of labor; but with the satisfaction
of the growing needs of the workers and with full employ-eat an increasing
surplus product norm makes it possible in necessary cases not to force

the growth of the technical and organic structure. Despite the obvious
role of the category of the organic structure of production under socialise.
certain writers ignore it in their studies.

With the growth of the technical and organic structure of production the

cost structure of the product changes: the share of the neans of produc-
tion increases and the share of wages decreases. with respect to the economy
as a whole this is a manifestation of the law of the preferential developed
growth of subdivision number I; that is, the law in accordance with which.
as Marx noted, constant capital has a tendency to grow at more rapid rates
than variable capital. Lenin wrote that "the proposition concerning the

most rapid growth of the neana of production is a simple rephrasing of this
law in application to all social production."6

Various opinions have been expressed in the intensive discussion of the
relationship between the subdivisions of social production. In recent

years the opinion has again appeared which. in our view. is invalid and
which denies the law of the preferential growth of subdivision 1. Thus.

E. Gorbunov7 asserts that the most characteristic tendency of our present
economy is an acceleration of the development of subdivision 11. its
stabilization, and even an increase in its share of the gross social product.
he denies the growth of the organic (technical) structure of socialist
production. believing that under the influence of a decrease in capital and

materials intensiveness the share of "c" decreases relatively. while the
share of "v" increases. As a result of this, in his opinion, under present

conditions the organic structure of production does not have a tendency to
increase.

Let us first turn to the facts. Let es examine how the relationship between
the two subdivisions has developed over the entire history of the develop-
ment of the Soviet economy.

11»
ron orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1) Vacuum! set I a II on satacusa s mused
upoaytawn upoauoco loss tree a rpyne «A. a «I;-
s spouumatsmm CCCP (s ‘H

 

 

(2)5‘.."’.‘..‘:‘. nm-m'w-
________.__......__1_____.
'3“: $522:- an «\- rpysas all-

l9|3r . . . . . . ‘7 b3 35.! “.9
ION/W?! r ..... ‘9 6! 39.5 “.6
I9J2r . . . . . . 54 ‘6 53.4 46.6
”331'. . . . . 67 ‘3 69.2 ”.8
”ﬁt ....... 69 ‘I 72.0 20.0
I972r. . . . . . . 63 37 73.6 26A
I915! ....... 6d 30 73.7 26.3

Kay:
1. Share of subdivisions 1 and II 3. Industry
in gross output of the economy 6. Subdivision I
and of groups "A" and "B" in 5. Subdivision II
USSR industry (in percent) 6. GrOup‘VV'
2. Economy 7. Group "B"

The actual data which has been published by the Central Statistical
Administration USSR does not permit the assertion that the share of
subdivision I1 has been increasing. 1he growth rates of the two sub—
divisions are getting closer to one another. but there is no outstripping
develop-cut of subdivision 1!. In order to evaluate the dynaaica of the
shares of the subdivisions it would be necessary to take account of price
changes. But there are not published calculations of this kind. The
dynamics of the physical volume of the output of groups "A" and "B" of
industry could serve as a certain orientation point. During the years
1961-1975 the output of the forest increased by 3.5 tines. while that of

the latter increased by 2.8 times. In order to substantiate his conclu-
sions B. Gorbunov calculates the output of the subdivisions in the following
way: he includes non-production accumulations in subdivision II. excluding
it from the output of subdivision I. however. by virtue of their composi-
tion the elements of non-production accunulations (construction materials
and structures. piping for water lines. sewage. gas) become priaerily
consuaer goods only utter the completion of construction and are taken
account of through depreciation in the consunption fund. Nor does the
previously cited data confirm the writer's speculative conclusion concerning
the absence under socialism of a growth in the organic and technical
structure of production. 0n the contrary. the technical structure of
production and the capital-labor ratio under socialism are in continuous
growth. which, as we have seen. is taken account of in V. I. Lenin's schemes.

A denial of the preferential develop-ant of subdivision 1 and of the growth

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the technical structure of production is also theoretically invalid.
Technological progress. a rise in the capital-labor ratio. a rise in labor
productivity, a decrease in the overall expenditures of live and past labor
per unit of output with an increase in the proportion of expenditures of
past labor, and the preferential growth of subdivision 1--these are very

important prerequisites for the economic progress of society. for its
movement to cos-unism..

But perhaps the above-named chain of dependencies between the phenomena

of economic progress is not entirely mandatory? Perhaps another procedure
of Joining the elements is possible? Some economists assert that for
present conditions it is wrong to connect the law of the outstripping
development of subdivision I with a growth in the technical and organic
structure of production. The relationships in the develop-ant of sub-
divisions l and 11 are tied together with the expenditure of the means
of production per unit of consumer goods. And the following arguaents

are cited here. If the amount of the means of production in physical terms
for the production of a unit of output in subdivision ll increases, then
subdivision 1 rose more rapidly; if it decreases, the growth slows down.8

As is known. technological progress reduces the expenditures of the means of
production per unit of consumer goods. and hence,it would be easy to draw

a formally logical conclusion to the effect that the preferential develop-
ment of subdivision 1. is not mandatory during the epoch of the scientific
and technological revolution. But it has to be considered that the decrease
in the means of production per unit of consumer goods occurs with an even
greater decrease in expenditures of live labor. In the decreasing assresate
expenditures the share of past labor increases. and this means nothing other
than the preferential development of the production of the means of produc-
tion which is caused by the changing relationship between the expenditures
of live and past labor; that is, precisely by a growth in the organic and
technical structure of production.

Is it possible to have cases when a growth in the technical structure of
production dose not entail the preferential development of subdivision 1?
Hypotheticslly, it can be assumed that with a very substantial increase in
the surplus product norm the growth of the organic structure will not
influence a nore rapid development of subdivision 1. Thus. with a growth
of reproduction when the surplus product norm increases by three times the
output of subdivisions 1 and 11 will remain unchanged. But this example
is far from life. A tripling of the surplus product norm during any planning
period is impossible under modern conditions. Actually. during the years
1959-1975 the output of subdivision 1 increased by 227 percent. while that
of subdivision [1 increased by 174 percent. The surplus product norm
increased by 11 percent, while the technical structure of production
increased by 3.2 times. In order to have equal development rates for both
subdivisions with the same technical structure it would be necessary to

16
FOR OFFICIAL use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increase the aurplua product by two tines, which. of courae, ia unrealistic.

l.

2.

3.

b.

Se
6.

7O

8.

FOOTNOTES

N. h. Vozneaenekiy. "The Military Economy of the USSR during the Period
of the Fatherland “hr." 0112, 1957, p. 45.

See the following diagram. Actual data on reproduction in the USSR
during 1959-1975 in also cited.

V. D. Kalayev. "Developed Socialian: Ratea and Quality of Scone-1c
Growth," lzdetel'etvo "Myal'". 1977. p. 6.

V. Mayer. "Standard of Living of the Population of the USSR,"
Izdatel'atvo "Hyel'." 1977. p. 237.

K. Marx and P. Engeln. "works," Vol. 23. p. 636.
V. I. Lenin. "Complete Horka," Vol. 1, p. 80.

B. P. Gorbunov, "The Structure and Efficiency of Social Production."
lzdatel'atvo "Hyal'." 1976, pp. 132, 145, and othera.

V. A. Hedvedev, "Socialiat Reproduction and Structural Change. in the
Economy," Izdatel'atvo "Bkononike," 1973. p. 79.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda", "Voproay akonoaiki", 1979

2959

050:

1820

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAPITAL INVESTMENT EFFICIENCY IN NOﬂPRODUCTION SECTOR DISCUSSED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No L Jan 79 pp 47-58

[Article by Academician T. Khachapurov: "The Effectiveness of Capital
Investments in the Non-production Sector")

[Text] During the last two decades a theory of the economic efficiency
of capital investments in the economy as a component part of the

theory of socialist reproduction has been basically worked out and

has received a wide practical application. The theoretical proposi-
tions which have been published and the practical recommendations
which follow from them are applicable to evaluating theefficiency of
capital investments in the branches of material production. As for

the non-production sphere. in certain methodological documents it is
recommended that the efficiency of capital investments be determined

on the basis of the same principles as in the production sphere.
however, this applies only to those elements of the non-production
sphere which operate on the basis of cost accounting (urban transport,
municipal services, and others). But for most of the branches of

the non-production sphere methodological instructions on determining
capital investment efficiency have not even been worked out. This is

a serious gap in economic theory and practice. It is not only that

20 and more percent of our total capital investments (excluding invest-
ments in the construction of municipal enterprises) are assigned to

the non-production sphere. but also that its importance has been
increasing at the stage of developed socialise.

The growth of production is the condition for an increase in consumption
in a sense for the sake of which the non-production sphere and also
all of material production as a whole exists. It is stated in the
Constitution of the USSR: "The supreme goal of social production under
socialism is the fuller satisfaction of the growing material and
spiritual needs of the people" (Article 15). A rise in the material

and cultural levels of the people is the chief task of the 10th Five—
Year Plan. This is discussed in the "Basic Directions for the Development
of the Economy of the USSR for 1976-1978" which were adopted by the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

25th Congress of the CPSU. The basis for this rise is the dynamic and
proportional development of production which creates the possibility for
satisfying the needs of Soviet people and itself gives rise to ever

new needs. 0n the one hand, increased needs stimulate the development
of production. The decisive element in the interactions between
production and consumption is production - the condition for the

vital functioning of socialist society and the source of its development.
0n the other hand. an increase in needs and their satisfaction is of
great importance not only as stimuli for the development of production,
but also as factors in raising the level of social development and in
improving socialist production relations.

Until recently economists and practical workers devoted little attention
to the study of needs, consumption. and supply and demand. In economic
planning the resource approach was primarily used in making up plans.
The problems of consumption -- not only final and personal consumption.
but also production consumption - were not studied sufficiently. All
of this can hardly be regarded as justified. In an analysis it is
essential to show the diverse character of needs which influences the
measurement of the expenditures connected with their satisfaction and

of the effect which is obtained. This does not concern only the desire-
bility of an evaluation of the economic efficiency of such expenditures
with methods which are usually used in determining it in the branches

of material production. It is also useful to attempt to determine the
amount of social effectiveness which does not lend itself to measurement
by cost indicators.

works directly devoted to the problems of the efficiency of capital
investments in the non-production sphere have already been published
in our literature, including in our periodical.1 In some of them the
methodological problems of determining the efficiency of the non-
production sphere are treated from correct positions. One must, for
example. agree with B. Vaynshteyn that it is not possible to reduce
the entire effect of the non-production sphere to an economic effect
expressed in rubles. In a number of cases calculations of this kind
produce extremely unconvincing results.

As analysis shows. it is possible with sufficient accuracy to determine
expenditures for the satisfaction of individual types of needs -- both
capital and current needs. However. both the total amount of the
expenditures and their distribution for capital and current needs are
very diverse. For the satisfaction of certain kinds of needs of
decisive importance is not so much the amount of expenditures as the
creative abilities of those who are the creators of the consumed effect
-- a scholar, a teacher, an artist, a painter. In evaluating the
efficiency of these expenditures one has to take account not only of

19
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the quantitative magnitude of what has been created and designated for
consumption, but also of the quality which is obtained in the process
of the consumption of the results.

Determining an effect which can be measured against expenditures is
much more difficult than determining expenditures. This effect can
only partially be expressed in cost indicators. For this reason, in
the calculations use has to be made of physical indicators, consumption
norms which are attained with given expenditures, a decrease in time
expenditures by the consumer, and so forth.

These indicators of social effect have to be taken into consideration
when the final result of a measure is determined. However, attempts

to give a cost evaluation of a social effect in order to total it up
with the cost indicators of the effect frequently have an artificial
character. In this connection, in certain cases it is useful to
determine the indirect damage which is prevented when a given measure
is carried out. Yor example, the effect of the fight against water
pollution consists not only in providing enterprises and the population
with the clean water they need, but also in preventing the destruction
of fish which can be expressed by the cost indicators of fishing output.

In analyzing the efficiency of capital investments in the non-produc-
tion sphere we shall not consider the satisfaction of material needs

for various consumer goods in their physical form (for example, for
foods, clothing, furniture, and so forth). The satisfaction of these
needs depends directly upon the amounts of production and the delivery
to consumers of the corresponding products, and also upon their quality
and price. All of these‘questions belong to an analysis of the material
production sphere; the specific nature of services does not manifest
itself here, and, for this reason, these questions can not be the object
of this study.

Let us begin our examination of the efficiency of capital investments

in the non-production sphere with housing. housing construction demands
very substantial investments. During the six post-war five-year plans
and the three years of the 10th Five-Year Plan almost 300 billion rubles
have been invested in housing construction and this comprises 17 per-
cent of the total capital investments during those years. As a result,
2,693,400,000 square meters of total (useful) living space has been
commissioned: This represents 56,200,000 apartments in which 235 million
people, that is, 90 percent of the country's population has been
housed.2 Sixty-three percent of the living space has been commissioned
in cities, and 37 percent in rural areas. As a result of construction,
the urban housing fund has increased compared to 1965 by approximately -
five times and in 1977 came to 2,001,000,000 square meters.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A large part of the housing fund. especially in the cities. has been
built with state resources and provided to citizens free of charge.
Around eight percent of conmissioned housing space is accounted for
by housing construction cooperatives; aoreovsr, the state allocates
the cooperatives substantial credit. The construction of houses on
the basis of personal resources of workers and employees and with the

participation of state credit also occurs and is performed primarily
in the cities.

"hat is the economic effectiveness of the housing construction which
is_perforned by the state? First of all, it can not be determined
solely on the basis of the value of housing construction output. Using
this method, the problem could be solved not for the effectiveness of
construction itself, but for the effectiveness of new equipment which
is used in construction, or the effectiveness of new construction
methods. For example. capital investments in new naterials, in the
mechanization of construction, and so forth, make it possible to
economize expenditures or to increase the amount of construction.
This effect in relation to the investments which gave rise to it
determines effectiveness. In addition, it is necessary to know if
there is a change in the quality of housing as a result of the use of
new equipment.

An analysis of the data for recent years shows that housing is
nproving. As a consequence of this, first. the value of one square
meter of housing space has been increasing from year to year, and,
secondly, the average amount of useful apartment space has been
increasing. This is witnessed by the following figures:

-—-——-————————————__

Periods and Years Average Cost of One Average pseful

Square Meter of Space per Apart-
8 see Rubles - ment s . meters

Fifth Five-Year Plan 76 39.7

Sixth Five-Year Plan 83 d2.0

Seventh Five-Year Plan 92 42.5

Eighth Five-Year Plan 115 45.8

Ninth Five-Year Plan 136 68.5

1975 168 b9.3

1976 155 50.3

1977 156 51.1

——————_—___—

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As we see, the average value of one square meter of space during the
time being considered doubled, while the average useful apartment
space increased by 28.7 percent. This means that the quality of
housing has improved, but the state has not obtained any "commercial"
advantage from this. Nevertheless, it regards it as a highly impor-
tant economic task to continue to improve the quality of residential
houses and to provide more and more conveniences to the people who
move into them. Industry which supplies construction materials,
piping, and housing construction equipment has a considerable role
in the accomplishment of this task.

In improving the quality of housing and the housing conditions of
the population, we increase the social effectiveness of housing con-
struction, those standards by which clients and contractors and the

suppliers of materials and equipment have to guide themselves. Housing
is one of the most important consumption articles. Its value, like
that of other types of output, is determined by the socially necessary
labor expenditures. The distinctive feature of this type of output is
in the fact that it is not sold, but distributed in accordance with
the right to housing written into our Constitution. The effect of
capital investments in housing construction consists in raising the
standard of living of Soviet people and improving their material and
cultural wellbeing. There is also an economic effect, but an indirect
one which consists in the fact that an improvenent in housing condi-
tions, as, in general, an improvement of the material wellbeing of

the workers, inevitably influences a rise in labor productivity and,
this means, the volume of output. The extent to which a rise in
.labor productivity is determined by an improvement of housing condi-
tions can only be judged approximately, on the basis of the data in
questionnaires. It appears that this influence is diverse depending
upon the degree to which the needs for housing are satisfied. For
example, moving from a room in an old house without conveniences into
a modern well-equipped apartment will have a greater influence on
increasing labor productivity than if this same worker were to move
from one apartment with all conveniences into another, similar one,
but with more space. These diverse influences of housing can be
disclosed by questionnaires.

Such is the situation with capital investments. As for reducing current
expenditures for housing repairs and maintenance, capital investments
cannot reimburse themselves on this basis. Only in the capitalist
countries do house owners obtain profits from rents. In our country
rent is very low and its level has been stable for a number of decades.
There can be no question of profits: Rent for housing and municipal
services covers no more than one-third of the expenditures for the
operation and repair of current housing.3 There are even greater

22
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expenditures for capital repairs: They cospriae around 60 percent
of the annual capital invest-ants in state and cooperative construc-
tion in the cities and workers' settlesents. An increase in thase
expenditures can be liaited through organizational and technical
aessures. They include the steps already being taken to create a
systes of large specialized organizations for the technical servicing
and current repairing of residential houses and their equip-ant
(elevators. heating systems, the nechanizstion and autoaation of
operations processes) and others.

The task now is to further develop housing construction in order to
provide the population with even sore housing apace. During the years
of the post-war five-year plans we were able to satisfy the urgent
needs of the population for housing. to bring per-person housing space
close to the hygienic norm. and to free people fro. the inconveniences
of conunal apart-ants. The issue today is to provide a separate roo-
for every family seaber. to further increase useful space per person.
and to bring it to 18-20 square tasters in the cities (instead of the
l2.2 square meters at the present tile). This social effect which is
aeasured in physical indicators will also increase the econolic effect
°rhich is created by providing houaing. At the sane time. there are
important tasks in reducing the coat of construction. but not through
lowering its quality. but through a better organization of the labor
of construction workers. through its aachsnisation. and through a
thrifty attitude towards asterisla. The absolute effect of the con-
struction of residential buildings is the aaount of housing space of
a given normal quality which has been co-issioned on schedule. and
the relative effect -- the difference in the cost of construction per
unit of space at a given quality level.

heads for domestic services are another type of needs by the population
which are satisfied through the non-production sphere. This includes
needs for footwear and clothing repairs. their individual mufactura.
repairs of various household Iachines and instruasnts, furniture repairs
and production. dry cleaning and dyeing. laundering. apart-ant repairs.
public bath services. barber-shops. and photography. The doustic
services branch is developing rapidly. Their volume in 1977 was 1.9
tines greater than 1970 and coaprise 6.3 billion rubles, including

2.2 billion rubles —- clothing and footwear repairs and unufacture.

l.7 billion rubles .. repairs of dolestic Iachinery and instrulents,
and .6 billion rubles -- hair cutting.

Doaestic services for the population belong to the sphere ﬁf aaterisl
services and in their character are in any respects similar to the
production of consumer goods. In order to provide services to the
population it is necessary to have capital investaents for prenises.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run ”FFICIAL UﬁL UNLY

equipment. and inventory. and in certain cases circulating capital

(for materials) is needed and also an increase in the wage fund. The
construction of spec=a1 buildings for domestic services is needed
chiefly in building Houses of Domestic Services. Domestic SerV‘ceo
Combines, Dry Cleaning and Dyeing Factories. and others. The equipment
of domestic services enterprises in frequently comprised of obsolete
equipment which has been passed on from industrial enterprises.
Domestic services enterprises receive little modern. new equipment

of high productivity.

All of this leads to the effect that capital investments domestic
services enterprises are small compared to the branches of industry
which produce consumer goods. The total volume of capital investments
in domestic services in 1977 was 3.6 times smaller than the investments
in light industry. and the capital-output ratio came to around .6 rubles
per one ruble of domestic services. The construction periods for
domestic services enterprises are also small: they come to around one
year. On the whole. the service sphere is economically effective;

its profits in certain years come to 9-10 percent.

But the effect of the sphere of services cannot be characterized solely
by the profits indicator. its social effect consists in the fact that
the work of this sphere frees time for the population. frees it from
household work. and raises its standard of living. Domestic services
are not always profitable: in small cities and villages they produce
losses. but for considerations of social effectiveness the network of
domestic services enterprises in the village and in small cities is
continuing to develop.

The quality of services -- the lack of lines. efficient work by recep-
tion points. the filling of orders on time - is of great importance
for increasing social effectiveness. All of this places serious taeke
before the workers of domestic enterprises. Their total number in
1975 was 2.5 million people. The success of services depends to a
large extent upon the qualifications of the employees which for a
number of jobs has to be rather high and upon the system of material
stimulation. in determining the effectiveness of domestic services
with regard not only to the econcaic but also to the social effect

it would be useful to develop and introduce coefficients for the
evaluation of the quality of services on the basis of the time savings
which are obtained by a consumer of these services. For the calcula-
tions one could conventionally equate the value of every man-hour of
this savings to .S of the value of a man-hour of work time. The
average monthly wages of a worker and employee in the economy, including
payments and benefits from the social consumption fund, came to 212
rubles in 1977. or 1.3 rubles an hour; if one calculates wages to

2%
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

include the surplus product with a ratio of 1:1. then it was 310 rubles.
or 1.9 rubles per hour. This indirect effect should not be totaled up
with the direct effect -- it should be calculated "outside the balance."

To a large extent the quality of doeeatic eervices depends not only
upon the work of donestic services enterprises theeeelves and of their
personnel. but also upon the punctual delivery by industry of the
spare parts. eateriale. and equip-ant they need. Unfortunately. sole-
tines the perfor-ance of these deliveries is regarded as a secondary
task of industries. The quality of services suffers froe this. orders
are not filled in tine. end refusals to perfora necessary repairs and
other types of services are possible. The social effect of the service
sphere is thereby lowered. and this lowering has to be seen as being
the fault of industry.

Materiel neede include the services of passenger transportation. He
are not concerning ourselves here with the controversial question of
whether general use passenger transportation belongs to the sphere of
naterial services. or directly to the sphere of laterial production.
Quite a few different opinions have been expressed on this point in
the literature. The Central Statistical Adninistretion USSR, for
example. classifies neither passenger transportation nor general use
coenunications in netsrisl production. which. in our opinion. is
incorrect. However. everybody agrees that the effect of transportation
-- moving. a change in location - is an entirely neteriel effect
which requires specific expenditures of live and past labor. Hence.
the possibility of calculating the econonic efficiency of capital
investments in passenger transportation. This efficiency can be
calculated as it is for other enterprises by coepering cepitel invest-
ments with the Output which is obtained (absolute efficiency). or

by conpering the difference in capital invest-eats for variants with
the difference in cost of output (relative efficiency). Cost here

is for-ed. as at other production enterprises. fro. wages. fuel.
energy. and neteriale expenditures. and depreciation. All of these
calculations are nore siaple to perforn for enterprises which are
engaged solely in passenger hauls. At railroads and other types of
general use transportation the nethode of applying both current
expenditures end cepitel invest-eats to freight and passenger hauls
have been used successfully for a long tile already.

The traditional calculations of efficiency -- based on coepering
cepitel investeente and current expenditures - will fer fron always
yield a conplete picture concerning the expediency of carrying out
various transportation develop-eat neaeures. Let us take as an
exalple the subway. The Moscow subway carries 2.1 billion passengers
a year (1977 data). With a fee of five hopecks per ride the gross
receipts now cone to approximately 100 nillion rubles a year. Mean-
while. at current prices the capital invest-eats in the Moscow subway

25
roe orncuu. use ONLY
FUR 0H ICIAI. l' -l‘2 ONLY

system are expressed in many billions of rubles (a kilometer of shallow
line is 3.5 times more expensive than a surface line and half the cost
of a deep line). and if the decision on building the subway had been
based on the capital investment reimbursement period through net
profits. it would not haVe been built at all.

But the effectiveness of developing the subway is determined not so
much by how much can be obtained from it in net profits. but by its
social effect -- an improvement of the living conditions of people.
It is also this which determines the reaarkable appearance of the
stations which is characteristic for the Soviet subway not only in
Moscow. but in other cities also. The subway also yields a substan-
tial indirect economic effect in that it saves people time. If the
time economy is taken to be only 30 minutes per trip (in fact. the
economy is much greater if one considers what transportation diffi-
culties there might be in a city of 8 million without a subway) and
the cost of a man-haur is taken as one ruble, the indirect economic
effect of the subway would be expressed in a figure that is ten times
greater than its gross receipts.

Proceeding from the above-cited considerations, the efficiency of
increasing the speeds of passenger hauls can also be calculated. This
increase demands an increase in direct expenditures for the hauls.
since with higher speeds more fuel. energy. and materials are expended
and the wear and tear on the rolling stock and lines is increased.
Correspondingly there has to be an increase not only in the cost of
the hauls. but also in their price. and this means in the total income
of transportation enterprises also. which may justify the required
capital investments. But. in addition. account has to be taken of

the indirect effect which is to a large extent a social one -- an
economy of trip time which makes it possible to increase production
tine and free tine. Based on the cost of a man-hour of work and

free tine, the cost equivalent of the economized aaouat of man-hours
has to be taken account of in a special manner and conpared with the
direct effect from the speeding up of the hauls. This kind of calcu-
lation can be performed both for an acceleration of hauls on a given
type of transportation and for a shift from one type of transportation
to another. In all of these cases one must refrain fro. totaling up
the direct effect with the computed conventional indirect effect.

But it is essential to know the magnitude of the indirect effect and
to consider it in evaluating a variant for speeding up hauls.

One also has to take account here of another effect from the speeding
up of passenger hauls and from improving their quality - a decrease
in so-called transportation weariness as a consequence of shortening
the tine spent enroute, or increasing conveniences. As surveys have
shown. transportation weariness which occurs during a trip in an over-
crowded car has an effect on labor productivity. If the degree of the

26
ton orncw. use omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

decrease in this uearlness is known, this eeans that it is possible

to calculate its negative influence on econoeic indicators and to
define the advantages which are achieved as a result of the coeplsta

or partial elieination of this hateful influence. Dseaga froe trans-
portation weariness soeetiees occurs as a result of poor operations by
transportation. legging in repairing transportation equipeent. the
failure of buses to cone out onto the line. and so forth. The daeage
resulting free it in these cases has to be attributed to transportation
enterprises and reflected in their work indicators.

Special note has to be taken of the effect of ensuring the safety of
passengers. A person's life cannot be evaluated in cost indicators.

The eexieue safety of passengers is an indispensible condition of the
effectiveness of transportation. and it has to be ensured at practi-
cally any cost. The nethods of estieeting the required level of

safety which exist in capitalist countries and are based on the aeounts
of insurance payeents for injury or death froe transportation accidents
are unacceptable for the socialist systee.

Let us now sxsnine the problae of evaluating the efficiency of the
expenditures for education. Here. perhaps to a greater extent than
in any other sphere it is ieportsnt to determine the social effect.
Universal educaticn, the eastery of knowledge by the great easses.
and the creation of all of the necessary conditions for the advance-
nent of talent -- this is an enoreous advantage of socialise. The
right of citizens of USSR to free education of all kinds is recorded
in the Constitution of the 058R. This right is made wide use of by
the people. An end has been put to illiteracy - the lot of the
eajority of the people before the revolution. Universal eandatory
secondary education has been effected, and vocational-technical.
secondary specialized. and higher education have been widely developed.
Training is carried out at production. All of these features are
esgnificant gains of socialise. The high social effectiveness which
is characteristic of socialist society eanifests itself in the educa-
tion of the people, the comprehensive developeent of the individual,
and in satisfying the thirst for knowledge.

But it is not only a letter of social and cultural progress: the
comprehensive training of cadres is also of great econoeic importance.
The educational systea creates the lost valuable eleaent of the
productive forces -- qualified cadres who are capable of running
eodern enterprises with their increasingly coeplex iepleeents of
production, of creating these iepleeents and of organizing relations
between people which correspond to developed socialise.

The expenditures for education as a whole and for its individual types
of cadre training can be detereined quite accurately. In 1940 they

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

came to 2 billion rubles. in 1965 they had increased to 14 billion
rubles. and in 1977 to 28.3 billion rubles. In 1977 capital investments
from the state budget for science and education reached 1.9 billion
rubles.“ During individual periods construction for educational purposes
was even greater. in Moscow alone before and after the war hundreds of
school buildings and the buildings of Moscow University and a number

of institutes and educational institutions were built. In the country
as a whole. from 1918 through 1977, 114.000 schools for 61 million
students were put into operation. During the years 1971-1975. 6.2
million square meters of space were put into operation in higher and
secondary specialized educational institutions.

Not only the total amount of expenditures is known. but also the
expenditures for training cadres in individual specialties and with
individual qualifications. According to the data of state statistics.
the state's expenditures per student comes to 180 rubles a year in
general educational schools. 650 rubles a year in secoadary specialized
institutions. and more than 1.000 rubles a year in higher educational
institutions.5 This means that training in the average 10-year

school costs 1800 tables, in the tekhnikum (three years) -- 2.000
rubles, and in a higher educational institution -- from 4,000 to

6,000 rubles. There are smaller expenditures in the humanitarian VUZea
and greater ones in the technical and medical VUZes.

Thus. educational expenditures can be calculated more or less accurately.
in is much more difficult to determine the effect. The social effect

of education consists in the following. Society has planned to provide
a definite educational level for the popular masses and a definite

level of training as a whole and of training in concrete specialties.
Time and expenditures are required to achieve these goals. These
expenditures can be greater or lesser depending upon the physical

plant and personnel provided for the needs of education, but with

high quality absolutely ensured. It is necessary to verify has all

of this has been done.

It is also important here to evaluate the economic effect. It is
obvious that it should have an effect upon a rise in labor productivity.
an increase in the amount of output and an improvement of its quality,
and a rise in the technical level of production. All of these results
are not achieved immediately. but with the passage of sufficient time
to obtain a secondary or higher education and also to accueulate

work experience and advanced training.

It has already been suggested in published articles that the influence
of a worker's skills on the level of labor productivity be defined.

it was assumed here that the difficulty of the work performed depends
upon the education which has been obtained (number of years of study).

28
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however. the coefficiente which are at the baee of euch a calculation
(length of etudiee) can hardly be acknowledged ee providing a correct
characterization of the level of qualificatione.

Celculationa of the proportional wagee of each category of workera,
keeping in mind that in the eetabliehnent of wage levele the qualifi-
catione of the workere are the baeie. correepond aore cloeely to the
adopted econoaic aethode. Given an equal inteneity. the reault of
coaplex and ekilled labor ehould be output of higher quality and of
greater quentitiee. It ie already poeeible on thie baeie to draw con-
clueione about the efficiency of ekilled labor and. thereby. about

the effectiveneee of education. Thie aeane that if, for exaaple. the
wegee of e ekilled worker ie 1.5 tiaee greater than the wegee of an
unekilled worker. and the wagee of an engineer ie 1.5 tiaee greater
then thoee of the ekilled worker. then the effect which ie obtained
froa their training can be taken in each caee to be 1.5 tiaee greater:
that ie. proportional to their labor expendituree which are expreeeed
in wagee. Expendituree of live labor in output coeta ere aleo deter-
ained in accordance with thin. The differencee in the effecte of the
labor of workers with dieaiailer qualificatione can be taken as a
conventional “education rent." as the differentiated effect which is
obtained froa their labor. The total effect of the education of each
worker can be determined by aeane of dividing thie "rent” by an
effectivenoee nora:

p
£9 —- in

This effect. of course. in different fro. the coat of training which
in coaputed on the baeie of expenditurea, and such principlea of the
calculation of effectiveneea ehould be regarded ae only one of the
possible propoeale for evaluating it.

An increeae in the eociel effectiveneee of education ie aleo proeoted
by auch characteriatite of the organization of labor which affect

its productivity ee the creative character of labor end the eliaine-
tion of monotony. aetiafection with one’e work. an improvement of
working conditione and greater eefety, the elinination of induetrial
injuries. help in the eelection of occupatione and typee of work, and
eo forth. We do not have the poeeibility of examining theee charac-
terietice of work in eore detail here, but we would like to note

that in aoet caaee. in addition to the eocial effect. account ehould
aleo be taken of their econoaic effect through a riee in labor produc-
tivity.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm OFFICIAL llllll ONLY

In its essence. the effectiveness of ucience is close to the effective-
ness of education. although the methodsof calculating it are very
different. Karl Marx's statement about the transformation of science
into a direct productive force is well known. This applies in full
measure to the applied branch sciences which directly service produc-
tion. Therefore, the effectiveness of applied scientific research
should be calculated on the basis of the sane methods as the effective-
ness of planning and other production operations. The methods of
determining the effectiveness of applied scientific research were
developed in "The Basic Methodological Propositions on Determining

the Economic Effectiveness of Scientific Research "ark." In

accordance with these propositions. we establish the field of its
application (applied research), a basis for comparison (new and
replaced equipment), economic potential (with full introduction).

and tne division of expenditures and effect into types of work through-
out the entire ”science-planning-experimontins-production" chain.
Capital investments and costs were distinguished within total expen-
ditures, and then the relationship of the obtained effect to expendi-
tures was calculated.

The situation is different in determining the effectiveness of basic
research. First, it is by no means always possible to judge its future
practical result. not to mention at least an approximate calculation
of the relationship of effect to expenditures. Sometimes even the
creators of Very important scientific discoveries do not have a clear
idea of the possibilities for their direct application in practice.
Secondly. the effect of the achievmnts of the funds-ental sciences
-- that is. of scientific discoveries -- is not limited to an economic
effect and is supplemented. as a rule. by a social effect, opening up
for human society ever new prospects for mastering the secrets of
nature and helping to perfect man himself.

However. it should he noted that the social effect of the development
of science may not only he a positive one (a rise in the standard of
living. an improveaent of medical services, an improvement of working
conditions -- factors which also have an economic significance). Along
with this social effect of the development of science there may also

be a negative effect consisting in air or water pollution, or in a
deterioration of recreation conditions. If one were to speak about

the development of science in modern capitalist society which is

rent by contradictions. the development of the means of mass destruc-
tion are a great threat for mankind.

As for the methods of calculating the effectiveness of science as a
whole. this kind of calculation is possible through a computation of
labor productivity. Effectiveness is obtained from the expression

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_ sown-A.
‘9 '- Of ﬁnk

where [in is the annual increase in the annual income; t -- is the
numerical value of the proportion of this increase which depends upon
a rise in labor productivity; n - is the numerical value of the
proportion of the rise in labor productivity which depends upon
scientific achievements; C - is the annual expenditures for science;
K -- are the capital investments in the development of science; Eh --
is the normed coefficient of effectiveness. 0n the basis of this.
the reimbursement pgriod of the expenditures for science comes to
four to five years.

The above-examined partial indicators of the effectiveness of scien-
tific research work are indicators of absolute effectiveness. Along
with this. it is entirely possible to make use of relative effective-
ness calculations. This is required in cases when from several possible
variants of scientific research work it is necessary to select the most
effective one which ensures the best correlatioas between expenditures
and results. The calculations for a relative effectiveness variant may
be performed in accordance with the recommendations of the Standard
Methodology for determining the effectiveness of capital investments and
new equipment in the USSR economy in accordance with the method of
adduced expenditures.

it is very unlikely that the effect.veness of a rise in the level of
culture or art lends itself to any kind of accurate measure-ant.
however. the development of all types of art is of enormous social
importance in that it influences the education of the man of communist
society and his perfection. Expenditures for the development of
culture and art increase as the level of the development of production
and the level of national income rise. These expenditures are justi-
fied by their social effect.

Health care is a component part of the non-production sphere. The
social effect here manifests itself in the fact that it is directed
toward improving the health of people. decreasing the amount of time
lost from active life due to illness, improving overall health
conditions and. as a result of this. prolonging people's lives. All
of this requires definite expenditures.

in 1977 expenditures for health care (including physical culture) case
to 16 billion rubles in our country; they had increased by two times
compared to 1965. Hithin the 1977 expenditures 12.5 billion rubles
had been allocated from the state budget. including 703 million rubles

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR \IFFICIAI. USE ONLY

in capital invest-eats: The corresponding figures in 1970 were 9.3
billion rubles and 599 million rubles. As a result of these expendi-
tures great successes have been achieved in creating a health care
base and decreasing illness.

in 1977 there were 900,000 doctors or all specializations in the USSR.
or 35 per 10.000 inhabitants. Many first class hospitals equipped with
the latest equipment have been built. The number of sanitoriums and
rest homes increased by 3.5 percent compared with 1939 and by 35 percent
compared with 1970. The USSR is in first place in the world for the
number of its doctors. and occupies one of the leading places for the
number of its hospital beds. As a result of the successes of health
care there has been a sharp decrease in infectious diseases. Mortality
from diseases of the circulatory organs. malignant growths. diseases

of the digestive organs. and others is lower in the USSR than in the
United States, England, and the Federal Republic of Germany.

The above data testifies to the great social effect of the development
of health care. A decrease in sickness makes it possible for the
workers to make fuller use of the physical and intellectual goods of
life and ensures them a prolonged active life and a prolonged life

in general. The social effect from new medicines. means of treatment,
and medical equipment is exceptionally great. Thanks to the discoveries
of E. Jenner. L. Pasteur. I. Hechnikov. H. Roentgen, A. Fleming, and
J. Salk a countless number of people have had their lives saved or
prolonged. It is possible to estimate the social effectiveness, but
it is impossible to express it in cost indicators. The social effect
resulting from the improved quality of medical services and also from
treatment and rest in sanitoriums and rest homes can be determined
through special studies. It has to be considered that the improved
health of people and the prolonging of their lives is influenced not
only by an improvement of health care. but also by the way of life and
a rise in the material and cultural levels of people. To discover the
measure of this influence requires special study.

Along with the social achievements in the field of health care. the
economic effect of its development also has to be determined. There
is a decrease in failures to appear for work due to illness, the
amount of time worked increases and along with it the production of
output and labor productivity increase. All of this can be accurately
calculated with the data of the existing statistics.

however. the organization of health care has to be further improved.
The level of comfort in hospitals has to be elevated, more space per
bed has to be provided, meals have to be improved. and better care has
to be ensured. These measures have to be carried out in the very

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system of health care. At the same time. it is essential that the
medical and pharmaceutical industries increase the production and
improve the quality of the medical equipment and medicines. above all
the scarcest items, which they provide to health care agencies. The
accomplishment of these tasks requires a further increase in expendi-
tures both in the health care system and in the industry which produces
the output it needs.

As in the health care system. there is a substantial social effect

from physical culture and sports and also from tourism. Methodologies
for determining the effectiveness of expenditures in these branches ofthe
non-production sphere have been developed on the basis of the fundamental
propositions of the theory of efficiency and they have received a
practical application.

The distribution sphere in which trade and public catering can be
included merit especial consideration. In a number of published works
on this problem one can encounter assertions that the effect of capital
investments is discovered by comparing them with the turnover of a
trade enterprise: The greaterthe turnover per ruble of investments,
the greater the effectiveness. It is hardly possible to agree with
this way of framing the matter. The final result of trade is not
turnover by itself, and especially, not the profits of a trade enter-
prise, but the delivery of goods to the consumer with the greatest
convenience for him. It is not only necessary for a good to be sold

to a consumer, but also for the consumer not to less time in searching
for a necessary good and in standing on lines. Thus. in evaluating
the effectiveness of trade it is important to know its social effect
which consists in satisfying the needs of the people and in shortening
the time required for a purchase and in making more free time available
to the consumer. The economy of time in these cases can be calculated
physically on the basis of the number of man-hours. and. if necessary,
evaluated in rubles by using the above—cited calculations of the cost
of a man-hour of free time.

The problems of determining the effectivenest of capital investments
in municipal services which belong to the sphere of eervices but have
the features of material production have remained outside of our
analysis. The calculation of the effectiveness of capital investments
here does not differ from the analogous calculation in the production
sphere. Nor have we touched upon the methods of calculating the
effectiveness of capital investments in the field of ecology which
require an independent study.

The above-cited considerations show that it is time to move to a deter-
mination of the social effectiveness of capital investments. The

33
roe orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development of the methodology of this kind of calculation has to be
completed and handed over to planning in econonic agencies: This
will make it possible to evaluate the social and econonic results of
the develop-eat of the non-production sphere on a single scientific
basis.

 

1.

2.

3.
4.
S.
6.

FOOTNOTES

Ye. Voronine. "The Effectiveness of Social Expenditures on Educa-
tion." VOPROSY EKONWIKI, No. ll. 1973; B. Veynshteyn. "0n
Evaluating the Social Results of Scientific and Technological
Progress," VOPROSY momma. No. 2, 1976; E. Gorhunov. "The
Effectiveness of the Sphere of Domestic Services," VOPROSY
EKONOHIKI, No. 7. 1976; V. Konerov. "The Sphere of Services and
the Effectiveness of Social Production," VOPROSY EKOWIKI, No.
2. 1975; A. Vitin, "The Effectiveness of Non-Production Capital
Investnents," VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No. 7, 1978.

"USSR Econony in 1977." Izdstel'stvo "Statistika." 1978; pp. 352-
353, 615. 412. 413; "USSR Econony in 1970." Izdstel'stvo "Stetistike."
1971. p. 566.

"USSR Econony in 1971." Izdetel'stvo "Statistika." 1978, p. 1.15.

Ibid. p. 562.

Ibid. p. 408. note.

"Soviet-Amricen Sylposiun of Economists," Indetel'etvo "Progress,"
1978. p. 18.

COPYRIGHT: lzdetel'stvo "Pravda". "Voproey ekoaoniki", 1979

2959

C80:

1820

3k
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inasmuch CAPITAL rumma- coupm mm
Moscow vomosr momma in Russian so 1, Jan 79 pp 59-69

[Article by V. Krasovskiy: "The Investment Complex: Planning and Unused
Potential"]

[Text] The economic system of advanced socialist society is characterized
by the existence of a powerful group of sectors and industries in Depart-
ment I producing the means of labor for shaping the country's fixed capital
and figuring as the basis of socialist expanded reproduction. The intersec-
tor capital investment complex, that is, the complex of sectors and indus-
tries creating products that will become fixed capital, is the most dynamic
part of Department I of the econow. whose special role was emphasized by
V. I. Lenin when he was analyzing expanded reproduction as a whole. An ad-
vanced intersector capital investment complex makes it possible to ensure
stable economic growth rates. to adopt technical progress. and to carry out
.large-scals socioeconomic programs.

But sufficient use is not being made of the broad opportunities of the in-
tersector capital investment complex. At the November (1975) Plenum of the
CC CPS!) L. I. Brezhnev stressed that the state of affairs in capital con-
struction is slow to improve. It was also noted that a certain lag of ma-
chinebuilding behind the needs of the economy has begun to take shape.

Under present-dry conditions there are new approaches to the planning of the
intersector capital investment complex, to the mobilization of its unused
potential and to more intensified use of its potential.

The Intersector Capital Investment Complex, Its Makeup, Indicators and Ori-
entation Tovard End Product

There are both broad and narrow approaches in defining the makeup of the in-
tersector capital investment complex. The more restricted makeup of the
complex is limited to the construction and building materials industries,
but machinebuilding is excluded. Yet the manufacture of the end product of
sectors and industries producing fixed capital in the form of finished prod-
ects requires not only the passive part of fixed capital in the form of

35
FOR OFFICIAL us: can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

buildings and installations. but also the most active part—manufacturing.
transport and other equipment, and that is the product or machinebuilding
enterprises. 'Ihe expanded treatment of the complex sees unity in the inter-
sector capital investment complex on the basis of resources and includes the
production of materials used in construction. including nonterrous and fer-
rous metallurgy, as well as a number oi groupings in the chemical industry
(for example, production or synthetic resins. plastics and products made
from them). The industries and sectors in the investment complex included
in the expanded view supposedly accomplishes more enclosed and internal
turnover or pivsical resources. But this kind of ”vertical" structure or
the investment complex would seem to violate the nomenclature for complexes
which has already developed and in which distinction is now made for the
ﬁnal and power complex, the complex of natural and chemical raw materials.
etc. He should also take into account that the principal tasks or the in-
vestment complex include the production on schedule or a high-quality end
product of construction in the form of technically advanced fixed capital,
which puts the emphasis rather on the goal than on the orientation toward
resources. Moreover. in the broad treatment considerable double counting
of the output 01‘ the raw materials industries is inevitable because they
participate simultaneously in many complexes. In shaping the makeup of the
large intersector complex we must do everything to avoid double counting.
such as when the raw materials industries in the mel and power complex in-
clude in their makeup construction organisations for building mines. quar-
ries, and so on, while on the other hand the investment complex ubraces the
mining of ore and the production of coke. For complexes shaped by their
goal elimination of double counting is an important methodological and plan-
ning problem.

According to available calculations, the investment complex has a share of
more than one-fourth of the entire output or the branches of physical pro-
duction, about 18 percent of fixed productive capital and capital invest-
ments. and 25 percent of production personnel. We should expect a certain
growth or these indicators in the future. 'Ihe productive capital of the in-
vestment complex stood at 138 billion rubles even in 1975. and production
personnel ran to 20.6 million persons.

Until recently no indicators were singled out in reporting and planning for
the investment complex as a separate group of sectors and industries ac-
countable for expansion and renewal of the country's fixed capital. which
made it difficult to establish a balance-sheet linkage for the means of '1"-
bor and also to achieve the necessary cooperation between capital cor.» .- -
tion and machinebuilding. Yet in the drafting of medium-term and lo;., -“\':'¢',-
plans. in which maJor social, economic and investment programs are dist :.-
guished, it is becoming indispensable to have this kind or record on the
complex. The investment complex has already been given a special section
in the drafting of the Comprehensive Program for Scientific-Technical Prog-
ress in the USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR State Committee for Sci-
ence and Technology.

. 36
son orncm. us: on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The progressive practice of issuing planning assignments concerning startup
of operating complexes and enterprises as called for by designs to sectors
and industries producing fixed assets should be expanded in order to radi-
cally improve the planning of capital construction and of the entire invest-
ment complex. as well as to improve the economic machinery in the sphere of
capital investments. It is evident that we should abolish the practice of
planning and accepting work by intermediate stages in construction and in-
stallation operations as the end product of the investment complex. we ac-
cordingly must have a schedule for gradual transition of the relevant minia-
tries and departments to the system of delivering the capital investment
product ready for operation or. as it is put figuratively. "pod klyuch." for

the 1979-1980 period. These measures follow from the requirements advanced
by the 25th CPSU Congress.

It was pointed out at the November (1978) Plenum of the CC 0930 that the ori-
entation toward the end results of production and the search for the most ef-
ficient and economical ways of achieving them should be put at the center of
all the work on the new 5-year plan. There must be interrelated planning of
all the capital-building sectors and industries. including contract construc-
tion organizations. enterprises in the building uterials and fabrications
industry. the portion of machinebuilding producing capital goods, organiza-
tions engaged in construction by the direct labor method. and also organiza-
tions that carry out operations for major repairs and which assemble equip-
ment and construction fabrications for construction proJects. Yet at pres-
ent the investment plan regulates primarily the activity of organisations
operating as contractors in capital construction.

Planning assignments for the startup of productive capacities and facilities
envisaged by 5-year plans of capital investments should be stable in the
size of investments. the amount of financing. deliveries of manufacturing
and electrical equipment. etc. The investment plan could be adjusted during
fulfillment only for the starcup of capacities because of the new problems
that have arisen.

Ve should place restrictions on the practice of defining capital construc-
tion's need for materials. fabrications. wire and cable. etc., on the basis
of standard amounts per 1 million rubles of the estimated value of the con-
struction and installation work to be done, which is Justified only for ap—
proximate forecasts. This is a consolidated indicator based on averages
that is called the "millionnik." It is obtained from summary data on the
resources needed by capital construction as a whole per 1 million rubles of
construction and installation work. This indicator is useful in aggregate
computations, but altogether unsuitable in determining the need for materi-
als of construction sites and projects. since it does not take into account
either the specific nature of sectors and industries or the phase of comple-
tion. In the very near future there will be a need to organize the transi-
tion of participants in the investment complex to material supply in accor-
dance with the needs stated in proJect plans and cost estimates and synchro-
nized with the construction schedule and deadlines for startup of facilities.

37
ran omcm. use our
FOR (Ii'l'liilN. I::;I. Inn)!

At the same time project planning organizations should furnish in project
planning documents order specifications for building materials and equipment
to be used by supply components of USSR Gossnsb. In addition all partici-
pants in the investment complex should take measures to disseminate more
widely and develop further the effectivc forms of package delivery of pro-
ductibn equipment to capital construction projects.

The problems of improving planning and mobilizing unused potential should be
dealt with in the various stages of the investment process--project plan-
ning, construction, attainment. of rated capacity and retooling of existing
enterprises.

New Tasha of Project Planning and improvement of Its Effectiveness

0n the whole project planning organizations are still fulfilling their im-
portant role in the capital investment field unsatisfactoriu. often out of
touch with those new requirements which capital construction must now meet.
For instance. they are doing little to facilitate adoption of the new indi-
cators of the output of the investment complex. Customers and construction
organizations at the local level are not able to competently distinguish
within the overall design the individual linen and units that optiamlly make
up independent production complexes. Only experienced production planning
organizations are capable of this. Yet until recently project plans were
not ordinarily developed in elaborate form, the individual lines and com-
plexes were not distinguished. and this. of course. made it more difficult
to produce the product in units of productive capacity that could be put
into operation. as required in the decisions issued as directives.

The volume of project surveying is steadily increasing in proportion to the
rising estimated cost of construction. since it is established as a certain
percentage of capital investments. This allows project planning organiza-
tions to be rather free in disposing of growing financial resources and in
doing dealers for projects not included in the construction plan. As a re-
sult uncompleted project planning is increasing by almost 700 million rubles
every year. and in 1977 amounted to approximately 8 billion rubles. Profit
of project planning organizations has reached 2': percent, and has risen far
above the standard. The number of project plans developed exceeds by more
than fourfold the need for new construction starts.

Yet year after year the econow is feeling a shortage of project planning
documentation to cover the planned volume of capital investments, and many
leading construction projects receive blueprints and cost estimates literally
on the run. At the same time, customers are building up on their books an
increasing amount of unused project plans and cost estimates which do not
mtch the list of projects scheduled for construction. The volume of proj-
ect planning and cost estimate documents continues to be excessively large.
Even for plants in the petroleum refining and rubber industry of the same
type all the cost estimates are compiled from scratch. though in large part
they duplicate one another. whereas relatively small changes would have to

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be rude ii‘ a standard version vere used. Interesting in this connection is
the progressive experience in construction or the Volga Motor Vehicle Plant.

This made it possible for the proJect plan to take into account the host re-
cent developments in architectural layout and design. it made the design
sore resistant to obsolescence." and it also meant that the first phase of
the plant vent into operation 2.5 years earlier than envisaged.“

quired machines, apparatus. instruaents. and so on to meet the design spec-
ifications. supervising progress in construction and attainment of rated ca-
pacity. and control at construction cost and other technical-and-eeononic

indicators. ProJect planning and design organizations developing engineer-

price lists for finished capacities and facilities. even though they might
easily be compiled on the basis or the standard designs. It would seen that

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the growth of standard project planning should show results in a faster pace
for the process of project planning as a whole. Many departments are load-
ing up their project planning organizations with all kinds of studies. re-
ports, analyses of the current state of ongoing enterprises and other mate-
rials. frequently to the detriment of their principal work of project plan-
ning and cost estimation.

It is also important to turn attention to the production engineering part of
project planning. The production engineering part of designs. which is the
heart of them. is now in a worse state than the construction part. since
here there are far more materials providing information. instructions. meth-
ods and other guidance from USSR Gosstroy. There have been well-known
achievements in standardization of the construction of buildings and instal-
lations and in the compilation of standard albums. catalogs and other simi-
lar materials for organizing up-to-date project planning. But the produc-
tion engineering part of project plans is not so well supplied with the nec-
essary intonation, is not receiving the materials on standards and methods
it needs. and would seem to be in a neglected state.

What are called "production modules,” whereby the overall manufacturing lay-
out of new enterprises would be broken down as it were into individual units
and blocs which can be successively put into operation and are capable of
producing finished products on their own. are widely known in the foreign
practice of capital construction. This kind of system makes it possible to
obtain output in the second year after construction begins and to obtain
profit from the first phases to help in financing subsequent construction
work. In the USSR this kind of procedure in project planning is used in the
electronics industry, it was used in building the Volga Motor Vehicle Plant.
etc. In ferrous metallurgy the ”modular method" would mean the erection of
a series of vertical production chainsufrom smelteries to the respective
set of rolling mills; in nonferrous metallurgy it would mean vertical lines-
from the enrichment mills and smelteries to the refineries. But it has not
been given official recognition in project planning practice. in the refer
ence materials on production engineering in project planning or in nor-tive
publications. Construction time indicators ought to be based on synchroni-
zation in the startup of the various production modules.

Certain Problems in Improving the Planning of Capital Construction

The principal task in drafting plans of capital investments is the retooling
of industries. associations and enterprises with recent equipment and ad-
vanced production technoloy. Physical and financial resources are first
comaitted to performance of these projects at existing enterprises. The or-
der of priority in the conduct of these measures. their expected efficiency.
completion dates. the necessary material support and complete synchroniza-
tion with production plans are determined on the basis of intersector and
sectorwide plans for retooling. Capital investments must be appropriated
not in general terms. for projects. but for the output obtained from the
retooling. In the same way the allocation of funds for new construction

1&0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

should'be allowed only if the required volume of output cannot be obtained
at existing enterprises even after reconstruction or retooling.

llot only construction organizations but also nchinebuilding enterprises
should become extensively involved in carrying out projects for the retool-
ing and reconstruction of existing enterprises, and in a number of cases
this also applies to major repair subdivisions of the operating industries.
Machinebuilding ministries and associations must unfailingly take into ac-
count the peculiarities of enterprise retooling and reconstruction. Along
with large-scale and powerful machines, they should also organize the manu-
facture of small-size and light-duty machines and transport equipment capa-
bio of being ”fitted in” to the buildings and wings of existing enterprises.

The continuing squandering of capital investments is causing great concern.
At the November (1978) Plenum of the oc CPSU L. I. Brezhnev said: "So far
we have been unable to halt the process of the squandering of capital in-
vestments over numerous construction projects. Unfinished construction is
growing. Uninstalled equipment worth several billions of rubles is lying
idle in warehouses." In the capital investment field we find that sizable
funds are being allocated to new construction projects instead of concen-
trating capital investments on construction projects which are closest to
completion so that they could be coqleted more quickly. For instance, con-
struction projects in a high stage of completion carried over from the pre-
vious year are allocated altogether inadequate funds—approximately 11-12
percent of the entire estimated cost, which makes it inevitable that they
remain part of unfinished construction for a long time. The problem is not
just that this creates above-allowance unfinished construction, but that
this unfinished construction consists of a large number of construction
sites and projects with a low level of technical completion.

In order to correct the situation that has come about with the degree of
completion of unfinished construction, in our opinion, over the next year
or two the transition should be made to approval of volumes of capital in-
vestments not only for construction projects as a whole, but also for proj-

ects that promise output. A realistic concentration of investments will re-
sult. .

In plans for development of the Soviet economy capital investments should be
given for the major capital investment programs which are being devised in
accordance with the decisions on important national-economic problems issued
as directives. They are given on a separate line to indicate the volt-re of
investments and the date when they will go into operation under each pro-
gram. The techni :al-and-economic justification of the program can be set
forth in special documents-4120's (technical-and-economic reports), which
would also contain the volume of work planned, the schedule of stageby-
stage completion, arrangements for intersector relations and deliveries, an
exhaustive list of who is responsible for what, a calculation of the total
benefit of the program, and also a plan showing the gradual repayment of
hands as the various units in the program are completed.

1&1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A progress schedule and interrelated itemized list should be worked out for
each program. The transition nust be made from approval of itemized lists
diversified by departments to the planning and approval of the lists an a
body, so that they are economically and technologically consistent vith one
another.

Inclusion of new enterprises and also of proJects for reconstruction and ex-
pansion of existing facilities in the plan for proJect planning and construc-
tion should be based on TEO's [feasibility studies]. reflecting advanced
technical designs and economic solutions and stating the maximum cost of
construction, In determination of the estimated cost of industrial and tech-
nical pr oJects it is indispensable to make provision for outlays for the con-
struction of housing and facilities for social welfare and cultural services
for the work force of the enterprises being built.

But the overriding task is to reassess the list of unfinished construction
projects and determine the sequence in which they are to be completed on the
basis of speed in starting up production capacities and facilities that are
in a high degree of completion. At the same time construction projects in a
low state of completion or being done according to outdated designs should
be temporarily halted.

It would be helpful to have full cost ceilings of new proJects for the
branches of physical production or ceiling levels of specific capital in-
vestments at which the efficiency of newly built enterprises is preserved,
and to organize the use of such standards in the expert evaluation of proj-
ect plans and cost estimates and also in bank supervision of the effective-
ness of credits extended.

A question also arises of the requisite legal enforcement of government de-
cisions concerning reduction of the estimated cost of construction and com-
pilation of timely and good-quality cost estimate documentation. Probably .
the USSR Ministry of Justice should draft reccmendations concerning legal
enforcement of decisions concerning the estimated cost of construction in
view of the fact that cost overruns inflict great damage on the country's
economy and stand in the way of rapid adoption of the achievements of tech-
nical progress. The State Price Comittee of the USSR Council of liinisters
should scrutinize the relationship between the cost and capacity of machines
and also between the weight of machines and their effective output. prevent-
ing a hidden rise in the cost of machines disguised as modernization or mod-
ification.

At the same time, until the estimated cost of capital construction becomes
altogether stabilized, temporary indices should be used for converting the
value of capital investments to comparable prices. and they should be used
in planning capital investments and in the selection of proJects to be in-
cluded in the plan so that reserve funds are left in case of a cost increase
that cannot be controlled.

1&2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to sharply reduce the length of the investment process and also to
prevent the obsolescence of enterprises with long construction times. it is
recommended that full records be kept on the time factor in capital con-
struction. This would include adoption of the method of concurrent perfor-
mance of the various stages of capital construetion--surveying, proJect plan-
ning, construction and attainment of rated capacity, using the progressive
experience of the Volga Motor Vehicle Plant, where construction work was con-

current with proJect planning and also with the efforts to attain rated ca-
paeity.

There should evidently be a change in the procedure for compiling standard
proJect planning and construction times so as to eliminate the present prac-
tice of allotting additicnal time in the standard construction time for the
startup of each new shop, complex, and so on. The construction time of proJ-
ects should be limited to. say. 2 or 3 years, regardless of the size of the
proJeet; then it would not be the construction time set that could vary, but the
number of simultaneous flows and the support of construction proJects.

In our opinion we should organize gradual reduction of the standard time for
attainment of rated capacity at new enterprises as uniform rules are adopted
for delivery of projects ready for operation so that in the llth Five-Year
Plan standards for attainment of rated capacity could be abolished at proj-
ects converted to this system of delivery. That time would make provision
for only brief startup and prestartup periods lasting a maximum of 6 months.
and provision would also be made for organising a network of teams and crews
for startup and adjustment.

There is also a question of the gradual transition of capital construction
to work in two and three shifts without increasing the total number of con-
struction workers. using the experience of Leningrad machinebuilding plants.
It is important to correctly determine the capacity of construction organi-
zations and to plan their optimum use. Finally, one might recommend adop-
tion in the practice of planning capital investments of the indicator of the
degree to which capital investments are determined by investment decisions
made in the past and proJect plans and cost estimates already compiled; it
is these which predetermine the future allocation of investments for proJ-
ects already begun. This coefficient would be subject to a limit of 3-3.5
years.

Speeding up the process of bringing new enterprises and new production ca-
pacities up to rated output is an important means of reducing the length of
the production cycle as a whole. In the USSR the standard time for attain-
ment of rated output ranges from 1 year to 3 years. According to foreign
data. the startup period and attainment of rated capacity do not exceed half
a year. At the present time the actual time for attainment of rated output
exceeds the noun. A number of scientific developments call for a still
longer period for attainment of rated output, including so-called "economic
assimilation." which would mean 6-? years. In our opinion we must on the
contrary make a thorough examination of all violations of standard periods

13
ros orrtcuu. use our
FUR (ll-'FICIM. USE (INM'

for attainment of rnted output and gradually tighten up the present stand-
ards. Very important and useful work has been done in this respect by the
scientists in ﬂashkiraknyn ASSR in an affiliate of the Scientific Council
for the Efficiency of Capital Investments. The research was done at enter-
prises of the petroleum refining and petrochemical industry in Bashhirskava
ASSN. where in the 1966-1970 period 60 major production projects with more
than 800 million rubles were put into operation. But at only ll projects.
which means 18.3 percent, were the rated output indicators achieVed within
the standard time. The length and period required to attain rated output
meant a loss of more than 180 million rubles of gross output.

Researchers of the Bashltir affiliate of the USSR Academy of sciences

Yu. Malyshev. V. Kiseleva. D. Bronshteyn and V. Ivalyuh correctly noted the
similarity of many operations carried out in attaining rated capacity and in
the performance of major repairs. More and more frequently now. when major
repairs are undertaken work it done on reconstruction of particular units.
to modernize equipment and partially replace it with new equipment when this
is economically advisable. The principal stages in the preparation of equip-
ment for operation and bringing it up to operating parameters are practi-
cally identical following the run range of tests and major repairs. The
only difference is in the level of the qualifications of personnel. however.
when we compare the standard time set for attaining the productivity of
standard units following major repairs and following completion of construc-
tion (and the full range of testing). we find that a different time in plan-
ned for the same work. For example. following major repairs on a unit for
hydrorefining of diesel fuel 120 hours. or 5 days. are given to achieve full
rated output. while attainment of rated output on the same installation by a
construction and installation organization is allowed 2.160 hours. or 90
days. which is 18-fold more. Relations like this are typical of almost all
types of capacities being brought up to rated output (hydrorefining of die-
sel fuel. catalytic reforming, atmospheric-vacuum pipe, etc.).

The Bashkir economists provide a table in which standard times for attain-
ment of rated output following construction and installation on the one hand
and major repairs on the other can be compared. More economical times are
achieVed for almost all types of capacities by organizations doing major re-
pairs; in practice the time required to reach rated capacity is reduced to

The time for reaching rated capacity in facilities furnished with new equip-
ment occurs as a rule because there are "difficult" assemblies. Though in
value term their share is no more than 5-8 percent. much time is, neverthe-
less. spent on their ”adjustments." For instance. full assimilation and re-
finement of certain assemblies of an installation for the hydrocracking of
vacuum gas oil too): 23 months. whereas attainment of mu average daily out-
put took only 15 days. For that reason principal attention should be paid
to timely attainment of rated capacity on those assemblies which are new and
on preparing special recomendations for bringing them to rated capacity.
testing them and making refinements in them. There is also interesting

ht
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experience in the use of funds allocated for maJor repair treated in the
writings of the Kuybyshev economist (I. Riser. for example). 0n the whole
we should note that in the stage of attainment of rated output at new pro-
duction capacities there is a large unused potential for shortening the time
required for this important stage in the investment cycle.

ﬂew Technical Directions in Capital Construction and the Tasks of the Plan

In the USSR a mighty material and technical base has been built in past years
for capital construction. But we now note serious shortcomings in it. Defi-
nite mistakes have been committed in developing the production of certain
building materials and fabrications. Preference has been given to such ma-
terials as reinforced concrete. cement and metal. At the same time the pro-
duction of finishing materials has been insufficiently developed. and this
has had an adverse effect on the rise of labor productivity in capital con-
struction. The importance of preasaembly in construction has been exag-
gerated beyond all measure. Most installations haVe reached 80-90 percent

in the degree of preassembly. but labor expenditures on them are in a number
of cases higher or the same as for brick construction. Many skeleton-panel
apartment houses or skeleton-type administrative buildings would require less
labor and would be cheaper if built from brick.

Accordingly the CC CPSU and 0883 Council of Ministers adopted the course of
extensive use of light and lightweight fabrications back in 1972. In the
years that have passed since that decree was issued. considerable work has
been done in building and putting into operation plants for making light-
weight fabrications. for producing special highly efficient floors. aluminum
fabrications. asbestos-cement construction products. lightweight fillers and
thermal insulating materials. etc. Unfortunately. many project planning and
construction organizations are reluctant to use these lightweight building
materials. They seem to have become devoted to the heavy and expensive ma-
terials and fabrications. It is significant that the construction and re-
construction of plants for reinforced-concrete products. which number nearly
260. are being carried on more rapidly and vigorously than construction of
enterprises for lightweight products and fabrications. where the level of
planned fulfillment for construction and installation work is sometimes not
even as high as 20 percent. The example of construction of enterprises for
glued wooden fabrications is very instructive. 3y the end of the Ninth Five-
Year Plan capacity was to be built for the production of h65.000 cubic meters
of these fabrications. and 31 sets of manufacturing equipment for those on-
terprises were to be manufactured. In actuality the enterprises built in the
years so far have a capacity of only 90.000 cubic meters. and this is done

on imported equipment. and instead of the 31 sets of equipment. only 1 proto-
type has been made.

If the same amount of rolled products of ferrous metals now allocated were
used to manufacture 250.000 tons of cellular floor decking instead of
125.000 tons and approximately 300,000 tons of best profiles instead of
lbs.000 tons. progressive lightweight fabrications would be largely in use
in construction.

“5
son omcuu. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Total outlays to build capacities for the production of flat steel fabrica-
tioua and rock-wool battn are a fraction of the cost of building capacities
for the production of reinforced-concrete slabs and the corresponding amount
of enforcing steel. cement. sand. gravel and keramsite. which would not be
needed at all if the lightweight steel fabrications were used.“

One might cite a multitude of such examples and cases. But in this case we
are talking about a resolute reassessment of the technical policy in con-
struction along the linen indicated in the decree of the CC CPSU and USSR
Council of Ministers (1972) which promises a tremendous gain in time. qual-
ity and reduction of labor intensiveness and materials intensivenena of con-
struction. but to a considerable extent this is being held back by the pres-
ent system of payment for partial completion. so that there is a drive not
toward cheap versions, but toward those which are heavy and expensive. The
plan of the intersector capital investment complex must be oriented toward
the use of progressive materials and fabrications.

Some Unused Potential for Reduction of the Estimated Cost of Construction
and the Bconomic.Machinery

Within the group of the capital investment sectors and industries (those
whose products become fixed capital) we observe the sharpest and most per-
sistent departures from a system of comparable prices that has been adopted
in economic practice. The reason is that the so-called fixed (comparable)
prices in capital construction are not prices for the finished product of
construction (that is. for capacity. an enterprise with a stated output. and
so on). but prices for partial completion (per cubic meter of earth moved.
per cubic meter of brick laid. per cubic meter of reinforced concrete poured.
per cubic meter of plastering. and so on). The emergence of these ”compara-
ble” prices for partial completion could substantially increase the cost per
unit capacity. which would not be comparable with the cost of projects built
earlier.

The increase in the cost of construction and installation work now taking
place even in calculations made in fixed prices and costing standards is
largely the result of the effort to increase the materials intensiveness of
these operations. since the more expensive the building materials and fabri-
cations used. the larger the wage fund and the more profit are planned for
construction and installation organizations. At the same time even the vol-
ume of project planning work is determined as a function of the scale of
construction and installation work embodied in the design. which motivates
even proJect planning organizations to make the projects they design more
expensive. 0n the whole the procedure used in determining economic incen-
tiven and in evaluating the perfomnance of builders and project planners
does not on the whole orient them toward making proJects cheaper. but toward
making them more expensive. At the same time this is having an impact on
the drop in the output-capital ratio in the economy.

0 See vopsosr EKONOHIKI. no 3, 1916. pp 22-23.

b6
ros orrtcrlu. uss ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculations show that optimlisstion of the composition and quality of
building materials makes it possible to reduce their mass per work unit ap-
proximately 25-30 percent. which has an effect on construction time. on la-
bor intensiveness and also on the cost of construction.

Predominant use of heavy fabrications and materials in construction. heavy
reinforced concrete above all, whose share is 354.0 percent of the cost of
all the materials used. is mainly the result of organizational factors. h1-
terprises subordinate to construction ministries are producing 96 percent of
all the reinforced concrete. The prices for prefabricated reinforced-con—
crete products offer comparatively high profitability for construction orga-
nisations-~nppmximately 20-25 percent. The cost of the reinforced concrete
used is in turn credited to halfillment of the plan of construction and in-
stallation work. so that it encourages predominant use of this heavy mate-
rial. This is standing in the way of development of the production of poured
reinforced concrete. whose use makes it possible to save as much as 25 per-
cent of the metal and concrete and to reduce the construction cost consider-
ably. For instance. prefabricated reinforced-concrete footings for columns
are 1.5-2-fold more expensive than poured footings, and their manufacture
requires larger expenditures of labor. but the output per construction worker
is 2.5-3.5-fold greater than when the footings are poured. This. of course.
distorts the indicator of labor productivity, but it predetermines the higher
"profitability" of the heavy materials. we should also hear in mind that
steam curing of 120 million cubic meters of prefabricated reinforced-concrete
products requires a tremendous amount of fuel. since the use of steam is not
always required with poured concrete.

within the group of the capital investment sectors and industries we observe
the sharpest and most persistent depsn tures from a system of comparable
prices that has been adopted in economic practice. It is thought that the
source of the cost shifts is primarily prices of raw materials and Mel and
poser resources in the group of nonreplaceable resources and subject to the
conditions of rent relations. But under present conditions the most disor-
derly and uncontrolled price changes are taking place in the capital invest-
ment industries and sectors.

The political and economic tasks of the present period and also the long-
range tasks of scientific-technical progress cannot be performed if the eco-
nomic machinery for the conduct of the capital investment process is left as
it stands. Principal attention in the long run should be paid to intensifi-
cation of the investment sphere. to stabilisation and reduction of estimated
cost. to the orientation toward the end product. to s new organization of
the investment process. to a decisive improvement in the rate of turnover of
capital investments and therefore to creation of new internal potential for
expanded reproduction.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Pravda." "Voprosy ekonomiki.” 1979

70155
680: 1820

“7
son omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE “NLY

BALANCE SHEET WWOD 0F PLANNIRG
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 1. Jan 79 pp 70-80
IXrticle by P. Krylov. "Improve-eat of the Balance Sheet Method of Planninng

[Text] The balance sheet nethod occupies a leading place in the methodology
of planning. which is governed by its role in ensuring the proportionate de-

velopnent of the national economy in conformity with the requirements of the
economic laws of socialism. This method makes it possible to draft a uni-
fied state plan. in which the physical-material and value proportions of
socialist expanded reproduction and the development of all the sectors and
regions of the country are integrally coordinated.

The balance sheet merhod--the most important element of the entire system
of scientific methods of planning--is directly connected with the program-
goal and standard methods. Its bases were incorporated in the plans of the
State Commission for the Electrification of Russia and the First Five-Year
Plan. The elaboration of the main group of balances during the drafting of
the First Five-Year Plan was a significant stage in the formation of the
balance sheet method. Along with the physical balances the most important
value balances. as well as the balance of labor resources were drawn up for
the first time. With allowance for the social tasks of the First Five-Year
Plan the main types of balances were drawn up by social sectors. The fur-
ther development of the balance sheet method proceeded along the line of
both the enlargement of the group of balances being drawn up and the in-
crease of their validity. The various types of balances now being used en-
compass all the sections and indicators of the plans at all levels of eco-
nomic management: from the plans of enterprises and associations to the
unified state plan.

The enormous scale of the economy and the complication of national economic
and intersectorial ties under the conditions of a developed socialist soci-
ety are making increased demands on the balance sheet method. These demands
have been caused first of all by the creation of new sectors and works. the
expansion of the list of products being produced. the types of jobs and serv-
ices. the formation of more and more diverse intersectorial ties. Thus. in
the standardised list of sectors and subsectors of industry their number is

EB
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

abouts-00, while the detailed products list by grades and sizes nmnbers

12 million items. A great dynamicnees, which is determined by the accelera-
tion of scientific end technical progress and the change of the pattern of
production and personal consumption on the basis of the development of new

types of products and technological processes, is typical for intersectorial
ties under present conditions.

A significant feature of the process of forming the proportions at present
is the intensification of their interconnections, including the connections
of the physical-material proportions with the proportions of the distribu-
tion of labor and financial resources. The careful coordination of the
physical-material resources with the value indicators is especially impor-
tant for meeting the effective demand of the population for co-aodity serv-
ices of the necessary variety. As to the production of the means of pro-
duction, here the production of various types of products, which meet uni-
form demands, particularly for interchangeable types of fuel and power,
construction materials and so on, is being rapidly expanded. All this has
caused the need for the considerable development of all types of balances.

The most important demand on the balance sheet method of planning at present
is its use with allowance for the finding of the most effective means of
the proportionate development of the economy on the basis of the economical
use of resources and their purposeful distribution so as to ensure the meet-
ing of the demands with the least expenditures.

The new demands being made on the balance sheet method of planning are being
met in the practical activity of planning organs. The elaboration of bal-
ances is being accomplished more completely at all stages of planning, be-
ginning with the preparation ef variants of the preliminary balance sheet
estimates for the control figures of the annual and long-range plans up to
the approval of the main types of balances within the state plans. The sub-
stantiation of the calculations of the demands by individual item of the
balances by using technical and economic standards has been improved. Ho-
dern computer equipment is widely used in the formulation of a number of
balances, for example, in the centralized calculations of the demands for
rolled ferrous metal products by sectors of machine building, for materials
in construction, the aggregate balance of machines and equipment in value
terms and others. A number of models of the intersectorial balance of the
production and distribution of products in physical and value terms have
been developed, which are beginning to be used also in planning estimates.

However, the achieved level of the elaboration of balances does not yet
fully meet the increased demands of planning. The development of the balance
sheet method in recent times has proceeded primarily in the direction of

the increase of the number of balances being used with the retention of

the basically formed methods of their compilation. A significant drawback

is the fact that the main place in balance sheet work is assigned to the
elaboration of annual balances, while for the present long-range (five-year)
balances are not being used entirely. The necessary coordination of the

‘09
roe 01-17mm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

three main types of balances--physical, labor and financial-~hns not been
assured. The principle of efficiency is not always consistently followed
in balance sheet work. The inadequately reliable balancing of the develop-
ment of individual sectors of the national economy remains one of the unre-
solved complicated problems.

he planning organs at all levels and especially USSR Gosplan when drafting
plans attempt to ensure their balancing, but there are some difficulties in
solving this problem. They are the result of a number of causes. Some of
them are of an objective nature, others involve shortcomings in the organ-
ization and methods of planning. The main objective cause is the fact that
in recent years a number of sectors of the extractive industry have been
developed by means of a shift to the use of less rich deposits or deposits
in remote regions, which has led to an increase of the specific capital in-
vestments and the production cost. Thus, during the years of the Ninth
Five-Year Plan in the petroleum and gas industry, metallurgy and the timber
industry the increase of capital investments outdistanced the increase of
the production of products. A tendency toward the increase of the produc-
tion cost of the products of some sectors of the extractive industry and
agricultural products was noted. All this adversely affected the rate of
development of the basic sectors of heavy industry and the increase of re-
sources of agricultural raw materials.

A number of difficulties in the formation of financial balances are con-
nected above all with a certain lag of the increase of the production of
consumer goods, which enjoy a greater demand, behind the increase of the
monetary income of the population, as well as with the decrease of the
growth rate of the profit.

Serious tasks on the inrovement of the balancing of plans and on the as-
surance of the proportionate development of the national economy are set in
the 10th Five-Year Plan. In a report at the 25th CPSU Congress 1.. I. Brezh—
nev especially emphasised that the assurance of the stable balanced growth
of heavy industry is the core of the party .conomy policy for the long-
range future. At the congress much attention was also devoted to the de-
velopment of agriculture and the production of constant goods on a scale
which meets the demands of the population and the national economy. In con-
nection with this during the 10th Five-Year Plan it is planned to increase
the absolute increments of the production of petroleum and gas, the smelt-
ing of steel, the production of plastics and synthetic resins, chemical
fibers. At the same time stepped-up assignments on the economy of the most
important types of material resources were established. During the first
three years of the five-year plan the recovery of petroleum and gas and the
production of a number of basic chemical products and construction materials
increased significantly. however, as 1.. I. Brezhnev noted at the Noveder
(1978) CC CPS!) Plenum, the overall development of the economy in many re-
spects depends on the further increase of the production of metal and the
extraction of fuel.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Additional measures on the acceleration of the development of agriculture
are being implemented in conformity with the decisions of the July (1970)
cc CPSU Plenum. Much work on the improvement of the system of planning as
a whole. including the improvement of the balance sheet method of planning,
is necessary along with the measures being implemented on the increase of
production and the economy of material resources.

The development and enhancement of the role of all types of five-year bal-
ances are the most important direction of the improvement of the balance
sheet method of planning. The five-year plane are the main form of planning
of the ecommic and social development of the country. Within the frame-
work of annual planning it is ispossible to improve substantially the pro-
portions of the development of the national economy and its main sectors.
since the opportunities to increase production or save resources here are
very limited. In connection with this the stricter limiting of some de-
mands, the reduction of reserves. the increase of imports or the reduction
of exports and so on are the main way of achieving a balance of development
in the annual plane when there is a shortage of resources.

The complex and effective balancing of the development of the national econ-
omy and its sectors can be assured only in five-year plans. which create
considerably more opportunities for the achievement of the proportionate de-
velopment of associated sectors and works and the necessary value propor-
tions. The drafting and coordination of the five-year plan with a break-
down by years as the basis of the proper balancing of annual plans are
especially important.

In recent years the balance sheet work when drawing up five-year plane has
been improved. The number of physical balances being elaborated has in-
creased. Hithin the 10th Five-Year Plan 232 physical balances with a break-
down by years were spproved. of them 15!. were approved by the USSR Council
of ﬂinisters. while the remainder were approved by USSR Gosplan. The bal-
ance of labor resources and the main financial balances were drawn up by
years. However, the established practice of elaborating balances when draw-
ing up five-year plans still does not completely meet the current demands
of the proportionate development of the national economy.

A significant drawback of balance sheet work when drawing up five-year plans
is the fact that USSR Gossnab. as well as ministries and departments. as a
rule. do not elaborate the physical balances in accordance with the products
list being planned by them. Meanwhile, more than 13.000 balances are ap-
proved in the annual plans by USSR Gossnab and its organs. In the five-year
plans a considerably smaller number of balances of production capacities

are also used than in theannual plans, although the problems of expanded
reproduction can be solved successfully only in long-range plans. All this
attests to the expedience of enlarging the group of physical balances which
are elaborated in the five-year plans. which will make it possible to coor-
dinate quite completely the main intersectorial proportions.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the better provision of the five-year plans of production and capital
construction with material resources it is necessary to determine the main
directions of the distribution and supplies of allocated resources in a
breakdown by sectors and the ruin consumers. The increase of the number of
physical balances and the enhancesent of their role require the correspond-
lng expansion of the planned products list and production capacities. which
are elaborated in the five-year plan. At the same time this products list
should be more consolidated than in the annual plans. since in the drafting
of five-year plans the specific types of new machines. equipment, instru-
ments andnaterials cannot yet be entirely specified; substantial changes in
the variety of consumer goods and in the dates of the placement of new
types of products into production are possible.

A drawback of the system of value balances. which are drawn up in the five-
year plan. is the lack of approved five-year financial plans with the neces-
sary estimates by ninistries. departments and councils of ainisters of the
union republics. In connection with this the plans on production and capi-
tal construction by sectors are inadequately backed by financial resources.
changes in the economic interrelations of the sector and the state are not
revealed. the planning of long-tern credits is made difficult. The calcula-
tions of the main types of revenues and expenditures of the state, which

are made in the five-year plan, are consolidated ones and subsequently are

adjusted substantially. This especially pertains to the profit. The bal-
ance of the monetary income and expenditure of the population in a breakdown

by union republics in the five-year plan is elaborated only for the final
year of the five-year plan.

The systematic revisions during the five-year plan of wholesale prices.

which are made for many sectors and subsectors. adversely affect the stabil-
ity of the value indicators and the proportions of the five-year plan. Thus,
during the years of the Ninth Five-Year Plan the total aaount of the changes
of wholesale prices was 15 billion rubles. As a result the coordination of
the financial indicators of the annual and five-year plane was considerably
complicated.

All this causes the need for the elaboration in the five-year plan of fi-
nancial balances in the full aaount mainly according to the group of bal-
ance sheet estimates of the annual plans. including the drafting of five-
year financial plans for ministries and departments and their delivery to
associations and enterprises (according to a consolidated group of indica-
tors). An important condition of the effectiveness of the five-year fi-
nancial plans and balances is the naintenance of the stability of wholesale
prices. so that their revisiOn during the five-year plan would be nade only
for individual types of products in case of sharp changes in the conditions
of production.

In addition to the enlargement of the group of balances elaborated in the
five-year plan. it is necessary to increase their validity. This is con-
nected with the fact that when drafting the five-year plans an adequate

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OﬁFICIAL USE ONLY

technical and economic substantiation of the applied standards. including
the assignments on the reduction of the rate of consumption of material re-
sources. is not ensured. In part this is caused by objective difficulties
of taking into account the achievements of scientific and technical progress.
The shortcomings in determining the economic efficiency of new equipment are
the primary cause. In connection wir' this the development of a system of
progressive technical and economic norms end standards. which is elaborated
for a five-year period and is made more precise subsequently by years, is an
important direction of the improvement of balance sheet work.

The increase of the level of validity of the balances is the most important
prerequisite for their directional nature. approval and delivery to the
performers. The expansion of the work on the elaboration of the five-year
balance of labor resources. especially with a breakdown by individual rayons.
krays and oblaata. the making of balance sheet estimates of the supply with
manpower of the main sectors of the national economy, industry and construc-
tion. as well as the training of skilled personnel and specialists are also
of great importance.

One of the main prerequisites of the improvement of the elaboration of the
balances in the five-year plan is the availability in them of the necessary
reserves of material and financial resources. During the five-year period
additional demands for resources usually arise. which are connected with
the use of the latest achievements of science and technoloBY. the develop-
ment of new mineral deposits. as well as with changes in the conditions of
foreign trade. Deviations in the production and purchases of agricultural
products. which are caused by weather conditions. substantially influence
the development of the national economy. Additional demands also arise
with the need for the accelerated development of individual sectors or the
solution of territorial problems.

A shortage of the reserves. which are stipulated in the five-year plans.
especially for capital investments, under the conditions of substantial

changes of material and financial resources and demands during the five-year
plan leads to adjustments of the plans of capital construction. as well as
the plans of production and economic indicators for a number of sectors of
industry and the national economy. to violations of the planned proportions
of the five-year plan. Along with the reserves of resources of raw mate-
rials. fuel and materials. including for additional capital investments.

the reserves of consumer goods with allowance for the possible increase of
the effective demand of the population, the reserves of financial assets

in the estimates of the balance of income and expenditure of the state and
others are also of great importance.

The creation of a system of fixed standards of the reserves of the most im-
portant types of material resources, which are stipulated in the balances.
especially for scarce materials. is the main means of solving this problem.
in this case all the indicated reserves should be coordinated with each
other. At the same time it is improper to direct one's attention toward

53
ron onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USIZ ONLY

the formation in the five-year plans of especially considerable reserves.
twuuu‘hllly under the conditions of a shortage of a number of the main types

of raw materials. material and financial resources. The main way of ensur-

ing the reliable balancing of the five-year plans is the more careful de-
termination of the demands of the national economy and the possible re-

sources. The amounts of the reserves should be established only on the

basis of those demands which it is impossible to foresee in the calcula’
tions of the five-year balances.

Consolidated balance sheet estirwtea for the long-range future of the eco-
nomic, scientific. technical and social development of the country are con-
ducive to the increase of the level of balance sheet work in the five-year
plans. They make it possible to characterize the main shifts in the pro-
duction and consumption of the most important types of material resources
with allowance for the trends of scientific and technical progress, as well
as the availability of natural resources and manpower by regions of the
country.

Useful experience on the formulation of consolidated physical balances.

as well as the balance of labor resources for the long-range future has
already been gained in USSR Gosplan during the work on the main directions
of the economic and social development of the country up to 1990. The data
of these balances are also promoting the determination of the changes in
the structure of the demands of the national economy and the population
during the five-year plans. the establishment of the most effective ways
of meeting them with allowance for the forming trends for a long period.
All this attests to the need for the development of an intercoordinated
system of balances for the long-range future. for the five-year plan and

the annual plans.

0f great ismortance for the successful elaboration and fulfillment of the
planning balances is the enlargement of the group of annual report balances
which at present are drawn up according to a significantly smaller products
list than the planning balances, which complicates the analysis of the ac-
tual proportions in the development of the economy. It should be emphasized
that the annual report balances are the most important means of monitoring
the fulfillment of the planning balances and the observance of the planned
proportions. however. in the check of the fulfillment of the plans. espe-
cially the annual plans, the violations of the planning balances are being
inadequately analyzed. As a result the timely taking of steps to eliminate
the arising individual bottlenecks and disproportions is being complicated.

One of the most complicated problems of the elaboration of balances is the
assurance of their intercoordination. 0n the scale of the national econ-

omy the physical. labor and financial balances are coordinated on the basis
of the comprehensive substantiation of the state plans according to all
types of resources. Such work is also performed within the calculations of
the main indicators of the balance of the national economy. The formulation
of the planning balances of the social product and the national income are

5h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

the primary content of these calculations. The balances for such very im-
portant aspects of expanded reproduction as the dynamics and use of fixed
capital and labor resources are elaborated separately.

The separation of the groups of balances especially influences the drafting
of the plans of development by sectors. This finds expression above all in
the inadequate coordination of the balances of material and financial re-
sources. Thus. the plan on the production cost and the profit is directly
not coordinated with the allocated material resources. which in most sec-

tors constituts the bulk of the production costs. The plans of capital in-
vsstments are coordinated with material resources in value terms only for

deliveries of equipment on the basis of the elaboration of the aggregate
balance of the equipment.

The elaboration of physical balances not only in physical-material terms.
but also in monetary terms might be the main means of the direct coordina-
tion of naterisl and finacisl resources. An example of coordination of
this type is the above-indicated calculations of the aggregate balance of
equipment in value terms, which generalize the data of a large number of
balances by its individual types.

it is most complicated in the calculations of physical balances in value
terms to determine the average wholesale prices of the material resources
which are used according to individual directions. The data of the annual
intersectorial report balances of the production and distribution of pro-
ducts. which characterize the consumption of material resources by sectors
of the national economy in value terms. night be the underlying basis for
the calculations of the physical balances in value terms. However, for the
practical use of these data it is necessary to elaborate specially the dy-
namics of the average prices of the consumption of material resources. The
NIIPiN [Scientific Research Institute of Planning and 8tandard§7 of USSR
Gosplan in the early 1970's made experimental calculations of the balance
of ferrous metals in value terms. but. unfortunately, subsequently this
work was not continued.

Considerable experience on the elaboration of physical balances in value
terms has been gained for consumer goods. Balances of this type are elab-
orated primarily for the main nonfood consumer items. At the same time for
many balances of consumer goods and above all for foodstuffs only the de-
liveries according to the market funds are elaborated in monetary terms.
which complicates the analysis of the structure of the use of goods by in-
dividual directions. In our opinion. the elaboration of the balances of

the means of production in monetary terms should be revived and the calcula-
tions of the balances in value terms for foodstuffs of a complex assortment

should be made.

The more extensive use in the system of balances of calculations in value
terms is of great importance for the consolidation of the unity of the plan-
ning of physical-material and value proportions. This will also make it

55
FOR ormua. use ONLY
FOR OFFA'CIAI. "SE 01“.?

possible to improve the substantiation of the financial balances on the
basis of their coordination with the physical balances and will promote the
more complete accounting in planning of the effect of the law of value
under socialism.

The expansion of the practice of elaborating complex physical balances as
the most important condition of intercoordinated material and technical sup-
ply is of great importance for the improvement of the balance sheet method.

At present the majority of the physical balances are compiled as one-pro-
duct balances and only some of them are compiled as complex balances. for
example. the balance of boiler and furnace fuel. of reinforced concrete
structures. the aggregate balance of lumber in terms of round timber and
several others. however. the group of interconnected balances can be ex-
panded. for example. by means of the balances of all types of fibers. some
interconnected types of machines and equipment. construction materials and
so forth. The importance for long-range estimates of even more "extensive"
complex balances. such as the balance of construction materials (ferrous
metals. aluminum. plastics and wood). systems of machines and machinery.
which ensure the complete mechanization of difficult and labor-intensive
Jobs in the sectors of the national economy. textile raw materials. inter-
changeable food products. is increasing.

The use of complex physical balances requires the solution of a number of
tethodological and organizational questions. It is necessary to elaborate
methods of the determination of generalizing measures. VhiCh could char-
acterize the given set of interchangeable materials with allowance for the
consumer qualities of the individual types of products. For example. in
the balance of construction materials 1 ton of aluminum replaces in con-
struction 3 tons of ferrous metals. while 1 ton of plastics replaces in
machine building 5 tons of ferrous metals. The NllPiN of USSR Gosplan
proposed to develop special coefficients of the interchangeability of
material resources. which take into account both the efficiency of the pro-
duct being produced and the conditions of its use by different consumers.

The method of elaborating complex balances is more complicated than that of
one-product balances. since interchangeable types of material resources
should be distributed with allowance for the peculiarities of their consump-
tion in individual sectors and the possible replacement of some materials

by others. here it is necessary to calculate the economic feasibility of
such a substitution depending on the cost of the individual materials. their
quality. degree of scarcity and other factors. Due to the large number of
factors of this type when elaborating complex balances it is necessary to
use various economic-mathematical models. The use of the calculations of
the intersectorial balance of the production and distribution of products
plays a noticeable role in ensuring the completeness of the entire system

of physical balances. However. this question requires special examination.

An important direction of the improvement of the elaboration of balances
is the assurance of the unity of the fundamental scheme of their compile-
tion. The main principle of the existing scheme of physical and financial

56
ton orrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

balances is the comparison of the demands with the resources, which makes
it possible to establish the presence of individual disproportions and
"bottlenecks." The use of this scheme is an essential condition of the as-
surance of the proportionate development of the national economy. however.
for a number of types of balances the demands are not being compared with
the resources. This pertains above all to the balances of fixed capital
and production capacities, the scheme of which foresees only the movement
of capital and capacities: their availability, increment, retirement and
increase by the end of the planning period. Such a scheme does not make

it possible to establish to what extent the planned increase of the fixed
capital and capacities corresponds to the demands of the national economy.

One of the main causes of the shortcomings of the existing scheme of the
elaboration of the balances of fixed capital and production capacities is
the nonelaboration of standards of the demands for them by sectors and
works. Meanwhile. such standards are necessary for the planning of capital
investments on the basis of the increase of production, as well as with al-
lowsnce for the assignments on the increase of production efficiency and
above all the rise of labor productivity.

The demands for some items of the physical balances are also not being fully
taken into account. This pertains. for example. to material resources
being allocated for capital repair and current operating needs. the market
funds and reserves of suppliers and consumers of a number of scarce mate-
rials. As a result it is impossible to compare the actual amount of the de-
mands with the resources. which leads to the incomplete balancing of the
plans according to some items.

All this attests to the need for the consistent use for all types of bal-
ences of that scheme of estimates. which would provide for the determination
of the total amount of the demands. For this the data on the total amount
of the demands should be cited in the used scheme of the elaboration of bal-
snces for individual directions of the use of material resources, where the
amount of the demands is not being fully satisfied. The comparison of these
data as a whole according to the balance will make it possible to establish
the degree of satisfaction of the total demands of the national economy and
the population. here by a demand we understand a really existing demand
which stems from the established standards, from the amount of the effective
demand of the population.

The assurance of the coordination of the physical balances and plans of dis-
tribution, which are elaborated by different links of planning and manage-
ment. is an important question of the improvement of physical balances.
Thus. at present USSR Gosplen draws up about 1,700 balances. USSR Gossnab
directly-ebout 2.500 balances, the all-union main administrations of supply
and marketing attached to USSR Gossnab--about 11.000 balances, the union

and union republic ministriea--approximately £0,000 balances. here the
balances and plans of distribution of USSR Gosplan cover more than 70 per-
cent of the value of the products, while for some very important material
resources this proportion is 90-95 percent, ferrous metals-99 percent.
fuel--100 percent.

57
ton orrtcm. use on!
F0“ ”FHQZ'IM "3|; ‘ONH‘

Nevertheless the physical unlauccs and PiJuL of distribution. which are
elaborated by USbR Gosplan, cannot ensurt the balancing of the demands and
production according to a specific products list. This work is done by
USSR Gosnnab and its organs, as well an by ministries and departments.

The balances and plans of distribution. which are elaborated by them. are
the concrete expression of the balances elaborated by USSR Gosplan or their
supplement primarily by means of the products of the chemical industry.
equipment and instruments. which are consumed in relatively small amounts.
Under the conditions of the performance of balance sheet work by different
organizations cases occur when in satisfying the overall demand for basic
materials and equipment discrepancies on the specific list of products being
produced arise and the necessary auxiliary materials and components are not
allocated. The proper coordination of the deliveries of material resources
which meet similar demands is sometimes not ensured. Thus. the balance of
linoleum for floors is elaborated by USSR Gosplan, while the balance of
parquet is elaborated by USSR Gossnab.

The achievement of the completeness of material and technical supply re-
quires above all the increase of the coordination in the work of various
organizations which distribute materials resources. and above all USSR Gos-
plan and USSR Gossnab. The proper determination of the list of products.
the assignments on the production and the balances for which are established
in the state plan. is also of great iaportance. It is necessary to include
in this list all the types of products, which play an important role in the
establishment of the national economic and intersectorisl proportions. the
increase of the standard of living of the people. the strengthening of the
defensive capability of the country and the development of foreign economic
ties. as well as scarce types of products. At the same time it is necessary
to have and constantly to update the unified list of balances and plans of
the production of products which are liable to centralized distribution on
the basis of the All~Union Classifier of Industrial and Agricultural Pro-
ducts with an indication of the individual organs of planning and management.
which carry out this distribution. There should also be determined the
procedure of coordination by planning organisation of the interrelated
balances and plans of distribution.

The development of direct ties between supplies and consumers. during which
the peculiarities of the pattern of production and consumption for each pro-
duction association (enterprise) can be taken fully into account. is an es-
sential condition of the proper balancing of production with material re-
sources sccording to a detailed products list. The organisation of long-

tsrm direct ties for deliveries of products should basically be completed
already during the 10th five-Year Plan.

Above it was noted that the establishment of the most efficient proportions.
in case of which the meeting of the demands is achieved with the least as-
penditures of material. labor and financial resources, is the most impor-
tant demand on the balance sheet method. This approach to balance sheet
work in recent years has been especially typical of such a balance as the

58
ton orrtcm. use 0er
FOR OPTICIAL 088 ONLY

balance of fuel and power resources. In connection with the extensive use

of gas‘and petroleum the cost of a conventional ton of consumed fuel re-

sources has decreased substantially. which led to a saving of assets during
the years of the lest three five-year plans in the amount of approximately
30 billion rubles. The effectiveness of the balance of textile rew mate-
:iais increased due to the replace-ant of natural fibers by artificial
ibers.

The main direction in increasing the efficiency of the use of resources
when elaborating all types of balances is the determination of the demands
of the national economy on the basis of progressive standards which provide
for the gradual reduction of the expenditures per unit of production. The
economy of resources at present is playing a greater and greater role in
meeting the demands. Thus. with an overall planned increase of the produc-
tion of finished rolled ferrous metal products during the lOth Five-Year
Plan in the amount of 19 million tons. its economy in 1980 should be more
than 9 million tone. or about 50 percent of the increase of the resources.
for cement--nore than 5 million tone. or more than 20 percent. The economy
of fuel and power resources in 1980 is envisaged in the amount of 190 mil-
lion tons. that is. more than 30 percent of the total increase of the re-
sources of the fuel and power balance. The economy of lumber in capital
construction and the production of packaging. the planned amount of which--
30 million m3--exceeds many times the stipulated increase of the export of
timber, is of even greater importance. The established assignments on the
economy of materials resources in 1976-1977 on the whole were fulfilled.

The role of the economy of labor inputs during the use of labor resources
is especially great. During the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan the in-
crease of the number of workers and employees in the sectors of physical
production is envisaged in the amount of «.5 million, while the economy of
manpower by means of the increase of labor productivity in terms of 1980
should be 26 million people. During three years of the five-year plan the
economy of manpower was about ll million people with an increase of the
number of those employed in physical production of about 6 million people.

However. given the achieved gains in the area of balance sheet work, in
planning practice a unified system of indicators of the evaluation of the
efficiency of the economy of materials resources has not yet been created.

Along with the economy due to the decrease of the rate of consumption of
resources. as compared with the base period, it is necessary to calculate
also the economy due to improvements in the pattern of consumption of mate-
rials. Here a shift should be made to the extensive making of calculations
of the economy of materials resources in value terms. which will make it
possible to take this economy more fully into account in the plans on the
production cost and the profit. The making of such calculations is espe-

cially urgent under present conditions, when the economy of individual mate-
rials in physical terms is at times achieved by means of an increase of the

use of other. at times more expensive materials (for example. with an in-
crease of the use of nonferroue metals and plastics instead of ferrous
metals).

59
ran orncua. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USIZ ONLY

The problem of making comprehensive calculations of the economy of all ex-
penditures when elaborating individual types of balances is also becoming
urgent. Thus, when elaborating physical balances calculations should be
made not only of the economy of materials resources, but also of the ex-
penditures of living labor and capital investments. This is especially
important because the economy of material expenditures frequently involves
an increase of other types of expenditures, the influenCe of which at pres-
ent is not taken into account. The calculations of the economy should be
made not only for the producing enterprises, but also for the consuming
enterprises. Therefore the amount of the total economy, which is connected
with the use of more economical types of material resources, can be ob-
tained on the basis of the data on the national economic impact, which in-
cludes the total economy both for the producer and for the consumer of the
product with allowance for the economy of material resources, living labor
and capital investments. Along with these general indicators for some
types of balance» it is expedient to use more extensively specific indica-
tors of efficiency. For example, in the balance of rolled ferrous metal
products the coefficient of the yield of satisfactory metal from ingots.
the coefficient of the use of rolled ferrous metal products in machine
building and so on can serve as such an indicator.

The creation of a unified system of norms and standards, which would cover
all types of resources-material, labor and finsncial--is of decisive im-
portance for the economical use of all types of resources. The existing
norms and standards characterize at all levels of production mainly the
use of material expenditures. The standards of the expenditures of labor
resources are used primarily at the level of associations and enterprises.
The group of financial standards, which includes only the standards of the
provision of enterprises and associations with working capital, the stand-
ards of the formation of economic incentiva funds, the norms of amortisa-
tion deductions and several others, is limited.

The plan of the first section of a comprehensive system of standards. which
covers the main types of material, labor and financial resources, has pres-
ently been prepared. It is envisaged to elaborate this system from the
level of enterprises up to USSR Gosplan, which will make it possible to
accomplish the necessary coordination of the norms and standards at various
levels of planning. It is proposed to use considerably more extensively

the standards of the use of equipment and the calculations of the demands
for it, to elaborate a number of new economic standards, including the en-
largement of the group of standards of capital investments and the standards
of the expenditures of wages per unit of volume of production. The develop-
ment of systems of economic standards will promote the integral coordina-
tion of the amount of expenditures of certain resources or others with the
achievable results and above all with the output of products. The creation
of a unified system of standards presumes not only the enlargement of the
group of standards and the assurance of their intercoordination. As prac-
tice shows, the isolated approval of different standards, including stand-
ards of material and labor expenditures, frequently has the result that the

60
son orncm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

planned economy of material expenditures can be covered by an increase of
the expenditures of living labor. and vice varse.

It is expedient to exercise control over the achievement of the overall
economy of assets when making calculations of the standards of expenditures

in monetary terms. However. this requires the performance of much prelimi-
nary work and the extensive use of computers.

‘lhc most important demand on the system of standards is the assurance of
their progressive nature on the basis of the consideration of the achieve-
ments of the scientific and technical revolution. This problem is especial-
ly pressing. since in planning practice overstated. technically unsound
rates of consumption of material resources are still being used. there are
instances when the planning standards are established higher than the actual
consumption of materials. In solving this problem it must not be forgotten
that frequently the norms of consumption of materials are not observed

and orientation on the actual consusption would mean the refusal to intro-
duce sound standards. It seems to us that. while maintaining the existing
system of determining the standards for the main consolidated types of
norms end standards. the cowarison of the planning norms not only with the

preceding norm. but also with the level of the actual consusption should
be made.

It is possible to solve many of the above-examined questions of improving

the balance sheet method of planning only in integral connection with the
overall increase of the scientific level of all methods of the economic

and social planning of the development of the national economy in conformity

with the main tasks set by the 25th CPSU Congress and the subsequent de-
cisions of the party and the government.

COPYRIGHT: Isdstel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki". 1979

7807
080: 1820

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR l‘PFHIlM. I‘Sll "NIX

FINAL PRODUCT ACCOUNTING HILL INPROVE AGRICULTURB'S EFFICIENCY
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No l,Jan 79, pp 81-91

[Article by VASKHNIL Academician V. Tikhonov, and ". Lezina:
"Final Product of the Agroindustrial Complex"]

[Text] One of the most im ortant characteristics of contemporary
economic development is t e progressively more complex structure
of social production, the su division and consolidation of pro-
duction functions, and their attachment torelatively independent
sectors. The expansion of intersector linkages leads to the
increased role and significance of the planned regulation of
intersector exchange proportions in order to orient each sector

regards the maximization of final economic results. At the
Rovember (i978) L. I. Brezhnev stressed that orientation

towards the final results of production should be at the
center of all work on the new five-year plan. This "requires
more detailed a-tention both towards intersector and intra-

sector proportions.

The prOcess of the division of labor accompanying the creation

of new sectors, the rapid development of intersector economic
linkages forming the material basis for intersector integration,
has, in recent years, been especially intensive in the economy's
agrarian sector. During the past decade such specialized large
sectors as water resources and land improvement, machinery build-
ing for animal husbandry and fodder production, rural construct-
ion, the mixed feeds and microbiological industries, the repair
of equipment, and material-technical support and supply for
agriculture have been, in essence, built from the bottom up.

The problem now is to form industrialfoed‘ production and the
meat animal sector. Tractor and agricultural machinery building,
the production of mineral fertilizers. the processing industry
specializing in preparing high quality products fron agricultural
raw materials, the transportation and communications system,

a well developed network of wholesale and retail trade in agri-
cultural products, and processed products are all under intensive

62
roe OFFICIAL as: cszr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development. In other words, an entire multisector s stem

oriented towards the expanded reproduction of agricu tural output,
its processing into objects of final consumption, and its delivery
to the consumer is being formed.

Although this system has not yet been organizationally formalized
it exists and functions in the form of a national economic
agroindustrial complex (AIC), being realized through the exist-
ing widespread distribution of agroindustrial enterprises and
associations. Each of the sectors making up the AIC carries out
one specific function within the intersector division of labor,
specializing in its own stage of a single process of reproducing
a final product produced from agricultural raw materials. At the
same time each sector maintains its economic independence and
relative economic individuality. In this regard it has its own
specific sector goals implemented through a system of intersector
commodity relations.

The significance of the intersector commodity circulation as a
factor determining to a great extent the economic results of
management has increased especially rapidly for agriculture.
During 1966-1970 the relative share of ROI he: and sovkhoz
expenses for payments for material deliveries and services from
nenagricultural sectors amounted to 48.5 percent of all material
expenses, during 1971-1975 it increased to 54.6 percent and in
1976 reached 61.3 percent. At the same time the sector is being
increasingly converted to a supplier of raw materials for the
processing industry. Thus, in 1959, out of a total mass of agri-
cultural output which entered circulation outside the sector,
about 43 percent was consumed by the population and almost 52
percent was used as raw material for industrial processing.
During 1972 the share of raw material amounted to 66 percent and
the share of consumed final product 31 percent.

Special requirements are made upon the planning and management
system. It must, not infringing upon sector economic interests,
orient all Sectors of the AIC towards the optimization of sector
and the maximization of final national economic results. This
presupposes the maintenance of stable, regulated intersector
economic relations which, as is stressed in the decree of the
July (1978) Plenum of the cc.CPsu "should assist in the growth
of the community and the unity or interests of the state,
kolkhozes and direct producers of products, and serve as an
active factor in the growth of labor productivit ." It was noted
at the plenum that certain negative factors wit regard to this
problem have not yet been overcome. In recent years the terms

of intersector exchange have become unfavorable for agriculture.
Prices for material resources and rates for productive services
provided to kolkhozes and sovkhozes by nonagricultural sectors

63
roa OFFICIAL us: OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have increased considerably faster than the magnitude of their
useful effects. As a result, despite the increase in procurement
prices, the amount of agricultural output exchanged for each unit
of supply and services is systematically increasing. This leads

to an unjustifiable increase in material outlays, the growth of
product nrime cost, and reductions in the profitability of kolkhoz
and sovkhoz production. In addition, technical resources for
labor are still not supplied in an integrated_manner. This reduces
the efficiency of their utilization and makes necessary the
employment of sizable quantities of manual labor and the retain-
ment of relative surplus labor in agricultural production.

most important forms of which is the final product of the agro-
industrial complex. The existing system of statistical accounting
is not yet adapted towards determining the magnitude of the A16
final product and the size of the allocations to each sector
participating in the production of a given product. This leads

culties in AIC planning and in the development of an
effective system for economically orienting each sector towards
the maximization of final product.

This is why it is necessary to develop methods for calculating
the size of AIC final product which would realistically evaluate
the share of each sector in its formation. The first attempt

at solving this problem was made by M. Bydelnan on the basis

of the intersector report for 1972. ‘Such a methodological
approach was necessary. However, it was very complex and the
potential for its uSe is restricted. It is therefore necessary
to reconstruct the entire system of statistical accounting for
AIC sector activity in order to obtain information on the

role and share in the production of final product. Such a
restructuring requires the solution of a number of methodological
problems: the essence, boundaries and structure of the AIC,
methods for calculating net product and net income created in
each sector. and on this basis developing methods for calculating
final product which reliably represents the mechanism of

Alc formation in the mutually related stages of production.

The AIC is a production and economic system, the goal of which
is the expanded reproduction of objects of consumption, reserve
and export stocks of products of agricultural origin.‘
Theoretically, as an economic category of developed socialist
society, the AIC reflects the totality of economic relations
operating within the interlinkage of relatively independent.
sectors producing agricultural goods and pr0cessing them into
finished items of demand and delivering them to the consumer. It
follows from this that; first, the agroindustrial complex

6h
son orrrcra; us: ova
FOR OPI’ICIM. USE ONLY

includes only those linkages which arise in the process of
agricultural production and processing into final consumer
goods; second, all those production and economic linkages
which are irreplaceable in carrying out the target function
(tasks) are of major significance.

In its natural form, the arc final product is created mainly

in agriclature, sectors of the food and light industries, and
partially in the public food service system. The initial stage
in the reproductive process of the entire complex, the central
element of which is agriculture, is the reduction of the means
of production for the sector making up t e AIC, and the final
stage is retail trade. At all stages of the reproduction process,
sectors in the AIC infrastructure carry out service functions.
There is widespread reference in the economic literature to

the functional structure of the AIC, which reflects the sequent-
ial and parallel stages in the process of reproducing its final
product: 1 - production of the means of production for AIC
sectors; 2 - production of agricultural goods: 3 - the pro-
duction of produce, footwear. fiber and other goods from agri-
cultural raw materials; a - sales of A10 goods to the consumer
through the wholesale and retail trade system; 5 -production
and technical servicing of all stages in the reproduction cycle.
These structural elements also determine the functional boundaries
of the agroindustrial complexl. In addition, the A10 is also

a totality of relatively detached sectors, participants in econ-
omic interaction, making up the Single target function. The

Alc is a complicated multisector subdivision of the national
economy. It is (and should be) a relatively independent and
unified object of central planning.

If one views the agroindustrial complex from this perspective
then a more thorough analysis of its sectoral structure is
required. First of all, not all sectors of the national economy
sup orting the AIC with means of production can be included
wit in it. For example, motor vehicle building, the chemical
industry, and the petroleum refining industry, while playing an
important role in AIC functioning, are not included within it
and their activities are only included to the extent that they
participate in the formation of the final product of the entire
sector. This means that the sector boundaries of the AIC as a
production subdivision of the national economy substantially
differ from its functional boundaries.

Second, a number of sectors of the food and light industries
processing agricultural goods are simultaneously suppliers of
means of production to agriculture. During 1966-1975 the delch
cries of such sectors increased more than 6 fold, and, according
to our studies, in 1975 amounted to more than 9 billion rubles.

65
ran OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

As can be seen, the sector structure of the AIC is also dis-
tinguished from its functional structure. Therefore, in order

to study the mechanism of ATC final product value formation and
to calculate the share of each sector in the final effect, in
addition an analysis by stages of the reproduction process it

is also necessary to carry out a differential analysis by
elements making up its sector structure.

It is customary to consider the final product of an intersector
production complex as the output created during a definite
period of time (usually one year) and entering into personal

or productive consumption beyond the boundaries of such a
complex, i.e. not entering into the current productive use
within it. The natural, material-physical form of AIC final
product is the entire amount of items for consumption manufact-
ured from raw material of agricultural origin; agricultural
production entering into private and social consumption without
industrial processing: products entering state export and
reserve stocks, and the productive consumption of sectors in the
national economy not included within the A10.

The sum of the value of these groups of products reflects the
total magnitude of AIC final product value at the sales stage,
i.e. where it is manifested. ﬂith regards to the sources of its
formation (production), they turn out to be obscured and the
extent of AIC sector participation in their creation is dis-
torted. That is why this method for calculating AIC final
product can only be used on a restricted scale. In order to
estimate the role of each sector in the A10 in creating final
product, the production approach is necessary. This would reveal
the actual sources of formation. The starting point for this
method is the calculation of the magnitude of the net product
created in AIC sectors. This is the basis of final product value.

Net product is the totality of all value created within a definite
time unit (usually a year). In a multisector system, in which
each sector carries out a sequentially implemented stage in the
process of reproducing a single product. the magnitude of net
product created at the first stage of the cycle can be used

as a base. At all subsequent stages the newly created value is
"attached to this amount. Th the‘AIC the production of agrié
cultural goods can be considered as this stage since the sectors
carrying out subsequent stages --the production of means of pro-
duction --realize the net product created by them through prices
reaching back to the beginning of producing and processing agri-
cultural goods. At this stage all newly created value in plant
and animal raising is included in the calculation. The existing
methods of statistical accounting do not precisely reflect its
magnitude. As a result there is an artificial increase in the

66
FOR orrtcxxt cs: ostr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

magnitude of net income in the reported component of newly

created value in the sector and a corresponding reduction in
the magnitude of necessary product. In addition. not all net
product produced in agriculture is taken into consideration.

For example, in 1972 the Value of agricultural net product
statistically riported amounted (in current prices) to $9.6
billion rubles. The fund for the payment of labor expended in
the production of agricultural products at state enterprises
and kolkhozes was 28 billion rubles and the amount of net
product realized by agricultural enterprises was 8 billion
rubles. The remaining 23.6 billion rubles ($9.6 - 28.0 -8)

is considered the net income of the population engaged in
individual operations. The latter cannot be considered proper,
since, first of all, private subsidiary operations are organ-
ically linked with public production at kolkhozes and state
agricultural enterprises and function with the constant partic-
iﬁation of their productive resources. Consequently, part of

t e value of its goods is produced by the labor of workers in
the public sector and is only sold in the private sector.
Secondly. the payment of labor in the state and kolknoz sectors
is below the socially normal level and private operations

are objectively a source of part of the necessary product.

All this means that with regard to itseconomic nature newly
created value in private su sidiary operations is divided into
three parts: necessary product created by the labor of workers
in social production; necessary product created by the labor of
workers engaged in private subsidiary operations; surplus product
created by them. If one assumes that t e average social
magnitude of outlays for the reproduction of labor power is at
the level of wages in nonagricultural sectors of the national
economy, then the first part amounts to 9.2 billion rubles, the
second 8.2 and the third 6.2 billion. Then the structure of
newly created Value in agriculture will be as follows (in
billions of rubles):

Public sector 37.2v r 8.0m I45.2
Private sector 8.2V + 6.2m '14.4
as. v + I n . O

A question arises in the analysis of these figures; yhy does the
norm for surplus Eroduct in the private sector turn out to be
several times hig er than in the public sector? Theoretically
there should not only be no difference here, but, on the contrary
in the public sector, characterized by a higher level of labor
productivity the surplus product norm should be higher than in
the private sector.

6?
FOR OFFICIAL vs: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is due to inaccuracy in statistical reporting. The "$50
TSSU [Central Statistical Administration , summing up data
on the size of the net product created in agriculture states
that it is reduced since part of the net product of agriculture
is accumulated in the centralized net income of the state by a
system of turnover taxes and is included in industry, that is,
not at the site of its creation, but at the site of its sales.3

As is known, the turnover tax not only has a function.of
accumulating net income in the centralized net income of the
state, but also serves as a tool for redistributing primary
incomes. In this case we are not interested in the economic
nature of its component parts, but in its primary sources, from
which part of the centralized net income is received by the
state. Agriculture is one of these. Part of the net income
created in this, the material basis of which is the surplus

net income in the form of differential rent is, in the course of
intersector exchange, shifted to the processing industry and
realized in the form of industrial product prices. Naturally, the
problem arises of justifying the incidence of the turnover

tax on production and the industrial processing of agricultural
raw materials, and between sectors carrying out these functions.

This task is solved in various ways: the method of determining
the magnitude of differential rent on the basis of calculating
unit prices, the method of calculating outlays of reduced labor
based upon intersector balances, and others. All these produce
roughly equivalent results. Since the first method is disting- -
uished by high labor intensity and requires special study of the
quality of farm lands , in this case we prefer the method of
calculating reduced labor outlays. In 197 , the light and food
industries processed 50.3 percent of agricultural gross output.
This means that out of the average annual total of 28.7 million
agricultural workers, 14.4 million were engaged in the production
of such raw materials. About 3.4 million annual workers in

the light industry sector were engaged in the industrial process-

ing of agricultural raw material, and in the food industry
the figure is 1.7 million.

A coefficient of 1.2 was used in order to reduce labor at indust-
rial sectorss In the study it was established that of the labor
outlays for the production and processing of raw material of
agricultural origin 70.2 percent were in agriculture, 19.8
percent and 10.0 percent respectively went to the light and

food industries. This computed structure was used to delineate
the share of agriculture in the part of the turnover tax which

is placed upon the light and food industries on the sales of
products made from agricultural raw material.

68
FOR OFFICIAL use 031!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1972 agriculture accounted for about 26 billion rubles of
the total turnover tax entering the state's centralized net
income from sectors engaged in the processing of agricultural
products. The total net product amounted to 85.6 billion rubles
(59.6 + 26.0). Kolkhozes and state agricultural enterprises
are the suppliers of the overwhelming share of raw material to
the processing industries.0ne can therefore be completely
justified in including this part of net income as the public
sectqr,of production. The structure of its net product also
changes correspondingly. In the ublic sector it amounts to
71.2 billion rubles (45.2 + 26.0 , and in the private sector
remains as before --l4.4 billion rubles.

The second stage in the study is the determination of the value
of the "attached" net product created in the food and light
industries, in infrastructure sectors and the circulation
sphere. The value of the net product of these sectors is cal-
culated on the basis of total wages, profits, and turnover tax.

In order to determine the net income of these sectors accruing

to agroindustrial production, coefficients based upon intersector
balances and current statistical materials which indicate the
relative share of raw materials entering these sectors from
agriculture and the percentage of sector workers engaged in

its processing and the percentage of services provided to the
sectors making up the complex by sectors in the infrastructure
and circulation sphere have been developed.

Sectors of the food industry, with the exception of the
fisheries induztry, work almost can letely with agricultural
raw materials. Therefore part of t e net product of these
sectors is included in_the arc. The net product of sectors in
the light industry is included in the AIC in proportion to
outlays for labor utilized in the processing of agricultural
raw material. The size of the net product created in trade, the
procurement system, material-technical sugply, transport and
communications is determined similarly. T e size and structure
of net product value for 1972 calculated by this method and
arranged by groups of sectors making up the AlC is as follows:

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Not Including Norm For

product surplus
(hill. Nccgssgry Surglu: nroduct )
uhles pro UC DTO 0C ercnnt
’ ) (bill. (hill. (p
ruhles) rubles)
Agriculture 85.6 45.4 40.2 88.5
Including
Public Sector 71.2 37.2 34.0 91.4
Private sector 14.4 8.2 6.2 76.5

Food industry 14.0 3.5 10.5 300.0

Light industry 16.7 4.5 12.2 271.1

Trade and public

food service, pro-

curement, material-

technical supply,

and sales 13.1 6.7 6.4 95.5

Transport (freight),

and communications

in service of

production 2.4 1.2 1.2 100.0

For AIC as a whole 131.8 61.3 70.5 115.0

Materials for the calculation of the size and structure of net
product and net income of the agroindustrial complex produce
extensive and important information for the analysis of the inter-
sector relationship of economic conditions and results of economic
activity. The dynamics of these indicators can be used to

improve the planned management of intersector linkages in

t e AIC.

From 1966 to 1975 the size of AIC net product increased from

96.0 to 146.2 billion rubles, or by 52.3 percent. The lowest
rates of growth in net income were in agriculture. As a result
the relative share of this sector in total AIC net income was
reduced From 72.5 percent to 62 percent, while for the remaining
sectors it increased. This is a normal process, indicating

the intensification of the division of labor, improvements in the
socialization of production in the AIC, and the constant tendency
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

towards the transformation of agriculture into n specializod
"pure" sector engaged directly in plant and animal raising.

Concurrently. attention should he directed towards two conditions:
First, the high norm for surplus product in the processing
industry sectors. This is due to a number of factors, in partic-
ular the higher level of labor productivitv here, compared to
that in agriculture. To a certain extent the surplus product
norm influences price dynanics. There is a large di€£erence
between procurement prices for agricultural raw materials and
wholesale prices for processed products entering agriculture
from these sectors. For example. during 1966-1976 procurement
prices for grain did not change, but prices for mixed feeds
delivered to agriculture from the food industry doubled. nuring
these years the deliveries of mixed feeds to kolkhozes and
sovkhozes increased 2.8 fold, while their monetary cost,
in current prices increased 5.7 fold. The second factor is the
high growth rates of net product and net income in the sectors
of the circulation sphere, in which the systems of procurement
Tgteriaiitpchnical supppy and sales occupy a signif cant share
ee ta e

tructure o - Avera e annual
net product growt rate of

(percent) AIC net roduct
(percent

1966 1972 1966-1975

 

Agriculture 72.5 64.2 62.0 3.0
Light industry 10.4 12.7 13.8 8.0
Food industry 9.7 10.6 11.6 6.9

Trade, procurement,
material-technical

supply and sales 5.7 9.9 10.5 12.1

TranSport and

communications 1.7 1.9 2.1 7.3

AIC as a whole 100.0 100.0 100.0 4.7
71

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such a relationship of growth rates can hardly be justified.
Characteristically, the growth in net income per 1 percent
growth in wages during 1966-1975 in agriculture was 1.3 percent
while the number of employees was reduced, in sectors in the
circulation sphere it was more than 1.5 percent, in spite of
the fact that the average annual growth rate in the we es fund
in such sectors was 9.2 ercent w th an average rate a such
growth in the AIC as a w ole of 4 percent. Obviously, the
difference between sectors in the Alc with regard to surplus
product norms and growth rates of net product is to a consider-
able extent explained by proportions in intrasector exchange
which are unfavorable for agriculture.

Examined from a value perspective, the final product of the A16
is the total net product created in AIC sectors, amortization
deductions made from fixed productive capital, the value of
objects of labor and productive services obtained from sectors
producing means of production and conducting production service
unctions (for example, repair, land improvement construction,
and the servicing of water resources systems, etc). The final
product of the AIC should include the net product and amort-
zation deductions of specialized sectors in machinery building
producing the means of labor for all other sectors of the A16.

With regard to the objects of labor. the AIC final product
should include the va ue of those goods from outside of the

the complex. This will take place in due course when the
agroindustrial complex is formed as a relatively independent
subsystem of the national economy and as an integral object
of management. Now, however, when this formation has not yet
occurred,the calculation of the value of subjects of labor
created in these sectors and used for the production of A10
final product is the sole method for reflecting the growing
role of these sectors in the creation of food products and
other consumer goods manufactured from agricultural raw
materials.

Output directed towards intrasector production are intermediate
products, just like the value of agricultural raw materials
entering the processing industry within the complex. The final
product of these elements is reflected through the size of

net product. One should keep in mind that a sizable share of

the subjects of labor (all seeds and part of the feed) created
in agriculture for intersector consumption are stocks at the
beginning of the year. That is, they are intended for consumption
in a future period and consequently should be included in AIC
final product. To the extent that it is assumed that the value
of seeds and ‘feeds consumed in a given period of production are
equal to the value of these subjects of labor intended for a
future period we include this magnitude in final product..

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

However, such values do not coincide and consequently in
calculating AIC final product their differences should be
taken into consideration.

The contemporarK information base does not permit the direct
estimation of t a magnitude and structure of A16 final product.
It is necessary to carry out complex and laborious calculations
using materials from intersector balances, current sector and
general state statistics in order, in particular to determine
the share of each sector in AIC final product; We made the
calculations of amortization deductions of fixed capital similar
to the net product calculation with the help of specially
developed coefficients.

At the present stage of its formation AIC final product value
is broken down into the following elements: magnitude of net
product created in agriculture; part of the net product of
sectors of the food and light industries, sectors of the
service sphere, transport and communications (engaged in
production servicing) rendered to the processing, transport
and sales of agricultural output and processed products; amort-
ization deductions from the value of fixed productive capital
of agriculture, sectors of the processing industry, the circul-
ation sphere, transport and communications utilized for the
production, processing, transport, and sales of agricultural
products and processed items; the value of subjects of labor
entering agriculture, the processing industry, the circulation
sphere, and transport and communications from resource producing
sectors to the extent that they are utilized for the production,
transport, processing and sales of agricultural products and
processed good. In the approgriate accounting one can also
include here the difference etween the value of goods of.
agricultural origin productively consumed in agriculture in a
given year and the value of their reserves at the beginning

of the subsequent year.

The agroindustrial complex is characterized by an abundance of
intersector linkages. A given sector is a supplier and consumer
of the same types of products. An orientation towards the
gross turnover between results in the complication of the
accounts and double counting, which amounts up to 40 percent

of gross output volume, but also promotes increases in unprod-
uctive expenditures. This is especially manifest in the operat-
ion of the procurement system, where counter flows of the same
types of products assume gigantic scales. For example, in

1960, 15.4 percent of the total grain procured was returned

to agricultural enterprises in the form of feed and seed ,
while in 1976 the figure had reached 36.6 percent. This leads
to unjustifiable increases in agricultural enterprise Production

73
FOR OFFICIAL us: ova
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

costs. In our opinion it is necessary to decisively move
towards the planning not of commercial or gross output, but
final product, taking into consideration t e real scales of
lntrn complex commodity circulation, which should he based
primarily on direct intersector linkages formalized hy the
appropriate contracts.

Sector Structure and Dynamics of Agroindustrial Complex Final

"OM“ 1966 1972 1975

o . o o
- rub. total rub. total rub. total
Capital
sectors 19.0 16.5 38.4 22.6 56.4 27.8
Agriculture 69.6 60.5 85.6 50.3 90.7 44.8
Food
industry 9.3 8.1 14.0 8.2 16.9 8.3
Light
industry 10.0 8.7 16.7 9.8 20.2 10.0

Sectors in the

sphere of cir-

culation

(public food

service, pro-

curement,

material-

technical

supply and

sales 5.5 4.8 13.1 7.7 15.4 7.6

Transport

(freight)

and

communications 1.6 1.4 2.4 1.4 3.0 1.5

Entire AIC
final product 115,0 100.0 170.2 100.0 202.6 100.0

Including
net product 96.0 131.8 146.2

71.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1966
2.968

1,303
1.817

2.020

2.800

1.875

1,762

1,523
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to obtain the sector structure of final product in
the process of its distribution between AIC sectors, the sum
of amortization deductions From fixed productive capital of
industrial origin, and the value of subjects of labor are
included in the share of resource producing sectors. The share
of the remaining sectors in AIC final product is primarily
net product.

During the decade from 1966 to 1975 the structural dynamics of
final product clearly reVealed a tendency towards reducing the
share of agriculture and increasing the share of remaining AIC
sectors. There was an especially rapid increase in the share

of resource producing sectors supplying means of production and
productive services. During l966~197s the value which these
sectors contributed to AIC final product increased almost 3
fold, including 2.3 fold for products of light industry and
transport, 2.4 fold for the food industry and circulation sphere,
3.4 fold for agricultural products, with an increase of net

product amounting to 30.3 percent. There are theoretical ex lan-
ations for this process of more rapid growth rates of mater al

expenditures compared to growth rates of net product. However,
in each specific case, the size 0? the more rapid increase is
determined by several optimal boundaries. .Output material
intensity is one of the indicators of these boundaries.

During these years the index of material intensity per unit of
agricultural output calculated by the physical volume of the
delivery of means of production to agriculture from nonagricul-
tural amounted to 1.79, while the index of material expenditures
of the sector for their payment in money terms was 2.38. This
means that the total index for the price of delivered means of
production was 1.33. According to our studies, during these
years the price of a unit of capacity in the tractor fleet

and its "train" of agricultural machinery increased by 1.8

fold, the price of mixed feeds by 2 fold, the units of productive
area in livestock raising by 2.3 fold, and in swine raising

by almost 4 fold. This lead to corresponding increases in
amortization deductions. This process, improving the conditions
in resource producing sectors leads to reductions in growth
rates of agricultural net income.

Compensations For the growth in material outlays through
increased procurement prices to some extent promote the normal-
ization of conditions for expanded reproduction in agriculture,
but cause corresponding changes in the level of material outlays

in the processing sectors, increased rates for services rendered
by sectors in the circulation sphere and the infrastructure,

and in the final event give rise to a tendency towards
hidden increase in retail prices. In other words, in the

75
ran OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

course of intersector exchange a process of redistributing

net product created in agriculture takes place. For example,

the volume of work for the repair and technical servicing

of enterprises in ﬂosselkhozte hnika rendered to bolkhozes and
sovkhozes increased by 3.9 fold in monetary terms during
1966-1917. The profits From these operations increased by

5.3 fold. The volume of procured agricultural roducts '
increased by 50.7 percent. During this period t e profit of
enterprises and institutions in the procurement system

increaseg from 668 to 1,364 million rubles, i.e. it more than
doubled. The magnitude of net income at kolkhozes and sovkhozes
during this period has practically no change, while the profit-
ability level constantly declined. Increases in agriculture's
material outlays, involving above all the growth in prices for
industrial goods and services. and related increases in pro-
curement pr ces accompanied by stable retail prices have had

a number of negative effects hindering progressive changes in
AIC production structure, and in the systems of retail trade,
transportation services and communications. Therefore the instru-
ctions of the July (1978) Plenum of the cc CPSU on the necessity
of seriously improving economic relations between sectors of the
agroindustrial complex are of special significance.

The final product indicator can play an important role in the
implementation of these instructions, since it can be the basis
for obtaining a reliable estimate of the results of AlC prod-
uctive activity in general. and role of each sector within it.
This will help solve the problem of orienting all sectors in
the complex towards the maximization of national economic
results. The suggested methodology for calculating final product
can in principle be implemented on the basis of official stati
istical information from the T58" and a number of coefficients
calculated on the basis of data from national economic inter-
sector balances. This involves quite laborious computations.

With appropriate improvements in statistical reporting this

work could be carried out with less labor and with a higher
degree of accuracy. Therefore, it seems to us under contemporary
conditions it is very necessary to restructure the accounting
system for the productive activity of the A16 and its sectors.
It is above all essential to bring some order into annual
information on the value of means of production enterin the

AIC from capital producing sectors, on the share of agricultural
products in the raw materials of processing industry sectors,
the number of workers engaged in rocessing agricultural raw
materials, and to the extent to which trade and transport
participate in servicing AIC sectors. The availability of this
information will permit the development of a single proven and
sufficiently simple algorithm for calculating AIC final product

76
roa orrxcm as: om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which will ensure the practically conplete reflection of
its formation processes at various stages of reproduction.

FODTNOTES

Sone economists distinguish sector infrastructure as an
independent sphere of the A10. In this work we will not

take that position, since we see our task as the analysis

of only the production functions of the Alt which are
reflected in the final product.

See."Narodnoye Khozyavstvo SSSR v 1975 godu"[Nationa1'
Economy of the USSR during 1975], Statistical annual,
Izdatel'stvo Statistika, 1976, p 564.

op. sit.p $64

VOPROSY EKONOHIKI No 4, 1975, p S9."Narodnove Khozyavstvo

533:: v 1975 aodu" National Economy of the USS» during 1975]
p 110.

H. Eydel'm n, "Mezhotraslevov balans obshchestvennogo

produkta" Intersector Balance of the Social Product) "oscow.
p 361.

The share of agriculture in the raw material base of the
sector (without fisheries) was 96.4 percer‘ in 1972. See
"Narodnoye Khozyaystvo SSSR v 1975 godu". pp 101-108.

We did not include the value of imported agricultural raw
materials entering the A16 into its final product because,
in our opinion only real internal resources measure the
productive capacity of the AIC.

. "Narodnoye Khozyaystvo SSSP v 1977" [National Economv of the

USSR During 197” , lzaatel'stvo Statistika, 1978, p 541.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", ""onrosv eronomiki", 1979

11.

574

C80: 1820 END

77
Fox OFFICIAL use ONLY