l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10414

26 March 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES
(FOUO 4/82)

FOREIGNBROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
_ [l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.

Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source. ‘

Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT IAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500040060-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR REPORT
HUMAN Resouacss

(3000 3/82)
CONTENTS

LABOR

Efficient Use of Labor in 11th Five-Year Plan
(N. Rogovsldy; VOPROSY EKONCMIKI, Jan 82) ..

DEIOGRAPHY

Book Discusses Demography of Family, Individual Lil
(DEBORAH WHAYUT, SPORYAT, SOVETUIUT, 198]

- a - (III

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000600040060-6
EFFICIENT USE OF LABOR IN 11TH FIVE-YEAR PLAN
Moscow VOPROSY EKDNOHIKI in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 3-11
lzrticle by N. Rogovskiy: "Labor Efficiency in the 11th Five-Year Planff

lTexE] The 26th CPSU Congress devoted much attention to the questions of the im-
provement of the use of manpower resources. .And this is quite natural: the meet-
ing of the need of the national economy for manpower since 1981 has become compli-
cated, since the adverse demographic situation, which formed primarily during the
postwar years due to the disturbance of the normal sex-age structure of the popula-
tion, is beginning to appear. The young people, who were born of mothers of war
years of birth, are coming of able-bodied age. At the same time large contingents
of adult men and women are exceeding able-bodied age.

with respect to individual regions the situation of manpower resources is forming
differently: in the RSPSR and the Ukraine an absolute decrease of the size of the
population of able-bodied age will occur, while in the republics of Central Asia,
Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Armenia and Moldavia the relatively high growth rate of the
able-bodied population will be maintained. There will be an especially tight situ-
ation in the central regions of the RSFS'.

However, many workers of ministries and departments, associations, enterprises, in-
stitutions and organizations treat this situation as something of no concern to
them, believing that it is impossible to do without an increase of the number of
employed people with the introduction of new capacities and the increase of the
output of products. Until recently the executives of many enterprises envisaged
in the plans approved by them increases of the number of workers and employees,
which exceeded by twofold the estimated number which is determined by USSR Gosplan
on the basis of the balance of manpower resources. The incorrect determination of
the necessary number decreases production efficiency, since it does not direct the
attention of the executives of ministries, associations and enterprises toward the
efficient use of manpower resources and, what is especially alarming, objectively
disposes them to the extensive path of development.

Often the attempt is made to explain the shortcomings in the organization of produc-
tion and labor, the inability to establish the proper order in the use of operating
equipment and its modernization and the lack of plans of the complete mechaniza-
tion and automation of production proceaSes by the want of manpower. At new enter-
prises and institutions the need for manpower can be met only in the case of the
further substantial increase of labor productivity.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a was we ray-rah wot. Ul‘lal

ization of production and labor during the 10th Five-Year Plan the productivity of
national labor increased 17 percent. In industry 75 percent of the increase of
output, the entire increase of agricultural output and 95 percent of the increase
of the amount of construction and installation work were obtained by means of the
increase of labor productivity. However, the assignments on this most important
indicator, which were established in the five—year plan, were not completely ful-
filled. This is explained first of all by the fact that the reequipment of labor
was carried out in an inadequate amount: the achievements of science and technol-
ogy were introduced slowly in production and the replacement of obsolete equipment

small amount. The serious shortcomings in the organization of labor also had an
adverse effect: technically sound output norms, especially for workers whose wages
are based on a time rate, were poorly introduced; the idle times, unauthorized ab-
senses from work and turnover of workers are great, the shift coefficient in prac-
tice is not increasing.

eastern regions of the country was intensified, which required greater ex-
penditures of labor. In a number of sectors of the mining industry the content of
metal in the ores decreased, and as a result the labor expenditures increased.

In the total volume of industrial production the share of the food and several
other sectors of industry with a relatively higher output of products per worker
as compared with the average output for industry decreased. In construction during
the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan nothing new happened in the area of the mecha-
nization of labor and the introduction of advanced materials and designs, which ad-
versely affected labor productivity in the sector.

The acceleration of the growth rate of labor productivity in all sectors of physi-
cal production is called for by the Basic Directions of USSR Economic and Social
Development for 1981-1985 and the Period to 1990. In industry labor productivity
should increase by 23~25 percent. At the same time the increase of output due to
the increase of labor productivity should come to 90 percent. This means that at
operating enterprises the entire increase of output should be provided by the in-
crease of labor productivity, while at many of them it should be provided even with
a decrease of the number of workers. In construction it is envisaged to increase
labor productivity by 15 percent, owing to which 100 percent of the increase of
construction and installation work is being achieved, while in rail transport it

is envisaged to increase labor productivity by [0-12 percent (86 percent of the in-
crease of the freight turnover).

The achievement of such high indicators, of course, cannot be guaranteed without
serious work on the identification of the reserves available at enterprises and
their efficient use. Such work first of all must begin with the elaboration of
specific measures on the significant decrease of the number of workers engaged in
manual operations. It is impossible to link this question only with the complica-
tion of the demographic situation. The decrease of manual and difficult labor is
an independent and very important social sphere of activity at enterprises.

2
FOR OFFICIAL lﬂﬂE¢NVLY
Ministers on the improvement of the economic mechanism, assignments on the reduc-
tion of the use of manual labor are established for USSR ministries and departments
in the five-year plan for 1981-1985. However, no matter how good a plan indicator
might be, it cannot yield the anticipated results, if work ensuring the outlined
reduction of manual labor is not performed before and after its approval. This
means that comprehensive programs of automation and mechanization, in which first
of all the production of more perfect machines, equipment, instruments and devices
and their extensive introduction in all production processes would be envisaged,
should be elaborated by every ministry and department, association and enterprise.

ductive sphere, in which about one-third of all workers are employed at present.
During the Ninth and 10th Five-Year Plans the increase of the number of workers

crease of the number of workers in the nonproductive sphere by the considerable en-
largement of the sphere of the norm setting of labor. Such more advanced norms
than the prevailing ones should be elaborated by the Ministry of Trade, Tsentro-
soyuz, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health and other ministries and
departments, under the jurisdiction of which there are institutions and organiza-
tions of the sphere of service. The limits of the number in the annual and five-

It also seems expedient to expand the application of the Shchekino method, which
ensures the fulfillment of a grcater amount of work with a smaller number of per-
sonnel in the sectors of the nonproductive sphere, including institutions of sci-
ence and scientific service, having permitted not only workers, but also engineer-
ing and technical personnel and employees to combine occupations (positions). At
the same time collective piece-rate wage should have been used more extensively
at enterprises and organizations for the rendering of services to the population
(public dining, trade and so on), which would have stimulated the release of ex-
cess personnel, the filling up of the workday and the development of interchange-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run venuun. var. URL!

management staff. According to a preliminary estimate, the number of these workers
in 1980 came to 15 percent of the number of workers and employees. The government
has restricted somewhat the rights of the executives of ministries, departments,
councils of ministers of the union republics, associations and enterprises and has
permitted them to approve the staffs for operating and new enterprises and institu-
tions not within the limits of the plan on labor, as was done until now, but within
the limits of the maximua allocations for administrative and management expendi-
tures, which are established in the state budget.

A certain limitation of the increase of the number of workers at institutions of
science and scientific service and at all other institutions and organizations,
which are financed from the budget, including design institutes and bureaus, will
be a definite source of the meeting of the need for manpower of the sectors of
physical production, especially of the central regions of the country.

At the 26th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev said that our veterans must be enlisted
more extensively in labor activity, particularly in the sphere of service, of
course, to the extent of their possibility and with allowance made for the need of
the national economy. Under present conditions this is a very important task. At
the same time the strictest steps should be taken with respect to people who de-
liberately evade socially useful activity. There are also other reserves, the ef-
ficient use of which could improve the provision of.the national economy with man-
power. It is necessary to use work at home more extensively, which for the present
is being done on a inadequate scale. But meanwhile the experience of work in some
socialist countries, which for a long time have used the labor of homeworkers, at-
tests that it is possible to derive a significant advantage from this, especially
in the increase of the production of mass demand goods and services requiring pay-
ment. At present the number of homeworkers in our country comes uaabout 200,000.
It is expedient for their number to be increased significantly.

The use of the manpower of kolkhozes and sovkhozes between seasons is of great im-
portance. From December to February millions of kolkhoz farmers are nor involved
in the public sector. The production cooperation of state industrial tnterprises
with kolkhozes and sovkhozes, for example, in the production of simpre parts, as-
semblies, semimanufactures, packaging, wrapping materials and so on, began to
spread in recent years. Positive experience in this respect has been gained by the
LOMO and Skorokhod production associations, the Moscow Radio Plant, the Novaya
zarya Perfume Factory and other enterprises.

Various sections am! shops of industrial enterprises, which would use the labor of
kolkhoz farmers and the workers of sovkhozes between seasons, should be set up in

rural areas during the years of the llth Five-Year Plan. As rough estimates show,
hundreds of thousands of people could be involved in this form of the organization
of production.

The more extensive dissemination of work with a partial workday or a partial work
week merits serious attention. At present employment in the national economy with
a partial workday amounts uaonly about 500,000 people, or less than 0.5 percent of
the total number of workers and employees. At the same time the number of women.
who have children and work a partial work week, came to about 120,000 (according to
the data as of 1 July 1978), including 28,000 in industry, 8,000 at sovkhozes,
4,600 in construction and about 82,000 in other sectors of the national economy.

in
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
In many sectors of the national economy real possibilities exist for the more ex-
tensive enlistment of women having children in various jobs, as well as of other
categories of the population (retirees, the disabled, students and others) in work
with a partial workday (partial work week). However, many executives of enter-
prises are still refraining from the enlistment of women in work and of people with
a limited capacity for work in a job with a partial workday.

It is necessary for USSR ministries and departments, the local soviets of people's
deputies and labor departments when drafting the plans of the provision of subor-
dinate enterprises and organizations with manpower for 1981-1985 to envisage the
more extensive enlistment, where conditions permit, of woman having children and
people with a limited capacity for work in a job with a partial workday. Previous-
ly this was hindered by the fact that these contingents of working people were in-
cluded in the limits of the number, which were approved in the plan. Now the situ-
ation has changed. The USSR Council of Ministers has established that the people
working a partial workday or partial work week, as well as at home. are not taken
into account in the limit of the number of workers and employees. Thus, extensive
opportunities have been afforded to enterprises and associations for the enlistment
of considerable contingents of workers in work.

The greater involvement of women and people of retirement age in social production
would be promoted by a well-elaborated list of occupations and jobs, in which it is
most expedient and efficient to use their labor. The USSR State Committee for La-
bor and Social Problems with the participation of ministries should do this.

The more extensive use of the holding of more than one job, which in our country
amounts to only about 2 percent of the total number of workers and employees, is
among the factors which increase the efficiency of the use of manpower resources.
Extensive opportunities for the expansion of the system of the combining of occupa-
tions were afforded by the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Coun-
cil of Ministers on the improvement of the economic mechanism. Apparently, this
must also be extended to the holders of more than one job, who work in the sectors
of nonphysical production.

In the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th party con-
gress L. I. Brezhnev emphasized the need for the leveling of social differences
with a breakdown by territories. At the same time it is difficult to ensure the
organized distribution and redistribution of manpower resources, if up to now con-
siderable differences exist in the cultural and personal living conditions of the
population by regions of the country. The lag in this respect of Siberia and in:
Far East, which are richest in natural, fuel, energy and raw material resources,
on the basis of which the intensive development of productive forces is envisaged
during the 11th Five-Year Plan and beyond it, is especially intolerable. Until
now it was believed that the attraction of the necessary manpower to these regions
could be achieved by means of various wage increments. However, such an assumption
has far from completely justified itself. The cost of living in the eastern re-
gions as compared with the European regions still remains higher. The preferences
and benefits in the wage, which are in effect there, with the exception of the re-
gions of the Far North and the regions equated with them, do not take fully into
account the additional expenditures of the population, which are connected with
the peculiar natural and climatic conditions. Moreover, they continue to lag be-
hind the European regions in the development of housing and municipal services,
institutions of health, cultural and personal service. "That is why,"

5
ma omaat use ONLY
I'UK Ufl'lblAL UDI'. UNI-Y

L. I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress, "we are planning during the current
five—year plan to carry out even more rapidly in these regions the construction of
housing and the entire sociocultural complex and to improve the supply of the popu-
lation with mass demand goods. Everyone will agree that,the situation here must
be changed, and as soon as possible!"

However, not only Siberia and the Far East, but also the regions of the Noncherno-
zem Zone of the RSFSR, where the increased outflow of the rural population to the
cities and beyond the region is continuing, are arousing anxiety. The solution of
the problem of attaching the rural population of the Nonchernozem Zone of the
RSFSR requires the taking of cardinal steps on the improvement of the economy and
the social development of kolkhozes and sovkhozes. A comprehensive program of the
development of agriculture and the social transformation of rural population cen—
ters is now being implemented in this zone. The continuation of the work in this
direction is called for in the five-year plan, and the maximum effort must be ex-
erted so that the five-year plan of the comprehensive development of the Noncherno—
zem Zone would be fulfilled.

A special task faces the republics of Central Asia and the Caucasus. In the region
the number of workplaces will be increased substantially, first of all in the
sphere of physical production. This will be conducive to the increase of the so-
cial mobility of the indigenous inhabitants and the creation of the conditions for
the territorial redistribution of manpower resources in the interests of the de-
velopment of production in both these and other regions of the country. L. I.
Brezhnev said that "it is necessary to involve the population of these places more
actively in the development of new territories of the country. And, of course, to
develop here the works necessary for the national economy, to carry out more ex-
tensively the training of skilled workers of the indigenous nationality, first of
all from among rural young people." The means of the further work on increasing
the efficiency of the use of the manpower resources of Central Asia and the Cauca-
sus are specified in this conclusion. USSR Gosplsn, the USSR State Committee for
Labor and Social Problems and the councils of ministers of the corresponding union
republics should elaborate measures on the realization of this very important con-
clusion.

I would like to speak briefly about so—called daily commuting. In the USSR the
process of urbanization is developing rapidly. The proportion of the urban popula-
tion in 1950 was about 40 percent, while on 1 January 1980 63 percent of the popu-
lation of our country already lived in cities. The process of urbanization is also
characterized by the rapid increase of the number of large cities, including city
giants. In all during the years of Soviet power 1,188 cities have been formed.

But it is well known that industry is the main city-forming factor. And indeed,
there is no city in the country, in which there are no industrial enterprises, for
which, of course, considerable contingents of manpower were required, which in most
instances could not be provided by means of the available population. Thus, the
population of cities increased due to a large influx of rural inhabitants. A sig-
nificant portion of the peasants, having become workers, moved for permanent resi-
dence to the cities, while others, as in the pest, live in rural areas or in the
suburbs and merely go to work in the cities. The available data attest that at
present many people, who live in rural areas and the suburbs and work in the
cities, often spend up to 2 hours traveling in one direction. Thus, our society

is incurring enormous losses from a spontaneous process which cannot be controlled
by anyone-odaily commuting. And it is a matter not only of the loss of time, but

6
FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MULY
also of the social consequences of such a forced "way of spending time": for these
people nearly all the free time is spent on travels. No time is left for cultural
recreation-—the theater, the movies, self-education and so on.

be studied from the beginning of the 11th Five-Year Plan. It seems expedient to
begin the work in this area first of all with a comprehensive study of daily com-
muting. Here specific recommendations on the normalization of this process by in-
dividual regions and cities should be elaborated. Foremost attention must be de-
voted to the regions, in which the distances, the time spent on traveling and the
number of commuters are the maximum, and particularly to such cities as Moscow,
Leningrad, Khar'kov, Donetsk, Dnepropetrovsk, Sverdlovsk, Chelyabinsk and others.

Two opinions are expressed in economic literature. Some authors believe that all
"out-of-towners" should be resettled at the place of their job, others propose. on
the contrary, to build new enterprises or branches of operating urban enterprises
in rural areas. The second suggestion seems more practicable to us. Indeed, sev-
eral hundred thousand people travel to work in Moscow from the suburbs. If sudden-
ly they all moved to Moscow for permanent residence, the size of the population of
this city would increase due to commuters alone by 15-20 percent, which from all
points of view is inadmissible. Apparently, the further increase of the number of
inhabitants of large cities must be checked in every possible way. Hence, a second

branches). It is necessary to do this, since under the present conditions of soci-
ety it is impossible to accept the fact that millions of people are wasting their
time. In this connection the work carried out by the Moscow ZIL Production Associa-
tion on the creation of subsidiaries in the outlying area, which enabled the asso-
ciation to greatly increase the output of products and to use manpower locally,
merits serious attention. Many other enterprises are also taking this path, which
must be encouraged in every possible way.

The improvement of the norm setting of labor is one of the effective means of the
economy of labor expenditures. Meanwhile some ministries are inadequately carrying
out the work on the revision of obsolete and too low norms in accordance with
established procedure. USSR ministries and departments, associations and enter-
prises should sharply increase the proportion of the technically sound norms for
piece-rate jobs, first of all auxiliary jobs, using extensively intersectorial and
sectorial norms and standards. It seems to us that associations and enterprises
shOuld have annual and five-year plans on the revision of the output norms on the
basis of the technical improvement of production. Moreover, maximum amounts of the
exceeding of the output norms should be established. It is impossible even to
recognize it to be normal when the prevailing output norms are exceeded by 1.5- to
2-fold and are not revised for a long time.

Serious attention should also be devoted to the improvement of the use of working
time. At many enterprises and construction projects the losses of shift time are
still large, due to which a large number of workers and a large amount of equipment
are idle. What are the causes of idle times? About half of them are due to short-
comings in material and technical supply and the organization of production and la-

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I VI VI‘I‘ILlI‘L but. Ul‘LI

end of the month, the quarter and at times the year, which in the end gives rise to
the unevenness of the work and forces them to retain a reserve number of workers.
But there are also other causes: the disorderliness of the organization of produc-
tion at the enterprises themselves, the disintegration of the work of individual
shops and sections, shortcomings in the service of workplaces (the lack of the nec-
essary tools, the unsatisfactory operation of intraplant and shop transportation
for the delivery to the workplace of blanks and parts, the maladjustment of equip-
menr due to shortcomings in current and capital repair and so on, for which the
executives of enterprises are to blame).

Considerable losses are connected, unfortunately, with violations of labor disci-
pline. These are first of all unauthorized absences from work, late arrivals to
work and the early leaving from it, the unsatisfactory organization of lunch breaks
and so forth. The drive for the filling up of the workday and the tightening up of
production and labor discipline should always be at the center of attention of the
executives of ministries, associations and enterprises.

It is hardly necessary to speak of the fact that the increase of the efficiency and
quality of work is directly dependent on the increase of the personal material in-
terest of workers and employees in the results of their labor.

In conformity with the policy of the CPSU, which is aimed at the steady increase of
the material and cultural standard of living of the Soviet people, the planned in-
crease and improvement of the wage of the workers and employees engaged in the na-
tional economy were continued during the 10th Five-Year Plan. The amounts of the
wage rates and salaries of 31 million workers and employees engaged in the nonpro-
ductive sphere were increased. Rewards for seniority or for length of service are
being paid for the purpose of increasing production efficiency, attaching personnel
and tightening up labor discipline in a number of the most important sectors of the
national economy, particularly in construction and rail transport. For some groups
of workers regional coefficients have been introduced or their amounts have been
increased.

The average monthly monetary wage of workers and employees in 1980 was 168 rubles,
while with the addition of payments and benefits from public consumption funds it
was 232 rubles. However, it should be noted that the increase of the average wage for
each percent increase of labor productivity in industry in recent years was higher
than envisaged in the five-year and annual plans. This attests to the inadequate
effectiveness of the use of the wage fund.

At many enterprises of industry and other sectors of physical production the wage
does not always directly depend on the specific results of work, but is "derived"
mechanically, primarily in order at any cost not to permit the transfer of workers
to other enterprises. Such cases are completely intolerable, and they must be com—
bated, since they have nothing in common with the socialist principle of wages.

measures on the increase of the wage at the expense of centralized sources are en-
visaged in the 11th Five-Year Plan. N. A. Tikhonov spoke about this in a report at
the 26th CPSU Congress: "The increase of the monetary income of the population will
also continue. The average monthly wage of workers and employees will be increased
by l3-l6 percent. Moreover, the strengthening of the dependence of the amount of
the wage on the end results of the work of the collective and each worker should be
ensured. The gradual increase of the minimum wage to 80 rubles a month and of the

8
FOR(MHHCJA[.USE(NVLY
rates and salaries of workers and employees, first of all in the productive sectors

of the national economy, is envisaged as the conditions are created and the re-
sources are accumulated.

"It is planned to implement centrally a number of other measures: to introduce in
the Ursls and in some regions of Kazakhstan regional coefficients of the wage of
workers and employees, for whom they have not been established, raises for a con-
tinuous length of service in the southern regions of the Far East and Eastern Si-
beria, to increase the supplementary payments in some sectors for working at night.

"It is planned to allocate in terms of 1985 approximately 10 billion rubles for the
implementation of new measures in the area of the increase of wages.

"The pay of kolkhoz farmers will increase by 20-22 percent. With allowance made
for the income from the private plot the income of kolkhoz farmers will come close
to the income of workers and employees."

The implementation of these measures will make it possible to eliminate some sub-
stantial shortcomings which exist in wages. But it is impossible to rely only on
centralized measures. Ministries and departments, associations and enterprises have
sufficient means so that the wage would be paid for work, and would not be derived
regardless of the quantity and quality of the expended labor, which, unfortunately,
has become quite widespread. Any violation of the socialist principle of pay ac-
cording to labor should meet with active opposition and should be punished.

The successful accomplishment of the tasks set by the 26th CPSU Congress requires
the implementation of the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council
of Ministers "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic
Mechanism on Increasing Production Efficiency and Work Quality." What has been done
to implementit in thetine thathas passed? First of all the use when calculating
labor productivity of the standard net output instead of the grass (cotmodity) out-
put, as well as of standards of the expenditures of wages has been increased con-
siderably. In the plan for 1980 limits of the number of workers and employees were
approved for USSRIninistries and departments and the councils of ministers of the

union republics, while the latter approved them for the associations and enterprises
subordinate to them.

All the procedural principles and instructions on the compiling of plans on labor
for the year, the 5-year period and the more distant future were elaborated and
approved during July-December 1979 and the first quarter of 1980. Procedural in-
Structions on the manner of determining the long-range standards of the wage per
ruble of output were approved, which should ensure in the plans a closer rela-
tionship between the volumes of production and the amount of assets, which are be-
ing spent on wages, the increase of the interest of associations and enterprises
in the adoption of more intense annual plans as compared with the five-year plan,
the increase of the dependence of the wage of each worker on the final overall re-
sults of the work of the association and the enterprise, the improvement of the
monitoring of the expenditure of assets for wages.

The Instructions on the Procedure of Determining the Indicator on the Reduction of
the Use of Manual Labor in Industry for 5 Years, on the basis of which USSR Gosplan
drew up the control figures and reported them to the ministries, were approved in
early 1980. However, I would like to note that the elimination of the lag in the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
~ v0. Va .lsao-u \oJl— VI‘LI

mechanization of manual operations and the automation of production is being carried
out to an inadequate extent and is dependent not only on the unsatisfactory work of
enterprises in this respect, but also on shortcomings in planning. It is necessary
to change the existing situation. The acceleration of the mechanization of manual,
and first of all difficult, labor-consuming operations which are detrimental to the
human body is the most important direction of the improvement of the social condi-
tions of labor and the reduction of the need for manpower.

In the plan for 1981 and in the Basic Directions of USSR Economic and Social Devel-
opment for 1981-1985 and the Period to 1990 USSR Gosplan jointly with the USSR

State Committee for Labor and Social Problems drew up a balance ofamnpower resources
for the country as a whole and by individual union republics. The USSR State Com-
mittee for Labor and Social Problems is elaborating and implementing economic and
organizational measures, which are aimed at the increase of conformity to the plan

in the distribution of manpower, at the reduction of the turnover and the attach-
ment of personnel.

The councils of ministers of the union republics, the oblast (kray) and city execu-
tive committees of the soviets of people's deputies are drawing up balances of man-
power resources by republics, while those of the RSFSR are drawing them up by eco-
nomic regions, oblssts (krays) and large cities. Moreover, plans of the provision
of production associations (enterprises) and organizations with manpower are being
compiled. Thus, the further improvement of planning at all levels of the national
economy was begun in 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1982

7807
C80: 1828/53

10
FOR 0FFNJAI.USEINVLY
FilltﬂﬂWCJAl.USE(HNLY

DEMOGRAPHY

BOOK DISCUSSBS DEMOGRAPHY OF FAMILY, INDIVIDUAL LIFE

Moscow DEMOGRAFY DUMAYUT, SPORYAT, SOVETUYUT in Russian 1981 (signed to press
1 Apr 81) pp 1-22, 231-232

liable of contents, annotation and introduction from book "Demographers Think,
Argue, Advise", compiled and edited by Candidate of Economic Sciences 6. P. Kise-__
leva, Izdatel'stvo "Finansy i statistika", 48,000 copies, 232 pages, illustrations]

[Text] Table of Contents

G. P. Kiseleva. To the Reader of the Collection "Demografy dumayut, sporyat,
sovetuyut" O O O O O C O O I 0 O C I O O O O O O O O O O 0 C C O O O O O D O O O 3

The Population of Our Country

D. I. Valentey. 250,000,000: Comments, Problems, Forecasts . . . . . . . . . . 23

A. A. Isupov. Great Social Achievements (Results of the All-Union Census). . . 46
Our Happiness Is in Children

G. P. Kiseleva. How Many Children Do You Have? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
I. P. Katkova. The Birth Rate and the Problem of the Family. . . . . . . . . . 60
A. I. Antonov, V. A. Borisov. Our Happiness Is in Children . . . . . . . . . . 67
M. S. Matskovskiy. Hhat Does a Person Have a Brother For?. . . . . . . . . . . 71
Yu. B. Ryurikov. Children Are the Creators of People . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
A. G. Viahnevskiy. The Time of Choice. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Add Life to Age

C. Sh. Bakhnetova, M. S. Bednyy. How Many Years Do we Live7. . . . . . . . . . 93
A. Ya. Kyashs. I. V. Kalinyuk. Records of Longevity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
M. S. Bednyy. Look for Influenza!... (A Commentary on Statistics). . . . . . . 101
G. I. Kositskiy. A Heart Attack From Loneliness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
V. D. Shapiro. Besides a Pension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
A. I. Antonov. Add Life to Age . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

How to Be Happy

I. V. Bestuzhev-Lada. Friendship, Love. the Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Ye. R. Mushkina. The Prestige of a Family Man . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132

11
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
rum UI‘I'ILIAL use ONLY

V. A. Voyna. Harmony of the Family. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
V. A. Sysenko. Paradise in a Hut and "the Prose of Life”. . . . . . . . . . . 147
V. I. Perevedentsev. Two in the Family Boat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
A. B. Sinel'nikov. Due to Dissimilarity of Natures? . . . . . . . . . . . . . 168
Ye. B. Urlanis. How Does One Maintain Love? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
A. P. Yegides. Mama and Papa Got Divorced . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175
L. N. Kuznetsova. The Right to Be Discriminating. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
M. Ya. Sonin. "I Don't Want to Get Married!". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
B. Ts. Urlanis. It Is Also Necessary to Look After women. . . . . . . . . . . 196
1. Yu. Rodzinskaya. Not Together, But Side by Side. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
D. S. Akivis. Eight Years After the Wedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
Z. A. Yankova. How Are They-Happy? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213
Where Are People to Live?

0. S. Pchelintsev. Forward, But Hhere?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216
M. L. Strongina. Small Cities Are to Live in the System of Large Ones... . . 219
B. S. Khorev. Host the Pendulum Be Stopped? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 222
B. S. Khorev, S. A. Lavrov, V. R. Balen'kiy. Changing the Customary Style . . 226

Some questions interest tens and hundreds of people, others interest thousands, but
there are problems which are of interest for millions. Questions of the population
are by right grouped with them. The titles of the articles published in this col-
lection: "Our Happiness Is in Children," "How Many Years Do We Live?" and "Tho in
the Family Boat," attest to the diversity of the demographic problems at the present
stage. Articles devoted to the birth rate and the raising of children, life expec—
tancy and active old age, the formation of families and the problems of divorce are
also included in the book.

For a wide range of readers.
To the Reader of the Collection "Demografy dumayut, sporyat, sovetuyut"

Among the adult population of our country, apparently, there is not a person who
has not once pondered the essence of the questions: how many children is it best
of all to have in the family and how does one achieve longevity, how does one get
in the family boat through the stormy sea of life to one's golden anniversary, not
only without having lost the kindness and tenderness, which they felt for each
other on their wedding day, but also having enriched them with the loftiest human
feelings of conjugal, parental love and affection, and others. Questions, ques-
tions and questions.

Of course, not all of the questions touched upon in the collection have been stud-
ied equally; it is not possible to give to all of them either an exhaustive or an
uneqivocal answer; for some questions there is not yet a universally accepted point
of view. But the authors of the articles, by using the materials of state statis-
tics, censuses and special sample surveys, as well as by analyzing the letters ar-
riving at the editorial offices of newspaper and journals, are seeking, thinking,

arguing, advising.

The comprehensive study of the problems of population, especially such complex
and diverse problems as the development of the family, the birth and raising of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
children, the increase of life expectancy, active old age and so on, cannot be
limited only to a demographic analysis. The knowledge and experience of a wide
range of specialists not only in the field of demography, but also in the field of
economics, sociology, pedagogy, psychology, sexology and an entire group of other
sciences, as well as of workers of literature and art, who, by using their specific
methods, extend and enrich our world outlook, are required here. Therefore in the
collection, along with the articles of demographers, articles of economists and

psychologists, journalists and futurologists, medical people and sociologists are
presented.

What reasons are responsible for the publication of the collection?

An enormous and ever increasing interest of broad strata of the population in
demographic problems has been observed in recent years. Today the word "demography"
has become one of the quite frequently used words, while just l5-20 years ago it

was encountered primarily as a synonym of the concept "population statistics" and
was present in the vocabulary of a very narrow group of specialists in population
statistics.

A large number of special works and quite a number of popular works, which are de-
voted to population problems, have been published by now. Articles, in which well-
known scientists, journalists and writers discuss population problems in a popular
form which is easily understood by a wide range of readers, are being published in
newspapers and journals. These articles are not only being read with great and in-
variable interest, but often result in discussions which are participated in by
thousands of people of different ages and occupations, who have just begun a life
of labor and who have worked more than 10 years; married and single people; fathers
and mothers, who have raised several children, and the parents of a single child;
couples who have lived a long life in love and harmony, and former husbands and
wives, whose length of family life did not exceed a few months. Letters, in which
difficult questions of love, marriage, divorces, the protection of one's health and
the raising of children are touched upon, are arriving at the editorial offices of
newspapers and journals. An exchange of the opinions of the readers both with the
authors of the letters and with those who responded to these letters arises. At
times at the request of the editorial board specialist-scientists, who give an
analysis of the voluminous mail of the readers and express their opinion on debat-
able questions, conclude the discussions.

The great sincere interest, which is constantly displayed by readers in the discus-
sion and analysis of demographic problems, an earnest interest, which rules out the
triviality of the opinions and the frivolﬁty of the conclusions, attests not only
to the need for the further scientific elaboration of a large set of demographic
questions, but also to the importance and timeliness of their discussion among the
broadest strata of the population of the country.

When discussing the various aspects of the development of the population it is also
necessary to bear in mind that demographic processes encompass the entire popula-
tion of the country, and, consequently, the understanding of their essence and
trends should become universal. It is our firm conviction that the success of many
state measures on the control of demographic processes to a considerable extent
will be determined by how the population itself treats the development of these
processes, what directions and means of their development it considers to be most

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
rout UFHCIAL USE. ONLY

favorable and necessary, how thoroughly it realizes the importance of the correct
solution of certain demographic problems or others. Self-knowledge is the most im-
portant condition, in case of which a person is aware of himself as a integral

part of nature and society with the peculiarities and needs characteristic of him.

The more thorough understanding of the socioeconomic, psychological and demographic
changes occurring in society and more mature social consciousness depend on the
correct realistic idea of the population of the country about the conditions of its
economic, social, psychological and demographic development; at the same time the
connection of one's own fate with the fate of the state and society will be sensed
more distinctly by people.

love, marriage, the family, the raising of children, longevity-these are not only
personal questions which concern individual people, but also questions which con-
cern our entire society. In the USSR Constitution it is stated that the family is
under the protection of the state. This is a great achievement of the socialist
system. In the end the well-being of our socialist society depends on the strength
and well-being of the family, the state of health of the population and its repro-
duction.

It seems that the collection of articles being offered may help the reader to under-
stand the essence of a number of demographic problems.

Along with prominent scientists of the country in the field of demography, medicine,
sociology, economics and psychology, well-known journalists and writers are also
authors of articles of the collection.

of course, this book can by no means aspire to a comprehensive and complete cover-
age of the most complicated theoretical questions concerning various aspects of the
development of the population. Its aim is to show that demographic problems cannot
be solved by themselves, but require both earnest, scientifically sound measures of
influence of the state on demographic processes and a conscious. thoroughly con-
sidered attitude of the population itself toward them.

The authors of the articles published in the collection, of course, do not present

ready-made formulas, by means of which it would be possible to resolve all the most
complex situations of life. Is it possible to give a formula of how many children

there should be in the family? Apparently not.

Thus, there also cannot be an unequivocal answer for different people to the ques-
tion of how to maintain love for long years and how to see to it that old age would
not be a burdensome, but a happy and active period of life. However, what has been
said does not mean that at present science does not have at all knowledge about how
it is possible to create a favorable psychological climate in the family and by
what means it is possible to avoid daily highly conflictual situations in the inter-
relations of couples; when divorce is a bad thing and when it is a good thing; how
many children it is best of all to have in the family both from the point of view
of the interests of the family and from the standpoint of the interests of the

state.

Indeed, there are no ready-made formulas for all events of life. But there are
data of scientific studies, there is the vast historical experience of the

114
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
development of human society, there are volumes of statistical data, which contain
the most diverse demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of the population
over many tens of years, there are the materials of censuses. All this enables re-
searchers, having armed themselves with the basic assumptions of the Marxist-
leninist theory of cognition, the most advanced theory in the world, and with all
the modern methods of analyzing the most complex social phenomena, not only to

seek the correct means of solving demographic problems, but also to find them.

The articles of the collection are broken down into five sections which are devoted
to the most urgent problems of population: the development of the population of
our country, the birth rate and the reproduction of the population, life expectancy

and health, questions of the family and daily life, the settlement of the popula-
tion.

It should be noted that some articles are assigned to one section or another quite
arbitrarily, since it is difficult, and at times simply impossible, to draw a line
between questions about the maintenance of family happiness and the number of chil-

dren in the family, about the well-being and strength of the family and longevity
and so forth.

Some of the articles included in the collection were published quite a long time
ago-7-10 years ago. However, some of the problems, which they touched upon, to
this time have not only not lost their topicality, but have even become more topi-
cal. Therefore it is possible and even useful to direct the attention of the read-
ers once again to the questions which have retained their urgency over many years.
As to some of the statistical data, which are contained in these articles and to

a certain extent are obsolete, from the point of view of the analysis of the most
important problems of the development of the population this is of no fundamental
importance.

In a number of instances the points of view of the authors on some particular
questions, which have been touched upon in the articles, do not always coincide,
which is quite natural. Not without reason does the word "argue“ appear in the
title of the collection. Some of the suggestions expressed in the articles are
also not indisputable. Thus, perhaps, not everyone will agree with the suggestion
of H. Ya. Sonin about the introduction of a very appreciable tax on single people,
which is contained in his article "I Don't Want to Get Married." At the same time
the idea of creating a special-purpose fund by means of a tax from people not having
children, the assets of which would be strictly distributed in favor of families
with children, so that all the members of society would to one extent or another
help raise the children-our young generation, merits attention. A number of
authors advance various kinds of suggestions which, in their opinion, will be con-
ducive to the solution of the questions being discussed by than. However, it
should be borne in mind that all these suggestions are the personal opinion of the
authors and many of them need more thorough study and serious, well-reasoned sub-
stantiation.

It is necessary to direct the attention of the readers to such a most important
circumstance: the raising by the majority of authors of urgent, problematic is-
sues, which concern various aspects of the development of the population at the
present stage, became possible only owing to the enormous social and economic
achievements which have been made in our country in a historically short time and
predetermined the formation of a new type of the development of the population.

15
FOR omcm. use ONLY
run unlum. use. ONLY

The qualitative characteristics of the population, first of all its social struc-
ture, educational and cultural level, especially of the population of previously
backward regions of the country, have changed substantially during the years which
have passed since the triumph of the Great October Socialist Revolution. A new
type of reproduction of the population has formed on the basis of a relatively low
level of the birth rate and a low death rate.

The structure of the employed population has also changed fundamentally: women

make up more than half of the population employed in the national economy. Employ-
ment in national labor provides them economic and social independence and is a pro-
gressive and irreversible process. And it is necessary, of course, to keep all this
in mind when reading the collection, since in many articles the authors direct at-
tention to the negative (dark) sides of a number of demographic phenomena and do
not dwell on the coverage of the great achievements which characterize the develop-
ment of the population of our country, believing that they are well known to the
readers.

At the 25th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev noted that "the problems of the environ-
ment and population, which in recent times have become aggravated, should not fall
from the field of vision of Soviet scientists. The improvement of the socialist
use of nature and the elaboration of an effective demographic policy are an impor-
tant task of the entire set of natural and social sciences."1 Therefore the attrac-
tion of the attention of a broad group of the population to the discussion of the
most complicated demographic problems and their serious, qualified analysis, in our
opinion, is one of the most important conditions when solving the most important
problem--the working out of measures of an effective demographic policy. Only on
the condition of universal demographic competence, with the correct understanding
of the trends of the development of the processes of population is it possible to
count on the success of the measures on the control of demographic phenomena.

The article of D. I. Valentey, "250,000,000: Comments, Problems, Forecasts," which
was published in November 1973, opens the collection. This article introduces the
reader to the group of most important and urgent problems of population. In spite
of the fact that many years have already passed since its publication, many of the
questions touched upon in it retain their urgency today as well and arouse deep
interest. In it a serious comprehensive analysis of the problems of the develop-
ment of the population of our country is given, the close dependence of demographic
processes on the socioeconomic development of society is shown; moreover, a large
number of demographic forecasts are contained in it.

It is possible to judge how accurate these forecasts were and how aptly the prob-
lems, which concern all the most important trends of the growth and development of
our population, were raised in the article ofDoctor of Economic Sciences D. I.
Vslentey on the basis of current data of state statistics and censuses.

The great social changes, which occurred in our country during the period between
the two censuses, in 1970-1979, are shown in the article of A. A. Isupov, chief of
the All-Union Population Census Administration of the USSR Central Statistical

 

1. "Haterialy XXV s"yezda KPSS“ [ﬁaterials of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1976, p 73.

16
FOR OiiﬂCJAL USE(NNLY
Administration. The results of the 1979 census convincingly demonstrated the great

achievements in the cultural, educational and economic development of the Soviet
state.

The elaboration of measures aimed at the improvement of the demographic situation
is an extremely complicated matter. Hany demographic processes are hard to regu-
late, particularly such a process as the birth rate. That is why tremendous
work is required not only on the study of the most important processes of popula-
tion, but also on the determination of the possibilities of their control. For in

order to propose certain measures of demographic policy or others, it is necessary
to be certain that they will be effective.

The appreciable decline of the birth rate on a greater portion of the territory of
the country is one of the basic problems of population, which have now become
acute. The section of the collection "Our Happiness Is in Children" is devoted to
the problems of the birth rate. Let us note that we consider the questions con-
nected with the birth rate to be the central theme of the collection. And they are
covered not only in this section, but also in other articles of the collection.

The complexity and uniqueness of the present demographic situation in the USSR to

a considerable extent are governed by the great regional differences in the inten-
sity of the birth rate among the population which lives on the territory of our
country. The point is that at present in all the economically developed countries,
including the Soviet Union, the death rate has in practice stabilized at a compara-
tively low level. Thus, the intensity of the reproduction of the population, that
is, the intensity of the replacement of the outgoing generations by new ones, as a
result of births and deaths, for the most part depends on the level of the birth
rate, since significant regional differences do not exist in the intensity of the
death rate among the population of the USSR. At present in our country there are
two types of the reproduction of the population. The main type is the reproduction
which is close to simple reproduction and is characteristic of the majority of the
population of the USSR (the RSPSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Belorussian SSR, the
Baltic republics). In the case of this type of reproduction the size of the popula-
tion is increasing negligibly-0.2-0.S percent a year. Its characteristic traits
are a low, deliberately restricted birth rate and a low death rate. The other type
is expanded reproduction. It is based on a high, deliberately unrestricted birth
rate and a low death rate and is characteristic of the population of the republics
of Central Asia and, until recently, of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and Armenia. The
natural growth of the population in the republics of Central Asia is the highest in
the USSR and for many years has been 2.0-2.5 percent a year. The transitional type
is the shift from expanded reproduction to slightly expanded reproduction, which

is characteristic at present of the population of the Georgian, Moldavian, Armenian,
Azerbaijan and Kazakh union republics. But another type of reproduction of the
population is also known to demographers-the contracted type, when the number of
births is less than the number of deaths and the size of the population decreases.
Fortunately, so far there has been no natural decrease of the population in any
republic of the Soviet Union, everywhere the number of births is greater than the
number of deaths.

However, if the trend of having no more than one or two children in the family

lasts among the nmjority of inhabitants of those repbulics, in which the level of
the birth rate is now already very low, there is the danger of a shift of a

M OFl-‘lah. USE ONLY
rust UI'I'ILIRI. but. UI‘LI

significant portion of the population to restricted reproduction. The lamentable
consequences of a low birth rate are stated in sufficient detail in the article of
Professor D. I. Valentey "250,000,000: Comments, Problems, Forecasts.”

Among the authors of the section "Our Happiness Is in Children" are the demographers
Candidates of Economic Sciences V. A. Borisov, A. G. Vishnevskiy and G. P. Kise-
leva, Doctor of Medical Sciences Professor 1. P. Katkova, the sociologist Candidate
of Philosophic.‘ Sciences A. I. Antonov and the writer Yu. 8. Ryurikov. All the
authors of the articles of this sector are united in the opinion that one child in
the family is a negative phenomenon which is unfavorable not only for society as a
whole, but also for the family itself and for the only child.

In our opinion, the need to set forth a clear and precise position on the evalua-
tion of the adverse consequences, with which the transition of a significant por-
tion of the population of the USSR to a single-child family is fraught, at present
is very urgent. This is explained by many reasons. First of all by the fact that,
in spite of the rather large number of scientific and journalistic works devoted to
the problems of the birth rate, among authors until recently there was still no
unity in the evaluation of this phenomenon for the development of our country. On
the one hand, many damographers (and not only demographers) are expressing serious
anxiety about the appreciable decline of the birth rate on the greater part of the
territory of the USSR; on the other, the opinion exists that since the decline of
the birth rate, that is. the transition from the family with many children to the
family with few children, under the influence of a large set of socioeconomic fac-
tors is an inevitable and objectively governed process, it is necessary to evaluate
this phenomenon in all instances as a positive one and no special steps aimed at
its increase should be taken.

The lack of unity in the assessment of the prospects of the birth rate in the USSR
among specialists studying the problems of population often has the result that
some readers are better informed about the problems of the high birth rate and the
rapid growth of the population in the developing countries than about the decline
of the birth rate in their own country. But the awareness of the population about
the essence and trends of the birth rate, we are firmly convinced, should become
universal. The change of the undesirable trends of the birth rate by the pursuit
of a purposeful demographic policy depends very substantially on how the population
itself regards this question, since the process of the birth rate is formed from
millions of births in individual families.

In the end the level of the birth rate in the country is determined by how many
children there will be in the majority of families. In order to overcome the demo-
graphic "illiteracy" which exists among the population, it is important for it to
have a correct idea of the demographic situation in the country. V. I. Pereveden-
tsev writes concerning this: "Let us note that extensive coverage of this question
(of the birth rate--G. K.) is important, in particular, because stable erroneous
stereotypes have formed in everyday consciousness. Thus, the overwhelming majority
of nondemographers believe that 'all is well' while there is not yet an absolute
decrease of the population of the country. The indicators of the natural popula-
tion movement are incorrectly taken as indicators of reproduction.... The point is
that children take the place of parents only in the structure of the population,
while quantitatively they take the place of the generations of great-grandparents.
when children come into this world, their grandfathers and grandmothers and

18
FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USE¢NNLY
great-grandfathers and great-grandmothers are dying. But since those generations
in our population take up much less space than would have been the case given the
current conditions of reproduction, if they were to continue for long, even the
present birth rate could ensure a significant increase of the population. Further,
the majority believe that if there are two children in the family, this is quite
sufficient for society, that the two-children family ensures the normal reproduc-
tion of the population. This is also an error."2

According to the calculations of prominent Soviet demographer 3. Ta. Urlanis Just
for the simple reproduction of the population, that is, for the replacement of the
generation of parents with a generation of children of equal size, it is necessary
for there to be 258 children per 100 married couples having children, since not

all children survive to the age of their parsnts, not all women get married and have
children, not all couples can have children.

The authors of the articles inserted in the section "Our Happiness Is in Children"
convincingly show that the question of the ideal number of children in the family,
and in a broader statement the question of the optimum level of the birth rate in
the country, is not at all pointless. Without shutting their eyes to the diffi-
culties connected with the birth and raising of children, all the authors are unani-
mous in the opinion that "children are one of the main layers of the human meaning
of life, one of the richest deposits of happiness in the world. But on two condi-
tions: if they are healthy and if we treat them correctly. Without this there is
little happiness from them, and much woe."‘ And the single child in a family from
the point of view of rearing is in an exceptionally difficult situation.

The fine Soviet educator A. S. Hakarenko believed that the conditions of being an
only child are extremely unfavorable for the formation of the character of a person.
It is very difficult to correctly treat a child, when he is growing up alone in the
family. Very favorable soil is created, on which egoism and at times egocentrism
grow luxuriantly. The overestimation of one's personality, which gets on very un-
usually with prolonged infantilism and with unreadiness to overcome life's diffi-
culties, very often develops among single children. And in all this lies not so
much the fault as the misfortune of single children, and not only the misfortune
and woe, but also the fault of the parents, who incorrectly raised the only chil-
dren only because they were the only ones in the family.

In the articles devoted to the birth rate it is emphasized that it would be incor-
rect to regard the birth and raising of children only as the private affair of par-
ents, since they also perform an important social task. The labor in the raising
of children is socially useful labor, and it is in the interests of society to

 

2. V. I. Perevedentsev, 'kamn, the Family, the People," LITBRAIURNOYE OBOZRENIYE,
No 6, 1979, p 37.

3. See 8. Te. Urlsnig, "The Family and Problems of Demography," "Holodaya sem'ya"
ljhe Young Family] ("Narodonaseleniye" jyopulstiogj, No 18), Moscow, 1977, p 7.

4. See the article of Yu. 3. Ryurikov, "Children Are the Creators of People," in
this collection.

19
FOI‘OFFKJAJ.USE(NVLY
rum UI'I'ILIAi. vat. out!

elaborate a set of measures, which evaluate it and compensate for it. In the major-
ity of articles of the section "Our Happiness Is in Children" the authors, taking
into account the difficulty of elaborating scientifically sound measures of demo-
graphic policy, which are aimed at the creation in the country of the optimum level
of the birth rate, still consider it possible already today to provide some recom-
mendations which, in their opinion, can promote the creation of the conditions,
which not only facilitate for families the raising of children, but also increase

in every possible way the social prestige of motherhood and fatherhood.

Our socialist society has sufficient opportunities for the implementation of the
measures of demographic policy in the area of the birth rate, in which the combina-
tion of the interests of the family and society would find reflection. However, it
is necessary to take into account that in order for these opportunities to be trans-
formed into effective measures, it is necessary not only for the problem of the de-
cline of the birth rate to worry specialists engaged in studies of demographic prob-
lems, writers and journalists, but also for the population of the country to real-
ize that the decline of the birth rate to the level, when the generation of chil-
dren may be smaller than the generation of parents, is an extremely unfortunate
phenomenon and that the extensive prevalence of one-child families is had both for
families themselves and for society as a whole.

The articles of the section "Add Life to Age" cover a wide range of questions con-
nected with the increase of the life expectancy and active old age. Among the
authors of the articles are the medical personnel Doctors of Medical Sciences H. S.
nednyy and G. I. Kositskiy, the demographers Doctor of Economic Sciences Professor

. Ya. Kvasha and Candidates of Economic Sciences 6. Sh. Bakhmetova and I. V. Kali-
nyuk and the sociologist Candidate of Philosophical Sciences A. I. Antonov.

So that some of the questions touched upon in the articles would be clear to the
readers, let us briefly characterize the present situation in the area of the death
rate, the length of life and the health of the population.

Our country has made great progress in the decrease of the death rate and the in-
crease of the life expectancy. It is well known that the life expectancy in the
USSR as compared with prerevolutionary Russia has increased more than twofold
(from 32 to 70 years). The number of physicians in 1979 was 958,000 as against
28,000 in 1913, that is, 1: has increased 37-fold.5

In the USSR a basically uniform type of death rate for the entire population of
the country has formed, in contrast to the birth rate, which has very substantial
regional differences. However, it is necessary to note that the overall coeffi-
cient of the death rate, which is calculated per 1,000 inhabitants of the country,
shows a very significant differentiation by union republics, which is governed for
the most part by the differences in the age structure of the population and first
of all by the proportion of people of older ages in the population. Thus, the low-
est indicator of the death rate (5.6 deaths per 1,000 inhabitants of the country)
in 1979 was in the Armenian SSR, where the proportion of the population of young
ages is high, while the highest indicator of the death rate (12.7 deaths per

——_.__..____
5. VESTNIK STATISTIKI, No 6, 1980, p 70.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1,000 inhabitants) was in the Latvian SSR, where the proportion of people 50 years
of age and older is one of the highest among all the union republics.6 Therefore,
when analyzing the overall coefficients of the death rate it should be borne in
mind that as the proportion of people of elderly ages in the population increases,
both the total number of deaths and the overall coefficients of the death rate in-
crease. Such a phenomenon may occur even in the case of a simultaneous decrease

of the intensity of the death rate and a decrease of the value of the coefficients
of the death rate in individual age groups.

At present cardiovascular diseases, malignant neoplasms, injuries and other diseases
of a so-called endogenous (internal) nature predominate among the causes of death,
while prior to the socialist revolution infectious diseases, tuberculosis, diseases
of the respiratory and digestive organs and other diseases, in the occurrence of

which decisive importance belongs to exogenous (external) factors, predominated
in the structure of the causes of death.

The present structure of the causes of death, which is characteristic of the USSR
population. exists in all economically developed countries, the population of which
has a high life expectancy. It is necessary to bear in mind that such a type of
death rate formed in our country in a historically very short time. This became
possible owing to the great attention on the part of the Soviet state to the mat-
ter of the protection of the health of the Soviet people and to the extensive de-
velopment of skilled and accessible medical assistance. The need to envisage in
the future "the improvement of medical service, the stepping up of environmental
protection, the creation of more favorable conditions for... the increase of the

length of life and activity of man"7 was emphasized in the Basic Directions of USSR
National Economic Development for 1976-1980.

In Article 42 of the USSR Constitution the right of citizens to the protection of
health, which is guaranteed by free medical assistance for the entire population of
the country, is specified and the need to conduct "scientific research, which is
aimed at the prevention and the decrease of the rate of illness and at the assur-
ance of a long active life of citizens"8 is also noted.

In the section "Add Life to Age" the problems connected with the lengthening of the
life of the population with the simultaneous retention of vital activeness are
examined; various adverse factors, which influence the health of the population,
and the possibilities of transforming old age not into years of decline, but into
an active interesting time of life are studied. Questions of longevity are also
touched upon.

 

6. See "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 g." lfhe USSR National Econoay in 19127,
Moscow, 1980, pp 38-39; "Itogi Vsesoyuznoy perepisi naseleniys 1970 goda" 1Re-
suits of the 1970 All-Union Census , Vol II. Moscow, 1972. pp 12-73.

7. “Haterialy XXV s"yezda KPSS," p 216.

8. "Konstitutsiya SSSR" the USSR Constitutioé7, Moscow, 1977, p 17.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Certainly, not all the aspects connected with the analysis of the problems of the
increase of the length of life and the decline of the death rate were reflected in
the articles of this section, but the authors directed the attention of the readers
to the fact that in many instances the preservation of health depends on the popu-
lation itself. The increase of the life expectancy of the population, the improve-
ment of its health and the lengthening of vital activity are problems, the success-

ful solution of which is of the greatest importance both for our entire society and
for each of its members.

The articles of the section "How to Be Happy" for the most part are devoted to the
most diverse aspects of the development of the family-the primary unit of society,
which plays a most important role both in the life of each individual person and
in the life of all the citizens of our country as a whole. "The family," V. I.
Perevedentsev writes, "stands at the center of all demsgraphic phenomena. The over-
whelming majority of children appear precisely in the family, precisely the family
holds the main place in the raising or socialization of the rising generation.
Finally, love-family-marriage relations constitute the center of the problems of
private life, the personal happiness of people. In short, the family is the center
of public and private interests, many demographic problems of society can also be
solved precisely through the family."9

The family, being the product of social development, is constantly in the process
of movement. In its historical development it underwent a large number of changes
both in the forms of organization and in the functions characteristic of it.

At present in our country there basically exist three types of families: completed,
so-called nuclear families, which consist of one married couple with children who,
as a rule, arenunors or have not formed their own family; complete complex families,
which consist of two or more married couples (the adult. married children live with
the parents); and broken families. The nuclear family is the predominant form of
-he family both in our country and in all economically developed countries.

According to the 1979 census there were 66.3 million families in the USSR. Among
them 29.7 percent of the families consisted of two people, 28.9 percent-—three
people, 23 percent--four people and 18.6 percent--five or more people. Consequent-
ly, more than 80 percent of the families are small family formations which consist
of four or less people. The average size of the family (family members living to-
gether) for the country as a whole was 3.5 people, among the urban population--
3.3 people and among the rural population--3.8 people. On 17 January 1979

122.6 million men and women in the USSR were married.10

In spite of the fact that the functions performed by the family are extremely di-
VUP30,they are at the same time interconnected, their classification and separate

9. V. I. Perevedentsev, "Women, the Family, the People,“ LITERATURNOYE OBOZRENIYE,
No 6, 1979, p 34.

10. See "Naseleniye SSSR. Po dannym Vsesoyuznoy perepisi nasaleniya 1979 gods?
ljhe USSR Population. According to the Data of the 1979 All-Union Census],
Moscow, 1980, p 17.

22
FOR‘OFFKJA1.USEGDNLY
examination are to a considerable extent of an arbitrary nature. In real life all
the functions of the family are in close connection and interdependence. It is
also necessary to take into account that with the social development of the family
the functions performed by it are subject to transformation and development. In
the scientific literature devoted to the problems of the development of the family
there is no uniform classification and typology of the functions of the family.
However, in spite of this, the absolute majority of scientists name as the most im-
portant functions of the Soviet family such functions as the reproduction of the
population, or the generative-rearing function, the economic function and the
organization of leisure time. In recent years many authors have believed that in
the modern world the family performs the functions of a "psychological refuge,"
where "the lifting of business tension" occurs and the creation of emotional com-
fort is ensured. Of course. only a healthy happy family, in which good-natured
relations between its members and a favorable psychological climate reign, can per-
formed the function of a "psychological refuge."

As is known, in our times the family has nearly ceased to perform such a most im-
portant function for it as the productive function, which is characteristic of the
earlier stages of social development. At the same time the importance of the
generative-rearing (demographic) function. the function of the organization of
leisure time, spiritual contact and mutual moral support, in our opinion, is in-
creasing substantially. It is possible that the assertion of an increase of the
importance of the demographic function of the family at first glance will seem
paradoxical, since at present families with few children (one or two children) pre-
dominate in the USSR. However, when speaking about the reproductive function of
the family, one should bear in mind not only the number of children born, but also
the quality of their rearing.

The present level of the development of productive forces is making great demands
on the education and skills of workers in all the sectors of production. And this
means that the time and assets, which are necessary for the training of highly
skilled specialists, are increasing. Thus, both the material expenditures of the
family and the amount of nonworking time of the parents, especially of mothers for
the caring for children and their rearing, are increasing. The quality of the rear-
ing of a child in many ways depends on the intellect. level of education, culture
and spiritual development of the parents. Whereas previously the demographic func-
tion of the family for the most part reduced to the bearing of the child and his
physical care, now the comprehensive rearing of children, including their spiritual
and intellectual development, is the most important and most labor-consuming com-
ponent of the demographic function of the family. "The basic moral ideas and moral
principles are formed in the family. The family introduces the child to the sphere
of esthetic culture, develops in him the feeling and tastes, which are necessary
for the knowledge and appreciation of art, forms his purposes of orientation and
criteria in this area."11 when speaking about the rearing function of the family,
it is necessary to hear in mind that both the mutual education of all the family
members and self-education take place in the process of communicating with children
and with each other.

11. Ya. Shchepsn'skiy, "The Family as a Factor of Social Development," SOTSIOLOGI-
cassxm: ISSLEDOVANIYA, No 2, 1977, p 162.

23
FIHICNHWCIAL USEGDNLY
l'Ull urn-tum. Uat. URL!

In the articles of the section "How to Be Happy" the most diverse aspects of the
urrnlinn and development of the family are touched upon, the moral, ethical, socio-
psychological, economic and other aspects of its life are analyzed. The role and
importance of children in family life are examined. The factors promoting the
strengthening of marital unions and the factors leading to their breakdown are stud-
ied. Considerable attention is devoted to the problems of the contact of single
people and to the problems of premarital acquaintance. The change of the social
status of the modern woman, the distribution of the duties between spouses in the
raising of the children, the organization of the leisure time of the family, the
care of the family and so forth are also discussed in the section.

The demographera Doctor of Economic Sciences Professor B. Ts. Urlanis and Candidate
of Economic Sciences Ye. B. Urlanis, the economist Doctor of Economic Sciences Pro-
fessor M. Ya. Sonin, the sociologists Doctor of Historical Sciences Professor 1. V.
Bestuzhev-Lada, Candidate of Economic Sciences V. I. Perevedentsev, Candidate of
Historical Sciences 2. A. Yankova and Candidate of Philosophical Sciences V. A.
Sysenko and the journalists D. S. Akivis, L. N. Kuznetsova, Ye. R. Hushkina and

V. A. Voyna are the authors of the articles of this section.

The majority of the articles of this section contain almost no numerical data, since
in them it is a matter mainly of concepts and phenomena, which it is hard to express
in formalized indicators, namely the psychological culture of family life, the oc-
currence of the most diverse complications and difficulties on the path of life of
the family and the means of overcoming them, family happiness and the bitterness of
loneliness.

)hny articles maybe especially useful to the readers, since in them life situa-
tions, which are quite typical for many families, are examined and they contain
favorable and sober recommendations on the standard of family behavior. "For
family happiness is not a gift of fate, not a result of sheer luck, it is a matter
of one's own hands, reason and kindness, a loving heart and high standards."12

It is possible to judge the importance of the problems discussed in the section
"How to Be Happy" from the evaluation of the role of the family, which 3. Ts. Ur-
lanis and Z. A. Yankova give it on the pages of the newspaper PRAVDA: "The family
is the primary unit of society, which in our life plays a role, the importance of
which it is hard to overestimate.... In uniting people by the bonds of love, kin-
ship, common interests and mutual responsibility, the good family makes them truly
happy, creates a unique world of human unity and a moral and psychological situa-
tion, which has an enormous positive influence on each person, promotes the spir-
itual flourishing of the individual."13

Demographic problems are extremely diverse. They go beyond the questions connected
with the study of the birth rate, the death rate, the length of life, the reproduc-
tion of generations, family development, marriages and divorces. Demography also

12. See the article of Z. A. Yankova, "How Are They--Happy?", in this collection.

13. B. Urlanis, Z. Yankova, “By "hat the Family Is Strong," PRAVDA, 11 May 1980.

2h
IN)R()FHKJA1.USE(MQLY
studies such most important aspects of the life of the population as migrations and
the settlement of the population over the territory of the country, engages in the
forecasting of the size and composition of the population according to sex, age,
place of residence, educational and occupational level and so on. Of course, it is
impossible to cover all the questions, which are studied in demographic science, in
a single collection. However, we considered it useful to include in the collection
a number of articles devoted to some problems which are connected with the develop-
ment of large and small cities and with the settlement of rural inhabitants. These
articles are united in the section "where Are People to Live?" Articles of Doctors
of Geographical Sciences 3. s. Khorev and S. A. Lavrov and Candidate of Geographi-
cal Sciences V. R. Belen'kiy, as well as Candidates of Economic Sciences 0. S.
Pchelintsev and H. L. Strongina are included in it.

The interest in the questions of the settlement of the population and in the means

of the development of the city and the countryside at present and in the future is

explained by the problems of the efficient settlement of the population on the ter-
ritory of our country, the equalization of the living conditions of urban and rural
inhabitants and of the population living in cities of different size.

In 1980 63 percent, that is, nearly two-thirds of the population of our country,
lived in cities. The cities are divided according to the number of inhabitants
into small (less than 20,000 inhabitants), medium-sized (from 20,000 to 100,000 in-
habitants) and large (from 100,000 to 500,000 inhabitants). The cities with a
population of more than 500,000 inhabitants form the group of major cities. More-
over, a special group exists--nillionaire cities. At the beginning of 1980 there
were 20 of them in the USSR.14

Nearly 20 years ago, back in 1961, 0. S. Pchelintsev in the journal VOPROSY PILO-
SOFII opened the discussion of the means of developing the processes of urbaniza-
tion and of the choice of the most efficient strategy of the regulation of settle-
ment with allowance made for the interests of the development of the population and
production.15 The basic idea of the author consisted in the fact that it is neces-
sary to choose the strategy of the settlement of the population on the basis of a
comprehensive analysis of the effectiveness of the socioeconomic development of re-
gions. At present these ideas are receiving some embodiment in the master plans

of the settlement of the population on the territory of the USSR. The article of
0. S. Pchelintsev, "Forward, Enzwhere7", is devoted to the prospects of urbaniza-
tion and the choice of the means of development for our largest cities and the sys-
tem of settlement as a whole. Its author, in arguing against the concept "the
optimum city," advances the idea of the existence of an objective law in the devel-
opment of the forms of settlement, on which any urban development policy, which
aspires to realisticness, should also be based. He questions the possibility of
turning this development "back," from large to small and medium-sized cities, and
emphasizes the development of complex, interconnected forms of settlement, which
are based on the process of the gradual decentralization of industry and the popu-
lation of major cities to more and more extensive suburban territories. In the

 

14. See "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 g.," pp 18-28.

15. See "The Efficient Location of Production and the Problems of Large Cities,"
VOPROSY PILOSOPII, No 2, 1961.

25
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FUR 0P1WL]AI.IEHECHVLY

article of H. L. Strungina the idea is stressed that the future development of small
and medium-sized cities, which are in the zone of influence of major industrial
centers, is not their autonomous development, but their inclusion in the established
system of the industrial development of major cities and their simultaneous use as
centers of the surrounding rural regions, for which the problem of successful
socioeconomic development will thereby be solved. The problems of the settlement
of the rural inhabitants of the Nonchernozem Zone are examined in the article of

B. S. Khorev, "Must the Pendulum Be Stopped?", which is devoted to the problems of
daily commuting, and in the joint article of B. S. Khorev, S. A. Lavrov and V. R.
Belen'kiy, "Changing the Customary Style."

The authors of the collection "Denografy dumayut, aporyat, sovetuyut" hope that
acquaintance with it not only will help the readers to realize the complexity of
the diverse problems of population and will promote cultivation of their definite
demographic "competence," but will also serve as a basis for serious thoughts. We
also hope that the advice contained in a number of articles will be useful to par-
ents and children, young couples and couples with a very substantial number of

years of living together, to young and old-in other words, to everyone who will
read it.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pinansy i statistika", 1981

7807
C80: 1828/54 END

26
FOR OFFICIAL UEHICNNLY