Hm (WI-N 1 0 INF 0V! \'

JPRS L/10070
23 October 1981

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 16/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

JPRS publications contain information priaarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign~language
scurces are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/100'

2 3 October

USSR REPORT
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(9000 16/81)

CONTENTS

PLANNING AND PLAN IMPLWTATION

Main Goals of 11th Five-Year Plan Reviewed
(F. Kotov; VOW EKOIVMKI, Jul 81) IOIIOOOIOOOOOOIOOOOOOOI

INVESTMENT, PRICES, BUMBT AND FINANCE

Impact of Banking System on Production Analyzed
(In Levchuk; VOW BKWCHIKI, Jul 81)....oouococoon-ocno...

INNSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERMANCE

Retooling, Repair in Industry Emmi-nod
(V. Krasovsldy; VOPROS! EKONIMIKI, Jul 81) ..................

-a- [III-USSR-3
FOR OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY

PLANNING AND PLAN IMPLEMENTATION

MAIN GOALS 0F 11TH FIVEﬂYEAR PLAN REVIEWED

Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 7, Jul Bl pp 9-19

lxrtigle by F. Kotov: "The Main Tasks, hates and Proportions of the llth Five-Year
Plan"/

lTexgj The 26th CPSU Congress specified the strategy and tactics of USSR economic
and social development for the 1980's as a new stage in the creation of the material
and technical base of comunism, the development of social relations and the forma-
tion of the new man. The continuity of the strategy and tactics in this area and
the further development of their principles as applied to the conditions of the new
10-year planning period so as to overcome the noted tendency for the rate of econom-
ic growth to slow and to make qualitatively new gains in the socio-economic develop-
ment of the country, are characteristic. During these years the changeover to the
primarily intensive path of the development of the economy will be accomplished
owing to the more complete utilization of the potentials of technical progress, the
increase of the level of management of the economy, the improvement of planning,

the stepping up of the influence of the economic mechanism and social factors on the
development of physical production, the improvement of the labor and moral training
of the workers, the improvement of the use of the socialist principle of distribu-

tion according to labor and the increase of the role and importance of labor collec-
tives and local soviets of people's deputies.

The goals of the long-range economic policy, which creates the prerequisites for the
further economic and social development of the country, are specified in the Main
Directions of USSR Economic and Social Development for 1981-1985 and the Period to
1990.

On the basis of the economic and social development achieved in past years with al-
Iowancc madefor the peculiarities of the planning period, the 26th party congress
formulated the main task of the 11th Five-Year Plan. Its accomplishment presumes
the implementation of a series of measures which cover all aspects of the labor,-
life, living conditions and cultural level of the Soviet people. The most impor-
tent of them are: the complete meeting of the demands of the entire population for
foodstuffs and nonfood consumer items; the improvement of the housing, cultural and
everyday living conditions of the population; the accomplishment of profound changes
in labor, the improvement of working conditions, the provision of extensive oppor-
tunities for creative activity; the further development of education and culture;
the improvement of the health and the efficient use of free time of the workers on
the basis of the improvement of trade and personal service, the development of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a_creation industry, tourism and physical culture, the network of medical institu-
tions and so on; the promotion of moral education and a communist attitude toward

labor: the overcoming of the socio—economic differences in the living, working and
everyday conditions of all categories of workers.

An entire series of measures has been outlined for the achievement of the ultimate
goals of the five-year plan. The emphasis is being placed on the development of
social production, the imprOVement of its pattern and the economical use of all re-
production resources, the improvement of product quality, the reorganization of
management and planning first of all for the purposes of the timely and more com-

plete utilization of the achievements of science and technology, equipment and work-
ing time.

The country has an enormous production, scientific and technical potential and
skilled personnel. The fixed production capital of the USSR in 1980 amounted to
l,lb9,000,000,000 rubles, that is, it was twofold more than in 1970. The volumes
of the extraction of raw materials and fuel and the output of construction mate-
rials increased. The areas of irrigated land and the number of livestock and poul-
try increased. Having 35 million hectares of reclaimed land, the country has begun
to depend less on weather conditions in arid regions. The fixed nonproductive capi-
tal has increased considerably. The number of those employed in the national econ-
omy came to 112.5 million. including 27 million specialists, about 1.4 million sci-
entists, approximately 900,000 planners and 500,000 designers. For the accomplish-
ment of the set national economic tasks in 5 years 13 million skilled workers will
be trained at vocational and technical schools and 10 million specialists with a
higher and secondary specialized education will be trained. More than 10 million
people are studying at the higher and secondary educational institutions of the
country. The participation of the USSR in the world and the international socialist
division of labor has increased. The foreign trade turnover of the USSR in 1980
came to 95.1 billion rubles.

Such major national economic problems as the construction of the Bsykal-Amur Rail-
way Line and the development of the natural resources of the regions adjacent to it,
the formation of industrial centers on the basis of the Ekibastus, Kansk-Achinsk
and Southern Yakut coal basins, the development of the Heat Siberian Petroleum and
Gas Region, the strengthening of the saterial and technical base of nuclear power
engineering, the creation of the robot equipment industry, the changeover of agri-
cultural production to an industrial base and an advanced technology and others
will be solved during the 11th Five-Year Plan. However, the accomplishment of all
these tasks will take place under the conditions of the slowing of the growth rate
of the able-bodied population in many regions of the country; the shift of the ex-
traction of fuel and many types of raw materials to northern and eastern regions,
where major material expenditures. especially in the infrastructure, and large ex-
penditures on the transportation of the raw materials and fuel extracted here to
the Urals and the European part of the country are required; the commiUment to pro-
duction of less rich deposits in developed regions; the remoteness of the lands to
be irrigated from sources of water; the need for the more significant increase of
the resources for simple reproduction and environmental protection and other factors
requiring major additional expenditures. The offsetting of these expenditures is
possible on the basis of the complete utilization of scientific and technical prog-
ress and the improvement of administration and management as applied to present
conditions.

2
INJR 0FF1C1AL USEZCNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The difficulties of changing over the economy to the primarily intensive path of
development were discovered during the 10th Five-Year Plan. With the abrupt reduc-
tion of the extensive factors of growth, it was indicated at the 26th CPSU Congress,
violations of discipline, displays of mismanagement and the inadequate preparation
of managerial personnel for work under the conditions of the sharp decrease of the

qualitative characteristics of production activity took place. "But, perhaps, the
main reason is," L. I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress, "that the force of
inertia, the traditions and habits, which formed during the period when not so much
the qualitative as the quantitativeaspect of the matter came to the forefront, have
not yet been completely overcome." The nonfulfillment of the assignments on the
output of resource-saving equipment was noted; a relatively small proportion of the
capital investments was allocated for the renovation and retooling of operating
enterprises. The socialist principle of pay according to labor was violated at
many enterprises and organizations. Many tasks, which were set by the 25th CPSU
Congress, in the area of planning, management, especially when introducing and aa-
similating new equipment, the organization of labor and wages were not accomplished.
All these shortcomings could notbut adverselyinfluence during the 10th Five-Year
Plan the growth rate of labor productivity, the use of productive capital and mate-
rial resources, the times of the placement into operation and the assimilation of

new production capacities and, consequently, the output of many types of products
of industry and agriculture. '

0n the basis of the critical interpretation of the experience of the 10th Five-Year
Plan the 26th CPSU Congress outlined a series of measures, which are aimed first of
all at the quickest possible elimination of the disproportions and ”bottlenecks” in
the national economy and the achievement of the optimum ratio between the consump-
tion fund and the accumulation fund, which ensure the solution of a wide range of

social problems and the steady increase of the production potential of the country.

An important place in USSR economic and social development for 1981-1985 and the
period to 1990 is assigned to the problem of the rate of economic development of the
country. In recent times the inadequately efficient use of reproduction resources
and the existing discrepancies between the achieved level of development of the pro-
ductive forces and the management and planning of the development of the economy,
which lagged behind it, as well as the economic mechanism were the cause of the
slowing of this rate. The workers of planning organs and economics scholars dragged
out the fulfillment of the assignments of the 20th and 25th CTSU Congresses on the
preparation of scientifically sound suggestions on the solution of the ripe problems.

The 26th CPSU Congress appraised these negative phenomena, outlined measures, which
are conducive to the increase of the rate of economic development of the country,
and outlined the further increase of the absolute increments for the most important
indicators. During the llth Five-Year Plan the significance of each percent in-
crease of the resources for current consumption and sociocultural construction will
increase substantially.

During the llth Five-Year Plan as compared with the 10th Five-Year Plan the absolute
increases of the national income will be 9 billion rubles more, including the con-
sumption fund--more than 13 billion rubles, the output of industry--46 billion
rubles. the output of group B-I8 billion rubles, the output of agriculture (average
annual production)--7.S billion rubles, the retail commodity turnover-—more than

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFT1C1A1.USEIDNLY

8 billion rubles. The decrease of the absolute increases according to these indi—
cators, which occurred during the 10th Five-Year Plan, is thereby being overcome.

-----——————————————.-—_—.____._______________________________________p__.________

1971-1975 1976-1980 1981-1985

_______________________..__.____——-——————

National income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 7b 86
Output of industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 127 171
including:
groupﬂ.........o....u...o.. 11‘. 98 [24
groupB..............o...... 38 29 ‘7
Output of agriculture (average annual production). 13 10 18

Retail commodity turnover. . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 52 60

 

The increase of the indicators of the material stimulation of social production is
planned. It is envisaged to increase the wages of workers and employees by 13-16
percent and the pay of kolkhoz farmers by 20-22 percent. As a result the proportion
of the population with a per capital income of 100 rubles and more a month will in-
crease considerably. These indicators are being coordinated more closely with the
tasks of the development of production and the increase of its efficiency, the im-
provement of product quality, the more complete utilization of production capaci-
ties, the strengthening of the stability of labor collectives, especially in the
regions of Siberia and the Far East.

Much attention is being devoted to questions of stimulation for the end results of
work, as well as to the improvement of the brigade form of wages. The main thing is
the combination of collectivity in work with the proper incentive for the specific
contribution of each member of the brigade. An important role belongs to the coun-
cils of brigades. The departments of labor and wages of production associations,
enterprises, ministries and organs of the State Committee for Labor and Social Prob-
lems should give them assistance. Here the planned increase of wages during the
llth Five—Year Plan will take place under the conditions of the stability of retail
prices for basic foodstuffs and nonfood consumer items, which will lead to absubo
stantial increase of the real income of the workers. As resources are accumulated
first of all by means of the utilization of the reserves of the increase of labor
productivity, a new stage of the increase of the minimum wage, the rates and sala-
ries of workers will begin. As in the past, the payments and benefits received by
the population from public consumption funds, which will increase during the 5-year
period by 20 percent, will play an important role. They are being linked to a
greater extent with the solution of the problems of the changeover of the economy

to the path of primarily intensive development, the introduction of new equipment
and thu increase and improvement of production.

The importance of passenger transport and communications in solving the set of so-
cial problems will increase. All types of passenger transport will be supplemented
with new vehicles, which will make it possible to shorten the time en route, espe-
cially when traveling to work.

The formation of the unified automated communications network of the country on the
basis of the latest data transmission systems will be continued, color television

and stereo radio broadcasting will uadergo development. Artificial earth satel-
lites will be used more extensively for the organization of multichannel television

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and radio broadcasting. The length of long-distance telephone channels will in-

crease approximately 1.8-fold, while the number of telephones in cities and vil-
lages will increase 1.3-fold.

The rapid development of the sectors, which produce consumer goods and the raw mate-
rials for their production, will be the material basis of the backing of the in-
crease of the real income of the population. Thus, the growth rate of the output

of the food industry will increase from 7 percent during the 10th Five-Year Plan to
23-26 percent during the 11th Five-Year Plan, local industry-from 31 to 40 per-
cent, light industry-—to 18-20 percent. Particular attention will be devoted to the
utmost development of agriculture--the main raw material base of the food and light
industry and the supplier of trade organizations with fresh produce which does not
require industrial processing. The planned acceleration of the growth rate of the
output of agriculture is connected with the strengthening of its material and tech-
nical base. In 1985 kolkhozes and sovkhozes will be supplied with 1.4-fold more
mineral fertilizers as compared with 1980 with improved quality characteristics,
1.8-fold more feed additives and more than l.S-fold more electric power. The de-
liveries of diverse equipment, tractors, agricultural machinery, machines for animal
husbandry and fodder production, motor vehicles and so on will increase.

Under present conditions, when agriculture is saturated with many types of equipment,
the main attention should he devoted to the quality of the equipment being produced
and the improvement of its structure so as to change over more rapidly to industrial
methods of work with allowance made for the improvement of breeding, the boosting of
production and the increase of the quality of mineral fertilizers, especially herbi-
cides. This will ensure an increase of the yield of crops and will increase labor
productivity.

Agriculture will continue development in the unified agro-industrial complex. An
important role is being assigned to the complex food program, which will be a com-
ponent of the five-year plan. In this program much attention is devoted to the de-
velopment of the production and social infrastructure, which will promote the pre-
servation of the grown produce and its delivery to the consumer. The development
of the hotbed and hothouse system, first of all in the regions of Siberia, the Far
East and the European north, also merits attention.

The role of heavy industry in the production of goods for the population is increas-
ing. Thus, the output of chemical fibers and filaments will increase 36 percent.

It is planned to increase by approximately 1.4-fold the production of cultural,
personal and household goods with the substantial enlargement of the assortment and
the increase of quality. It is envisaged to increase the volume of personal serv-
ices to the population by 40-50 percent with the significant improvement of the
standards of service and the increase of the number of services which are in demand.
The material and technical base of trade will be strengthened, warehouse facilities
and vegetable bases will be mechanized.

In the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress much attention is devoted to the develop-
ment of heavy industry, first of all to the strengthening of the material and tech-
nical base of the fuel and power complex, the sectors which produce construction
materials, the chemical industry and machine building. All types of transport and
first of all rail transport, which in recent types has become a "bottleneck" in the
national economy, will be further developed. It will be supplemented with a more
efficient fleet of locomotives and cars.

5
ma omcut use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The planned 12-15 percent increase of capital investments in the national economy
(7ll-230 billion rubles) will make it possible,withthe decrease of the proportion
of unfinished construction to the standard level and the observance of the set
per.od of the construction of facilities, to increase the fixed production capital
in the national economy by approximately one-third. The nonproductive fixed capital
will also increase substantially with an increase of its quality. Thus, with the
retention of the volume of the placement of living space into operation, which was
achieved during the 10th Five-Year Plan, the capital investments for these purposes
will increase considerably, which will make it possible to build apartment houses

according to new, improved designs which create greater conveniences for the resi-
dents.

Thc realization of the social program and the rate of development of the economy,
which have been outlined for the llth Five-Year Plan, and the decrease of the effect
of extensive factors of growth are possible on the basis of the utmost intensifica-
tion and the increase of the efficiency of social production. Labor productivity

is the most important indicator of production efficiency. The acceleration of its
growth rate in all the sectors of physical production is called for during the new
5-year period (see the table).

 

1976-1980 1981-1985

 

Industry....................-..... 17 23-25
Agriculture (average annual production in public sector). . 15 22-24
Rail transport. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.5 10-12
Construction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ll [5-17

 

By means of this indicator there has to be obtained 85-90 percent of the increase

of the national income, more than 90 percent of the increase of the output of indus-
try and the entire increase of the output of agriculture and construction and in-
stallation work. In many sectors of industry it is envisaged maensure the increase
of the output of products entirely by means of the increase of labor productivity.
The most important factors of the accomplishment of this task will be: the more
rapid introduction and assimilation than before of the achievements of technical
progress at operating enterprises; the increase of the level of the mechanization
and automation of production processes, especially in auxiliary, subsidiary, loading
and unloading and warehousing operations; the rapid development of the robot equip-
ment industry, which is being created, for the output of various manipulators; the
increase of the number of workers who have acquired an occupation in all forms of
resident educational institutions, and so on. The level of the electric power-
worker and capital-labor ratios will increase substantially. The capital-labor
ratio will increase in 5 years in industry by 32 percent, in agriculture by 38 per-
cent and in construction by 20 percent. Approximately 35 percent of the fixed pro-
duction capital in industry and more than 40 percent in agriculture will be re-
placed during this period. Much attention is also being devoted to the improvement
of the organization of labor and wages, the creation of the conditions for the
elimination of the turnover of personnel, the tightening up of labor discipline, the
introduction of the brigade form of the organization of labor and the increase of
the role of the councils of brigades in organizational and educational woﬁtand the
improvement of the rate setting of labor. As a whole in physical production dur-
ing the 11th Five—Year Plan not less than 20 million people can be conditionally
released due to the enumerated factors of the growth of labor productivity.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The changeover of the economy to the primarily intensive path of development re-
quires the efficient consumption of material resources and the more complete utili-
zation of fixed capital and production capacities. Particular attention is being
devoted to the saving of fuel and energy resources. which during the 5-year period
will amount to 160-170 million tons of conventional fuel. Important tasks have
been set for the sectors, which produce and use construction materials, on the im-
provement of the quality characteristics and their more efficient use. Thus. in
machine building and metalworking the specific consumption of rolled ferrous metal
products should be decreased on the average by not less than 18-20 percent, steel
pipe--10-12 percent, rolled nonferrous metal products-9-ll percent. A 7-9 percent

saving of rolled ferrous metal products and a 5-7 percent saving of cement will be
provided in construction.

For the achievement of the outlined saving of material resources there are needed:
the introduction of fuel- and energy-saving technological processes, including
waste-free technology; the complete processing of raw materials and materials; the
increase of the output of economical units of large unit capacity. especially for
thermal and nuclear electric power stations; the development of the central heat
supply of cities; the reuse of material, fuel and energy resources, as well as by—
product resources; the decrease of the weight of machines and equipment per unit of
useful effect; the replacement of metals with plastics, and so on. The outlined
measures on the intensification of the policy of economy, the improvement of the
rate setting of material resources, accounting and monitoring of their use, the im-
provement of the stimulation of the economical use of resources and the imposition
of strict penalties for the display of poor management should play an important role
in this. All this will promote a decrease of the materials-output ratio of the na-
tional product, which in many sectors continues to remain high.

The increase of the shift coefficient of equipment and the time of its utilization
during the week is an important factor of the overcoming of the decrease of the
output-capital ratio along with the preferential increase of the productivity of the
new equipment being produced over the increase of its cost. Experience has been
gained in this area, especially in the textile industry, but for the present it is
being disseminated slowly in machine building and other sectors with a discontinu-
ous nature of production. In this connection the workers who work in sectors with
a continuous nature of production have been placed under unequal conditions, which
creates a turnover of personnel and expenditures of time for retraining. This, in
turn, adversely affects the increase of labor productivity. the quality of the out-
put being produced and, in the end, the increase of the national income.

The consistent implementation of the measures elaborated by the party on the im-
provement of management, planning and the economic mechanism and the strengthening
of the comprehensive approach in planning and in the making of management decisions
in the process of their implementation will promote the increase of the efficiency
of social production. This appears in the elaboration and implementation of com—
prehensive goal programs on the most important and difficult problems. the solution
of which requires the participation of many organs of management and scientific
institutions.

More than 15 comprehensive goal programs on such economic and social problems as the
food problem. the fuel and energy problem, the development of the production of con-
Sumer goods, the reduction of the use at manual labor, the assurance of the complete

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

utilization of material resources, the development of machine building, transporta-
tion and others have been included for the first time in the llth Five-Year Plan.
In the union republics comprehensive goal programs were drawn up on many socio-
economic problems. The goal program method on the realization of scientific and
technical problems is being improved. Programs are being elaborated on 160 prob-
lems, which will be a most important factor of the acceleration of the rate of sci-
entific progress, which will conclude with the mass production of new types of prod-
ucts, the introduction of advanced technology and methods of prospecting for miner-
als and so on. All these programs will be a basic component of the five-year plan.
A number of new indicators, for example, the standard net output, a system of me-
chanical and economic norms and standards and others, which create the conditions
for the increase of the efficiency of social production, will be used in it.

The indicators of industry are being elaborated for a more extensive products

list, they reflect high quality and technically improved types of items; the meas-
urers ofthe indicators for many types of machine building, which are aimed at the
decrease of the weight of equipment per unit of its capacity, have been made more
precise. A plan of the production and deliveries of complete sets of technological
equipment is envisaged for the first time, the list of products. in accordance with
which the material balances are drawn up, has been enlarged. Moreover, in the five-
year plan the distribution of the most important types of products among users will
be envisaged, which will create great stability of the plan, especially in construc-
tion, as well as the conditions for the early conclusion of contracts between the
enterprises which supply and use these products. The assignments characterizing the
economic impact from the adoption of scientific and technical measures are speci-
fied in the five-year plan. The capital investments and material resources for the
retooling and renovation of operating enterprises will be stipulated, their propor-
tion in the processing sectors will be increased. All this will create the prere-
quisites for the more accurate calculation of the material stimulation funds of
enterprises and the strengthening of the contractual relations of the producers and
users of products.

The accomplishment of the main tasks of the five-year plan requires the improvement
of the national economic, intersectorial and intraaectorial proportions. The
closer link of science with production and the efficient use of material and man-
power resources should pronote this. The increasing absolute increments of the na-
tional income on the basis of these factors are making it possible to envisage the
leading growth of the consumption fund and the increase of its proportion in the
national income from 75.3 percent in 1980 to 77.3 percent in 1985. The growth
rates of both subdivisions of social production are approaching each other. The
proportions of industry will change in favor of consumer goods. Whereas during the
Ninth and 10th Five—Year Plans the growth rate of the output of industry of group A
exceeded the growth rate of the production of group B, during the llth Five-Year
Plan the preferential development of group B is planned. In the production of the
national product and the national income a further increase of the proportion of
industry will occur, including due to the increase of the volume of the industrial
processing of agricultural raw materials.

The implementation of the set of measures being outlined on the increase of the
effectiveness of capital investments and the more complete utilization of the cre-
ated production potential of the country will make it possible to change such an
important proportion as the ratio of the growth rates of the amount of capital in-
vestments and the national income. During the Ninth Five-Year Plan the growth

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFMJAI.USEZONLY

rate of capital investments exceeded the growth rate of the national income by
l.46-fold and during the 10th Five-Year Plan by 1.38-fold; an increase of capital
investments by 12-15 percent and of the national income by 18-20 percent is planned
for the 11th Five-Year Plan. This is a difficult task, and its accomplishment de-
pends on the efforts of scientific, planning and economic organs at all levels of
management.

The preferential increase of the volume of the retail commodity turnover and per-
sonal services as compared with the increase of the income of the population has to
be envisaged for 1981-1985, which will make it possible to improve the established
proportions between monetary income and its backing with resources. At the same
time it is necessary to eliminate the cases observed during the 10th Five-Year Plan
of the lead of the growth rate of wages as compared with labor productivity, espe-
cially in construction, agriculture, a number of sectors of industry and rail trans-
port. The optimality of this proportion should be achieved by the improvement of
the organization of production and labor and of material and technical supply, the
strict observance of contractual obligations between the enterprises which produce
and use the products, as well as the strengthening of the cost accounting relations
between kolkhozes and sovkhozes, on the one hand, and the enterprises of the sectors
of the national economy, which send workers and equipment to participate in agricul-
tural operations, on the other. Here it is necessary to specify the sources of the
wages of the workers being enlisted from nonagricultural sectors.

Important measures on the improvement of the proportion between the increase of the
capital-labor ratio and labor productivity have to be implemented. However, the
ministries of a number of sectors in their plans are still retaining the preferen-
tial growth of the capital-labor ratio over labor productivity. This concerns
first of all agriculture and the extractive sectors of industry. The increase of
production efficiency requires research and organizing work on the overcoming of
the formed trend.

The changes in the number of those working in physical production and the nonproduc-
tive sphere should also take place on the basis of the mechanization and automation
of production processes and the increase of labor productivity. It is planned

to increase the growth rate of the number of those employed in the latter by more
than threefold as compared with the sectors of physical production.

The further development of the structure of exports by the increase of the propor-
tion of the output of the sectors of the processing industry, semimanufactures and
enriched raw materials is envisaged.

The policy of the preferential development of the sectors which govern the accelera-
tion of the rate of technical progress in the entire national economy, especially
machine building and instrument making, the chemical and petrochemical industries,
will be continued in industry. The proportion of the output of the enumerated sec-
tors in the overall industrial production will be increased to approximately

38 percent in [985 as against 30.2 percent in 1975 and 34.5 percent in 1980. Major
structural changes will occur in all complexes and sectors. Thus, in the agro-
industrial complex along with the development of the sectors which ensure the in-
crease of the yield of agricultural crops and the productivity of animal husbandry,
measures will be implemented on the keeping capacity of products during harvesting,
transportation. processing and storage. In recent times the losses of agricultural
products, first of all vegetables, frequently have amounted to 20-30 percent.

9
FIN!(NﬂW(]AL USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the fuel and power complex it is planned to make structural changes in the direc-
tion of the increase of the role of atomic energy and water power, natural gas and
coal which is mined by the open-cut method. With the further increase of the pro-
duction of petroleum the latter will be used first of all not as a source of fuel,
but as a raw material for the chemical industry. The use of atomic energy for the
central heating of cities is being expanded. The construction of nuclear TETs's
and nuclear heat supply stations is envisaged for these purposes. Significant
changes will also occur in the regional proportions of this complex. The share of
the eastern regions of the country in the production of fuel and the generation of
electric power, which is produced on the basis of inexpensive coals and water re-
sources. will increase substantially. The construction of large therml electric
power stations for the transmission of electric power to the Urals and the regions
of the European part of the country is planned on the basis of the use of the coals
mined by the open-cut method at the Ekibastuz, Kansk-Achinsk and Kuznetsk coal
basins. All this is setting important tasks for pipeline and rail transport. The
transmission of electric power over long distances is acquiring especially great
importance. During the 11th Five-Year Plan only nuclear electric power stations
and stations for heat supply will be built in the European regions.

The increase of the role of aluminum, synthetic resins and plastics, composition
materials, laminated wood structural members and advanced types of rolled ferrous
metal products will be the main direction of the change of proportions in the con-
st ruction materials complex. As a result of the expansion of the assortment and
the improvement of the structure of metal products and the substantial increase of
their quality characteristics it is planned to obtain in 1985 a saving of metal in
the national economy in terms of rolled products of 7-8 million tons, which is al-
most threefold more than during the preceding 5-year period.

in the chemical industry the increase of the output of the latest types ‘ inlets
of the small-scale chemical industry, the highest grades of synthetic rt:
well as efficient construction materials and thermoplaats is being places
forefront.

The production of the most complicated instruments in machine building, including
for scientific research, mechanization equipment and control systems. machines and
devices for jobs and operations, which until now were performed manually, numerical
control machine tools, computers and automatic manipulators for use in difficult
and monotonous operations will increase. The list of machines and devices for the
output of consumer goods will be enlarged.

Particular attention is being devoted to the improvement of the structure of capital
investments. They will be allocated for new construction to the sectors which en-
sure the stability and balance of the economy, for the construction of facilities
which make it possible to expedite the elimination of the existing disproportions
and "bottlenecks," for the strengthening of the material and technical base of the
fuel and raw material sectors, for the development of the sectors which produce con-
sumer goods, and first of all for the solution of the food problem. The techno-
logical structure of capital investments will also be improved. Their proportion

in the development of the active portion of the fixed production capital will in-
crease.

More than one-third of the total amount of capital investments is being channelled
into agriculture with allowance made for the sectors which promote its development

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(agricultural machine building, machine building for animal husbandry and fodder
production, the production of nineral fertilizers and plant protecting agents, the

microbiological and mixed fodder industry and others).

The task is to use more effectively the enormous resources which it is planned to
allocate for the development of agriculture and the entire agro-industrial complex.
Here it is necessary to develop the sectors belonging to the complex proportionate-
ly and in a balanced manner. Cases of the use of expensive reinforced concrete
livestock barns must be eradicated, proper attention must be devoted to the develop-
ment of the fodder base. It is necessary to eliminate the existing disproportions
between production and the infrastructure, the availability of raw materials and the
insufficient capacities for their processing, which is leading to large losses and
the decrease of the quality of the products being delivered to the consumer.

Unfortunately, intrasectorial disproportions are occurring to one extent or another
in nearly all sectors, which is explained both by shortcomings in the planning of
capital investments and especially by the violations of planning discipline. The
pattern of the output of meta? orking equipment and its distribution between machine
building and the other sector: of the national economy require serious improvement.
Often new, highly productive equipment is sent not to the enterprises of machine
building ministries, but to other sectors where it is used for the repair of not
very complicated equipment.

It is also necessary to study the problems which arise in repair. The analysis
shows that the repair of obsolete equipment with respect to the ultimte indicators
is more expensive than the production of new equipment of better quality.

Important changes will also occur in the territorial proportions of the distribu-
tion of the productive forces of the country. Here the efficient combination of
comprehensiveness with the specialization of economic regions and union republics
with allowance made for the increase of manpower resources, the availability of
mineral reserves and climatic conditions is the main direction. The continued de-
velopment and formation of territorial production complexes, especially in the
eastern regions of the country, will promote this.

As a result of the transmission of inexpensive electric power from the east to the
western part of the country, as well as the development of pipeline transport (in-
cluding all-product pipelines) the location of not only the labor-consuming, but
also the power-consuming extractive sectors, especially in the regions of Siberia,
should be approached in a new way. This enormous region has three zones: the ex-
treme northern, the central and the southern zones.

It is feasible to develop the raw material resources of the first some primarily by
the work shift method, in the second zone it is feasible to develop the sectors
which refine raw materials, while in the southern zone it is feasible to carry out
development comprehensively with the emphasis on the utmost strengthening of the
social infrastructure and the development of the hotbed and hothouse system, which
will promote the influx of skilled personnel into this region.

The 26th CPSU Congress set strategic tasks not only for a 5-year period, but also
for a lengthy period. Firm foundations for their successful accomplishment should
be laid during the llth Five-Year Plan. In this connection a five-year plan of
scientific research on the most important economic directions has been drafted.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the 11th Five-Year Plan the conditions also have to be created for the solu‘
tion of such most important problems as the continuation of the development of the
Western Siberian Petroleum and Gas Complex, the formation of territorial productiOI
complexes on the basis of the use of the Kansk-Achinsk and Bkibastuz basins and tin
raw material resources in the zone of the Baykal-Anur Railway Line, the further de-

COPYRIGHI‘: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekononiki", I981

7807
CSO: 1820/3

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICHWHCJAI.USEIDNIN

INVESTMWT, PRICES, BUDGET AND FINANCE

IMPACT OF BANKING SYSTEM 0“ PRODUCTION ANALYZBD
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 73-83
[Krticle by I. Levchuk: "The Banking System and Production Bfficiencyﬁf

ljexgj During the period of mature socialism the task of actively influencing by
all the economic tools at their disposal the increase of the efficiency of social
production and work quality is coming up for banks. The main problem of those
which encompass all the spheres of the national economy, L. I. Brezhnev emphasized
in the Accountability Report of the C950 Central Committee to the 26th party con-
gress, is to complete the changeover to the primarily intensive path of develop-
ment. The congress advanced the demand: "To increase the role of financial and
credit levers in the intensification of production, the strengthening of cost ac-
counting and the tightening up of the policy of economy."

The influence of banks on the increase of the efficiency of the economy begins al-
ready at the stage of the drawing up of drafts of the five-year and annual plans.
In economic literature almost no attention is devoted to this question, while much
depends on the activity of banks. Banks study the drafts of the state plan of eco-
nomic and social development and the state budget and prepare suggestions on the
main proportions of the national economy, the ratio of groups A and B of industry
and of the monetary income and expenditures of the population, the development of
trade and the sphere of personal service, the monitoring of the expenditure of wage
funds and so on, which, as a rule, are then reflected in these state documents.

The All-Union Bank for Financing Capital Investments and Gosbank take an active
part in the preparation of the drafts of plans of capital construction and in the
checking of the title lists and intraproject title lists of construction projects.
here the attention is focused on questions which ensure the increase of the effec-
tiveness of capital investments. By taking part in the preparation of drafts of
the balance of the monetary income and expenditures of the population, as well as
by drawing up drafts of the cash and credit plans, the institutions of the banks
influence the formation of the volume and pattern of production, construction and

circulation.

The importance of the work of the banks in the area of planning is increasing in
light of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. Now a consolidated financial
balance with a breakdown of revenues and expenditures by years is elaborated within
the five-year plan. while an annual financial balance is elaborated within the an-
nual plan. In connection with this Gosbank and the All-Union Bank for Financing

13
FOI.OFFKJAI.USEGDNLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Capital Investments prepare es‘imates of the short-term and long-term credits for

the 5-year period with a breakdown by years. This work requires the thorough analy-
sis of economic and social phenomena.

of measures on the improvement of the economic mechanism, which are contained in the
decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers of

12 July 1979. Among them, in particular, it is envisaged to elaborate within the
state plan of economic and social development a 5-year balance of the monetary in-
come and expenditures of the population, which takes into account the needs of the
Soviet people for goods and paid services. on the basis of the steady increase of

One should aim at the formation of the volumes of the retail commodity turnover on
the basis of the extensive search for opportunities to meet more completely the con-
sumer demand of the population, and not just tn the basis of the available con-odi-
ty resources. In the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress for the 11th Five-Year
Plan, first, a taster growth rate of the production of consumer items than of means
of production is called for: second, the output of cultural, personal and household
goods at heavy industry enterprises will increase; third, the necessary masses of
commodities should additionally be sought locally by the increase of the output of
consumer goods made from local raw materials and materials and the waste products

of industrial and agricultural production. The measures of the party and the gov-
ernment on the improvement of the economic mechanism not only give room for the dis-
play of initiative locally. but also extend the rights of local organs and the man-

11;
m omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In analyzing from this standpoint the emission function of USSR Gosbank, it can be
noted that the steps on fulfilling the cash plan, which is an integral part of the
state plan of economic and social development, function here as the main steps.
Here the monitoring of the expenditures of wage funds and the development of the
commodity turnover, as well as of personal service, which cannot be separated from
each other, since the payment of assets for wages is the main item of expenditure
of the cash plan, while the receipt of the proceeds of trade is its main item of
income, serves as the decisive directions from the point of view of the influenc-
ing of the intensification of production.

During the present five-year plan it is planned to ensure the leading growth of
labor productivity as compared with wages. This requires that the standards of the
wage per ruble of output, which are subject to planning, the amounts of the wage
funds and material incentive funds and the amounts of the monetary payments to kol-
khoz farmers should reflect more completely and take into account the increase of
the efficiency of social production. The monitoring of the banks should promote
more actively the observance of the proportions incorporated in the plans and should
thereby be conducive to the intensification of production.

In recent years in some republics, krays and oblasts the unjustified exceeding of
the planned wage fund has been allowed due to the presence at some enterprises of
an above-plan number of workers and employees, a faster increase of the average
wage than was planned, the nonfulfillment of the assignments on the increase of la-
bor productivity and so on. In this connection in 1980 the assets for the payment
of wages began to be issued to associations and organizations in conformity with
the production volumes which wenzapproved by the ministries and departments, and
not by the enterprises themselves. It is well known that now a limit of the number
of workers and employees is established for ministries, associations and enter-
prises and the use of standards of the wage per ruble of output, which coordinate
the wage more closely with the production volumes, is being extended. The wage,
which was approved previously by the associations and organizations themselves for
above-plan construction and installation work, as well as for the repair of build-
ings, structures and local roads, is now stipulated by the state plan. The indi-
cated measures are increasing the importance of bank monitoring of the expenditures
of the wage fund and are increasing its influence on production efficiency.

The bank has received the opportunity to influence more effectively the precise ob-
servance of the state standards and specifications of the output of products. The
point is that if a portion of the output is produced with a deviation from the
standards and specifications, its value is excluded from the volume of sold output,
the amount of wages due for the corresponding period is recalculated and the assets
issued in excess to the economic organ are withheld by the institution of Gosbank
when issuing money for wages when making the final settlement for the current

quarter.

The assignments on and the means of increasing the production of consumer goods and
developing the commodity turnover are specified in the Main Directions. In this
connection the importance of the work of Uosbank on the realization of the income
portion of the cash plan and first of all on increasing the receipts of proceeds
from trade organizations is increasing. Bank organs should constantly keep track
of the fulfillment by trade organizations of both the main plans and the additional
assignments on the volume of the retail commodity turnover, should strive for the
expansion of trade in industrial goods and foodstuffs, the development of the net-
work of trade and public d'ning enterprises and so on.

15
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is well known that the plan assignments for the sectors of industry, which pro-
duce consumer goods, are regarded as the minimum assignments. Therefore, bank in-
stitutions jointly with associations and enterprises need to seek more actively
opportunities for the increase of the output, the enlargement of the assortment and
the increase of the quality of goods which are in demand. Bank credit will promote
the setting up and development of the production of such goods not only in light and
the food industries, but also at enterprises of heavy and local industry.

In the process of regulating the money circulation and realizing the assignments
established by the plan, Gosbank can try more effectively to see to it that the
items, which warehouses and bases have in a sufficient amount, would always be on
sale, that goods would be better distributed among oblasts and that the violation
of the work schedule of trade enterprises would not be allowed. The development of
the entire sphere of consumer service and the improvement of the quality of its work
are a substantial reserve for the increase of the well-being of the people and the
strengthening of the money circulation of the country.

The 26th CPSU Congress advanced the demands to increase the level of organizing
work, business ability and efficiency in all the links of the economy. This demand
imposes on Cosbank, as the cash-issuing center of the country, the duty to ensure
the more efficient organization of the cash flows and to expedite the turnover of
monetary assets. The level of all emission and cash operations should be increased
in order to increase their impact and to decrease the expenditures on their per-
formance.

The enhancement of the role of local soviets of people's deputies in solving ques-
tions of economic construction is of great importance for money circulation, the use
of money as one of the economic levers of the increase of production efficiency and
the exercise of control. At present they draw up and approve the consolidated five-
year and annual plans of the production of local construction materials, the output
of consumer goods and housing, municipal, cultural and general construction and
monitor their fulfillment. The saturation of the market with the necessary goods,
the provision of the population with paid services and the increase of the purchas-
ing power of the ruble largely depend on this activity.

The migration of money1 remains a major problem. It is clear that this process as
a whole must not be considered justified. In part it stems from objective factors,
which are caused by the development of the economy, scientific and technical prog-
ress and the increase of the well-being of the people. However, the significant
transfer of money in a number of instances is connected with shortcomings in the
operation of services and first of all trade. The improper distribution of market-
able commodities among cities and rayons, the poor consideration of demand and the
lack of some types of goods lead to the unjustified movement of money from many
rayons to oblast cities and capitals of the union republics. The strengthening of
the influence of the bank on the more complete meeting of the effective demand will
make it possible to improve trade and to decrease the migration of money.

The improvement of the savings business, the task of the further development of
which is set in the Main Directions, is an important factor of the increase of the

I. By the migration of money there is understood its transfer from one economic
region or city to another, from one republic or oblast to another.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORioFFKHAl.USE(NQLY

efficiency of management. Savings banks save workers time and facilitate the making
of many types of monetary transactions. With respect to the scale of the money
turnover, the degree of branching of the network and the number of clients served
the system of savings banks in the USSR is one of the largest in the world. At the
beginning of 1980 in the country there were nearly 81,000 savings banks, at which
there were 136 million deposits for a total amount of 146.2 billion rubles. Sav-
ings banks offer the population 60 types of services. In recent years new promis-
ing forms of consumer service have emerged and been developed. Among them are: the
transfer of wages and other types of monetary income of the population to accounts
at savings banks; the issuing of wages through them to workers and employees (by
1980 13,000 enterprises paid wages in this way to more than 4 million workers);
noncash transactions with trade organizations and municipal enterprises; the repay-
ment of state loans and others. It is important to take more completely into ac-
count the demands of the populatiwn and to develop advanced forms of settlements
and other types of monetary transactions, including the combination of the payments
for rent, municipal services, gas, electric power and telephone in a single payment
document.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress require the more active use of financial and
credit levers for increasing the efficiency of social production. Bank credit helps
to increase the scale of the production and circulation of the national product.

By means of it the growth of the monetary and physical assets of associations and
enterprises, which is necessary for increasing the output of products, is formed,
the financial base of the formation of the stockpiles and stocks of materials, un—
finished work pieces and equipment, which are necessary for industrial and agricul-
tural production, is provided, and the output of consumer goods increases.

At the same time credit promotes the improvement of the sectorial proportions of so-
cial production, since considerable amounts of credit are channelled into the sec-
tors of industry, which ensure to the greatest extent technical progress and the
increase of the well-being of the poeple, as well as into the base sectors-the fuel
and power sectors, ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy and agriculture.

Credit Investments of Banks in the National Economy2

(balances of loans at the end of the year, billions of rubles)
__._____._________._.___.___________.____________._________.________________._______

Increase in 1979 as against
1965 1970 1975 1979 1965 1970 1975

___.______________.._____..._....._______________._.__.__._____.
_______.__________

Credit investments,
total. . . . . . . . 74.0 126.2 204.0 300.4 4.1-fold 2.4-fold 1.5-fold

including:
short-term . . . . 66.7 104.7 160.5 225.0 3.4-fold 2.1-fold 1.4-fold
long-term. . . . . 7.3 21.5 43.5 75.4 10.3-fold 3.5-fold 1.7-fold

______________________.___——————————————-

Industry, agriculture, trade and construction accounted for the bulk of the credit
investments.

The stimulating influence of credit on production and circulation increases under
the conditions of mature socialism. It is actively involved in the formation of

_—__.—————

2. "Narodnoye khuzynystvo SSSR v 1979 g." lihe USSR National Economy in 19727,
Izdatcl'stvo "Statistika", 1980, p 557.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fixed and working capital of associations, enterprises and organizations. More
than 46 percent of all the circulating assets of the national economy are formed

by means of short-term credit. In industry credit covers 47.0 percent of the work-
ing capital, in agriculture (kolkhozes)--54.5 percent, in trade--S7.2 percent.3 The
proportion of bank loans in the sources of capital investments of enterprises and
organizations has also increased considerably. The use of credit is oriented to a
greater and greater extent toward the improvement of the end results of production
and construction: the fulfillment of the plan of deliveries of products, the place-
ment of finished construction projects into operation and the increase of the re-
sults of the use of material, manpower and financial resources.

In capital construction it is planned to complete in 1981 the changeover to settle-
ments between clients and contractors for enterprises and projects which have been
totally finished and put into operation in accordance with the estimated cost of
the commodity production of construction. The issuing by clients of advances to
contracting organizations for expenditures on the unfinished performance of con-
struction and installation work is being ceased with the introduction of this pro-
cedure. The meeting of expenses up to the placement of projects into operation
will he achieved by means of loans. All this will increase the interest of con-
tracting organizations in shortening the periods of construction and in increasing
its quality.

The Acceleration of scientific and technical progress required the increase of the
effectiveness of cost accounting levers with respect to the development, assimila-
tion and introduction of new technology. In connection with the changeover of
scientific research organizations of industry to cost accounting they make settle-
ments with clients for the completely finished and accepted work instead of payment
for it by stages. The expenditures of these organizations until the expiration of
the planning period are covered by bank credit. If the deadline of the delivery of
the work is exceeded. the issuing of credit is continued with the levying of a high-
er interest rate for the use of the loan. The changeover to such a system should
increase substantially the effectiveness of the work of the scientific institutions
of industry.

A significant portion of the credit resources of the banking system is used by
enterprises and associations for the implementation of measures on the technical
improvement of production and the expansion of the output of consumer goods. By
means of Cosbank loans for these purposes in 1980 10,565 production facilities were
put into operation; the measures implemented by means of credit made it possible to
produce in terms of a year additional output worth 2.3 billion rubles and to derive
a profit in the amount of more than 250 million rubles.

In recent years the procedure of issuing and repaying such credits has been im-
proved. COSbank and the All-Union Bank for Financing Capital Investments are per-
mitted to grant loans to production associations, enterprises and organizations for
the implementation of highly efficient measures on the output of new products and
the increase of the quality of the items being produced, as well as for the expan-
sion of the production of consumer goods and the improvement of personal service to
the population on the condition of the recovery of the expenditures and the repay-
ment of the debt within a period of 2 years. Moreover, such credit is granted over

 

3. "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 g.," pp 542-543.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and above the limit of state capital investments. Thus, credit has ceased to be

just an additional source of assets of enterprises when there are not enough re-

sources in the production development fund. It has become an independent tool of
the stimulation of technical progress and the increase of the output of goods for
the population.

All this makes it possible to make greater demands on the use of credit. In con-
formity with the Main Directions credit levers, like financial levers, should be
more actively involved "in the solution of the problems of expediting the develop-

- ment and introduction of highly efficient new equipment, as well as the removal from
production of obsolete equipment, of increasing the output of consumer goods and

the rendering of services to the population, of mobilizing internal economic re-
serves and eliminating unproductive expenditures and losses."

It should be noted that the methods of influence of the banks by means of credit

on the improvement of the work of associations, enterprises and organizations

should be developed and strengthened. The state of credit relations in the national
economy and the possibilities of improving the planning of credits and the mecha-
nism of lending attest to this.

Some liberalization of the conditions of the granting of credit has been accomp-
lished in recent years. Bank loans have begun to be used not only for the making
of the planned expenditures of economic organs, but also for the meeting of their
unforeseen needs. The expansion of lending from special loan and special current
accounts, the introduction of new types of loans and objects of credit and its ex-
tensive use for the making of settlements and the meeting of expenses, which do not
have material backing, had the result that the development of credit took place
more rapidly than its "return" increased. The volume of output and national income
per unit of bank investments decreased. Hhereas in 1965 there were 6.5 rubles of
gross national product and 2.9 rubles of national income per ruble of average an-
nual credit investments (with respect to short-term loans), in 1970 these indica-
tors were respectively 6.2 and 2.8 rubles, in l975-5.6 and 2.3 rubles and in 1979-
4.8 and 2.0 rubles.“

The demand of the 26th CPSU Congress: "To steadfastly implement the immutable prin-
ciple of economic construction--the achievement in the interests of society of the
best results with the least expenditures," fully applies to the use of bank credit
by associations and organizations. It is important for banks in their activity to
implement the named principle more completely. The economical expenditures of as-
sets should be specified already in the credit plans; at the stage of planning it
is necessary to stipulate that the growth rate of credit, all other things being
equal, should not be greater than the rate of increase of the gross national prod-
net and the national income. A similar correlation should be observed in the
formation of working capital with respect to these general economic indicators.
Thus, the increase of the efficiency of the use of working capital and bank credit
will be stipulated already in the plans. Such an approach should become the most
important principle of the planning of credit.

 

4. Calculated according to the statistical collections_pf the USSR Central Statis-
tical Administration "Rsrodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR" LThe USSR National Economi]
for 1965, 1976, 1975 and [979.

19
FOR OFTWCLAL.USE{MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is also necessary to step up the organizing and monitoring work of the banks in
the lending process: to adopt a sterner approach to associations and enterprises
which do not fulfill contractual obligations, production assignments and plans of
accumulations, produce unsaleable products and low quality goods, drag out the con-
struction periods, have above-plan stocks of physical assets and allow losses, un-
productive expenditures and waste. If the banks extend credit to these plants,
factories andconstruction organizations, they are objectively supporting them and
are as if covering with their own resources the gaps which have formed at them.
Such a situation must not be allowed. The banks, in our opinion, should restrict
the issuance of loans or refuse them entirely to such associations and enterprises.
The making of the approach to the issuance of credit more stringent will force

superior economic organizations to take effective steps to put right the operation
of the lagging enterprise.

This measure stems from the need to develop and strengthen cost accounting in
every possible way, which is specified by the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.
As is known, the sectors of industry during the 11th Five-Year Plan are being con-
verted as they become ready to self-sufficiency; the assets (from the profit),
which are necessary for the implementation of expanded reproduction, will remain at
the disposal of the ministries. The ministries and industrial associations should
bear full responsibility for the work of their economic organs, including the pro-
vision of assistance through their own resources and the taking of organizational,
economic and financial steps to improve their activity.

The need has arisen to increase the profitability, to eliminate the unprofitability
of production and to increase the profit, first of all by the reduction of the pro-
duction cost, the increase of labor productivity and the improvement of product
quality. By strengthening the control by the ruble and making the approach to eco-
nomic organs more stringent when issuing and repaying credit, the banks can do much
in this direction.

The question of the expediency of preserving some prevailing types of loans or of
the change of the procedure of granting them, apparently, should also be examined.
For example, the shortcomings of lending with respect to the turnover are well
known: the ease of obtaining bank resources here to a considerable extent is
achieved due to the weakening of the monitoring of their use. It is expedient to
halt the extension of loans to sugar refineries for covering losses against the
so-called fallout earnings. Apparently, credit should not be extended against ex-
cess, unnecessary and old physical assets, in order to promote their sale. The
amount of the loans to each given economic organ should be decreased by the amount
of the excess assets, considering that the capital invested in these assets has
been used unwisely.

The solution of the problem of enhancing the special-purpose nature of preferential
payment credits, which are granted to enterprises and organizations which operate
well in case of temporary financial difficulties, is of great importance. It is
expedient to allocate them only for the payment for physical assets and services,
and not for the payment of wages and the making of payments to the budget. Economic
organs need to have their own resources for these purposes.

Apparently, the time has come to erect barriers in the way of the consulerist atti-
tude toward credit for all economic managers who are rolling in bank credit, to
hold negligent managers more strictly accountable and to strengthen bank influence

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on enterprises and associations which permit gaps in their work. This would con-
form to the decisions of the 26th party congress on the increase of the level of

management in all the links of the economy, thereby promoting the increase of the
intensification of production.

To stimulate the better use of credit the banks in recent years have begun to im-
prove the procedure of paying for it. The interest for credit was differentiated
subject to the types of loans and the periods for which they are issued. The aver-
age level of interest increased, while the rate for overdue short-term loans came
to 10 percent. however, this did not yield the desired results. Practice shows
that the interest for planned credit does not have an adequate influence on its use
(by this credit there are understood the loans which ensure the normal planned cir-
culation of the assets of the economy). The point is that enterprises and associa-
tions stipulate in the financial plans the portion of the profit, which is for the
payment of interest on planned loans. In a number of instances this portion also
covers the interest on unforeseen loans. Therefore, as a rule, enterprises pay the
interest without detriment to the formation of economic stimulation funds.

In conformity with the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of
Ministers on improving the economic mechanism steps have been taken to increase

the influence of the interest for credit on the results of the work of associations
and enterprises. The differentiation of the rates by types of loans subject to the
nature and period of their use has been increased. The interest for credits, which
cover various unforeseen needs, has been increased, the rates for long-term loans
for capital investments have been differentiated considerably on the basis of the
principle-the more rapidly a measure is completed, the lower the interest rate is
(the difference between the planned and actual interest is turned over to the con-
struction organization or is exacted from it), the average level of interest has
been increased. All this makes it possible to use the interest for credit more
flexibly in the interests of the improvement of the results of the activity of the
economy.

The problem of enhancing the role of interest also has to be further worked on. It
is now already possible to say that the effectiveness of the interest for unfore-
seen loans henceforth has to be increased. Apparently. for the purposes of
strengthening it as a penalty measure it should be "weighted." However, it is not
a matter of further increasing the amount of interest for such loans. The interest
should he exacted not from the profit, but from the material incentive funds, re-
ducing the bonuses for the managers who are responsible for the organization of pro-
duction and the use of financial resources. This measure even in the case of a
comparatively small amount of interest will discipline the administrative and man-
agerial staff of associations and enterprises in the obtaining and expenditure of
bank loans.

Nuncash transactions, which are organized and carried out by the banking system,
are playing an important role in the system of economic levers of influence on pro-
duction efficiency and work quality. Such settlements for goods, services and per-
formed work and with respect to noncommodity transactions mediate practically the
entire economic turnover of the country and the movement of the national product.
In carrying them out, the banks verify the legality of the transactions, the mar—
ketability of monetary documents, the conformity of deals to the terms of the con-
tract and others. Consequently, they promote the strict observance of socialist
legality in economic relations. At the same time noncash transactions and their

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

organization are of great importance in the mutual monitoring by economic organs of
the delivery of commodity stocks, the timeliness and completeness of payment, in the
achievement of the greatest conformity between the movement of goods and money in
payment for them, in the economical expenditure of the assets of buyers and bank
credit for the payment for goods and services. Noncash transactions decrease the

amount of money necessary for the economic turnover and thereby reduce the market-
ing costs.

At the present stage it is important to fully utilize the mechanism of settlements,
just as other economic levers and stimuli, for increasing production efficiency and
work quality. The certificate of payment, which is carried out on behalf of the
supplier (contractor) by the buyer (client), is at the same time verification of the
conformity of the produced commodity (or service rendered) to the terms of the con-
tract. This check, as a rule, is made on the basis of the monetary payment docu-
ments, which are received by the buyer and at the bank institution serving him.
Thus, the mechanism of settlements makes it possible to monitor the conformity of
goods and services to the requirements of the plan and contract of deliveries; pay-
ment confirms the meeting of these requirements. Therefore, the more extensive the
opportunities of economic organs are to monitor the fulfillment of mutual obliga~
tions and, hence, to influence each other in the interests of their most complete
fulfillment, the more successfully the mechanism of settlement works and the greater
its influence on the increase of the efficiency of social production is.

The improvement of the acceptance method of payment is the most important direction,
in which, in our opinion, the strengthening of bank influence on the results of the
work of associations and organizations should proceed. Its proportion in the pay-
ment turnover of Gosbank in 1980 was more than 67.3 percent. The real influence of
this form is connected with the fact that before delivering monetary claims to the
bank for payment the supplier should meet a number of conditions and should reflect
them in the documents. Otherwise the bank will not accept the documents and, hence,
the supplier will not receive the amount indicated in them from the payer.

The supplier should ship the commodity, and precisely the one, in the amount and at
the price, which are stipulated by the contract, which is certified by reference in
the payment claim to the numbers and dates of the shipping and other documents.

The payment documents should be delivered to the bank only after the shipment of
the commodity. The bank, after receiving the claim for the payer, verifies it and
accepts it for execution, if the economic transactions behind it meet the terms of
the contract. True, the comparison of each document with the contract is not among
the functions of the bank; if doubts arise, the bank has the right to demand the
contract from the supplier and to verify the legality of the transaction. When the
unscrupulousness of a supplier is detected, for example. if he delivers documents
to the bank without having shipped the commodity, and such instances, unfortunate-
ly, are not rare, the bank imposes financial sanctions against the violator of con-
tractual discipline and can discredit him, not having accepted the payment claims
for encashment. Then the supplier, even in case of the observance of all the terms
of the contract, will have to resort to other forms of settlement, coming to an
agreement on this with the buyer. The buyer in this case can increase his demands
in the process of fulfilling the contractual relations. Apparently, the banks must
be granted more extensive rights in the imposition of sanctions, especially for

the delivery of claims for unshipped goods.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is necessary to make more coincident the time of the receipt by the buyer of the
commodity stocks and the entry of the payment into the current account of the sup-
plier. To solve this problem the organization of business at the enterprises must
be improved, their efficient and smooth operation. the timely and complete shipment
of the commodity and its delivery to the consumer and the good operation of trans-
portation and other economic links must be ensured. The banks should make their
contribution to the solution of this problem, by improving and simplifying the
organization of the paper flow on payment transactions and the tightening up of the
monitoring by the buyer of the quality of the products being delivered and the work
being turned over.

In recent years much has been done to increase the influence of noncash transactions
on production efficiency and to improve the effectiveness of sanctions for the
breech of contractual obligations. Thus, the fine for the late payment for deliv-
ered commodity stocks, services rendered and performed work has been increased.

It is now 0.04 percent of the amount of the overdue payment for each day of delay
(this is approximately E’percent per snnum). The former rate of the fine of

0.03 percent has been retained only for kolkhozes. In all instances the client
should now exact from the supplier fines and forfeits, if the latter delivered the
ordered products late, violated their assortment. the quality or the date of per-
formance of the contractual operations. However, this is still not always done,
and here it is important to make bank monitoring stricter.

Relying on the experience of the use of the credit system of our country and the
banks of the socialist countries, it is possible to outline a number of other meas-
ures on the strengthening of the role of noncash transactions. It would be feasi-
ble, in cur opinion, to introduce the acceptance of goods instead of the acceptance
of monetary payment documents. This form must be used first of all for consumer
goods. As a transitional measure it is possible to use the replacement of subse-
quent acceptance by preliminiry acceptance. Of course, this will slow to a certain
extent the transfer of payment to the account of the supplier, but then the oppor-
tunity will arise for the payer to carry out before payment the more careful inspec—
tion of the raw materials, materials. semimanufactures and other types of resources,
which he is receiving and which are necessary for the production process. The pay-
ment of the penalty and fines for the violation of contractual discipline should a1-
so be linked more closely with the economic stimulation funds and the amount of the
bonuses to production organizers at the associations and enterprises.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congres require the stepping up of the monitoring of
the results of management in the different links of the economy. Control by the
ruhlc has served and does serve as an effective lever for increasing the influence
of the banks on production efficiency. The extension of credit to the national
economy gives the greatest room for it. The economic credit work of the institu-
tions of the bank is based on the systematic analysis of the economic and financial
activity of associations. enterprises, construction projects, kolkhezes, sovkhozes,
trade organizations and other economic organs. The materials of the analysis en-
able the banks to make on economic organs demands concerning the elaboration of
specific measures on the increase of the volumes of the output of high quality
products, the shortening of the construction periods, the increase of labor pro-
ductivity, the mobilization of reserves, the tightening up of planning discipline
and finance and the elimination of shortcomings. The need has arisen for the
tightening up of the monitoring of the purposeful and efficient use of credit and

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the assurance of its timely return and for making stricter tin- nu’ulwmiu' sanctions
for the violation of the principles of the use of bank rt‘sotzrq'e'a iw enterprises and
organ izat ions .

The task to seek "the radical improvement of construction, rlu- increase of HIV ef-
fectiveness of capital investments" is set in the Main Directions, which were
adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress. The banks can do much in tlii< respmtt. Bank
monitoring of capital construction should be in: used first of all on the determina-
tion of its legality, the correctness of the us-: of the allocated assets and the
payment for the performed work. Such monitoring is based on the system of the
financing and extension of credit for capital investments, which stipulates the need
for the concentration of financial, material anti manpower resources at decisive
projects, the observation of the construction dates and the stimulation of a high
quality of construction and installation work. It is important to achieve the ut-
most concentration of forces on the quickest possible rumplet ion and start-up of
those enterprises which are capable of ensuring i'u- Iaruesl increase of output, to
undo the bottlenecks and to carry out more actively the renovation and expansion
of operating enterprises.

One of the most important measures of bank influence is the special rondit ions of
lending, to which enterprises and organizations, w"ich do not fulfill the plan in-
dimturs, can be converted. This measure provides for the possibility of imposing
a number of sanctions up to the halt of the extensions of some types of credit, and
if this does not help, the cut off from lending and the recovery of previously ex-
tended loans. The changeover of economic organs to these conditions is a very ef-
fective measure. lractice shows that approximately 60-70 percent of these enter-
prises and associations as a result of the implementation of the necessary measures
improve their operation in the next half a year. However, enterprises are still
not always changed over to the special conditions when this is necessary, or they
are cancelled before their production and financial activity has been firmly
stabilized. In recent years the banks have begun to use measures of economic in-
fluence more often. Thus, whereas in 1975 the proportion of associations, enter-
prises and organiations, on which Gosbank imposed the special conditions of lend-
ing, was 2.7 percent, in 1980 it was 4.5 percent.

The bank measures, as a rule, yield the necessary results; nevertheless some enter-
prises are again committing violations of state planning discipline. In light of
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress the banks should step up the work with such
associations, enterprises and construction and installation organizations. Here
the measures should be aimed not so much at the extension of the meaSures of eco-
nomic influence as at the increase of their effectiveness. Here it is important to
achievo a quick impact and to consolidate it for a long time. The steady improve-
ment of the quality indicators of the work of enterprises and organizations and the
increase of the efficiency of social production should be the end results.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 198!

7807
C80: 1820/]

211
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE

RETOOLING, REPAIR IN INDUSTRY EXAMINED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 31-61

lzrticle by V. Krasovskiy: "The Retooling of Production and the Effectiveness of
Repairi7

Ljeagj The timely updating and retooling of the production apparatus of all the
sectors of the national economy are a major reserve for increasing the effective-
ness of the mighty economic potential which has been created in the country. The
enormous scale of the created fixed capital is responsible for the considerable ex-
penditures on its maintenance. At the same time the accumulation of obsolete and
worn out means of labor is hindering the improvement of the economic indicators of
enterprises, is diverting great manpower resources for their maintenance and is in-
creasing substantially the expenditures on repairs, especially those performed on

a low technical basis. The need "to improve the use of production capacities and
fixed capital, to increase the shift coefficient of machines and equipment. To
create with allowance made ﬂat the peculiarities of individual sectors and works and
to use advancedsystems of the repair and modernization of equipment" is outlined

in the Main Directions of USSR Economic and Social Development for 1981-1985 and
the Period to 1990.

Progressive Decisions in the Sphere of the Replacement and Modernization of Means
of Labor

At the first stages of industrialization the increasing rate of expanded reproduc-
tion and the relatively large amounts of new production capacities being put into
operation overshadowed at times the problem of the age structure of the means of
labor and, consequently, their replacement on a progressive basis. At that time it
was believed that the more rapidly the amount of fixed capital increases and the
younger the production apparatus is, the relatively less importance the retirement
of means of labor due to their decrepit state or obsolescence has.

At present many sectors, which previously were regarded as leading sectors and were
distinguished by large increases of capacities (ferrous metallurgy, the coal indus-
try, the cement industry, railroad car building, tractor building and others),

are being developed much more slowly than new priority sectors--the petroleum and
gas industries, nuclear power engineering, cybernetics, electronic engineering and
laser technology, modern machine building and others. The capital investments in
the coal and mining industries, ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy, the construc-
tion materials industry and other "old" sectors are being allocated to a greater

25
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extent for the replacement and not the expansion of production capacities. Even in
the case when new enterprises or mines are being built, their output goes not for
the increase of the volume of sectorial output, but for the offsetting of the
capacities being retired. In urban construction a portion of the area of new apart-
ment houses and entire blocks goes for the offsetting of the demolition of old and

dilapidated housing, which is still carried on the balance of cities and settle-
ments.

In a number of capitalist countries the proportion of the replacement in capital in-
vestments amounts to 70-75 percent of their total amount. In the USSR the propor—
tion of the capital investments made at the expense of amortization by way of simple
reproduction is considerably less, but now in the extractive sectors of industry and
in agriculture it is 40-60 percent. The specific nature of the replacement of capaci-
ities in the extractive sectors consists in the fact that here the restoration of a
larger share of the productive capital by means of repair is absent. The exhausted
work areas in mines, pits, logging areas and so forth are not restored at the pre-
vious sections, rather a shift of the mining (or the logging areas) occurs. Only
some underground (mine shafts, ventilation shafts, tracks of undergound transport
and so forth) and surface structures wear out in approximately the same way as in
the processing industry.

The insufficient consideration of the role of replacement in capital investments
often makes it difficult to properly assess the accumulation fund and its effective-
ness. Precisely because replacement is taking on greater and greater dimensions, it
is important to determine the efficient direction of such expenditures, having in-
creased the proportion of investments in modernization and retooling.

The amount of amortization deductions in the USSR national economy was equal in
1970 to 29.1 billion rubles, in l979-67.6 billion rubles, that is, it increased
during the 1970's nearly 2.3-fold. The assets allocated for major repair increased
from 14.6 billion rubles to 27.8 billion rubles, or 1.9-fold.

In industry in I979 the assets for major repair were up to 32 percent of the total
amount of capital investments, and in some cases were even more. For example, in
ferrous metallurgy, according to estimates of the Central Scientific Research In-
stitute of Ferrous Metallurgy imeni I. P. Bardin, the capital investments in enter-
prises of the sector were equal in 1970 to 2.2 billion rubles, while the expendi-
tures on major repair were equal to 693.8 million rubles, or 31.8 percent. In 1978
they were respectively 3.1 billion rubles and 1.28 billion rubles for major repair,
or 4| percent.

In many instances the assets for major repair were allocated for keeping in opera-
tion obsolete, unproductive and inefficient equipment. It turned out that instead
of replacing the old equipment with new equipment, which was dictated by economic
necessity, it was repaired and reconditioned repeatedly on the old technical basis.
As a result obsolete and worn out equipment was often used in production, meanwhile
there were not enough assets for effective renovation measures. For example, at
the Magnitogorsk Metallurgical Plant mill No 1150 of blooming mill 3 was repaired
39 times. at the same time the expenditures on repairs exceeded its basic cost by
2.1-fold. while sinter plants No l and No 2 were overhauled respectively 16 and

28 times. The cost of repairs exceeded the basic cost by 8.7- and 16.9-fold. At
the Kuznetsk Metallurgical Plant the roughing mill 1100 during its service life

(46 years) was repaired 38 times with the exceeding of its basic cost by 1.9-fold.
In the petrochemical industry, particularly the rubber footwear subsector, the

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basic cost of a glue mixer was equal to 3,600 rubles, rollers-9.900 rubles. the
calender roll--l7,500 rubles, while the expenditures on their repair came to re-
apectively 13,900, 36,300 and 47,000 rubles, that is, they were 3.8-fold, 3.6-

fold and 2.7-fold more. At the same time the outlays for the purchase of new equip-

ment were in this sector not more than 2 percent of the amount of assets used for
major repair.l

In the mining industry of the Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy 31.6 percent of the as-
sets from the funds for major repair were issued to the Ore Administration imeni
Dzerzhinskiy alone for the purchase of new equipment. The majority of ore adminis-
trations did not receive assets at all for the purchase of new equipment. At the
Zaporozhstal' Plant in recent years not more than 15-20 percent of the assets were
allocated for the replacement of obsolete equipment. In a number of sectors of in-
dustry the equipment is kept in working order only by means of major repair, by
which the initial capacity. it is true, is not fully restored, the old technical

parameters of means of labor are being retained, which, of course, is hindering
technical progress.

One of the important means of increasing the effectiveness of the amortization de-
ductions being allocated for major repair is its combination with the modernization
of the equipment in use. This makes it possible to carry out modernization in a
short time and is an economical means of replacing fixed capital. Such a combina-
tion of major repair and modernization is called for in the instructions on the
planning and use of amortization deductions. At the same time the monitoring of
the timely reconditioning of operating means of labor and steps against the use of
amortization funds for the needs of new construction are required.

Modern Problems of Amortization Policy

The dependence of the relative amount of expenditures on replacementon the intensi-
ty of the expansion of the production apparatus has already been emphasized in So-
viet economic literature. Thus, in the studies of Ya. Kvasha it has been demon-
strated that the relative amount (percentage) of the fixed capital being retired
(in physical terms) in the case of certain service lives of means of labor is a
variable and depends on the rate of social reproduction: with an increasing rate
of reproduction the percentage of capital being retired (in physical terms) will
decrease, while in the band of stabilization it will increase.

At the initial stages of industrialization particular attention was directed to the
acceleration of the growth rate. The intensification of the already created mate-
rial and technical base and the stabilization of the rate of its development ac-
quire a timely importance for a highly developed economy. At present power engi-
neering, the chemical industry. electronics and the infrastructure are being de-
veloped most rapidly. while the rate of other, previously priority sectors, which
have achieved a large capacity. has decreased appreciably.

It is important to emphasize that an excess of amortization deductions over the
capital outlays, which are necessary for the replacement of retired means of labor,
forms with an increasing rate of development of production and capital construc-
tion. However, with the stabilization of the rate or its decrease this excess, of
course, decreases and a situation arises, in which an excess (preponderance) of
the expenditures on replacementover the amortization deductions is possible. At

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

present precisely such a situation is being created in a number of sectors of in-
dustry.

For a long time both the planning of capital investments and their financing, as
well as the practice of utilizing amortization funds in the sectors of the national
economy and at enterprises were based on the regular and considerable diversion of
the amortization assets, including a portion of the assets of major repair, for the
needs of new construction and major renovation. Such a practice began to be per-
ceived as a kind of law, which is characteristic of not only the early stages of
economic development, but also a mature socialist economy.

0n the basis of such notions a number of cconomistspropoaed even to exclude the
amounts of amortization from the production costs, believing that these amounts,
which are used entirely for the building of new enterprises, will provide there an
additional impact. 0n the basis of such suggestions it was proposed to discount

the amortization. that is, to decrease its amounts automatically with the passage

of time, relying on the future liquidation of the amount of the impact from the pro-
ductive use of the new facilities. Material and technical supply, the output of
machine building products and the orientation of the capacities of construction
organizations, which were aimed first of all at the development of major new invest-
ment programs and projects, were also developed in this direction. Such a situa-
tion, of course. created unfavorable conditions for the regular replacement of

fixed capital on a modern technical basis.

The amounts of retirement, which do not exceed 1.5-2 percent a year, are approxi-
mately half as much as the necessary amounts. But even these obviously inadequate
amounts of retirement in practice are unfulfilled, and major repair and, conse-
quently, the keeping of the available capital at the previous technical level are
becoming the main means of maintaining the production apparatus.

Primarily irregular material and technical supply is hindering retooling and the
replacement of capital and its modernization. Inadequate reliability in the valua-
tions of old and new capital, especially in connection with the fact that the form-
er is calculated histatistical collections usually at an understated value with a
discount for obsolescence, while new equipment is characterized by increased prices,
at times improportionately as compared with the increase of the capacity and tech-
nical characteristics of the machines being newly installed, is also conducive to
this. In a number of instances the purchase of such machines is unprofitable for
enterprises and moderates the demand for new equipment.

Over a comparatively long period the reinvestment process in the Soviet economy

was accomplished primarily by means of repeated repairs and renovations and to a
much smaller extent by the replacement of old equipment with new equipment. Here
the more productive equipment was sent, as a rule, to the new enterprises, while
the equipment for operating plants in many instances differed little from the equip-
ment being replaced with respect to productivity and the standards of service by
workers. Such a nature of the reinvestment process promoted the overloading of the
pools of equipment with obsolete machines, which increased the tightness in the
balance of manpower resources and led to a decrease of the number of shifts of
operation of the machines, and not just old but also new machines. In this con-
nection in economic literature recommendations have been made on the gradual
elimination of obsolete machines with the changeover of more productive machines-
technological duplicates—-to three-shift operation in order to do without the

28
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USEZONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

additional recruitment of workers. Of course, here not only should the operating
schedule of operating enterprises be changed, but the output of more productive
equipment, especially automatic equipment, should increase continuously.

However, it is hardly possible to carry out only the purchase of new equipment in-
stead of major repair. The reorganization of machine building--both general and
special technologica1-—for the assurance of the retooling of the operating fixed
capital would be required for this. Ya. Kvasha correctly noted that “the attempt
to coordinate on a broad front the rate of retirement of the pool of means of labor
with the period of the change of models, even if this latter is estimated not at

7 years, but more conservatively, would lead, taking into account the uniqueness of
the reproduction of fixed capital, to such an expansion of the production of means
of production and an increase of the standard of production accumulation, which did
not exist even during the initial period of industrialization."3 It is another
matter if the convergence of the proportion of items, which are new for an enter-
prise (with an annual assimilation of 10-12 percent), with the proportion of items,
which are being produced for the first time in the country (with an annual assimi-
lation of 4 percent), occurs in the commodity production of machine building. Such
a convergence is necessary for the implementation of the achievements of scientific
and technical progress, and is also dictated by the acceleration of the economic
aging of machines in the case of a tight balance of manpower. Moreover, this con-
vergence is possible owing to the existence in the country of developed machine
building.“

The consistent reduction of major repair and the equalization of the ratios between
the expenditures on the restoration of the initial properties of worn out equipment
and the expenditures on the production of new machines with advanced technical
parameters should be carried out only gradually and to the extent of the reorganiza-
tion of investment machine building. The decrease of major repairs is necessary,
but it is feasible only on the condition that in the balances of equipment the in-
crease of its proportion is envisaged in the deliveries for the replacement of ob-
solete and worn out means of labor within the fixed capital.

The Directions of Reproduction and the Solution of the Problems of the Replacement
and Modernization of Capital

The advanced experience of the investment complex attests to the diversity in the
methods of accomplishing retooling and the modernization of capital and capacities.
There are substantial differences in the mining industry, agriculture, the sectors
of the equipment type, in sectors with an especially rapid rate of change of models,
designs and processing methods and, finally, in sectors with many similar machines
and means of transportation. Therefore, apparently, the problems of replacement and
modernization should be solved on an individual basis.

In the sectors of the equipment type, which are distinguished by heavy-duty units
(in ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy, the chemical and petrochemical industry, the
cement industry, the pulp and paper sector and other similar industries), good re-
sults are achieved with the combination of two or three directions of reproduction,
for example, renovation and major repair or modernization and major repair, when
the capacities of both the construction and repair organizations are simultaneously
united.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Practice shows that in a number of equipment sectors the renovation of enterprises
is combined with the major repair and modernization of large units (that is what
happens in ferrous metallurgy when modernizing, repairing or enlarging blast or
open—hearth furnaces, in the chemical and petrochemical industry, the production of
construction materials). In the cement industry the production capacities increased
considerably as a result of the repair and modernization of the kilns and mills.

as well as the intensification of technological processes. The specific capital in-
vestments on the modernization, repair and reequipment of production came to

29 rubles/ton of cement, while in the case of new construction they would be equal
to 38-42 rubles/ton.

It should be borne in mind that the construction work connected with major repair
coincides with modernization and retooling in the indicated equipment sectors not

only in time, but also in the nature and conditions, as well as the organization of
material and technical supply.

In the petrochemical and petroleum refining industry the enterprises are distin-
guished by large-tonnage, consolidated and combined technological installations,
which unite in one technological block several different processes, and at times
plants which have an interconnected production cycle. The separate shutdown for

the repair or modernization of such complexes would be unprofitable, for it requires
the one-time concentration of installation and repair personnel and the correspond-
ing equipment. Moreover. shutdowns of large blocks involve losses of large amounts
of output. In this connection here, as a rule, modernization and major repair coin-
cide in time.

It is advisable to combine the modernization of fixed capital, especially its active
portion, with the performance of major repairs. The inclusion of the expenditures
on modernization in the norms for major repair is stipulated in the prevailing
Statute on the Procedure of the Planning of the Crediting and Use of Amortization
Pedurtions. The uniting of these two reinvestment processes makes it possible to
carry out modernization'in a shorter time and is the most economical means of the
reprod-.zlsn of fiXed capital.5 At the same time it should be emphasized that it

is possible to carry out modernization and implement it at the expense of the as-
sets of major repair not in case of any capital repair and nbt for every type of
equipment .

In many ways the reinvestment process in capital construction and agriculture takes
place differently. For all the difference of the technology and organization of
the production process both spheres are characterized by: the existence of a large
pool of comparatively similar machines; difficult operating conditions, when it is
necessary to take into account climatic conditions and seasonal fluctuation; the
comparatively rapid wear of equipment, which often breaks down before the standard
useful life. Moreover, these sectors have their own large, not always efficient
repair service.

An intensive growth of the pool of basic construction machinery has been observed
in the past 25-30 years. From 1950 to 1978 the number of excavators in construc-
tion increased from 5,900 to [60,000, that is, 27-fold, scrapers--from 3,000 to
45,300 (15-fold), bulldozers--from 3,000 to 167,000 (nearly 56-fold) and traveling
cranes--from 5,600 to 190,000 (36-fold). During the period from 1970 to 1978
alone the machine-worker ratio in construction increased twofold.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONI.‘l

At present almost every construction ministry has its own repair base; enterprises
of various departments, which perform repairs on similar machines, often in small
amounts, are concentrated in many cities and rayons. Departmental isolation hasnot
made it possible to concentrate the repair of every type of machinery in a given
rayon at a specialized enterprise, which would have made it possible to increase
considerably the technical equipment of repair work and labor productivity and to
adopt the unit-assembly method of repair more extensively.6

According to the data of A. Nemchinakiy, the total number of enterprises. which are
engaged in the major repair of construction machines, their units and assemblies,
exceeds 2,200, but only 214 are specialized primarily in repair. The low level of
the series performance of major repairs is leading to the increase of their cost.
For example, the repair cost of one 3-302 excavator at the Uglezavodsk Machinery
and Repair Plant of the USSR Ministry of Construction of Heavy Industry Enterprises
was 4,635 rubles, while in the case of the series repair of machinery at the Mari
Remstroydonmnsh Plant it was 2,403 rubles, or nearly half as much. It is even more
important that the quality of repair at small enterprises and workshops decreases
the average operating life of construction machines between major repairs by

50—60 percent as compared with new machines, which sharply decreases the capacity
of the available pool of construction equipment. At the same time the expenditures
on maintenance, as well as on current and unscheduled repairs increase (by 20-30 per-
cent). Meanwhile the average operating life of a repaired machine of not less than
80 percent of the operating life of a new machine is ensured at specialized repair
enterprises.

In the future the specialization of repair enterprises not only according to groups
of machines, but also according to type sizes is called for in construction, which
will make it possible to use production repair lines. The cooperation of the per-
formance of repairs according to individual rediviaions and objects with other
enterprises of the construction industry is an important direction of the increase
of the effectiveness of repair. The impact from the pursuit of a uniform technical
polity in the area of repair consists in the increase of its series performance,
the improvement of the quality of the repaired machines and the increase of its
overhaul life (up to 80 percent of the indicator established for new machines). At
the same time, the time that machines are in for repair should also be greatly
shortened. All these measures will make it possible to utilize more completely

the capacity of the enormous potential of fixed capital of the construction industry
and accordingly to reduce the capital investments in the pool of new construction
machinery. At present the number of workers employed in the repair of construction
machines is twice as great as in the production of new construction equipment.
Therefore the concentration of repair capacities and the technical equipment of re-
pair are an urgent task.

Just as in other sectors of physical production, construction workers are aiming

in plans and recommendations at the gradual transfer of the repair services to the
USSR Ministry of Construction, Road and Municipal Machine Building. This will

make it possible to organize a unified intersectorial system of repair enterprises,
to pursue a universal technical policy in repair service and to set up the plant
output of large assemblies of machines and their spare parts. However, the orien-
tation toward the Ministry of Construction, Road and Municipal Machine Building for
the present is regarded as a task of the distant future (2000).

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our opinion, the gradual intensification of the repair service of capital con-
struction is justiflcdxuulmerits support. But are four five-year plans really re-

quired to put the repair service of construction in order and to ensure here modern
organization and technical progress?

Enormous tasks of the intensification of repair service are arising in agriculture.
According to the data of studies conducted at the All-Union Academy of Agricultural
Sciences imeni V. I. Lenin by Ye. Bazarov and others, in agriculture of the country
approximately two-thirds of the fleet are machines which have undergone or are
undergoing major repair. However, the post-repair operating life, for example, of
tractors is substantially less than the prerepair operating life. According to the
available data. every machine during the service life undergoes major repair four
to five times. The fact that two-thirds of the fleet of agricultural machines oper-
ate after major repair affects not only the decrease of the productivity of the
equipment, but also the skill of the machine operators, gives rise to discontent
with the occupation and is a reason for the outflow of machine operators from sova
khozes and kolkhozes.

More than 300 repair plants and about 2,000 specialized workshops of the State Com-
mittee for the Supply of Production Equipment for Agriculture are in operation for
the repair of agricultural equipment. At the same time the level of concentration
of production at the plants of the State Committee for the Supply of Production
Equipment for Agriculture is many times less than the level of concentration at
motor building and tractor plants of the Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural Ha-
chine Building.

The output-capital ratio of the specialized repair workshops of the State Committee
for the Supply of Production Equipment for Agriculture is 30 percent less, while
the labor productivity is two—thirds as great as at tractor plants. The shift co-
efficient of equipment at the repair enterprises of the State Commuttee for the
Supply of Production Equipment for Agriculture is equal to 1.1-1.2 and the coeffi-
vient of the intrashift utilization of equipment is 0.4-0.5, while at the plants of
the Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural Machine Building they are respectively
equal to 1.6-1.8 and 0.88-0.9. Owing to the small-series nature of production the
repair workshops do not ensure the output of machines and their units with an oper—
ating life of 80 percent of the prerepair operating life. Meanwhile this figure is
the mandatory lower limit, which is established by state order.

According to estimates of scientists of the All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sci-
ences imeni V. I. Lenin, it is economically feasible instead of the existing 2,000
specialized repair plants and workshops of the system of the State Committee for the
Supply of Production Equipment for Agriculture to have in the national economy only
150-200 enterprises which perform repairs on the basis of large-series industrial
production. In the future it is possible to unite the network of large repair an-
terprises with the network of plants which produce new machines. The investments
in machine building for the purpose of increasing the quality, the service life

and reliability of new equipment are 2.5- to 4-fold more effective than in the
sphere of repair enterprises proper. The increase of the service life of new agri-
cultural machinery should lead to a sharp decrease of the amounts of major repair,
the consumption of spare parts and the diversion of manpower for repair work.

The experience of the leading workers of Kirovogradskaya Oblast of the Ukrainian
SSR, where competition was organized under the motto "The Entire Amortization

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Period Hithout Major Repair,“ merits attention. Measures of economic stimulation,
which are connected with the indicators of the age of the machines and the number
of repairs performed, have been elaborated here. Thereby the machine operators do
not strive to leave "old" machines, but turn over the new equipment to young ma-
chine operators. Tractor drivers, as a rule, stop working on a tractor at the
age of 50. But in accordance with the "Kirovograd system" they work at the engi-
neering and technical base of the farms and retain certain benefits which are
granted to tractor drivers. This procedure stimulates great efficiency of those
working on the equipment in the field and those employed in the maintenance and re—
pair of machines. Moreover, the conditions are created for the year-round work of
machine operators, which attaches personnel. As a result the level of the turn-

over of machine operators at the kolkhozes of Kirovogradskaya Oblast is one-sixth
as much as in neighboring oblasts.

Thus. in agriculture the use and repair of equipment are carried out differently
than in the equipment sectors of industry. Major repair in combination with the
modernization and replacement of units and other equipment is prevalent in ferrous
metallurgy. the chemical and cement industries and others. In agriculture, in
spite of the obvious preponderance of inefficient major repair which is performed
by the State Committee for the Supply of Production Equipment for Agriculture,
other, efficient forms of the restoration of the capacity of the production appara-
tus, namely the combination of the routine maintenance of machines with the plant
supply of equipment with spare parts and crucial assemblies of tractors, combines
and others, predominate.

The Process of Replacing Capital and Manpower Resources

The efficient organization of the reinvestment process has a bearing on the problem
of manpower resources. In the literature it has already been noted that under the
conditions of an unjustifiably large gap in the dynamics of fixed capital and man-
power resources in the case of increasing new construction and an inadequate pro-
portion of the capital investments, which are being allocated for the replacement
of obsolete equipment, the nonstaffing of workplaces increases. According to the
estimate of the Scientific Research Institute of Economics attached to USSR Gos-
plan, during l97l-l975 more than 2 million new workplaces, which were not fully
provided with manpower resources, were created 19 industry alone, while during
1976-1978 more than 1 million more were created. In the opinion of V. Kirichenko,
the proportion of the surplus placement into operation in the total amount of capi-
tal newly placed into operation is approximately one-fourth. "The existence of ex-
pensive, but unmanned workplaces is a factor of the decrease of the capital-output
ratio in industry."8

In this connection it is important to determine the role of reinvestment processes
in the formation of the balance of manpower resources. A. Tsygichko proposed what
is called "a structural investment model." He believes that this method, the SIM
(structural investment model), makes it possible to coordinate manpower resources,
capital inVcstments and technical progress and to determine under what conditions
of the retirement and retooling of labor the capital investments and the fixed pro-
duction capital, which has been put into operation, are fully utilized and, conse-
quently, the best use of manpower is achieved.9

ﬂochcr, in the examination of the expenditures on the compensation for retirement,
which are a part of his investment model (SIM), the author assigns a secondary and

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

neutral role to thla component. in the general formula of the effectiveness of
capital investments a zero value is assigned to the factor of compensation.

This question is much more complicated. When it is a question of renovation. it not
only reduces to the direct reproduction of the old technical indicators, but per-
force presumes the improvement of the indicators, the use of automation, scientific
and technical innovations and others. It is recommended to use even major repair in
combination with modernization and the improvement of the technical level of the
capital. It major repair is carried out on the level of the simple restoration of
the old parameters, here a zero result is not obtained, for the productivity of old
equipment after each repair decreases all the time. Therefore. when analyzing
labor-saving factors in the reinvestment process one must not make arbitrary assump-
tions, which are not based on the study of real economic factors and are not con-
firmed by calculations.

In the reinvestment process there are important labor-saving reserves, since the
number of personnel of the repair services is clearly overstated (the number of
workers of the corresponding sectors of machine building is two- to threefold great-
er) and can be reduced substantially with the more efficient organization of repair
in the main spheres of the national economy. Moreover, the combination of repair
with modernization makes it possible not only to maintain the previous capital-labor
ratio of manpower resources, but also to increase it and thus to decrease the pres-
ent norms of maintenance. The potentials of the labor-saving factor in simple re-
production have still beeninadvquately studied. The conclusion about the zero value

of the reinvestment process does not contribute to the studies of this important
direction of the present intensification of production.

The structural model of A. Tsygichko abounds with apriori assumptions which concern
not the minor details, but the key parameters of reproduction and the investment
process. The author assigns the main role not to the real analysis of the trends
and reserves of the efficiency of social production, but to mean statistical data
and arbitrary hypotheses.

A. Tsygichko draws the conclusion that the main factor of the decline of the
capital-output ratio in industry during the Ninth Five-Year Plan was the increase

of fixed capital, which was not balanced with manpower. According to his estimates,
at the end of 1975 the proportion of unused fixed capital was approximately 9.3 per—
cent of its total value. However, the author does not cite any basis and real ac-
counting data in support of this hypothesis, and its proof is based on indirect
analogies and arbitrary assumptions.

The Economic Limits of Major Repair

With respect to the amount of resources and the number of personnel, major repair
now holds first place in the resources allocated for keeping the fixed capital of
the country in working order. It clearly predominates in the amount of capital
over the retooling and replacement of the production apparatus of operating enter-

prises.

is it possible to raise the question of redistributing all the resources now being
allocated for major repair, for the more advanced and economical directions of capi-
tal investments--the modernization and renovation of capital and capacities? It is
necessary to carry out the effective industrialization of major repair, which is

311
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

based on the expanding plant production of spare parts and parts in machine building
with the simultaneous increase of the maintenance of new equipment by machine build-
ing plants. Under these conditions the effective concentration of the available
repair capacities and their specialization will be possible. In the future the
merging of the two indicated forms of repair and maintenance will apparently occur.
During their integration the amount of manpower resources, which are now employed

in the enormous network of small repair workshops, will decrease considerably.

However, such rationalization of the repair system should be carried out according
to a plan, encompassing first of all the sectors with large and similar equipment,
and then the sectors with a complex processing method and diverse machinery. The
already adopted and quite effective method of combining the major repair and modern-
ization of equipment should probably be used in the sectors, in which large units
and equipment systems predominate.

In housing construction and municipal services along with the demolition of dilapi-
dated buildings the effective major repair of more valuable and sturdy structures.
but with their mandatory modernization, the improvement of heat and water supply,
sanitary engineering, the installation of telephones and others, can also be main-
tained. The historically established centers of old cities, which are of great ar-
chitectural value, should undergo a cycle of complete and thorough restoration.

The different durability of the units, assemblies and parts of equipment, which
creates the natural needfor the partial compensation for the wear of machines, is
correctly indicated in the studies on the economics of major repair. As the equal
durability of the individual assemblies of machines gets closer, the need for major
repairs will decrease. Designers and machine builders in many instances underesti-
mate the importance of the indicator of the repair intensity of new equipment, al-
though the decrease of this indicator has proven its worth even at the cost of an
increase of the expenditures in the sphere of the production of machines. All this
emphasizes the importance of the coordination of the work of the creators of the
active portion of the capital and the personnel who use means of labor. The most
economical conditions of the operation of capital, particularly the indicators of
maintenance, the repair intensity, the reliability and others, should be taken into
account already when producing the capital.

At the same time it should be noted that there is a certain point beyond which the
performance of major repairs is obviously uneconomical. Thus, repairs of machines,
which have served the life set for them by the standards and are obsolete, are en-
tirely inefficient. Meanwhile up to 20 percent of the obsolete equipment undergoes
major repair. In this connection the effectiveness of so-called firm repair should
be emphasized. In our industry such organization has been adopted at a number of
motor vehicle enterprises, in the production of computer equipment, electronic
equipment and electrical equipment, in electrical machine building, in nuclear power
engineering, the aviation industry and others. It is also expedient to extend this
advanced know-how to the sectors of investment machine building.

Firm repair should probably be implemented first of all within enterprises and
agricultural organizations of the food complex, in the complex of transportation
sectors and in the investment complex, in which a comparatively compact set of
large agricultural. transportation and construction equipment is used extensively.
The new sectors, which are connected with the leading directions of technical prog-
ress, have been using such a system of repair and maintenance for a long time now.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under present conditions the changeover from the reproduction of capital on the old
technical basis to the modernization of the available capacities with allowance made
for many technical innovations is an urgent task. The accumulation in the sectors
of the national economy of obsolete, worn out capital is hindering the improvement
of economic indicators, is diverting large manpower resources and requires enormous
expenditures.

2.

3.

8.

9.

FOOTNOTES

Ye. A. Shapiro, L. L. Savranskazp, ”Bffektivnost' kspi'al' nogo remonta v nefte-

khinicheakoy promzshlennoati" [The Effectiveness of Major Repair in the Petro-
chemical Industrxj, Moscow. TsNIITEkhim, 1975, p 66.

"Ocherki promyshlennoy statistiki" [Etudies in Industrial Statistics7, Izdate1'-
stvo "Soyuzorguchet", 1937, pp 168-174.

Ya. B. Kvasha, "Faktor vremeni v obahchestvennom proizvodstve" IThe Time Factor
in Social Production], Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", 1979, p 77.

See Ya. B. Kvasha, "Faktor vremeni v obshchestvennom proizvodstve," p 77.
See VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, No a. 1981, pp 85—86.

D. M. Palterovich, "The Goal Program Approach in the Improvement of the Pool of
Construction Machinery" (EKONOHIKA STROITBL'STVA. No 11, 1979, pp 22-25).

See V. Kirichenko, "The Proportionality of Economic Growth and Efficiency"
(xounuuxsr, No 18, 1980, p 32).

I
,.

Ibid., p 32.

See A. Tsygichko, "The Reequipment of Labor and Production Efficiency" (Piano-
VOYE KHOZYAYSTVO, No 3, 1979, p 75).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

7807
C80:

1820/2 END

36
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEZONLY