FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

JPRS L/10444

9 April 1982

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain inforution primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trenslitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as sppropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TEAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(I’OUO 3/82)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Development of cm Nuclear Power System Viewed
(Yev eniy P. Vlaeov, et a1.; JADmNA WIS, No 12,

1981 OOOOCOODOCOCIOOOOOOO‘0.0'.DOO0.0..OI0.00000COOOOOOO

CZECHOSIDVAKIA

Value Added, Keying of Rages Disputed
(Milan Natejlu; POLITICKA EKONGIIE, No 12, 1981).........

-a- [III-EE-64PC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DEVELOPPBNT 0? cm NUCLEAR POWER SYSTEM VIEWED
Prague JADERNA ENERGIB in Russian No 12. 1981 pp 639-653

[Article by Yevgeniy P. Vlasov. International Scientific Research Institute of Con-
trol Problems. Moscow; 111103 Dually. Czechoslovak Atomic Energy Couission. Prague;
and Yuriy A. mun. Department of Scientific and Technical Cooperation of the can
Secretariat. Moscow: "A Study of Methodological Problems in the forecasting and
Optimal Development of a Nuclear Power ﬁstem for can utter-Nations")

[Text] One of the important directions in solving the fuel-
and-power problem of cm meﬁer nations is the accelerated devel-
opment of the nuclear power industry. The present stage of the
cooperation among these countries in this area is characterized
by the large-scale and comprehensive implementation of measures.
the considerable influence of scientific and technical progress
on production efficiency and the great contribution of these
countries to the overall issue of realizing the nuclear power-
production portion of the long-term specific program of coopera-
tion (D‘rsPs) to provide for the economically founded requirements
of the cm member-nations for the basic types of power. fuel

and raw material»: to the year 2000. The indicated conditions

for the development of the nuclear power industry are dictated

by the necessity of improving methods of controlling and planning
the development of the entire nuclear power complex (Yam) of

the socialist countries [1.2].

Figure 1 presents the interindustry structure of the nuclear power-production com-
plex. It includes the fuel-cycle industries (extraction. processing and enrichment
of fuels. the manufacture of fuel elements. chemical processing of spent nuclear
fuel and processing and storage of radioactive wastes). nuclear stations and in-
stallations for the generation of electric and thermal power (nuclear electric-
power stations. nuclear heat-and-pouer stations and nuclear power-production instal-
lations) and all capital—generating sectors of the nuclear pot er complex (metallurgy.
heavy. chemical and power-engineering industries. the electrical equipment industry.
instrument engineering. power industry construction and the construction industries).

Of course, the nuclear power complex of a given country can and must be considered
a subsystem of the integrated nuclear power complex of the cm member-nations.

It is possible to rationally solve problems which within the framework of a single
country cannot be solved at all or. at least. cannot be solved efficiently. This

1
me omen [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can be accomplist through international cooperation. division of labor. special-
ization of production and construction through codyined effort or cooperation with-
in the scope of capital investment in construction.

The industries in the nuclear power complex are ebraced by complex interrelation-
ships. including reciprocal relationships (for example. the chemical processing of
spent fuel). The formation of this aggregate of industries into a unified nuclear
power complex is dictated by the degree of specialisation. the influence they exert
on one another as well as by the overall production cycle.

The characteristic integrity of the nuclear power complex which we have pointed out
determines the necessity for applying a systematic approach to examining the pros-
pects for its developsent and the introduction of methods for multisector planning
and control.

The overall organisational structure for phoning the long-term development of the
nuclear power complex can be presented in the following manner (fig. 2). This dia-
gram displays the operational makeup and the interrelationships of these operations
in the forecasting and formation of nuclear power programs and a cowrehensive long-
range plan of development for those industries included in the nuclear power conplex.
The close interrelationship between the planning of scientific research and industry
is shown by a block for the determination of the needs of industry in the develop-
ment of equipment and technology and effective directions for the utilization of

the new results from scientific research and experimental design work. A positive
feature of this long-term planning program is the codaination of the processes for
forecasting and forming programs and plans for the development of the nuclear power
complex into a unified cycle of interrelated operations. The results from forecast-
ing programs and the coordinating of these prograns with specialized plans should
insure the best continuity.

At the present tine. we have good reason to believe that the CBHA mesber-nations
will insure the realization of a comprehensive and specific approach to managing
the development of the nuclear power industry up to the year 1990. within the scope
of the previously mentioned long-term specific program of cooperation. we have con-
cluded the Agreement on Multilateral International Specialization and Cooperation
in the Production and Mutual Supply of ABS Equipment for the Period 1981-1990. We
are creating the necessary organizational prerequisites and are solving three of
the most important problems in scientific and technical cooperation within the nu-
clear power industry: the mastery of water-cooled water-modulated reactors with
outputs on the order of 1,000 N"; the development of high-output fast reactors;
and the development of nuclear heat and power stations and nuclear heat plants.

However. features of the process for the integrated development of a nuclear power
complex--a considerable rate of growth. a broad spectrum of scientific research
and feasible structural transformations. the time lag and the capital-intensive
nature of the problen--dictste that technical and economic studies of the prospects
for a cam master-nation nuclear power complex be conducted for the years beyond
1990 and that corresponding long-term cycles for mnaging its development and pro-
gress be organized.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Control over the development and progress of the nuclear power complex and the real-
ization of the corresponding industrial-economic and scientific-technical activities

are contained in the field of activity of a nutter of agencies and organizations.
primary among which are:

a) at the national level:

- the highest organs (government and joint agencies for planning. finance. technical
development, foreign trade. etc.)

- special ministries (ministries of power, metallurgy, machine construction. instru-
ment engineering. construction and the construction industry. etc.)

- the organization of a scientific-research and experimental-design base:

b) at the GEM level:
- supreme organs (Supreme Soviet. Executive Committee).

-comittees for cooperation in the area of planned activity and for scientific and
technical cooperation. as well as their working agencies (namely, the Working Group
for the Fuel and Power Balance and the Council for Scientific and Technical Coopera-
tion in the Area of Fuel and Power Problems-«the 'l‘BP Council),

- special Permanent Comittees (nanely, those for the utilization of nuclear power

for peaceful purposes. for electric power, for machine building and for construction)
and their working agencies.

- international economic organisations (namely. international economic organiza-
tions of Interatomenergo and Interatominstrumsnt).

- international organizations of the scientific research base (namely, “8100--
the International Scientific Research Institute for Control Problems).

Within the organizational plan, integrated progra-atic-specific planning and man-
agement of the cm mater-nation nuclear power complex according to diagram 2 should
be constructed on one interrelated plan of harmonious work coordinated by the above-
mentioned agencies and organizations at the national and international levels.

Let us now dwell upon the statue of the work being done in the area of forecasting

the long-range development of the nuclear power industry in socialist countries.

We refer here to the work being carried out within the scope of activity of the
Comittee of the Scientific and Technical Council which. on behalf of the 2bth meeting
of the CM Session. organizes the development of a scientific and technical forecast
for the solution to fuel and power problems in the period to the year 2000 and for

the long term. This work. being carried out from 1980 to 1986, is based upon data
from interested cm member-nations regarding the planned development of national

fuel and power complexes.

The first seating of the Provisional Collective of Scientists and Specialists (VKUS).

created by the TEP Council to develop a forecast for the development of the nuclear
power industry. took place from 27 to 30 January 1981 in the city of Ostrsva in

msomaatuseonui
FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. The neeting exanined materials prepared
jointly by the Czechoslovak and Soviet aides with the participation of a department
of the Secretariat's Scientific and Technical Council and DINIIPU. mo najor docu-
lents were submitted for approval:

1. a program of development and

The sixth session of the TEP Comcil which took place in Berlin, Bast Ger-any from
16 through 19 June 1981 approved both doom-ants and noted that the Soviet Union had

ment of the nuclear power couple: of cm lather-nations together with the drawing-
up of reconendations for the individual countries. Forecast studies at the national
level are oriented toward the fomtion of an optimum long-tern strategy for the
country which is based on its specific situation and which insures the participation
of national organizations in international cooperation for the realization of inte-
grating measures in the area of nuclear power generation and related areas of the
nuclear power conplex. Studies carried out at the national level are the chief

and initial basis for forecasting. No major stages have been proposed: the develop-
ment of a forecast plan and. naturally. the forecast itself. During the first stage.
alternative strategies for the develop-ant of the power industry itself are examined
and evaluated. During the second stage, these strategies are refined and adjusted.
In addition, suggestions are developed regarding integrating measures and the con-
At the same time. on the international level. alternatives are worked out for the
realization of integrating measures for CBHA member-nations as well as mutually ad-
vantageous alternatives for scientific-technical and industrial-economic cooperation.

At the concluding stage of forecast development, the specific structure is submitted
for approval and a plan of the decisions is prepared for examination by the corres-

ponding CBMA agencies with regard to integrating measures which insure the long-term
growth of the CBMA member-nation nuclear power complex.

Let us dwell in more detail upon the development of a forecast plan for the growth
of the national nuclear power industry. The development of a forecast begins with
the determination of the scope of the national nuclear power industry for the years
1990-2000-2010 and the selection of types..unit outputs and the stages of utiliza-
tion of nuclear reactors. Then studies are developed for determining the basic
tasks of scientific research, alternatives for the development of an industrial

and construction base and the demand for scarce materials and the basic types of
equipment. Simultaneously, as a result of the determination of the structure of
AEs's. ATBTs's and AST's planned for construction in the period to 2010 and the
evaluation of the prospects for the utilization of nuclear power installations in

metallurgy. chemistry, agriculture. transportation and in other sectors of the
economy. we are conducting:

- an analysis of ecological factors and the identification of the corresponding
limitations on and requirements for the construction of nuclear power installations;

- the development of alternative methods for maintaining. storing and transporting
spent fuel and for processing and burying radioactive wastes;

- the development of alternative methods for decommissioning nuclear power installa-
tions.

Naturally. these problems in the development of the nuclear power industry give

rise to their own scientific-technical and industrial-economic questions. A study
of the alternative methods for developing production and scientific research in
individual sectors of the nuclear power complex concludes with a system for evaluat-
ing alternative methods for the development of the power industry. If it becomes
necessary, the previously selected structure and alternative methods for the utili-
zation of nuclear reactors can be adjusted according to the results of this evalua-
tion in order to improve the effectiveness of the solutions obtained. After satis-
factory results are obtained. a selection is made of the major directions for the
scientific and industrial work being done to insure the development of the national

nuclear power industry. The country then draws up proposals for international coop-
eration in the given area.

It must be noted that the initial selection of the structure and alternative methods
of utilization of nuclear reactors is a most critical stage in the development of

a national forecast. This selection essentially determines future scientific and
industrial activity both within the scope of the national nuclear power program

as well as international programs for the integrated development of the nuclear

power complex. Thus. we must develop this stage with particular care, enlisting
the aid of leading scientists from various sectors of the nuclear power industry.

5
F0. OFFIJAI.USB(IVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order to carry out systematic research and optimize strategies for the long-term
development of the cm member-nations' nuclear power complex, MNIIPU together with
the interested national organizations is formulating a system of mathematical eco-
nomic models. This system includes models for the development of fuel-cycle sectors,
a model for the development of the power-production base, a model for the develop-
ment of the machine-construction base and the related nuclear-power production in-
dustries as well as s model of the interrelations among sectors of the nuclear power
industry. This system of models reflects the multistage process of production (for
example. the extraction. enrichment, processing. etc. of ores) and considers the
basic production parameters which determine its teclmological feasibility and its
technical and economic efficiency. Moreover, the models directly reflect the re~
sults of the development of new equipment and techniques and their introduction into
industry.

The realization of tasks regarding research and the optimization of long-term strat-
egies for the development of a nuclear power complex utilizing the indicated models
is accomplished on the basis of the SOPOT [expansion not provided) man-machine sys-
tem developed at the International Scientific Research Institute for Control Prob-
lems. This system is problem-oriented toward the soluticn of tasks involving simu-
lation and the optimization of intersector industrial complexes [3]. The SOPOT
system consists of: a data bank; a generator of model programs; a numerical-method
library; a model-research and problem-solving block; and an interactive-procedure
block.

The features of the SOPOT system provide:

- the capacity for system correlation and problem decomposition in multilevel.
organizational systems;

- facility in adjusting mathelntical economic models and problem conditions;

- the solution to complex data problems. including the answers to nonoperational
queries.

At the present time. HNIIPU is organizing the exchange of SOPOT system software
with interested national organizations. The planned exchange will enable the coun-
tries to reduce considerably the time and resources spent on creating a system for
simulating the growth of national fuel-and-power complexes, as well as to prepare
a basis for combining national systems of power-industry models in order to conduct
joint investigations of alternative strategies for integrated development of fuel-
and~power complexes.

In conclusion. we must emphasize:

l. the importance of data formulated at the national level and, thus. the complex-
ity of the makeup of national working groups. It is desirable that all interested
agencies and organizations in the scientific-technical and economic spheres of each
country participate within the scope of these working groups. The participation of
administrative and economic agencies (the State Flaming Committee, the ministries,
etc.) is necessary in view of the fact that these agencies are the ones which will
subsequently utilize the results of the forecast and can from the very outset intro-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r ”1:306un OMICW JJW'Ji-Q'I'EYIWON «amena- —-—I

I vmmm nmmm mm Mumps mm may . ...,. ”my” roam .r . J

L- _____;__..;4_ ___4 __ii;i__ ___ _
gzz‘ i 92! ml 152T 56) mi ml (9)7
:amauwl _ ass-1hr: . IW? mung.“ : : .'l','".'a-.‘.‘I..‘ '-:."'o_‘-_‘-'“""
'“V‘357' ’ WW“! I ‘l’I-IH ”II" I IW il: '. 1' ‘ . . - ‘ '

      
   

    

   

  

Figure 1. Diagram of lnterindustry Structure
of the Nuclear Power Complex

3. Radioactive discharges and waste

1. Revenue-generating sectors of the nuclear power complex: metallurgy. heavy.
power. chemical and electrical machine construction. instrument engineering.
the construction industry. etc.

2. Equipment for extracting and preparing ore

3. Reactor units

6. Thermonuclear equipment

5. Chemical equipment

6. Electrical equipment

7. Instrumentation and computers

8. Hoisting and transporting equipment

9. Construction and prefabricated uterials

10. Natural reserves of uraniun

11. Natural reserves of thorium

12. Extraction and preparation of uranium are

13. Extraction and preparation of thorium are

14. [Iranian enrichment

l5. Enriched uraniu-

16. Depleted uraniua

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLUSEONLY

Figure 1. Key (con'd.)
17. Natural uraniua
18. Production of fuel elements
19. Burial of radioactive wastes
20. Processing of spent fuel elements
21. Fresh fuel elements
22. Spent fuel elenants
23. Radioactive wastes
21.. ABs's. ama'n and AST's with therml reactors
25. AES's, A‘m'h's and nuclear power installations with fast reactors
26. Nuclear power installations with high-temperature rectors
27. Electric power
28. High-potential heat
29. Low-potential heat
30. Thermal wastes
31. Non-power materials

duce the necessary corrections in the studies being conducted and orient these stu-
dies in accordance with their own requirements. The inediate users will be the
organizations in the scientific-technical sphere which will introduce the desired
scientific approach and methodological apparatus into forecast studies;

2. the important role of meetings of the Provisional Collective of Scientists and
Specialists which will observe and evaluate the progress of the work, insure the
exchange of information and experience as well as consolidate individual points

of view and discuss all data presented by the msdmr-nations and the coordinator;

3. the extraordinarily vital and complex role of the coordinator. In contrast to
the Provisional Collective of Scientists and Specialists, which can operate only
periodically during the course of its meetings and will be limited to the discussion
of the materials presented, the coordinator will continuously carry out the follow-
ing activities on an international scale:

- prepare proposals for refining methodological instructions and working prograns,

- develop a conceptual plan for an integrated nuclear power complex (at the first
stage of development),

- evaluate materials presented by the countries regarding national nuclear power
conplexes and develop plans of the corresponding recomendations,

- evaluate the countries' considerations regarding an integrated nuclear power com-
plex, summarize them and, finally.

- conplete editing of the forecast plan and the final forecast for the integrated
nuclear power complex.

Naturally. in order to successfully implenent such broad and multilateral activity,

the coordinator must make extensive use of its own scientific-technical potential
and accunulated expertise in the area of organisation of forecast work.

MOWUSEONLY
:J; 'III
I 1- limaa:

' ‘Ill'n'uln I

' . Pwmlu
[SF 11W ans-5:"“vh3-‘3'l:
I :lfgm a:'.’§.""°' ”E; .

- neat-um sauna . . .-
l . .7 as)

g: (16) um)

u ’!!"“"2‘.- Jena-nu

 

(10);£¥K5§$1¢?333u. I : - (19) :(20)

.= ' - ._ __ . N: t

\\ Khan-:22; mm. ; LN
(11) : Wﬁﬁ‘é‘ﬁ’ L; (21) ﬁr—

' l

x; (22)
(12)..::::‘=§..£':,1¢‘__..; waviwwm gm:- ‘M “'""".___,

(23) (24)

11. Analysis of foreign trends in the development of the nuclear power complex
[2. Formlation of forecast. and goals in the lons~ran3e development of the
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2. Key (con'd.)

13. Integrated forecast for the development of the nuclear power industry
and its raw-material, scientific-technical and industrial base

14. Determination of goals according to the basic directions for the develop-
ment of the nuclear power complex (the creation of ABS'a. development of
the fuel and raw-waterial base, nuclear equipment construction, etc.)

15. Formation of long-term scientific-technical and industrial programs for
the development of the nuclear pm: couplex

16. Industry requirements for the development of equipment and technology

17. Proposals for the utilization of new equipment and technology

18. Formulation of an integrated long-range plan for development of industries
within the nuclear power complex

19. Foraulation, balancing and optimization of alternative plans for scien-
tific-technical activity in industries within the nuclear power complex

20. Formulation of five-year plans for industry

21. Program adjustment

22. Limitations on resources

23. Formulation of long-term programs for the development of the nuclear power
complex

24. Formulation of long-range plans for the development of industries within
the nuclear power complex

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Drasny. M” and Svetlik, Ya., "The Nuclear Power Complex and the Main Directions
of Scientific and Technical Progress," AWAYA ENRRGIYA, Vol 109, 1980.

2. Drasn)’. "a. "The Integrated Nuclear Power Complex of the cm Meter-Nations,"
JADERNA ENERGIB, No 26, 1980.

3. Vlasov, Ye. P., nurin, Yu. A., "The Study of Methodological Questions and the
SOPOT Han-Machine System for the Forecasting and Optimal Planning of the Devel-
opment of the CEHA Member-Nation Fuel and Power Complex (Based on the Example
of the Nuclear Power Complex)," International Scientific Coordinating Conference
on the Problem of Improving the Control System for the Development of the CEHA
Member-Nation Fuel and Power Complex, Moscow, 1-3 Deceﬂaer 1980.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, mp. 1981

9512
680: 5100/3012

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZBGIO SLOVAKIA

VALUE ADDED, KEYING OP RACES DISPUTBD
Prague POLITICKA EKONOHIB in Czech No 12, 1981 pp 1269-1278
[Article by Milan Hatejka]

[Text] A still wide open subject in the socialist economy is the system
of [economic] indicators. 0n pages of various publications. we argue
about ways to measure certain economic phenomena (the past few years it was
characteristic to discuss measuring of production efficiency), and changes
occur even in the economic practice, with considerable differences between
the individual socialist countries.

The question of relations between the indicators is actually wide open.

The economic units (VHJ and enterprises), for example. are being mandated
values for individual indicators without any definitions of their relations.
The indicators are not the systn, they are only a set of measurements.

That together with the differences in indicators has some serious practical
implications. The lChozraschet [cost accounting] units are manipulating the
production process to fit into the range delimited by the set of indicators;
the decision making process in this context is very subjective (the number
of variables to be decided upon can often be extensive) not because it is
left upon the VHJ or the enterprises but because it is not backed by
scientific data. If the indicator relations are not properly formulated
then, in most cases, we are unable to determine which of the possible
answers is the best (only in a few cases is a given variable best according
to all indicators). Only a scientifically defined relation of the indica-
tors, conversion to a higher quality of a set of indicators--in a system

of indicators-will create conditions for objective optimalization.

But the management of proddction within these limits is not quite so coinci-
dental, dependent on the intuition of decision maker as to which indicator
to choose in a given situation. Defacto priorities among indicators do
develop in the subconsciousness of the managers and gradually become fimted,
based primarily on the stake which the collectives and individuals have in
the specific indicators. It is only natural, and historically confirmed,
that the greatest motivation is provided by indicators which determine the

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FI”!(HWH(1AI.USE‘ONLY

wages and salaries. The interest in such indicators is often so strong that
it leads to a lag in the uses of other indicators (for example, a plan for
a product mix) and even pushes into the background the khorraschet principles.

Such preferred indicators in the past were the gross production and later
performance (an indicator of similar characteristics like the enterprise
gross production, but including all activities-even indirect labor) or
the indicators of labor productivity derived from it. Currently we are
conceived with the value added as the basis of the wage structure.

The total performance in our economic practice is being succeeded by value
added in its broader context; in some relative indicators comparing output
(production) with input (used production resources). as for example, labor
productivity indicators. capital asset effectiveness, or indicators of
production cost efficiency.

The actual function of gross production or performance as a criterion indica-
tor was undisputably bad. The main reason--the possibility of its maximiza-
tion by uneconomical processes, primarily uneconomical vertical cooperation--
has already been theoretically clarified in the fifties and it is only
surprising how long this indicator (in its variations) survived in this
function. Of course, we must also be able to see its objective function

in the system of value indicators and not to dismiss it out of hand.

The value added must then be approached similarly. An indicator of this

type is indisputably a significant signpost. It is one of the traditional
western statistical indicators (value added in manufacturing). But its

worth should not be overrated. In this article I wish to point out primarily:

a) the general irreplaceability of gross production (performance) by value
added;

b) the questionable value of regulating wages according to any value indicator
including value added.

Total Performance and Reduced Production Indicators Relative to Inputs

If we evaluate the demands of the manufacturing process on production re-
sources, whether from the point of View of cost or its dependence on the
resources, we must always compare these resources (inputs) with the total
performance (outputs). The replacement of the total performance by a
deflated output is not appropriate within this context; derived relative
characteristics are subject to a very questionable interpretation and
util lty .

If we strip the material costs or even just part of them from the value of
the newly created product, it means the reduction [deflation] of the output
by the value of a portion (possible of all)used up production assets. The

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

value of relative indicators always reacts to the consumption of that portion
of production assets by which the value of the created product is also
reduced, further also to consumption or dependence of the production factors
expressed in the second item of the relative indicator. Thus for example,
the proportion of wage costs to the value of net production, ¥E—_, reflects
how labor-intensive the product (Q) is, (when capital consumpt on goes down
and the numerator (v) drops and thus the value of the relative indicators
will also decline. At the same time the product becomes less capital
intensive (when the materials costs (c) fall, the denominator increases

and the value of the relative indicator falls again).

The situation is further complicated by the varied reaction of these relative
indicators to the changes in individual cost items. Because with the changes
in material costs (as such) or at least in a partial change, the value

of the deflated production indicators also changes, while with the change

in the wage costs (as such) there is no change1 then, according to the derived
relative indicators, the unit change in wage costs (for example, a change

by Kcs 1.00) is not equivalent to the unit change in material costs. This.

of course, results in a highly questionable use and synthesis of these
relative indicators.

He are illustrating the net product cost on an example of indicators.2

Let us assume the possibility of manufacturing a certain product with a value
of 100 monetary units using three different technologies under conditions

described in the table. Our task is to estimate the overall costs of production.
production.

Manufacture Using Material Wage Total Total Value Net
Technology Costs Costs Costs of Manufactured Product
Product Value
Lﬁmiﬂ‘ﬂL—m
1 60 40 80 100 60
2 50 32 82 100 50
3 50 25 75 100 50

 

1. when for wage costs of the product, for example, fall and all else
(price. material costs) remain the same. the profit increase is
equivalent to the drop in wage costs and the net production value
does not change.

2. We have selected net production for its simplicity. He could come to
the same conclusions if we used value added instead.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FtHIGJFIﬁCJAl.lEHE(MVLY

If we use for the evaluation of the total costs the proportion of wage costs
to net production (wage costs are in the maerator, Iatsrial costs reduce the
value of the manufactured product in the denouinator). then the technological
process 2 appears to be nore advantageous than process 1. because:

v2 . —_:1_ - % -o.61., while
(czwzhz) - c2 '2 "2

 

V1 I V1 I 4—0- . 0.67
(cl-Pvl-i-Il) - :1 v1 + :1 60

But in reality. the costs for the same product are higher with the use
of process number 2.

The evaluation of overall costs will not be objective even if we assume that
(in an obvious contradiction to reality) the ratio of wage coats to net
production is only an indicator of relative use of labor and the relative
use of production assets is expressed as a ratio of material costs to net
production. Total production costs will then be defined by the ratio of
total costs to net production.

This is obvious fr m the evaluation of alternatives 1 and 3 from our example.
Using the ratio c we find the technological process 1 more profitable

 

 

 

because v+n,
c+v 80_ c+v_75_
v+a 60 1'33 v+m 1'5

even though the total costs for the same product are lower with process 3.

The synthesis of material and wage cost levels of net production is also
questionable from the formal logical standpoint. Both indicators are
qualitatively different types of structural measures. While the ratio of
wage costs to net production is the indicator of the structure of net
production (a proportion of the total), the ratio of material costs to net
production as an indicator characterizes (in another way) the structure of
the entire product. (This is a different type of structural indicator than
the proportion of the total.) Thus we cannot justify the adding up of
material and wage cost net production indicators even by a formal logic.

Also questionable is, of course, the ability to separate and utilize not
only the cost indicators but also indicators of linkage of net production
(value added, etc.) to resource allocation. These indicators react not
only to the linkage of a given item of production resources during the
manufacture of the product, but also to' the wear of that portion of
production asset which we use to deflate the value of the created product.
We would be hard pressed to find logical arguments for an appropriate cowi-
nation of production requirements to wear and [resource‘I] allocation.

ll.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR 0F1ﬂCJAl.thEZ(ﬂQLY .J'

And, if the ability to separate these indicators is questionable. that much
more doubtful is the formulation of their internal relations. If we further
consider that the deflation of production [indicators‘I] can differ, it is
obvious, that the relative requirement indicators of net [deflated‘l] pro-
duction on the use and allocation of production resources cannot be used

as the basic elasents of the system of relative indicators of relations
between inputs and outputs.

Value Added and "ages

The basic problems of the wage amount relation to value added derives from
the elements of the value added is composed.

It is undeniable that the increase in transferred value (depreciation and
possible supplemental materials and energy") mcluded in the value added
(item ca) does not by itself, create conditions for wage increases. Even
if this portion of the cost of production material correlates closer with
the quantity and quality of the actual direct labor than the remaining
Portion of material costs (Cb). including primarily the value of the used
basic material, we cannot expect a consistent relation. Thus, for example,
the increase in depreciation can, in most cases only be related to the
growth in direct labor involved, yet the rate of increase of either factor
will be generally different, we might have to admit the possibility of an
opposite development of both indicatorsnincreaae in depreciation with a
decrease in actual direct labor. We will show, that the problems arise
primarily in the substitution of direct labor for capital.

He can come to analogous conclusions concerning profits. In production
pricing we must assume that the profitability depends on the amount of
production assets tied up in the corresponding production run; a change

in the labor structure--substitution of direct labor for past labor input,
or an increase in the value of the past labor content without changing
the amount of direct labor-~creates a formal condition for the increase in
the level of wages (it increases the value of profit per unit of direct
labor) and that means even if economic conditions for this increase have
not been created, that profits per unit of total labor are falling.

Concerning the third element of total performance, the wage costs, the
relation between the wages and value added appears at first glance to be
the most questionable. It almost appears to be a case of tautology—we are
keying wages to wages. Actually, it is not quite so because we do not
consider the alue added to be a sum of individual items, i.e.

V-ca + v + m, but as a differentiation subtracting the value of cost of
material from the total performance, i.e., V - Q - ch.

* Limits of the reduced indicators are often different

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thu value added is determined by the factors Q and ch; the relation of wages
to value added then determines the size of the factor "v" of value added

and, indirectly, the value of profits; wage increases within the framework
of a given value added will lead to a fall in profit and vise versa (factor c
is not affected by the wage levels.

For further clarification. let us use mnerical enmples. Monetary indicators
are expressed in thousands of Ken.

Period Value of Nutter of Capital asset hterial ele- Other Value
production employees original pur- ment of value material added

 

chase pric e added cos ts
Q '1' P c‘ cb V
Base 200 50 200 30 50 150
Current 220 35 300 4 5 68 152

He can explain the value of the indicators in that during the current period
there was a qualitative improvement in capital assets as compared to the
base period. Instead of mechanized, qualified-labor intensive production
we have switched to automated production with a reduced number of workers.
The need for employee qualifications and work intensity has not changed
(Operating automated machines does not require higher level of qualification
than mechanized production, often the opposite is true).

Has we, under the conditions stated above. tied the wages to the value added,
then we would have in the current period (co-pared to the base period),

--a slight increase in total wages;
—-a rapid increase in the average wages.

However, neither is economically acceptable. On the face of it, the
situation is satisfactory,

«a reduction in total wages, and

-a stagnation in the average wage (quality and intensity of direct labor
has not changed).

"age as a Necessary Product

The question then remains: which indicator should determine the wages if we
reject not only performance but also value added?

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is my opinion that we cannot justify keying the basic wages to any general
value indicator (above we have indicated reasons why we could not use
profitability and in this relation, we can easily justify the unsuitability
of net production). The fact is that we cannot view the basic wages as an
element of distribution of a manufactured product; it must be understood
primarily as a cost element, as a necessary product with its size corres-
ponding to the amount and quality of direct labor in the given production
run; the wages (together with other social costs) are to ensure the replace-
ment of labor which has been used up by the production process.

This understanding of the (basic) wage is roughly correspondent to the
contemporary economic practice. This is most obvious in the case of
piece-work l-abor where the wages bear the closest relation to the quality
and quantity of the specific acconplished work. In case of the administra-
tive and supervisory personnel we are trying. within our possibilities. to
reflect the accomplished work by classifying them in wage categories corres-
ponding to the work requirements based on required qualifications. physical
difficulties, work conditions (difficult environment), etc.. again, in

such a way that we ensure the replacaent of labor. The labor replacement
must also be ensured under unfavorable developments in any of the general
value indicators; the concept of necessary product, introduced by the Harriet
political economy, does have its full justification.

It follows then: The principal approach to the objective remuneration should
be through higher quality work norms for piece-work labor and better quality
job classification system for other employees and, naturally, the criteria
for their assignments into a specific wage grade.

This route is no doubt considerably more difficult than tying the wages to a
given value indicator. Ensuring comparability of inter-enterprise norms and
inter-professional wage-rate Comparability are theoretically and practically
an extraordinarily difficult task. But, according to my opinion, there is
no other way to judge objectively the work effort and the corresponding basic
wage rates.

Other Wage Functions

The reader is certain to object: "The view of wages as a necessary product
is very lopsided. In determining the level of wages. especially under
socialism. we cannot subtract from the value of commodity production: it is
primarily necessary to ensure that there is a correlation between consumer
goods and the public purchasing power. The wage must be a factor dependent
on distribution of colmodity production.

Keying the wages to value indicators. furthermore. has a motivating function-
it causes the workers to develop a stake in the value of counodity production
and stimulates growth of production through the increase in labor productivity.

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

A position on the objection: Ensuring a balance between the consumer goods
and the public purchasing power is without a doubt a serious problem.
However, we cannot achieve such balance by tying the wages to gross produc-
tion, because it absolutely cannot be justified due to the nature of gross
production. The past experience,when total demand constantly exceeded
supply, has also convinced us of this; after years, when the wages "slipped"
excessively, centralized measures to slow the wage increases Ind to be
implemented, regardless of the gross production developments.

At the nacrolevel we can justify maintaining a relation between the wages and
net production (approximately also value added). However, the problem lies
in the fact that keying wages to net production is not appropriate for
ensuring this relation at the microlevels. The macro-micro relations are
complicated and agreed to. The reasons why we cannot generally ties the
wages to net production have been noted and illustrated above.

Furthermore: Relation between the level of output and wages can also be
derived from wages conceptualized as a necessary product. From wage
costs we derive material costs and from total costs (indirectly) also the
cost of production. Even this process, of course, 'has its danger points.
but it is not wholly unrealistic. It is actually being practiced in
capitalist countries where, in spite of the negative points of the system,
the problem of demand exceeding supply does not arise. The traditional
wage regulations by the way of general value indicators then is not the
only way* and it certainly would be worthwhile to investigate other methods.
more so, because that traditional method did not prove very successful in
practice and we can easily point out its weaknesses.

The problem of individual incentives in the production is also more complicated
than it would seem at first glance.

First of all, it is debatable whether maximization of the production indicators
even should be the employees primary interest--independently of how they are
defined (the gross production, valued added, net production, etc.) and whether
it would not be better to aim the main incentive elements at the effect
(profit) and efficiency (i.e., return on investment).

Second. individual stake in the economic results does not have to be ensured
by keying the basic wage rate to the corresponding economic result indicator.
For that we can use supplemental (bonus type) wage components--just as it is
in the current CS [Czechoslovak] practice when approximately 20 percent of
the total remuneration is dependent on the return on investment.

* The wage developments in Hungary are today weighed on the basis of natural
production indicators (the weights in the heterogenous production are wages
and depreciation of the base period), which tie the wages much better in
with the expanded direct labor, than coupling of wages to level of output
indicators. (More of the effects of changes in the production structure
are eliminated.)

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The existing combined wage relation to two value indicators is, in its way.
a double bonus where the value added carries a greater weight which is a
defacto priority given to this indicator and night result in a selection
of not the most effective solution. (That also applies in the case where we
will be deciding in the interest of maxim wages, considering the size of
its base and supplemental elements, that is. when we will take into
consideration both indicators to which the total wage is tied.) From the
preceding discussion it follows that the principle of the combined designa-
tion of the total wage could be established on a very rational basis, as
long as the basic element is understood to be a "necessary product"; the

supplemental elenent than is the item of distribution of the economic
results and dependent on its size (of the profit).

Third: The concept of wages as a necessary product generates an interest
in the efficient growth of production. It is quite obvious in the
case of the piece-work employee (the more they produce, the higher their

wages) and indirectly (through higher qualification [requirements]) this
goal can also be achieved for other employees.

wages and Labor Productivity

The innate cause of the problems arising in keying the wages to general value
indicators can be seen in measuring of labor productivity. This interaction
has historically developed from the relation of the wage levels to labor

productivity in the interests giving priority to the requirenent that the
productivity grow faster than the average wages.

If we express labor productivity as a relation

 

 

 

 

Q
v - -— ,
T
where Q is production indicator
T is manpower indicator,
average wage as a ratio In .11.!-
where M is the amount of total wages
and if we require that I I that is "l . Ql . Q0) M1 ,5-
v ’ v T ' T ‘1' '
o 1 o 1 0
Q1
than the relation > applies.
Qo Mo

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The requirements of growth in productivity faster than growth in average

wages then may be reduced to the requirement of production having to grow
faster than total wages.

In determining the authorized total wages in the past (adjusted wage fund)
we have based both relatiom (which, of course. with the use of given
adjusting coefficients expressing the authorized percentage of growth in
total wages for each 1 percent of increase in productivity or production
resulted in differing values of the adjusted fund); gradually we switched

to another, simpler procedure-~keying the total wages to production
indicators.

Both procedures assume that the measuring of labor productivity by the ratio
of..?.. is correct, that is we used the ratio of some monetary value indicator
of production (whether gross, net or only partially reduced by the material
costs) to the number of employees (or days or hours worked, etc.). Such is
the statistical practice (and economic practice) but it is this practice
which has been criticized a mnber of times. Particularly well known is the
basic criticism of a Soviet academician Strumilin.

Production as a Marxist concept is the relation of the amount of production
to the amunt of labor involved, i.e., past and direct labor inputs and only
on this basis can we economically justify the relation of wages and pro-
ductivity in the corresponding economic unit.

mfortunately, we must note that the quantification problem of productivity
as defined by the Marxist political economy have resisted satisfactory
solution on the part of the statisticians. although a number of such experts
in the socialist countries have attempted it. The problal lies in quantifying
the amount of production in cases of heterogenous products (monetary value
indicators, even if at deflated prices are not, strictly speaking, volume
indicators) and thus (primarily) in quantification of total labor input.

As for direct labor, we cannot objectively measure its intensity and quality
(according to Marx, in a more intensive work we are expending more work per
time unit while skilled work is really a multiplied simple work) and we are
in fact only measuring the production time. As far as past labor input
(dead labor) is concerned, it is not quite clear what use (whether
dependency on or the consmption of production means—because neither is an
analogy to expended direct labor). Additionally, we have the problem of
synthesis of the two elements as a result of various measuring units of
direct and past labor inputs.

Symbolically speaking, instead of the relation

_3_
v- La+1.b - T.k.i+Lb

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USIZONLY

where v is labor productivity
Q - production
La- direct labor input
Lb- past labor input

T - time worked (average number of workers in the period or number of
days or hours worked)

k - quality of labor input (labor skill)

i - labor intensity

we find in practice only the ratio

v .—

T

we can justify the measuring practice by the complications in measuring the

labor productivity; however, we should be aware of the simplifications made
and infer any consequences.

One of these consequences is the inappropriateness of wage relations to

the simplified productivity characteristics at the micro-levels. A complete
disregard of past labor input in the denominator will result in a substitution
of direct labor for past labor input, in an increase in the indicator value
without a corresponding actual productivity increase (Marxist concept of
productivity). We cannot subtract from past labor input because even this
labor input into the production of the evaluated production unit was in the
past, and in another production unit, the direct labor.

He take past labor input into consideration in the productivity indicators
which use the net production in the numerator; here we reduce the value of
the created product by the cost of material. But even this solution is

not in concert with the basic conceptual definition of productivity. Even

if we made the past labor input identical to the secondary inputs, we cannot
interchange the ratio of the two factors with the ratio of the same two
factors reduced by the same amount. If we express the productivity of total
labor in general terms by the ratio , and the indication constructed
as the ratio of net production to difﬁct lhbor input, Q ‘ Lb then we cannot

call it a productivity indicator. The cancelling effectLBf the two ratios as
well as their development are different. The first may be increasing and the
second may be increasing and falling at the same time.

__UJ1
Period Q La Lb La + Lb La
base 200 50 100 1.33 2.00
current 200 48 103 1.32 2.02

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If we cannot unconditionally accept the dependence of the average wages on

any of the currently employed labor productivity indicators, we cannot

accept the dependence of the volume of wages to production indicators either.
Much less can we then accept a dependence on other general absolute

indicators (i.e., profit, production costs, etc.) because their characteristics

do not define labor productivity (they do not appear in the nuneratora and
by reducing the denoninator we will not arrive to the appropriate linkage

either).

COPYRIGHT: Academia, Prague. 1981

cs0: 21.00/196 mm

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY