APPROVID FOR NIL-”I: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00UWR000100030010-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030010-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI’I’S L/B 30 7

'3 Ma rch 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR AGRICULTURE
(FOUO 2/79)

ll S.J(DHUT PLEHJCJKTHCUVS RESEJKRCJi SER\/NCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030010-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items‘are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Coverment.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3E RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAL USE ONLY.
7. Anal-«(cl .. I. gala-in (no-Janina ll
0-

‘0. Plaieel/Tuk/VMI Unu

Joint Publications Research Service

[000 North Globe Road ll. Comm/Gem No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

 

I2. Secs-«Ina (Mania-lion No.0 lad Mans 11. Type ol Report a Period
Coveted

As above
to

13. Supple-emu, Notes

I‘. Muraeu

The rvpurt contains information on trends and policy at the national and
republic lchls, plans and plan fulfillment. production statistics.
technological achieve-eats and shortcomings. and agricultural investments.

administration, and management. Information at lower levels is included
when it is indicative of trends or innovations.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS I

5 Marc

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR AGRICULTURE
(P000 2/79)

CONTENTS

Reserves Available for Further Development of Livestock Husbandry
(s. s. Dmeresov, et 31.; vornosx EKDNOMIKI, Nov 78) .......
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RESERVES mutants FOR FURTHER DBVILOPHBNT OP LIVESTOCK KUSBANDRY
Moscow VOPROSY “0M1“ in Russian No ll, Nov 78 pp 24-35

[Article by 8.8. Dzarasov, Doctor of Economic Sciences and professor in the
Department of Political lconomics of the Academy of Social Sciences at the
cc CPSU; P.A. lgnatovshiy. Doctor of Economic Sciences and professor;

P.A. Kudinov, Candidate of Economic Sciences and senior teacher in the
Department of Administration of Socio-Economic Processes of the Academy of
Social Sciences at the cc CPS!) and LP. Chernysvskiy. Candidate of Economic
Sciences and senior teacher in the Department of Administration of Socio-
Economic Processes of the Academy of Social Sciences at the to CPSU:
"Reserves for the Development of Livestock liusbandry”]

[Text] The achieving of successful eolutioxs for any national economic tasks
is dependent to a considerable degree upon the agrarian sector of the economy.
The consistent implementation of the long-term program developed by the party
for developing agriculture has nude it possible, within a brief interval of
time, to transform its logistical base. The party's agrarian policies are
directed not only towards achieving the technical reaming of this branch. but
also towards taking more efficient use of the reserves available for socialist
production. A successful solution for the food problem is dependent upon
more efficient use being made of the branch's potential and more rapid placing
in operation of the :eservee available for agricultural production.

During 2 years of the Tenth Pive-Year Plan the average annual volume of gross
agricultural output increased and the average annual production of grain
reached 209.6 million tons. compared to 181.6 million tons for the Ninth Five-
Year Plan. In 1977 a record yield of raw cotton was obtained and the
procurement plans for potatoes. fruit. eggs. milk and other products were
fulfilled. "The entire course of development of the country's economy and the
steady growth in 'JlO material standard of living of the people" stated

l..l. Brezhnev during the July 0978) Plenus of the cc CPS“. "attach special
importance at the present time to the task of achieving rapid improvements in
livestock husbandry. Naturally, recent improvements in national prosperity
have brought about a raised demand in particular for livestock husbandry

1
FOR OHIO!“ US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

products. In this regard the situation is now such that. notwithstanding
increases in the production of meat, milk and other products and improvements
in the operational organization of the branch. the present level of
development of livestock husbandry is still not keeping pace with the rapidly
growing requirements."

The development of this branch has been adversely effected by the unfavorable
weather conditions experienced during the past five~year plan. The feed
shortage during the dry year of 1975 brought about a reduction in the number
of pigs and poultry. however, increases are once again being observed in the
number of pigs and poultry. For example, by the middle of l978 the number of
cattle on public farms throughout the country had increased by 4.2 million
head compared to 1975. pigs -- by l0.8 million and sheep and goats -- by 26.7
million heed. This represents just one trend in the development of livestock
husbandry. Another trend. as mentioned by b.l. Brezhnev during the Plenum.
consists of "raising the productivity of all types of livestock and poultry
in all areas and as quickly as possible." The combining of these two trends
in the development of livestock husbandry -- raising the productivity of the
animals together with increasing their numbers -- implies that an increase in
the number of animals, assuming the average weight achieved throughout the
country for the sale of 1 head of cattle to the state (355 kg), will make it
possible to obtain l.h9 million additional tons of beef.

***

The data furnished in the table on the following page reflects the growth in
and structure of meet production volumes at all categories of farms. The
date underscores the increase that has taken place in the proportion of beef
within the overall structure of meat resources. This trend will continue in
the future. During the July (1978) Plenum, L.I. Brezhnev emphasized: "In the
majority of regions throughout the country, the solving of the meat problem
is associated mainly with increasing the production of beef. This is
conditioned on the one hand by the increasing demand of the population for
beef and, on the other. by the structural peculiarities of our feed balance
and natural conditions. He possess vast meadow and pasture lands and great
opportunities for the production of coarse and succulent feed. Large
quantities of by-producta are furnished by enterprises of the food industry.
All of these factors can be employed to great advantage in the raising and
fattening of cattle." The Plenum underscored the need for devoting special
attention to raising the weight of the animals being sold for slaughtering
purposes and to reducing the fattening periods. During the Ninth Five-Year
Plan, 60 percent of the absolute increase in beef was achieved by means of an
increase in the number of cattle and 60 percent -- by improvements in the
productivity of the herd.

Experience indicates that beef production will be expanded in the near future
both by an increase in the number of animals and by improvements in their
utilization, that is. by increasing the output of meat from each head
available at the beginning of the year. However. a change will take place in

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

               
  

     
    

      

         

UNI-UN I' "dd—‘13- r', ”El-d":- r-‘. LEI-J." N. n I
71 a; U) 2. '
. . . a“ ‘5; g as §.é g.
153.: g' .3. ‘2: 1 E- €52:
33;: .3 3§;£ ! §.2._ Sis: ..
z. - ‘ ‘ ‘
m5 0 ‘13. a; -e 1., 8%" "It. -'
em :4: any: a: is: 4:: a:

  

         

 

 

I101” |2| l4 l3?

   

(6 Meta sccx suns .

 

even «one: ' r , 671 7. 2.“
$231“ .' f I' :13 5.3934. 3; 3:5. «3%: 33. '66.?
( "2:33:11”. 94 972 7 as as: 5. 9m
11 mus . . .. m was 9 :57 um 10. um
212 npovnt . . . . 06 JIO 2 M2 313 2. 98,9
Key:
1. Average annual production (in 6. Heat of a11 types
thousands of tons of dressed 7. Including:
weight) 8. Beef
2. Proportion (in I) 9. Pork
3. Compared to 1961-1965 (in 1) 10. Hutton and goat meat
a. Compared to 1966-1970 (in I) ll. Poultry
5. Compared to 1971-1975 (in 1) 12. Other

the ratio of these factors as a result of production intensification. The
experience of republics in which livestock husbandry operations ere csrried
out on an intensive basis reveals that it is fully possible. within the next
few years, to achieve a production rate of 85-90 kg of beef per head of
cattle. In 1976 the average weight per head of cattle sold to the state by
kolkhozes end sovkhozes was 330 kg and in 1977 -- 352 kg. Compared to the
1961-1965 period, when the figure was 236 kg, an increase of 62 percent was
realized in the average weight. This very important factor is the result of
the intensive development of meat production.

According to available estimates, 30 percent of the beef produced can be
ensured on the basis of an increase in the number of animals and 70 percent --
through intensification of livestock husbandry. Such a change in the ratio
of the principal factors affecting growth in the production of beef is making
it possible to reduce substantially the labor and feed expenditures per weight
unit of beef and this signifies the creation of stable conditions for raising
the efficiency of livestock husbandry based upon intensive methods for
managing this branch. methods which will ensure an average live weight per
head of cattle delivered for meet purposes. at an age of up to 20 months. of
no lower then 600-650 kg. During the Plenum it was mentioned that such a
goal can be achieved in many rayons. oblasts. krays and republics during the
current five-year plan.

The solving of this task is dependent upon raising the level of specialization
and concentration in cattle husbandry. A considerable number of kolkhozes

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and sovkhozes still have small herds. For example. at the beginning of 1977
less than l,000 head of cattle weru being maintained at each of 3,800
sovkhozes (2i percent) and 7.000 kolkhoses (26 percent). At the same tine,
92.7 percent of the sovkhozes and 85 percent of the kolkhoees in the Estonian
SSR were each maintaining in excess of 1,000 head and for the belorussian 888
the figures were 9h.5 and 87.6 percent of the overall number of farms
respectively. As a result of measures carried out in Moldavia in connection
with the development of specialization and concentration of cattle husbandry
on an lnterenterprise basis, the production level achieved in I975 for beef
and veal per head of cattle amounted to more than 120 kg (for the USSR -- 57
kg). In 1971, these indices equalled b8.8 and 50.1 kg respectively.

During the July (1978) Plenum of the CC 0980, emphasis was placed upon the
need for forming an independent branch of beef cattle husbandrv involving the
use of pasture lands and also the creation of a strong feed base for irrigatio,
particularly in the republics of Central Asia, in the southern pert of the
country, in the nonchernozem sons of the RSPSR and in Belorussia. In this
regard, great importance is being attached to breeding beef strains of bulls
with dairy brood stock from which the plans do not call for replacement young
stock to be obtained. A gradual reduction and subsequently the elimination of
barrennsss in the cows will also accelerate growth in the production of meat.

The development of beef cattle husbandry will be promoted by improved feed
usage and by a reduction in output production costs, which are being raised to
a considerable degree as a result of improper feeding. In this regard, one
important condition for increasing the production of meat and lowering the
cost of meat production is that of ensuring that those enterprises engaged in
the maturing end fattening of young stock are supplied with protein-balanced
feed. The consumption of feed per quintel of weight increase in cattle at
kolkhozes, sovkhoses and other|public farms has remained unchanged for an
extended period of time throughout the country as a whole. This affects the
cost of production, since the proportion of feed in the structure of such
costs is considerable. Under modern conditions the maturing and fattening of
cattle, including feed production, become efficient only when carried out on
an industrial basis, involving both the modernizetIOn of the branch and the
construction of specialized livestock husbandry enterprises on an inter-
enterprise basis and by means of centralized capital investments. In this
regard. the development of specialization and concentration of livestock
husbandry, combined with the erection of mixed feed plants on an inter-
enterprise basis and using state appropriations, represents a most effective
sphere for the use of capital investments.

The system employed thrOughOut the country for the raising and fattening of
livestock is predicated upon specific conditions being taken into account.

For example. in the steppe regions of Kazakhstan, Kirghizia, the Volga regi0n,
Kslmykskaya ASSR. western Siberia, the Urels. north Caucasus. Buryatskaya
ASSR and certain other regions, one of the principal conditions for raising
the efficiency of cattle fattening operations is that of making proper use of
the natural meadows and pastures. Ideally the majority of regions in the

h
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Buropean part of the country require an industrial system for food production
and the raising and fattening of livestock, a system having definite logistical
requirements and particularly a network of specialised enterprises created
mainly on the basis of interenterprise cooperation. Experience indicates that
exceptional importance is also being attached to improving the economic
relationships between the reproduction dairy farms and enterprises engaged in
the raising and fattening of cattle. This has to do with those instances
wherein young stock intended to be used for meat purposes are transferred at
an early age (10-20 days) from reproduction (dairy) farms to completely-
mechanized enterprises and farms engaged in the meturing and fattening of
cattle. in those instances where the creation of livestock husbandry complexes

is justified, they function as independent enterprises which carry out their
work on the basis of complete economic accountability.

If conditions permit, farms and associations created on the basis of inter-
enterprise cooperation will serve as feed suppliers for the interenterprise
livestock husbandry facilities. Horeover. these facilities will be provided
with land reclamation equipment and elite seed. "Here we have in mind“
stated L.I. Brezhnev during the Plenum. "the need for making feed production
more specialized in nature at the kolkhozes and sovkhozas themselves, creating
interenterprise associations for the production of feed and developing agro-
industrial integration.“ The livestock husbandry complexes, while ensuring
the production of the final product. may also include mixed feed plants
engaged in the production of quality feed in conformity with the requirements
of the livestock age groups. hence a complex, as a specialised enterprise
and an interenterprise association. can have a state task for the production
and sale of the particular final product -- meat. In the case of inter-
enterprise cooperation. the state plan for the sale of meat is ensured by
shareholder-farms through deliveries of young stock by dairy (reproduction)
farms and also by means of contracts with the population for young stock and
ensuring high weight increases for the cattle during fattening. Specialization
and concentration in livestock husbandry make it possible not only to
introduce a pregressive technology and system of incentives into operations.
but also to raise the skills of workers who are capable of solving the task
of efficient meat production.

The development of specialised livestock husbandry enterprises (complexes)
can be carried out based upon existing farms in the Skotoprom system. In
those instances where such farms are not available, importance is attached to
economically substantiating the relationship between the new livestock
husbandry enterprises of the industrial type and existing farms in need of
modernization. The problem of supplying feed for the large state complexes
must be solved in a rational manner using different variants depending upon
the natural-economic conditions. For example, the cattle being maintained at
individual complexes should ideally be supplied with feed produced at these
same or other specialized farms and also by means of state forage grain funds.
Moreover, the relationships between the farming parties are developed along
economic accountability lines.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A strengthening of the livestock husbandry economy raises the need for
definite changes in the system of economic relationships. One measure in this
regard in the increase in procurement prices for milk, wool. mutton and other
agricultural products, approved during the July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU.
Regulation of the economic accountability relationships under intense
specialization presupposes the establishment of more sound accounting prices
for the young cattle stock supplied to the complexes by the reproduction
farms, with the price level being such as to ensure that the reproduction
farms enjoy the same conditions as those prevailing at complexes engaged in
the raising and fattening of livestock under more rational forms of
specialization. This raises the interest of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes in
obtaining and protecting their offspring and delivering them on the basis of
contracts arranged with the interenterprise complexes. The y0ung stock
obtained from crossing cows with beef strains of bulls could be sold at higher
prices. Under such conditions. specialization in the raising and fattening
of cattle exerts a positive influence on milk production. since earnings from
the sale of milk according to sound accounting prices promote improvements in
the profitability of dairy livestock husbandry and in its development.

The computatiOns for feed supplied by the koikhozea and sovkhozes to the
interenterprise comple"ss and associations for the raising and fattening of
cattle occupy a special place in the mechanism of economic relationships
among those participating in cooperative production on an interenterprise
basis. Uniform principles for such computations are still not available. In
some instances they are being carried out on the basis of the state
procurement prices for grain (this method is being employed on public farms in
Moldavia). in other instances -- based upon the production cost of the grain
and still in a third group of cases -- based upon the accounting prices.
Experience indicates that in the first instance the suppliers of the grain
forage stand to gain considerably, but at the same time the cost of meat
production will be artificially inflated. The profit which the kolkhoses
obtain from selling grain to the state is included in the expenditures for
raising and fattening cattle as production expenses.

it should be borne in mind that even when feed expenditures, based upon their
production cost. are applied to the output of livestock husbandry associations,
an increase often takes place in the production cost for the weight increases
in the animals and for milk, compared to kolkhoz and sovkhoz farms, while at
the same time labor productivity increases sharply. This is natural, since
complete mechanization ensures an economy in live labor. However, the
transferred value of the production resources to the final output at livestock
husbandry complexes is higher and it is still not being covered by a savings
in live labor. since the productivity of the animals, particularly cows,
remains at the same level in individual instances. The increaning material
expenditures associated with the introduction of mechanization. even in the
face of raised labor productivity, lead to higher production costs. This is
why the industrial methods employed in livestock husbandry production
operations require not only a complex of machines for conserving in the use
of live labor but also a more productive herd. improved pedigree data on the

6
ms OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

livestock, helanced feed and skilled labor. All of these factors will ensure
growth in the productivity of the herd as a condition for lowering production
costs. At the present time the computation for grain forage in Moldavia and
other republics, by livestock husbandry cmnplexes and associations with the
kelkhezes and sovkhozus. is carried out in accordance with the average
production cost (or the rayon. Under modern conditions, this is the most
suitable principle for the carrying out of computations.

***

Alter beet. pork occupies second place in the country's meat balance. During
the last two five-year plans its proportion in the meat balance amounted to
37-38 percent. Prior to the beginning of 1978. the number of pigs at all
categories of farms reached 70.6 million head, compared to 1965 when the
figure was only 59.6 million head.

The rates of growth for pork productiOn increased during the course of recent
five-year plans. Thus. during the 1966-1970 period the average annual
production of pork in the public sector increased by 22 percent above that
(or he preceding Eive~year plan and during the Ninth Five-Year Plan compared
to the Eighth ~~ an increase of 36 percent. In the private sector, the
growth amounted to S and 10 percent respectively. For all categories of farms
on the whole, the average annual production of pork increased respectively

by 5&0,000 tons or 12 percent and by 1.06 million tens or 25 percent. A
great deal was accomplished with regard to disseminating the progressive
technologies for pork production. Large-scale pig raising enterprises were
created both at kolkbozcs and sovkhOzes and on an interenterprise basis. The
results of their operations underscore the new opportunities that are
available for the intensive management of this branch. Nevertheless, the
proportion of such enterprises in the production of pork is still not very
high. An increase in the production of pork is being held up owing to the
fact that meat production per head of pig has decreased at a number of
kelkhozes and sovkhozes. Por example. during the Eighth Five-Year Plan an
average of 85 kg of meat in live weight was produced annually per head
available at the beginning of the year and during the Ninth Five-Year Plan --
83 kg.

During the years of the Ninth Five-Year Plan, 34 percent more concentrated
feed was used for feeding purposes on the pig farms of kolkhozes and
sovkhOzes than was employed during the previous five-year plan, despite the
fact that the proportion of such feed cempared to the overall mass of feed
used for the raising and fattening of pigs increased only negligibly. The
consumption of mixed feed increased by 66 percent. It bears mentioning that
the consumptiOn of grass meal and grain in processed form is increasing in
pig breeding with each passing year. Improvements have been realised in the
structure of the concentrated feeds being fed to pigs. During the Eighth
Five-Year Plan the average annual proportiOn of grain in concentrated feed
amounted to 28 percent; flour, sittings and other residues obtained from the
processing of grain -- 45 percent; mixed feeds -- 26 percent. For the Ninth

7
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Five-Year Plan the figures were 2a percent. 45 percent and 29 percent
respectively. An important factor with regard to raising the efficiency of
use of feed is that of realizing improvements in the structure of the
rations. However. this factor manifests itself fully only in those instances
where use is made not only of the best feed but where the feeding is carried
out in an intensive manner. This second condition must he realized more
fully. Compared to the Eighth Five-Year Plan when an average of 626 kg of
concentrated feed was fed to each pig, during the Ninth Five-Year Plan --

60] kg.

Fran the standpoint of the modern requirements of science and leading
experience, large numbers of pigs are not being utilized properly at a
considerable number of kolkhozes and sovkhozes. Special importance is being
attached to taking into account the regional aspect in the distribution of
industrial pork production. Statistical data reveals that 77.2 percent of
the pigs are located in the RSPSR (48 percent) and the Ukraine (29.2 percent)
and when Belorussia, Moldavia. Kazakhstan and the Baltic republics are
included -- 97.h percent. The principal suppliers of pork in the RSPSR are
the north Caucasus (17.6 percent of the pigs), the Volga region (16.5
percent). the central-chernozem regiOn (15.8 percent) and the central region
(13.3 percent, that is, 63.2 percent of the pigs on farms in the RSPSR are
located in f0ur economic regions. Since pork production represents clearly
expressed zonal specialization, the problenw concerned with the development
at pig raising and its intensification should be examined mainly in the
specific ohlasts, krays and republics. The organization, level of culture
and efficiency of pork production in the mentioned economic regions and
republics are determined by the economic status of the branch on the whole.

in 1974, a stable year from the standpoint of production conditions, and in
oblests which were not specializing in the production of pork, for example
Novgorodskeya Oblast, [50 kg of meat (in live weight) was obtained per head,
in Nurmanskaya Oblast -- 168, in Pskovskaya Oblast -- 132, in Volgogradskaya
Ohlast -- l2“ and in the north Caucasus, a region of traditional pig

raising -- 81 kg. The highest pork yields per head were obtained in oblasts
in the northwest, where industrial methods are employed mainly in pig raising
Operations, and the lowest yields -- in the regions of traditional pig
raising, considered at the same time to be large producers of grain as the
principal feed for pigs.

During the past few years, increases have taken place in feed deliveries for
livestock husbandry purposes. In 1965 the consumption of concentrated feed
at all categories of farms and in all branches of livestock husbandry
amounted to 65.3 million tons, in 1975 -- 118.9 million and in 1976 --'ll7.4
million tons. In 1975, 22.5 quintels of all types of feed were expanded per
head and in 1976 -- 25.5 quintels. However the desired results were still
not achieved, since zonal specialization was not developed in terms of
specialized enterprises, that is, it was not reinforced by a modern level of
production culture.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ilFPllilAl. "Si-2 ONLY

The development oi pig raising in promoting a solution (or the problem oi
lurluuslnu meat production as quickly as possible. The low indices cited
above lor pork output in oblasts, krays and republics having clearly expressed
zonal specialization are explained by the lsct that multi-hranch farms
predominate in these regions and intensive nethods ior developing the branch
have still not been adequately developed here. This is why a need exists ior
special purpose planning oi capital investments for the industrialization and

specialization oi pig raising operations in specific oblaata, krays,
republics and economic regions.

Takinu into account the opportunities available [or producing grain and
particularly protein and also the number oi pigs at kolkhozes, sovkhozes.
inierenrerprlse complexes and other state enterpriees, as set forth in the
nailnual utnnomic plan, cooputetlons reveal that it is possible to achieve a
yelght increase per head oi IZS-IJO kg. This will make it possible to produce
h.t-I.z million tons oi pork (in live weight) annually in the public sector.
In addition, innnrtance in also being attached to assisting the development oi
pig raining in the private sector, where the possibility exists oi producing
2.1-2.u million tons of pork. Taking into account this overall volume, the
«Verage annual production oi pork in the country could reach 9.2-l0 nilliou

(one, or 3.2 million more tons than the average annual production for 1970-
I')I':.

Unlinn the Ninth Five-Year Plan, an average oi 15.8 million tons oi
ruhlrultnlcd leed was led annually to pigs in the public sector. that is, 7.2
tuna lor eaeh ton oi pork produced. further iaprovements in the feed
structure and the ability to obtain l25-130 kg of product for each head
available at the beginning oi the year will make it possible, with use being
made 0! progressive technologies. to lower the expenditures of concentrated
ieed to an average oi 5.8-6 tons ior each ton oi pork produced. Thus pork
produ<tion will overtake the consumption oi concentrated feed by 29 percent,
whereas during the Ninth Five-Year Plan -- only by 2 percent.

This task can be accomplished provided a number oi organizational-economic
measures are carried out. in particular, improvements must be realised in the
level oi ronrentration and intensity oi specialization in pig raising

thrOugh the conversion oi this branch over to an industrial basis and also in
breeding work, ieed ration: and in the training oi skilled personnel. in
addition to modernized laras, closed cycle industrial complexes capable of
lnltunin” l2,000, 26,000, 5h,000 and in some regions l08,000 pigs annually
have also proven their vorth in pig raising operations. The construction of
th- ilrst two or three types oi couplexes could be carried out on an inter-
u-nterprise basis; the larger ones should be built only with orientation
lowaldn the needs oi the large cities. construction projects and industrial
«nature and in the interest ol ensuring reliable and regular deliveries of
liesh pork lot the population. it is obvious that the larger complexes
nhould ideally be supplied with nixed ieed from state iunds.

ﬁrrording to rough estimates, the task oi supplying adequate anounts oi meat
lor titles oi the ksPSk having populations oi '50,000 or sore can be carried

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uni by ornanizlnx the industrial production of pork in a volume in excess of
2.0 million tone (in live weight annually). Towards this end. the complexes
will require l2 million tons oi ieed units. In l9IS. all of the kolkhozes
nnd sovkhozes in tho RSPSR produced 2.6 million tons of pork and expended

22 milliOn tons of feed units. that is, considerably more than the couputed
teed expenditures for the industrial production of pork.

In recent yeirs the construction of pig fattening enterprises on an inter-
nnterprise babis has undergone further deveIOpment. The animals to be
Isttened are supplied to these enterprises by the reproduction farms of
knlkhozes and sovkhozes. The technoIOgical cycle for the production of pork
nmy be disrupted if there is a considerable number of smell ferns. The
rhythmic deliveries of young stock will be disturbed and this will lead to
poor use of the production capabilities of the fattening complex and to
limitations on the number of hybrid yOung stock that become available for
Iattcning purposes. in the final analysis, decreases will take place in the
weight increases and in the effectiveness of feed usage, the probability of
iniectious diseases breaking out at a complex will increase and greater
expenditures will be required for carrying out additional veterinary-
nnnitsry measures. in addition, the system of organizational-economic
relationships between those participating in production cooperation will
become more complicated and it will not always be possible to merge the
interests of the cooperating farms in a harmoniOus manner. This lowers the
reliability. efficiency and rhythmic nature of the functioning of the
production network. Thus reproduction facilities are being created at the
isttening enterprises. that is. they are truly becoming complexes for the
production of pork. Other progressive methods are also being employed -- the
network of reproduction farms is being regulated and reproduction is being
concentrated at nearby and conveniently located (relative to the fattening
complex) fares. in Estonia. for exasple. the construction of large regional
interenterprise reproduction farms is being developed. These farms ensure
the mass production of hybrid pigs for delivery to all of the kolkhozes and
sovkhozes in a region and to the private farms. Bxisting livestock facilities
at the kolkhozes and sovkhozes are being modernized for the mass fattening of
young stock.

Outing the July (19’8) Plenum of the CC CPSU. it was noted that the
ronVeraion over to industrial methods for producing pork will make it
posnible to raise the weight increases. shorten the fattening periods and
obtain output with reduced expenditures of feed. labor and other resources.
The progrsm aimed at achieving an industrial technology for pig raising is
:ondltioned by the need for centralizing the technical policies of this
branch in a single organ and cOncentrating organizational control in
ciOnOIlf accountability rayon and oblast (kray, republic) associations.

A stable supply of feed is achieved for the pig raising enterprises by
treating a network of specialized feed farms and mixed feed plants attached
to the appropriate associations (this oethod is employed extensively in the
Ukrainian SSR) and also associations for the production of (sod similar to

10
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

those operating in the holdavian SSR. Such an approach makes it possible to
solve more rapidly those problems concerned with providing balanced feed for
pig raising Operations and organizing the sale of feed to the population.

Iii

Large reserves for increasing the production of neat are available in poultry
raising -- the livestock husbandry branch that is developing in the most
successful manner. This is being promoted by its conversion over to an
industrial basis and by the creation of the Ptitsapron system. in which 675
poultry factories were operating at the beginning of 1976. The principal
trend in the develop-eat of this branch continues to be that of egg
production. in l976-l977. egg production amounted to 58.6 billion units.
compared to only 28.7 billion units during the l96l-l965 period. This

ensured an increase in the per capita consumption of eggs during this period
oi from [20 to 22k units.

Definite successes were also achieved in the production of poultry neat.
During the l9ll-l975 period and compared to the previous five-year plan. the
average annual production of poultry meat increased by 57 percent and
amounted to l.53 niiiion tons in dressed weight. Compared to the 1961-1965
period. the production of poultry meat had increased by more than twofold.
however. notwithstanding such growth. the increasing demand for this product
is not being satisfied. if this problem is to be solved. we must devote
special attention to: erecting large enterprises of the industrial type for
the raising of geese chicks. ducks. turkeys and geese; Iodernising existing
poultry factories; expanding interenterprise poultry factories.

Heat production on the private farms of the population centinues to be an
important reserve for increasing the production of neat. During the last
three five-year plans. the average annual figures for poultry neat produced
in this sector were 6bb.000, 111,000 and 892.000 tons respectively. Por the
most part, this sector of production is satisfying only the internal needs of
the population (particularly the rural population) and is still not exerting
e substantial influence on state procure-onts. During the last three five-
yesr plans. 3.300. 3.000 and 6.600 tons were procured in this sector. or

5.h percent. 1 percent and 0.6 percent respectively of the overall state
procure-cuts. In the interest of developing poultry raising on the private
farms and increasing the state procurements. the plans call for the extensive
sale of chicks (nainly of meat strains), goslings, ducklings and young turkeys
to the population via the state end kolkhoz incubators and poultry factories.
Consumer cooperation can increase the procurements of eggs and poultry from
the population by s inulating counter sales of deficit goods. construction
materials. feed and so forth.

But the chief reserve available for increasing the production of poultry
meat consists of further developing broiler production. At the present time.
broilers constitute approximately [3 percent of the poultry meat being
obtained in the country. According to our computations. this proportion will

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill IWI’ICIAI. "5." ONLY

increase to 50 percent by I985. Broiler production is developing mainly as a
rvﬂull nl the introduction of the system of raising poultry in cages.
involving both the construction at new poultry factories and the more intensive
unc of already existing production areas. Substantial improvements have been
realized in the concentration of broiler production. Compared to 1913 when

bl percent of the Ptitseprom (arms had gross weight increases of more than
5,000 quintals, by 1976 the proportion of such terms had increased to 91
percent. Nevertheless. the reserves for iurther concentration of poultry
raining have not as yet been exhausted. At one half of the farms the meat
yield per laying hen was lower and the coats for weight increases. labor
expenditures and feed were higher than these [or the system as a whole. The
experience of leading poultry factories has shown that when the broilers are
raised in cages the meat yield per square meter of production space increases
irmn too to 200 kg. that is. a twofold increase. The introduction of the cage
system ior raising poultry at all oi the broiler poultry factories would make
it posnible to obtain approximately 200.000 additional tons of meat using
existing production capabilities.

in addition to the construction of state broiler factories. interenterprise
pﬂullry iartories iurnish great opportunities for the raising of meat poultry.
The experience accumulated in Krymskaya Oblast has shown that in addition to
vb“ production it is possible to develop meat poultry raising on an intensive
Lanls within a relatively short period of time through cooperation between the
state enterprises and the kolkhozes. A scientific-production associatiOn for
the raising of broilers has been in operation here since 1970; it involves the
participation oi 97 enterprises representing various departments (the
Krymskoye Branch of the Scientific-hesearch institute of Poultry Raising, 10
larms oi the Ptitseurom System. 29 sevkhozes oi other trusts. 65 kolkhozea and
ii interkolkhoz incubator-poultry raising stations). During the Ninth Iive-
Year Plan the purposeful and coordinated work oi this association produced a
tnreeiold increase in the production of broilers. in l976 the procurements of
poultry meat in Krymskaya Oblast reached 03,300 tons and constituted 33 percent
of the oblast's meat balance. The number of poultry in the oblast increased
Iron a million in 1965 to 17 million head in 1916.

[he organization oi the industrial preparation of mixed ieeds and also an
increase in the production oi premixea (or the purpose of raising the
nutritional value of the feed resources at the farms themselves are promoting
the development oi interenterprise and specialized poultry raising at the
koikhozes and sovkhozes. in addition to premixes. importance is also being
attached to orumnizing the production of pharmaceutical coccids for preventing
poultry losses caused by diseases. This will make it possible to obtain up

to Izo additional grams oi meat from each head of poultry raised.

Special attention should be given to the breeding of such poultry types as
nuese, ducks and turkeys. From l960 and up until 1975 the number of geese
decreased to almost one iiith of its previous level and the number of ducks --
to ten-lorty iourths of its previous level. The number of turkeys remains at
the l960 level and amounts to only £00,000 head. For all practical purposes

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the development of these types of poultry is being carried out on an amateur
basis. The reductions took place mainly in the public sector. For exanple.
during the mentioned period the nnaher oi geese in some republics decreased
to one lifth and even to one tenth of the previous levels. The brooding of
geese was discontinued on the public farms in individual republics.

in late 1915 the USSR Ministry of Agriculture outlined special measures to he
carried out for the purpose of developing goose raising: s standard plan was
approved for a factory for 500,000 geese. the technological conditions were
developed and highly productive strains were brought in. At the same time,
greater use must be made of the potential available for raising geese on the
private farms. As no other type of poultry, geese adapt very readily to
private farms. Although they arrive in May and June from incubators, by
September the young geese have grown and achieved a weight of up to 5 kg. In
view of their resistance to cold, the construction of geese ferns does not
require great expenditures. Thus the development of this branch also appears

to hold great promise for the northern regions of the country and the regions
of Siberia.

ﬁn important reserve for increasing the production of poultry meat is that of
improving its processing and sales. in poultry raising carried out on an
industrial basis. the processing and preparation oi eggs and meat for sale
are performed directly at the enterprises and are the final stages in the
entire technological process. However. as yet only slightly more than one
half of the poultry at Ptitsepron (arms is actually being processed. The
Remaining amount is being delivered to the neat cowbines. Experience has
shown that a niniuu- of IO percent of the live weight is lost during the
transporting and delivery of the poultry (losses caused by cooling. freezing
and storage in refrigerators amount to 2.3 percent of the dressed weight.
reductions also take place in the grading of the neat). In 1975, when the
poultry slaughtering was carried out in the fare slaughtering departments,
16.: percent of the neat obtained was classified as being of [at grade
quality and when the slaughtering was carried out at neat combines -- 20.6
percent. According to data furnished by USSR Ptitsepron, approximately

100 million rubles worth of losses were sustained in 1915 owing to a reduction

in the yield of let grade neat when the slaughtering was carried out at neat
cauhines.

Notwithstanding the positive results already achieved in poultry raising,
the further development of this branch requires improveuents in the
Ptitsepron System itself. particularly in the form of increased division of
labor. An intensification oi the coordinating influence of the Ptitseprom
System on the development of poultry raising at kolkhoses and sovkhoses and
in the private sector is inevitable. Moreover. special importance is being
attached to the carrying out o: breeding work on a centralised basis. in
addition to raising the productivity of the poultry factories, the creation
ol the required nuaber of breeding plants will also serve to ensure that the
poultry iarns oi the kolkhoses and sovkhoses are adequately supplied with
pedigree pOultry. Assuaing the formation and strengthening throughout the

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entire system of e common economic acc0untability structure, including
production planning and financing problems. Ptitseprom will be able to
provide a greater amount of planned assistance to holkhoz and sovkhoz

poultry raining in reproduction of the stock, in introducing progressive
technologies and in organizing the production of goods on an industrial basis.
Ptltueprmn can exert e greet amount of influence on branches that are allied
with poultry raising. such as planning organizetions and plants for the
nmnufacturlng of technological equipment and biological preparations and for
the production of mixed feeds.

*i*

The development of rabbit husbandry also represents an important source for
supplementing the meet resources. Despite the fact that the production of
rabbit meat increased by 83.000 tons over the past 5 years. its proportion
with regard to the overall meat balance. just as in previous years, does not
exceed l percent. The production of this type of meat in the public sector
is negligible. 0( 146.000 tons (dressed weight) of rabbit meat produced in
I9I5, only 1,000 tone or “.8 percent were obtained from holkhozes, sovkhozes
or other state farms. Rabbit raising operations are concentrated for the
most pert in the private sector. The experience accumulated in Krylsksya
Oblest is deserving of attention. It was one of the first oblasts in the
Ukraine to cmnmence the breeding of rabbits on an industrial basis.

Crest reserves for increasing the production of meat are to be found in sheep
husbandry. The production of this branch has been curtailed in some
republics. The principal bulk of the mutton is being produced on the basis
oi pssture feed. During the July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU, attention was
iocused on the fact that the feed lands of steppe and semi-desert zones can
be employed to great advantage for sheep raising purposes. The creation of
carry-OVer iued reserVea is of special importance for the stable development
of sheep relsing in such regions. More extensive use should be made of an
industrisl technology for sheep raising in regions characterized by a high
level of cleared land.

the July (l9ld) Plenum of the cc CPSU singled out the following tasks as being
ol mﬂjor and urgent importance: implementing radical improvements in feed
production and creating a reliable feed base during the next few years. The
Iesolutlon handed down during the Plenum contained the following statement:
”Peed production carried out on the farms should become more specialized in
nature and every attempt should he made to develop cooperation and agro-
Industrial integration and to organize interenterprise associations and
enterprises [or the production and processing of feed." In essence. this
rails [or the development of a special-purpose and complex program for the
develonnunt of feed production and one which provides for the creation of
ﬁpdllllllcd ieed production zones. These zones must ensure the guaranteed
production of forage grain, soybeans and grass meal, increased capabilities
lor the mixed feed industry and the creation on this basis of an all-union
teed fund. the construction of interenterprise mixed feed plants and the

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

creation of specialized feed production associations for ensuring that the

interentetprise livestock raising complexes and kolkhoses and sovkhoses are
supplied with adequate quantities of feed.

The need for ensuring more efficient use of capital investments intended for
the development of livestock husbandry should be emphasized. in recent years
there has been an increase in the fixed production capital for livestock
husbandry at the kolkhozes and sovkhozes. while at the same tine the workload
per worker in this branch has remained at the former level or has increased
negligibly. Growth in the capital-labor ratio is not being accompanied by an
increase in labor productivity and this is bringing about a reduction in the
efilciency of capital investments. At the same time. it is generally known
that labor productivity increases by tenfold when beef is produced an an
industrial basis, pork -~ by a factor of 8. milk -- by a factor of 5.6 and

feed expenditures per unit of product decrease respectively by factors of 2
and 1.8 and by 28-32 percent.

The use of capital investments for measures aimed at completely solving those
problems associated with converting livestock husbandry over to an industrial
basis will make it possible to realize the following: first of all. to reduce
caisiderably the number of workers in livestock husbandry; secondly. to
produce a greater quantity of output using the same feed; thirdly. to improve
the supply of meat for the population.

The above represent just a few of the conclusions drawn from an analysis of
the practice and actual status of production of various types of meat at
koikhozes. sovkheses. production associations and private farms and also the
experience accumulated in the use of available reserves. In the process,
the actual resources of grain and other types of feed available to the
national economy. particularly at kolkhozes and sovkhozes. are taken into
account a

The data obtained from leading experience indicates that a more rational
(special purpose) use of planned capital investments and feed and modern
production organization can serve to eliminate the deficit in the meat balance
within a short period of time. in light of the tasks established during the
Zﬁlh party congress. the July ([978) Plenum of the CC CPSU and in
corresponding resolutions of the CC C950 and the USSR Council of Ministers.
specific special purpose programs for the development of livestock husbandry
and feed production by individual republics, obiasts and krays and involving
participation by specialists in the variOus areas should ideally be developed
within the framework of the natiOnal ecOnomic plan. For example. as already
mentioned, a special purpose program for pork production can be developed for
such regions as the north Caucasus. the Volga region, the central-chernozem
zone and others, which are presently producing the principal bulk of this
type of meat. Requirements exist for implementing a complex of measures
aimed at increasing the production of a particular type of product and for
solving the protein problem in feed production for definite economic regions
of the country and in a thsely manner. here we have in mind the practical

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

implementation at the decisions handed down during the July (1978) Plenum of
the ac HPSU and the resolutions of the CC CPSU and the USSR Council of

Ministers dealing with theae matters. through the Joint uiiorte oi the
appropriate uinietriea and depart-enta. planning. ntate and economic organa.
specialists and agricultural workers and with the cooperation of the acientilir

research institutions.

The successful implementation of the vast program (or further agricultural
development and particularly in livestock husbandry, adopted during the July
(19/8) Plenum of the cc 6950. will promote solution. (or large-acnle social
Leeks -- achieving further inprovenente in the etanJ..d of living for the
people and bringing the material and cultural-dementic living conditiona in

the citiea and rural areaa cloaer together.

lzdatel'etvo "Pravda", "Voproey ekononiki". '78

Copyright:
7026 ‘
cso: 1824 3ND

16
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY