FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10289
28 January 1982

Translation

CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION STATISTICS

By

Arkadiy Nilovich Ustinov

FORE|GN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION STATISTICS

Moscow STATISTIKA KAPITAL'NOGO STROITEL'STVA in Russian 1980 (signed
to press 3 Jan 80) pp 1-240

{Textbook by Arkadi, Nilovich Ustinov, Izdatel'stvo "Statistika',
4,000 copies, 240 pages]

CONTENTS

Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

CHAPTER I: THE CONCEPT OF CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION STATISTICS AND ITS
ORGANIZATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51. The Subjects Studied by Capital Construction Statistics . . . . . . .
52. The Subject. Method and Tasks of Capital Construction Statistics . . .
93. The Organization of Capital Construction Statistics in the USSR . . .
54. Organizational Forms of Statistical Observation in Capital Construction

55. Reporting-The Basic Porn ofStatistical Observation in Capital
Construction . . . . . . .I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ll

OOUIN N

CHAPTER II: THE STATISTICAL STUDY OF THE VOLUME, COMPOSITION AND DYNAMICS
OF CAPITAL INVESTMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

51. The Concept and Technological Composition of Capital Investments . . . 18
52. Indicators of the Capital Investment Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
53. Basic Groupings in Capital Investment Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . 26
54. Methods of Studying the Dynamics of the Capital Investment Volume . . 29
SS. Incomplete Construction and Its Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
56. A Statistical Study of Plan Fulfillment, the Dynamics and State of
Incomplete Construction . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . 37

CHAPTER III: THE STATISTICS 0P PUTTING CAPACITY AND FIXED CAPITAL INTO
OPERATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

51. The Tasks of Statistics for Putting Capacity and Fixed Capital into
Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
52. Accounting for the Putting of Fixed Capital Projects into Operation
in Physical Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . AS
rm: Ul'l'ﬂ IAI. ILNI', UNIX

Page

§3. Indicators for the Amount of Fixed Capital Put into Operation . . . . 46
sh. Studying Plan Fulfillment and the Dynamics of Putting Capacity and
Fixed Capital into Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
$5. The Statistical Study of the Duration and Intensity of Construction . 57
56. The Relationship of the Basic Indicators in Capital Construction
Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

CHAPTER IV: THE STATISTICAL STUDY OF CAPITAL INVESTMENT ECONOMIC
EFFECTIVENESS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

§l. Basic Areas in the Statistical Study of Economic Effectiveness . . . . 67
§2. A Statistical Study of the Economic Effectiveness of Capital

Investments in the National Economic Aspect . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
53. A Statistical Study of the Economic Effectiveness of Capital

Investments in Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

CHAPTER V: THE STATISTICS 0F CONSTRUCTION PRODUCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84

_ . The Tasks of Construction Product Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
52. Construction Product as an Object of Statistical Study . . . . . . . . 85
53. The Concept of Construction Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
54. The Stages of Construction Product in Terms of the Degree of Ito
Completeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . 90
55. Accounting for Construction Product in Physical Units . . . . . . . . 92
56. Accounting for Construction Product in Cost Units . . . . . . . . . . 94
57. Indicators for the Volume of Produced Construction Product . . . . . . 96
58. Indicators for the Fulfillment of the Construction Product Plan . . . 99
59. Indicators for the Volume of Construction Product Under the Conditions
of Specialization and Cooperation of Contracting Organizations . . . . 103
510. The Relationships of the Indicators for the Construction Product

Volume . . . . . . . . . . ......... . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
§ll. Indicators for the Volume of Construction Work . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
512. Gross and \et Construction Product ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111

§l3. Methods of Studying the Dynamics of the Construction Product Volume . 112
514. A Statistical Study of the Steady Output of Construction Product and
Its Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114

CHAPTER VI: LABOR AND WAGE STATISTICS ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . 119

51. The Tasks of the Statistical Study of Labor and Wagcs in Construction. 119
§2. A Statistical Study of the Size. Composition and movement of the

Workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
53. Accounting for Working Time and the Indicators of Its Use . . . . . . 125
54. The Statistical Methodology for Measuring Labor Productivity in

Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
55. The Statistical Methodology of Analyzing Labor Productivity . . . . . 133
S6. A Statistical Study of the Wage Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
57. The Study of Average Wages and Their Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . 140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER

51.
52.
53.
54.

55.
56.

CHAPTER

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

CHAPTER

5!.
52.

53.
54.

55.
56.

57.

CHAPTER

51.
52.
53.
§4.
55.
56.

CHAPTER

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VII: FIXED CAPITAL STATISTICS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ......

The Tasks of Fixed Capital Statistics and Its Classification . . . . .
A Study of the Volume, Dynamics and State of F! ed Capital . . . . . .
Indicators of Fixed Capital Utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Accounting for the Number, Power, Composition and Condition of
Construction Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of the Extensive Use of Construction Machines . .
Indicators for the Use of Construction Machines for Capacity and

Work Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

VIII: A STATISTICAL STUDY OF THE SUBJECTS OF LABOR IN CONSTRUCTION .

The Tasks of the Statistics of the Subjects of Labor . . . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of the Availability and Composition of Materials .
Indicators for the Movement of Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of the Availability of Construction Materials . .
The Statistical Study of Materials Utilization in Construction . . . .

IX: STATISTICS OF TECHNICAL PROGRESS IN CONSTRUCTION . . . . . . . .

The Tasks of Technical Progress Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indicators for the Elaboration and Application of Standardized

Designing ...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Statistical Study of Introducing Advanced Industrial Methods . . .

A Study of the Introduction of New Technology, Progressive Production
Methods and Efficient Materials . . . . . ...... . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of Construction Mechanization . . . . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of Specialization, Concentration, Cooperation and
Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of the Economic Effectiveness of Technical

Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

X: STATISTICS OF CONSTRUCTION PRODUCT COSTS . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Tasks of a Statistical Study of Construction Product Costs . .
Types of Construction Product Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Statistical Study of the Fulfillment of Quotas for Reducing Cost
Studying the Dynamics of Construction Product Costs . . . . . . .
A Study of the Composition of Expenditures on Construction Products .
Studying the Dynamics and Fulfillment of the Work Costs Plan by

sea.

Expenditure Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... . . . . . .
Methods of Analyzing the Influence of Individual Factors on
Construction Product Costs ....... . . . . .......... .

XI: A STATISTICAL STUDY OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES AT CONSTRUCTION
ORGANIZATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Tasks of Financial Activity Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A Study of the Volume and Composition of Working Capital . . . . . . .
A Study of the Efficient Use of Working Capital . . . . . . . . . . .
The Study of Profit and Profitability of Construction Organizations .
Analysis of Factors Influencing the Financial Results of Construction
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

178
180

184

190

194

194
195
197
199
202

204
206

.11

211
211
213
215

217
F1)R‘0F1ﬂ(JAI.IJS£Z(HVLY

ANNOTATION

The textbook examines the questions of capital investment and construction statis-
tics and the methodology for calculating the statistical indicators for the use of
capital investments and the completion of fixed capital, production operationd and
the economic effectiveness of capital investments and construction work.

The book is designed for students and instructors at the economic VUZes and
faculties as well as for the employees of statistical bodies and construction
organizations.

FOREHDRD

In the USSR, under the leadership of the Communist Party and the Soviet government,
grandiose tasks are being carried out in laying the material and technical base of
communism, in improving the prosperity and cultural standard of living of the peo-
ple and ensuring national security. Here an important role has been given to capi-
tal construction which must bring about a further growth and qualitative improve-
ment in the national economy's fixed capital. The CPSU Central Committee and the
USSR Council of Ministers, proceeding from the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress,
have adopted the Decree "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Effect of the
Economic Mechanism on Raising Production Efficiency and Work Quality" in which
great attention has been given to capital construction. The effective activities
of capital construction at the present stage are possible only on a basis of in-
proving the organizational structure and management methods of the sector. These
are based upon complete, reliable and scientifically sound information which is as-
sembled and processed by capital construction statistics.

In the given textbook, the author has endeavored as fully as possible to shed light
on the present tasks of capital construction statistics. For this reason in the
book particular attention has been given to a statistical study of the economic ef-
fectiveness of capital investments and construction by reducing the construction
time and lowering incomplete construction, technical progress and industrialization
of the sector as well as to improving the methodology of calculating and analyzing
the statistical indicators which characterize the result and conditions of the con-
struction organizations' production activities.

The textbook's contents encompass the subjects and questions of a course on capital
construction statistics within the limits of the curriculum of the economic VUZes
and faculties. The subjects of the chapters and their sequence reflect the struc-
ture of the course adopted in the curriculum: the first four chapters are devoted
to capital investment statistics and the remaining chapter to construction statis-
ties.

The author expresses sincere gratitude to the instructors on the statistical chairs
of the Moscow Statistical Economics Instutute who participated in a discussion of
the manuscript, to the instructors of the statistics chair at the Moscow Order of
the Labor Red Banner Management Institute imani Sergo 0rdzhonikidze and to co-
workers fron the section of the Scientific Research Institute for Construction
Organization and Management under the Moscow Order of the Labor Red Banner Construc-

tion Engineer Institute imeni V. V. Kuybyshev for a thorough editing of the text-
book.

ron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OI-HCIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER I: THE CONCEPT OF CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION STATISTICS AND ITS ORGANIZATION
51. The Subjects Studied by Capital Construction Statistics

The continuous growth of social production in our country's national economy is one
of its essential development traits. The growth of Soviet social production and
its material and technical base has occurred due to the 1ccumulation fund with sur-
plus product being its source. The Soviet state through capital investnents has
provided accumulation in the area of creating new factories, mills, mines, elec-
tric plants, railroads and highways, housing, hospitals, sanitoriums, schools and
other projects in the production and nonproduction spheres of the national economy.
Prom 1918 through 1978, l,833.400,000,000 rubles of capital investments were chan-
neled into the national economy and during the Tenth Five-Year Plan alone more than
620 billion rubles will be spent on adding to and replacing fixed capital.

In the creation of the material and technical base an important role has been as-
signed to construction. This can be judged from the following data. During the
Tenth Five-Year Plan the increase in the capacity of electric plants should be ap-
proximately 60—70 million kilowatts. This means that over the five-year plan we
will build power plants with capacity equal to 100 Dneproges [Dnepr Hydropower
Plant] or 13 such as the Krasnoyarsk 635. During the same 5-year period we plan
to build housing with a total usable area of 565-550 million m2 and this is the
equivalent of the available housing in 5 such cities as Moscow, 10 such as Lenin—
grad or 35 such as Gor'kiy. Equal scales and rates of construction are planned in
other sectors of the national economy's production and nonproduction spheres.

In line with the enormous scope and rate of capital construction, a socialist state
is confronted with the need of generalizing economic practices involved in the use
of capital investments and the describing of their effectiveness as well as estimat-
ing the state, results and development of construction. In this generalization an
important role is assigned to capital construction statistics.

Capital construction statistics is a sector of economic statistics. It is based on
the procedures and methods common to this science for studying phenomena and proces-
ses. At the same time, capital construction statistics is an independent science
which differs from the other statistical sectors in its object and subject of study.
Let us examine these important concepts of science.

Capital construction statistics has two objects of study: in the area of capital
investments this is the aggregate of enterprises, organizations and institutions

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

making capital investments, that is. participants in the investment process; in the
area of construction activities this is a sector of material production, that is,
construction. These objects each have independent significance but they are close-
ly interrelated and as a consequence of this within capital construction statistics
two independent parts are formed: capital investment statistics and construction
statistics.

Capital investments are the expenditures channeled into the creation of new fixed
capital, for the expansion and reconstruction of existing in both the production
and nonproduction spheres of the national economy. Statistics studies capital in-
vestments in the broad sense, viewing them as a national economic financial and eco-
nomic concept related to the patterns of socialist expanded reproduction. In ac-
cord with the established planning procedures, capital investments for the acquisi-
tion and construction of fixed capital projects are directly allocated and approved
for industrial and agricultural enterprises, construction, transportation and sup-
ply organizations as well as for ministries, departments, VUZes, hospitals and
other budget-supported institutions. All of them become the holders of capital in-
vestments and at the same time are the legal representatives of the state for which
the fixed capital will be built or acquired in a finished form. The enterprises,
economic organizations and budget-supported institutions which make capital invest-
ments are called in practice the builders or the title holders.

In Studying the aggregate of builders as an object, statistics encompasses only
their activities involving the use of capital investments related to the reproduc—
tion of the means of labor. But capital investment statistics does not examine the
basic activities of the enterprises, organizations and institutions operating in
the role of builders. A significant portion of the aggregate of builders is rep-
resented by the state enterprises, organizations and institutions making state cap-
ital investments. Another portion is formed by the aggregate of cooperative (in-
cluding kolkhozes) and public organizations which invest money for acquiring and
building fixed capital projects. In addition. the individual builders (the public)
building for personal needs is also an object of statistics' study.

Construction as a national economic sector is the second object studied by statis-
tics. Its activities is aimed at the creation of new fixed capital as well as the
expansion. reconstruction and rebuilding of existing fixed capital. The end prod-
uct of construction is production capacity. buildings, installations and other
production- and nonproduction—end projects. Construction has a number of particu-
lar features making it possible to differentiate it from the other sectors of the
national economic production sphere. An essential feature of construction is the
territorial association of its products; the buildings and installations are fixed
objects of fixed capital while the products of industry, agriculture and the other
sectors are movable objects. The production cycle in construction is the longest
and days, weeks, months and even years are used as the unit of measurement of its
duration. ConstruCtion has vividly expressed individual production. The con-
struction site is not fixed, it changes after completing the erection of the proj-
ect while the means of production and workers move to another construction site.

Diverse activities are carried out in construction and these differ in terms of the

purpose and nature of the product to be created, the particular features of the
production process and other features. For this reason within construction as a

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tUK UPI‘ILIAL USE. ONLY

national economic sector distinctions are drawn between subsectors or types of ac-
tivities (production): research (geological prospecting), design-estimate and
construction (construction work).

All types of construction production activities are carried out, respectively, by
research, design and actual construction organizations which in their aggregate
form the sector, that is, construction as an object of statistical study. In terms
of the scale of activity in this sector an essential role is played by construction
work which is based on the construction industry. The construction industry is the
aggregate of contracting construction and installation organizations equipped with
modern means of production and skilled workers for carrying out construction work
using industrial methods. At present the construction industry possesses a diverse
network of state contracting organizations (including rt;s1r-construction), inter-
kolkhoz construction organizations and the construction organizations of the con-
sumer cooperatives and public organizations.

In the sphere of construction work, along with contracting organizations there are
also temporary construction organizations which are set up with the direct labor
method of construction in the form of capital construction sections (0x5) and ad-
ministrations (UKS). Since in organizational terms the OKs and UKS are directly
part of the enterprises and organizations making the capital investments, the des-
ignated aggregate, in essence, is formed by the builders carrying out construction
by the direct labor method. The result of individual construction by the public is
also considered as part of construction work (activity) in the broad sense.

Figure 1.1 shows the structure of construction as an object of study by statistics.

r____________________________________________
Construction

    
   
 
 
 
 

  

Design
estimate
activities

 
   
 

Research
activities

     
  
 

Construction work

    
  
  
 
  
 

  
 

Construc-
tion by

direct
labor
method

  
    
 
 
 

Individual

construc-
tion

 
   

    
  

Construction industry

 

Fig. 1.1. Composition of construction as the object of study by statistics

Thus, capital construction statistics has two objects of study which differ in

terms of their economic content. The uniting of the two different objects into a
single science cannot be considered fully sound. The reason for such a solution to
the question is to be found in the particular features of organizing and accounting
for fixed capital reproduction. In the construction stage capital investments are
made into the designing, manufacturing and acquiring of equipment and into construc-
tion work per se. As a consequence of what has been stated, accounting for capital

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

investments and construction activities is concentrated in the same organizations,
enterprises and institutions, that is, it coincides in time and place. However an
examination of two objects by one science does not mean their merging into a single
object as capital investment statistics and construction statistics are independent
but closely interlinked sectors of economic statistics. From the viewpoint of the
science's content it would be more correct to call "capital construction statistics"
as "capital investment and construction statistics."

52. The Subject, Method and Tasks of Capital Construction Statistics

Capital investments and construction are studied not only by statistics but also by
other economic and technical sciences, for example, construction economics and plan-
ning, construction technology and so forth. The content of each of these sciences
is determined by its subject which differentiates one science from another. Statis-
tics studies the quantitative aspect of economic phenomena in an inseparable link
with their qualitative features which are manifested in their development patterns.

The subject of capital construction statistics is the quantitative expressions and
ratios of mass economic phenomena and processes which arise and develop in the
sphere of fixed capital reproduction which is carried out by capital investments
as well as in construction as a national economic sector under the specific condi-
tions of place and time.

Capital construction statistics works out and scientifically establishes systems of
indicators which reflect the dimensions, directions, structure and effectiveness of
capital investments made into fixed capital reproduction as well as the state, di-
mensions and ratios of labor, material and financial resources of the construction
and design-research organisations, the result of their work, technical progress in
construction, the econonmic effectiveness of construction work and other economic
phenomena.

Political economy and sectorial economics serve as the theoretical basis for capital
construction statistics. In accord with the laws of these sciences, capital con-
struction statistics provides a numerical description of phenomena and processes.
Harxist-Leninist dialectics is the general methodological basis of statistics, as

it is for other social sciences. At the same time capital construction statistics
employs procedures and methods for calculating indicators which are characteristic
for all statistical science. These include the methods of mass observation, statis—
tical groupings, average values. index and balance methods, correlation-regression
analysis and others.

Capital construction statistics is closely tied to capital construction economics.
organization and planning as well as accountancy in construction. Construction
economics examines and formulates the developmental patterns and paths of the sec-
tor and studies the principles of construction organization. its specialization,
combining and concentration and so forth. 0n the basis of the theoretical premises
of sectorial economics. capital construction economics elaborates the indicators
and their systems which in a numerical form characterize the dimensions and rela-
tionships of the economic concepts, the degree of interaction of phenomena and
processes and establishes the boundaries and conditions for employing the statisti-
cal methodology in the study of capital construction. The statistical data are
used by construction economics for the further development of the science.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm unit Ml. UM. UMA’

sources. For these reasons the range of indicators employed in planning and statis
tics, as a rule, coincides. ,At the same time the aggregate of indicators employed
in statistics is significantly greater than the aggregate of planning indicators as
statistics studies phenomena and events which have occurred and many of these could
not be planned ahead of time, for example, the amount of rejected work, unproduc-
tive expenditures and so forth. Capital construction statistics is also linked to
accountancy the data of which serve as the source for obtaining and calculating

many statistical indicators, in particular. censuses and other special statistical
surveys. in order to gain the fullest notion of the content of the subject of capi-
tal construction statistics. let us examine the tasks of this science.

The carrying out and improving of the economic reform in capital construction have
increased the role of statistical economics analysis in the aim of disclosing the
intrasectorial reserves for increasing production, saving expenditures, shortening
construction times, reducing its cost and increasing effectiveness. At present

As was shown above, capital construction statistics consists of two independent
parts, each of which has an independent object and subject of study. For this
reason capital investment statistics and construction statistics, along with com-
mon tasks, also have specific ones determined by the corresponding object of study.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among the basic tasks of capital investment statistics are the following:

1) A study of the volume. structure, direction and concentration of capital in-
vestments and an elucidation of their role in bringing about an acceleration in
scientific and technical progress as well as in the reequipping and reconstruction
of existing production capacity;

2) Supervising the course of carrying out capital investment plans for the depart-
ments. ministries. as well as the sectors and national economy as a whole. The
task of statistics includes not only evaluating plan fulfillment but also elucidat—
ing the soundness of the plan itself, the supply of the planned projects with-
material and monetary resources and the observance of measures which prevent the
scattering of capital investments;

3) Evaluating plan fulfillment for the completion of capacity and fixed capital in
terms of the volume, dates, quality and composition of the projects and the estab-
lishing of reasons for deviation from the plan and changes in the projects to be
put into operation. their capacity and cost;

4) Studying the volume of incomplete construction. its conformity to the planned
level or norm and disclosing instances and the analysis of reasons for the scatter-
ing of capital investments over projects;

5) A description of the dynamics of capital investment volumes, production capaci-
ty put into operation and fixed capital in operation. An important part of this
task is the elaboration of a methodology to calculate the capital investment in-
dexes;

6) A study of capital investment economic effectiveness. This task is a task of
primary importance. In carrying it out, statiscics should improve the system of
indicators which describe actual capital investment effectiveness.

Construction statistics should solve the problems which directly involve the area
of design and research activities and construction work. The central task of con-
struction statistics is to study the entire result of production activities in this
sector and to assess plan fulfillment for construction products. This task con—
tains questions which involve a description of construction products as a national
economic sector as a whole as well as the result of activities carried out by its
component parts, that is. design-research activities and construction work. In
studying the result of construction work a special place is held by the construc-
tion industry's product and. in particular, monitoring the fulfillment of the pro-
duction programs by the construction organizations.

The next task of statistics is to study labor. This encompasses the questions of
labor resources and their use, measuring the level and dynamics of labor produc-
tivity as well as wage characteristics.

A study of the means of production is also a major task of construction statistics.
This involves a group of questions among which an important place is held by the

study of the efficient use of fixed capital and subjects of labor and elucidating
reserves for saving the employed means of production.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A description of technical progress and industrialization in construction is an
important statistical task since the employment of new highly productive equipment
and advanced production and technical methods has a decisive impact on the growth

of labor productivity, the saving of expenditures and the improving of product and
work quality.

A study of the costs of construction products, the ways to reduce these as well as
an examination of the financial state of the construction and design-research or-
ganizations are the final task of statistics.

The designated tasks determine the content and sequence of laying out the theoreti-
cal material ln the textbook's chapters.

§3. The Organization of Capital Construction Statistics in the USSR

Construction, as a national economic sector, was formed only after the Great October
Socialist Revolution. For precisely this reason in pierevolutionary Russia there
was no capital construction statistics either as a sector of scientific knowledge
or as a sector of practical activity. Only scattered information on the construc-
tion of fixed capital projects was gathered by the Central Statistical Couittee
under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The completeness and reliability of this
information were extremely unsatisfactory.

Capital construction statistics, along with the other economic statistics sectors,
arose along with the formation of the socialist state. On 25 July 1918, by a Decree
of the Soviet of People’s Cumissars over the signature of V. I. Lenin there was
ratified the "Regulation Governing State Statistics" which served as the basis for
the creation of the Central Statistical Administration (TsSU). However, during the
period of the reconstruction of the national economy and the establishing of state

S'atistics, that is. up to the 1930's, capital construction statistics did not have
organizational independence.

In line with the elaboration cf the first five-year plan for the development of the
national economy, the leading departments of the nation (the Gosplan, the people's
commissariats and so forth) needed detailed and accurate information on construc—
tion and its resources on a statewide scale. This circumstance served as an impe-
tus for the rise of capital construction statistics in the USSR as a sector of prac-
tical activity of state statistics with corresponding organizational independence.
In 1932, as part of the Central Administration for National Economic Accounting
(TsUNK‘nlI) under the USSR Cosplan, .1 sector was organized for the accounting of

capital work and construction. Subsequently, along with the development of capital
construction in the nation, this area of wotk for state statistics also developed,

as improved and became an important sector in statistics' practical activities.

.\ characteristic feature of statistical practices in the 1930's and 1940's was the
departmental approach to organizing the observation, collecting and processing of
statistical material. with such a system, the elaboration of report data and the
very terms for capital construction was carried out not only by the state statisti-
cal bod ics but also to a significant degree by the USSR people's comissaritts and
departments. However, as of January 1951, new standard reporting forms were intro-
duced for all the nation's construction organizations.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The improvement in the organizational forms ' aanaging capital construction
brought about a further reorganization in acc.;nting and statistics. In 1960, the
USSR Council of Ministers adopted a new regulation governing the USSR TsSU and

this became a Union republic body which provided centralized leadership over ac-
counting and statistics throughout the nation. Since this time the entire elabor-
ation of data. and in particular for capital construction. has been centralized and
concentrated in the state statistical bodies. The USSR TsSU carries out this work
through the Union republic TsSU, the statistical administrations of the oblasts,
krays and autonomous republics as well as the rayon state statistics inspectorates.

At present the Capital Construction Statistics Administration of the USSR TsSU and
analogous bodies in the Union republic TsSU are the leading capital construction
statistics center. The Administration includes capital construction sections or-
ganized along sectorial and functional principles, for example, sections for en-
dustrial construction, housing and municipal construction, contracting and design-
research work, methodology and others. Within the oblast, kray and city statistical
administrations capital construction statistics sections have been set up and these
provide methodological leadership, the preparation of statistical collections, sta-
tistical economics analysis for the party and soviet bodies as well as computer
centers engaged in the collecting of statistical materials, their monitoring, proc-
essing, grouping and sunnarizing of data.

Departmental statistics holds a significant place in capital construction statis-
tics. The Union and Union republic ministries and departments include sections and
sectors which carry cct statistical work. The USSR TsSU provides overall leadership
and control over the organization of departmental statistics.

Finally, in the construction, design and research organizations, the employees of
the planning and other economic sections are engaged in statistical work related to
the collecting of data. the filling out of forms for annual and current reporting
and conducting statistical surveys for the needs of the associations, ministries
and departments.

54. Organizational Forms of Statistical Observation in Capital Construction

Statistical observation as the planned and scientifically organized collecting of
mass data on economic phenomena is carried out in capital construction in accord
with the state statistical tasks. work in the area of obtaining and nonitoring
statistical data is carried out by the city. oblast and kray statistical adminis-
trations and in individual instances also by the central statistical bodies.
Methodological leadership over the organization of statistical observation. that
is, the establishing of data which must be obtained, the procedure, periodicity,
place. time and methods of obtaining them, is carried out by the Capital Construc-
tion Statistics Administration of the USSR and Union republic TsSU.

Statistical observation in capital construction should ensure the obtaining of sci—
entifically sound data needed for drawing up the current and long-range capital in-
vestment and construction plans as well as for monitoring plan fulfillment. The
assembled statistical information should be reliable and fully cover the entire ag-
gregate of studied economic phenomena in capital construction. These demands are
reflected in the observation programs, in the instructions for filling out the
statistical forms as well as in the instructions of the central statistical bodies.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

Capital construction has employed various forms of statistical observation and these
have been of varying significance in the individual historical development states
of the Soviet state. Starting with 1917 and almost up to the end of 1930, a large
portion of the statistical information on capital construction was based on materi-
als of so-called construction registration. Its essence was that each construction
project was registered with the local statistical organization and for this the ap-
propriate statistical form was filled out. This gave the name of the project, the
production capacity of the objects, estimated cost and other information. After
the completion of construction on the same blank additional informatiwn was given
and changes made in the initially indicated information. Construction registra-
tion in essence was not a form of current or periodic observation and it did not
contain a complete coverage of the aggregate of sites and projects and information
about them was not always correct. This form of observation was very primitive and
for this reason could not satisfy the needs of capital construction statistics.

The other part of information on capital construction was collected in conducting
population censuses and various industrial surveys which, as a rule, were organized
by the individual departments and people's conmussariats.

In 1932, as part of the TsUNKhU under the USSR Gosplsn, a sector was organized for
the accounting of capital work and construction. The main task of this sector was
to organize a new form of statistical observation, that is, reporting in capital

construction. This became the basic form for collecting statistical data on capi-
tal construction.

The statistical reporting on capital construction has been systematically improved
and altered in accord with the tasks and directions of national economic development
and with its management and planning. At present, this form of observation has
reached a high level of organization and virtually solves all the basic problems
confronting state statistics. Along with introducing reporting in capital construc-
tion, primary accounting has been systematized in the nation's construction organi-
zations and projects. Subsequently extensive work was carried out to standardize
the primary accounting documents and to introduce them into practice.

Along with reporting in capital construction, specially organized statistical ob-
servation was also employed, that is, censuses, one-shot counts and surveys. In
1932, for the first time in the history of capital construction statistics, using
a program elaborated by the TsUNKhU under the USSR Gosplan and an organizational
plan, a census of the construction industry was carried out. This census assembled
extensive statistizal material on the number and composition of construction organ-
izations, on the auount of work carried out by them and, most importantly, on the
number, composition, capacity and state of the fleet of construction machines in
1932. The cxtensiveness of the program for the construction industry census for a
long time held up the elaboration of its materials and led to a decline in its
timeliness.

Subsequently this form of statistical observation was developed, improved and be~
came an important source of information complementing the basic source of data,
that is, the statistical reporting on capital investments and construction. Among
the most important of this type of work for the national economy we must mention
the censuses for incomplete construction carried out according to a very extensive
survey program, the construction machinery and equipment censuses, the annual ac-
counts of construction-installation organizations, the censuses of inventories of

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

materials and equipment at construction projects, of individual housing construc-

tion. sampling surveys for the length of construction. for the influence of factors
on labor productivity dynamics and others.

One of the particular features in organizing and conducting censuses and surveys in
capital construction is that they are carried out on the basis of data from the
primary and bookkeeping accounting of the construction organizations and projects
(the builders). For this reason in capital construction the censuses have the
nature of and are termed one-shot counts and surveys.

55. Reporting-~The Basic Form of Statistical Observation in Capital Construction

State statistical reporting is the most significant source in terms of importance
and scale (scope) for obtaining information on capital construction. The organiza—
tion and configuration of reporting should conform to the tasks of capital construc-
tion statistics, to the essence of its objects of study, to the forms and principles
of capital construction management, planning and organization.

Considering all these requirements in capital construction statistics traditionally
a system of reporting has developed in which two independent but closely related
groups of forms of reports have clearly been formed. These are for capital invest-
ments and for construction as a national economic sector. In addition, as part of
the construction reporting there is an independent subgroup for design and research
activities.

Reporting for capital investments and for construction differs both in the composi—
tion and nature of the report units as well as in the contents of their survey pro-
grams. At the same time, capital investment statistics and construction statistics
have much in common, for example, the same indicators, the same report units and so
forth.

The initial stage of the given statistical observation is the drawing up of lists of
report units, that is, a list of all the operating enterprises, institutions and or-
ganizations which should submit reporting on their operations to the statistical
bodies and to the superior departments. In capital investment statistics, the basic
report unit is the builder, that is, the enterprise, institution or organization
which is legally empowered by the state to represent the client and carry out the
capital investments. Here each construction project should be entered on the title
lists which are approved in the established procedure and are the official permis-
sion for the legal existence of the construction project and for the builder. The
title lists of the construction projects become permanent planning documents for the
entire construction period.

All industrial, agricultural and transport enterprises, construction. supply and
other organizations as well as ministries, departments and budget-supported institu-
tions having administrative-managerial independence may be granted the right to be
a builder. Such enterprises. institutions and organizations which make capital in-
vestments solely for the acquisition of equipment. machinery and farm equipment
without the involvement of construction are also conditionally considered builders.
They also act as reporting units in a statistical observation.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Builders

__“_l

 

State enterprises,

Cooperative enterprises.

organizations, insti- and public organizations

tutions

 

Builders operating on
independent capital
investment balance

Individual
builders

Builders operating on
balance of basic
operations

 

Contracting Direct-labor Contracting Direct—labor

method method method method

New con- Major con- Major con- Construc- uxs 6 oxs Construc-

struction struction struction tion sites of execu- tion site

(construc- -at existing at opera- of operat- tive com- of operath
ltion direc- enterprises ting enter- ing enter- mittees enterprise
-toratea & organiza- prises prises, or- (uxs, OKS)
Iadministra- tions and (UKS) ganizations

tions institu- 8 institu-

tions (UKS) tions (UKS.

0K8)

 

 

Fig. 1.2. Composition of builders as an object of study by capital
investment statistics

The aggregate of builders is extremely heterogeneous. Certain differences among the
builders, for example, in terms of the forms of ownership, the volume of capital in-
vestments, the method of making them and so forth, are considered in organizing the
reporting. A notion of the composition of builders in terms of features which are
of importance in the organizing of a statistical observation and, in particular, in
reporting, can be gained from Fig. 1.2.

The groups of units given in the diagram, that is, builders, submit various forms

of reports according to the numbering and content of the programs which character-
izc the activities of the builders in the area of capital investment use.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A builder's capital investment plan may include not one but rather several construc-
tion sites. The sites can be large numbering scores of projects or small consisting
of one or several projects. The large construction sites of the ministries and de-
partments are usually made separate in administrative-management terms, that is,
they are put on an independent balance sheet for the capital investments and they
form a site directorate or construction administration. Such sites become inde-
pendent report units.

Below we have given a list of the basic forms of capital investment reporting as
submitted by the builders for a year.

No 1 (builder)
No 7-ks

No Z-ks

Appendix to Form
No Z-ks

Appendix 1 to Form
No 2-ks

Appendix 2 to Form
No Z-ks

Appendix 3 to Form
No Z-ks

Appendix to Form

Balance sheet for capital investments
Report on capital investment financing

Report on fulfillment of plan for completion of
capacity, fixed capital and capital investment plan

Production capacity and estimated construction cost
of enterprises and projects in backlog

Report on construction cost of housing and civil
projects

Report on capital investments for measures to protect
and rationally utilize natural resources

Statement on completion of fixed capital, capital
investments and housing construction in territorial
breakdown

Report on quality of construction projects put into

No l-ks and Form
No 2-ks

operation

In addition to the listed forms, in a number of instances the builder submits spe-
cialized reporting forms on capital investments. for example. Form No Z-ks (agricul-
ture) "Report of Agricultural Enterprise on Fulfillment of Plan for Completion of
Capacity, Fixed Capital and Capital Investment Plan." The standard forms of peri-
odic reporting for capital investments. as a rule, coincide in terms of names, num-
bering and basic indicators with the annual reporting, but its survey program is
significantly narrower than the annual.

Construction reporting is more diverse than that for capital investments, for it en-
compasses various forms of construction activities as an object of statistics (see
Table 1.1) In accord with the sectorial construction structure. two reporting sub-
groups have traditionally existed: for the activities of the construction organiza-
tions and of the design and research organizations.

Reporting on construccion activities should dncompass all its areas where construc-
tion per ae is carried out independently of the method, that is, the contracting
construction method1 and the direct labor method. The activities of the population

 

‘Tle contracting method encompasses all construction organizations and enterprises
which carry out construction-installation and other work under contract. Industri-
al enterprises which perform contracting work, like the enterprises carrying out
construction by the direct labor method, are not included in the system of the con-
struction industry.

13

IWDR OFFICIAL USE2CNVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600020058-1

a VA ue's'u use. not. URL!

in individual construction are not reflected in the reporting]
counted for by a specially organized observation, the annual o

   
 
 
   
  

      

Contra
Constr
Organi

Builders
(Direct
Labor

Method

Name of Reporting Form

      

  
    

'Balance sheet for basic
operations of contracting
organization

No l
(contractor)

Appendices 1, Appendix to balance sheet

2 and 2a to of contracting organization
Form No 1

Form No 3 Movement of charter capital
Form No 10 Movement of financing money

(construction) and special funds

Form No 11 Report on availability and
(construction) movement of fixed capital
and amortization fund

Form No 12 Presence and composition of

(construction) fleet of construction
machinery on balance sheet
of reporting organization

Form No 20 Profit and loss
(construction)

Form No l-ks Report on fulfillment of
plan for completing capacity
and plan for contracting work

Form No Z-ks Report on fulfillment of plan
for completion of capacity of
fixed capital and capital in-
vestment plan

Form No 3-: Report on fulfillment of
labor plan in construction

Form No 2-3 Report on cost of construc-
tion and installation work

Form No é-ks Report on fulfillment of plan
for design and research work

Form No ll-ks Report of interkolkhoz con-
scruction organizations on
fulfillment of plan for com-
pletion of capacity and con-
tracting plan

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500020058-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Within the contracting construction organizations, in terms of the type of owner-
ship of the means of production, a distinction is drawn between the state, coopera-
tive and public organization enterprises. Reporting for the construction industry
is organized in a corresponding manner. The basic production elements of the state
organizations in the construction industry are the construction and installation
trusts, the housing construction combines (DSK), the plant construction combines
(ZSK) and the rural construction combines (SSK). As a rule, these are covered by
the Regulation Governing a Socialist State Production Enterprise. The above-listed

contracting organizations and combines have been adopted in construction statistics
as the basic report units.

Trusts are ordinarily made up of construction and installation administrations, of-
fices, construction detachments and other subunits which are termed the primary con-
tracting construction organizations. Like the trusts, they are given administrative
and managerial independence. These self-financing construction subdivisions of the
trusts are also considered report units in construction statistics. Hith such a
system for organizing the report units for study in statistics, the reporting of

the trusts will always be summary in relation to the reports of the primary organi-
zations.

The system of trusts and their subordinate primary construction organizations is
part of the departments organized along territorial lines (Glavmosstroy [Main Admin-
istration for Housing and Civil Engineering Construction in Moscow City], Glavlenin-
gradstroy [Main Administration for Housing, Civil Engineering and Industrial Con-
struction of the Leningrad City Executive Committee] and so forth), along sectorisl
lines as well as along territorial-saccorial lines together. In a number of in-
stances, the statistical bodies receive summary reports from the ministries and de-
partments (the reporting of which is not centralized) and this significantly facil-
itates their work in summarizing the statistical data.

For obtaining information on construction acvitivies of enterprises carrying out
construction by the direct labor method, these builder enterpris's or more precise-
ly their capital construction sections and enterprises are adopted as the report
units. This is caused by the fact that in the given instance the builder, simultan-
eously with the function of the client, carries out the function of the construction
organization in performing the work. The direct labor method of construction, as a
consequence of the temporary nature of activity, does not create the conditions for
industrial construction. For this reason its employment is justified for small
amounts of construction and installation work or in instances when it is difficult
to carry out the work by contracting organizations.

A majority of the builders, regardless of the method of carrying out the work, in
the form of the 0K5 and UKS perform the functions of general management and leader-
ship of construction. These functions consist in coordinating the activities of

the design-research and construction—installation organizations and the industrial
enterprises manufacturing equipment for the construction sites. In addition, the
builder accounts for the expenditure of capital investments for the creation and
acquisition of fixed capital and for putting it into operation. Thus, the builder,
in terms of the nature of the activities performed by him in the reproduction of

fixed capital, acts as a report unit in the statistical study not only of capital
investments but also of construction as a national economic sector. However, the

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report units in construction statistics

Design-research Contracting con-

organizations struction organiza- Builders
tions

 

 
     
  
   

Cooperative and
public organi-

   

State organizations

 

Interkolkhoz

Trusts organizations

Primary construction organizations (construction admini-
strations, construction-installation administrations,
installation administrations, mobile mechanized columns,
construction trains and so forth)

Design Design- Research Builders
institutes research organiza- using direct

Builders per-
forming con-

organiza- tions labor method struction

tions (UKS, 0K8)

leadership
(organization)
functions

   

Fig. 1.3. Composition of report units in construction
statistics

builder does not submit reporting on capital investments and construction separate-

ly but rather together and this is completely justified in practical terms, for ex-
ample, Form No Z-ks and the appendices to it.
In the statistics of design and research activities. the design and research organ-
izations are used as the report units when these operate with the rights of cost
accounting and work out the necessary documents for construction. In practice these
are usually named institutes for designing and engineering-research organizations
(Promstroyproyekt [State Planning Institute for General Construction and Sanitary—

Engineering Planning of Industrial Enterprises], Gipromez [State All-Union Insti-
tute for the Planning of Metallurgical Plants] and others).

The composition of report units for construction statistics by types is shown in
Fig. 1.3. The report units of each of the groups given in the diagram present
statistical reporting according to the forms and programs established for them and
determined by the functions performed by them in construction. The composition of
construction reporting as a whole (and for the designated forms of the reports to a
certain degree also the conten; of their programs) can be judged from the list of
basic forms of annual reporting (see Table 1.1).

All questions related to the organization of reporting (composition, periodicity.
dates of submission and so forth) are settled by the Methodology Section of the
Capital Construction Statistics Administration under the USSR TsSU. The reporting
provided for in the list is approved by the USSR TsSU jointly with the USSR Ministry
of Finances, the USSR Gosstroy and other involved departments.

17

FOR 0FT1C1AL USEICNNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER II: THE STATISTICAL STUDY OF THE VOLUME, COMPOSITION AND DYNAMICS OF
CAPITAL INVESTMENTS

51. The Concept and Technological Composition of Capital Investments

In the USSR fixed capital is reproduced chiefly by capital investments. The aggre-
gate of expenditures going to create productive and nonproductive fixed capital in
the national economy is termed capital investments. Statistics studies capital in-
vestments not only as a financial category but primarily as a many-sided process of
fixed capital reproduction. Several production sectors of the national economy are
involved in this process, but it is chiefly construction and industry.

In terms of the nature of the expenditures included in them and their purpose, capi-
tal investments are extremely heterogeneous. Depending upon the structure and the
specific features of the fixed capital to be created, in varying proportions capital
investments include expenditures on research, designing and construction-
installation work to erect the buildings and structures, expenditures to purchase
equipment and so forth. For this reason statistics should primarily describe the
production-technical or, as they say, the technological structure of the assets in-
vested into the creation of fixed capital.

A study of the technological structure of capital investments is of importance for
coordinating the capital investment plans with the development plans of all the
national economic sectors, for setting the needs of construction for material,
labor and monetary resources. in estimating capital investment effectiveness and in
studying other problems.

In the technological composition of capital investments. a distinction is made be-
tween the following types of expenditures.

For design and research work. These include only expenditures on individual design-
ing and the engineer and research work to build the fixed capital projects and com-
plexes. Expenditures on geological prospecting to establish mineral resources as

well as for working out the standard plans of buildings and installations, the
projects for regional planning and development of cities and others not related to
construction are financed directly from the state budget and not from captial in-
vestments. Theoretically these expenditures should be accounted for in determining
the overall amount of reproduced fixed capital, that is, related to the capital in-

vestments o

18

FOR OFIHCJAI.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For construction work. Expenditures on this work comprise the most significant
share of capital investments. Among construction work is all the work related to
the erection, expansion, reconstruction and restoring of buildings and installs-
tions as envisaged in the plans, for example, drilling work, the digging of founda-
tion pits, the laying of foundations and building walls, the installation of metal
and reinforced concrete structural elements of buildings and installations, the

work of installing sanitarybtechnical equipment, the landscaping of territory and
other work.

For work to install equipment. In the installation of equipment is put the work
related to installing and assembling production, power and other equipment and pro-
duction structural elements, the bringing in of utilities, insulation work and so
forth.

Hork related to the installation of equipment which is a part of the buildings and
installations is not considered in the given type of capital investments.

For the acquisition of equipment requiring installation. This includes production,
power, transport and other equipment which can be put into operation only after its
assembly and attaching to supports, for example, steam turbines, electric genera-
tors, metal-cutting equipment. textile looms, printing equipment and much else. Ex-
penditures for this equipment comprise a high proportional amount.

For the purchasing of equipment not requiring installation. In terms of the nature
of use, this equipment does not require assembly, attachment or other installation
work, for example, motor vehicles, internal combustion engine and battery operated
plant trucks, bulldozers, excavators and other types of equipment. This type of
capital investment in planning and statistical practices also makes separate pro-
vision for expenditures on equipment which is not included in the construction esti-
mates. This includes equipment for replacing worn out machines or adding to the
fleet of machines at an existing enterprise as well as the equipment which, in
accord with the adopted procedure for elaborating the plans, is not included in the
construction estimates.

For production tools and supplies. This includes all types of production tools as
well as rapidly worn out and inexpensive articles expenditures on the acquisition
of which are included in the capital investment volume for the construction esti-
mate.

For the purchasing of draft animals, that is, the purchasing of adult draft animals
(horses, mules and so forth) which are included as fixed capital.

Expenditures which do not increase the cost of fixed capital. These include expend-
itures on the training of operational personnel, forestry and land use measures, for
totally cancelled construction and installation work ("throw-away" work) and others.
A majority of these expenditures is not involved in construction but from the
national economic viewpoint they are inevitable.

Other capital expenditures. These include expenditures on the purchasing of struc-
tures from cooperative organizations and kolkhozes, for resettlement from areas al-
located for construction, for the support of the administration and technical super-
vision snd for the planting and raising of perennial crops (orchards, preserves and
so forth).

l9

FOR4OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
I'UK UH’ILIAI. USI'. ONLY

The technological composition of capital investments is periodically revised in
planning and statistical practices. For example, expenditures on design and re-
search work were not included as part of capital investments during the period from
July 1950 through October 1959. since during the designated period the activities
of the design and research organizations were financed directly from the state
budget. Up to 1950, capital investments did include expenditures on geological
prospecting as well as for forming the producing herd [of animals]. The change

in the capital investment composition must be considered in studying the dynamics
of its volume.

Capital expenditures on all types of works and equipment requiring installation
have come to be termed capital work while expenditures on equipment (except that re-
quiring installation), production tools. supplies and draft animals are considered
capital acquisitions. In planning and statistical practices. the technological com-
position of capital investments is represented by three consolidated groups (Table
11.1). Here in the statistical reporting within the first group special provision
is made for expenditures on the installation of equipment; as part of the second

group expenditures on equipment not included in the construction estimates; in the
third group, expenditures on design and research.

Table 11.1

      
    
 
   
 
 
 

Seventh
Five-Year Five-Year Five-Year Five-Year
Plan

Types of Capital Investments

  

Construction-installation work
Equipment, tools. supplies
Other capital work and expenditures

32

Capital investments do not include expenditures on the major overhaul of fixed cap-

ital objects, although the construction organizations carry out this. This is due
to the fact that. in the first place, as a result of a major overhaul only the pre-

viously created consumer value is restored and, secondly. a major overhaul is car-
ried out from a certain portion of the amortization fund which is earmarked for the
partial rebuilding of the fixed capital.

The data given in the table on the technological structure of USSR capital invest-
ments (in percent) show that a predominant portion of the capital investments
(around two-thirds) goes to carry out construction-installation work, approximately
one-third for equipment. supplies and so forth, and here one can clearly trace a
tendency for a rise in the proportional amount of expenditures for equipment. This

tendency means an improvement in the technological structure of capital investments
and leads to an increased proportional amount of the active part of fixed productive
capital in the national economic sectors and, consequently, to a rise in the eco-
nomic effectiveness of capital investments.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

52. Indicators of the ﬁzpital Investment Volume

In studying the use of capital investments, in planning and statistics use is made
of a number of indicators which reflect the economic features and result of this

process, starting out with research and designing of the projects up to their com-
pletion. Among the most important of them are the indicators describing the capi-
tal investment volume, the investment structure, incomplete construction, the com-

pletion of capacity and fixed capital, the readiness of projects and construction
sites, capital investment effectiveness and others.

The capital investment volume is a generalizing indicator which in monetary terms
describes the amount of expenditures on fixed capital reproduction by capital con-
struction and for the acquisition of equipment not included in the construction es-
timates and plans. Being a cost indicator, this is formed as the total of financial
expenditures going for the creation and acquisition of fixed capital and. thus,
characterizes the result of using the capital investments. The economic sense of
this indicator makes it possible to successfully apply it not only in studying
fixed capital reproduction but also a nation's economic potential, the directions,
pace and scale of the development and placement of the material and technical base
for all the national economic sectors.

The capital investment volume is planned for the national economy as a whole broken
dcun for the sectors, ministries, departments and so forth, down to the individual

builders. The task of statistics is to establish the actual amounts of capital in—
vestments and in establishing control over the fulfillment of the current and long-
range capital investment plans on the various organizational levels. For carrying

out this task it is essential first of all to determine the actually completed cap-
1 ta 1 inves tment volume .

As was stated above, the builders are the immediate disposers of the capital invest-
ments. Capital investment accounting is concentrated in the technical supervision

sections and the bookkeeping offices of the builders (OKs and UKs). For this reason
the builders are the primary report units in capital construction statistics and
they submit data on the completed volume of capital investments using the estab-
lished reporting forms. Control over the fulfillment of capital investment plans
starts with the builders.

The amount of capital investments is expressed by the estimated cost and this is set
in the designing of the projects and installations for fixed capital. For each con-
struction site, along with a plan, an estimate is drawn up and this contains infor-
mation on the monetary outlays for creating each individual object and the entire
project as a whole, that is, the estimated cost of the objects and the project.

Here the monetary outlays are determined for the types of capital investments in

accord with the specific features of the fixed capital to be built or acquired.

The setting of the estimated cost of construction, installation, design and research
work is based on the methodological provisions formulated in the Construction Stand-
ards and Rules and is marked by labor intensiveness and complexity. A detailed ex—

position of the methodology for calculating the estimated cost of this work has been
given in the chapter on construction product of which all the above-listed work is a
component part. Here we will merely point out that the estimated cost of

r\

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Olt (WHOM. "SI". ONLY

construetion-installation work is set by estimate rates for the expenditure of pro-
ductiun resources, by the wholesale prices and rates for transporting materials
put in effect on 1 January 1969 considering the increased wages of construction
workers_in 1970 and the reduction factors for construction-installation work as of
1 January 1975,, the corrections to reduce the rates and the change in the prices
for individual types of materials and equipment.

The methods for determining the estimated cost of production equipment differ de-
pending upon whether its acquisition is related to construction or not. Thus, the
eatimated cost of equipment for projects under construction is set from the whole-
sale industrial prices on 1 January 1973 considering its delivery, storage, crating
and assembly at the estimate rates and charges for preparatory-warehousing and
transport expenditures. The cost of equipment and machines not included in the
construction estimates in the completed capital investment volume is accounted for

"—1“. - adopted in drawing up the capital investment plan. To a certain
degree this marks a dev scion .

 
 
 

The estimated cost of design and research work is determined in the des gn
mates on the basis of special manuals for consolidated rates which contain the
price lists for this work. The estimated cost of other capital work is set accord-
ing to rates on the basis of the design data.

Capital investments are an interval indicator characterizing their volume over a
report period. The actually completed capital investment volume includes the esti-
mated cost of all capital work produced during the report period, the acquisitions
as well as all other capital expenditures made from capital investments. Here, from
the viewpoint of accounting, the types of capital investments which are considered
actually completed are those which satisfy the set requirements for the state and
completeness of the corresponding work. acquisitions and expenditures and have been
formulated in approved documents of internal project accounting regardless of the
level of completeness of the projects under construction.

The heterogeniety of the technological composition of capital investments predeter—
mines the use of various methods for calculating the types of capital investments.
‘l‘hese .‘ tdamental provisions are given in the Construction Standards and Principles
and in the capital construction financing rules. -

the principles of incorporating the cost of construction product in thecompleted
capital investment volume are correlated to the adopted payment systems between the
hui lders nnd executors and, in particular, with payments for the finished project

and work stage without intermediate payments. The builder considers as completed
v-npital investments the cut of only that construction-installation work which re-

I. .tc-s to completed prm: ate and work stages as formulated in the proper documents.
we}: official documents for :1 complete project is the statement of Form No 2 and
the statement of Pow: No 2a [or a completed construction stage. In addition, as an
L'XCt-ption the completed capital investment volume may include the value of work
where the volume. nature and methods of executing this work become clear only in
the course of construction. In these instances the work is accepted by the clients
according to the percentage of technical completeness (the statement of Form No 2b)

and for completed structural elements and consolidated types of work (the statement
of Form No 2c). With monthly payments in these instances the information of Form

No 3 is employed.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
vestments. In the first place, for the construction organizations there was a

sharp rise in the volume of incomplete construction work, that is, work on projects
and work stages that were incomplete and not turned over to the client and thus
kept on the balance sheets for the basic. operations of the organizations. Naturally
this amount of work could not help but be reflected in the capital invest-eats.
Secondly, in payments for completed projects and work stages a significant portion
of them could have been conpleted not in the report but rather in the preceding
periods. With the turning over of completed projects and work stages to the build-

plete production within the volume of capital investments. Should the completed
amount of capital investments include the work done on completed projects, stages or
of the cost of the work
th. The solution to these questions de—
ta I a In t

 
     
   

capital. In terms of the construction industry this means that the capital invest-

report period for all projects regardless of the level of their completeness. In
accord with this principle it is possible to determine the capital investment vol-
ume since each month the builders receive information from the contracting organi-
zations on the amount of work carried out in the report period for all inconplete
projects (the information of Form No 3).

However, in capital investment planning, as a consequence of a number of circum-
stances incomplete work is not always taken into account. It may also happen that

Such a solution to the question cannot be viewed as successful, since, in the first
place, it takes into account only the conditions of comparability between the actual
and planned capital investment indicators; secondly, there is no correlation to the
acceptance of incomplete production by the client and this disrupts the methodolog-

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

same procedure as with the contracting method, only these calculations are made by
the builder or its 0K8 and UKS.

The carrying out of capital investments for installation work is accounted for with
certain deviations from the general rules. The estimated cost of work related to
the installation of equipment is included in the completed capital investment volume
if the installation of machine tools, machinery, units and so forth has been com-
pleted and formally accepted. With the installation of large units and machines,
for example the turbines or boilers at GRES or rolling mills, the estimated cost of
the work related to installing parts of the units which have been formally accepted

by the appropriate statements is accounted for in the completed capital investment
volume.

Design and research work is accounted for in the capital investment volume accord-
ing to a methodology analogous to the one examined for construction-installation
work. In instances when payments with builders are made for completed plans for
projects or work stages, the statement of Form No la is used as the basis for includ-
ing their value in the capital investment volume. Information on the value of de-
sign and research work relating to incomplete projects and stages is submitted by
the executor to the builder in the information of Form No 3.

maria installation is accounted for in the com-

pleted capital investment volume under the condition t a

been installed. The actual fact of the beginning or completion of installation is
established by any acceptance document or by the inventorying of installation work.
The estimated cost of equipment not requiring installation as well as tools and sup-
plies are accounted for in the completed capital investment volume after they have
been delivered to their destination, usually to the construction site, and after
they have been accepted by the builder's bookkeeping office, that is, with the
presence of a statement, bill or invoice on the acceptance of the given equipment.
The official documents drawn up in the established order (statements, lists, bills
and so forth) are the grounds for including other capital work and expenditures in
the completed capital investment volume.

Depending upon the nature of fixed capital reproduction, the volume of capital in-
vestments can be determined, in the first place, as an indicator describing the
capital investment volume to be carried out through construction; secondly, as an
indicator describing the capital investment volume for the purchase of completed
fixed capital without the involvement of construction: in still other instances, as

the total capital investment volume for the creation and acquisition of fixed capi-
tal.

Let us give an example which illustrates the methodology of calculating the capital
investment volume. Let us assume that during the report year a capital investment
plan has been established for a machine building plant totaling 1.58 million rubles
and the volume of construction-installation work is to be included only for the
projects completed during this year for their full cost. Over the report year the
plant's OKS has made the following capital expenditures (Table II.2).

2/.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Name of Capital Work, Acquisitions and Expenditures

I. For plant reconstruction and expansion
1. Construction-installation work for erecting

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

building of machine shop (second stage)
Including work carried out in report year

2. 12 03-2 machine tools accepted by warehouse for

installation

3. Work of installing 12 DS-2 machine tools

6. Construction—installation work carried out in
report year for incomplete projects and stages

5. Expenditures on the training of operational

personnel

_—_——-ffT7EiﬁH3!IIEH‘Df-eqnipmone-uuLananl

struction estimates

1. 14 battery operated trucks accepted by warehouse

-s outside con-

2. 3 trucks accepted by garage

3. Equipment and supplies acquired for nursery
(under Article 12 of the budget)

III. Designing of reconstructed shop

IV. Major overhaul on main plant building

Table 11.2

Statement
No 2a

Acceptance
statement
Statement
of incom-
plete in-
stallation
Information
of Form

No 3

Bill

   

Invoice
Acceptance
statement

Bill

Statement
No 4

Statement
No 2

  

  

 
      
      
         
     
   
     
     
     
   
 
   
   
     
   
    
    
    
    
   

1,650
380

36

1.8

280

1.6

24.4

5.2
88

166

The total volume of capital investments as the total value of all the capital work
actually carried out in the report period, the purchases and other capital expendi-

tures will be:

380+36+1.8+280+1.6+7.8+24.lo+88 - 819,600 rubles.

The actually completed capital investment volume in terms of the planning procedure
adopted by the builder as a whole equals:

1,450+36+1.6+88

1,607,800 rubles,

while the percentage of the capital investment plan fulfillment will be, respective-

ly:

1,607.8 - 100‘ _ 101.76;

1,580

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the volume of capital investments to be made by capital construction equals:
l,450-+36‘+1.6-+88 - 1,575,600 rubles;

the volume of capital investments to be made by purchasing outside the construction
estimates equals:

7.81-24.4 - 32,200 rubles.

According to the established planning procedures the capital investment volume does
not account for a number of expenditures also made for the acquisition and creation
of fixed capital but paid for out of other financing sources. These include ex-
penditures on the acquisition of equipment and supplies by state institutions under
Article 12 of the budget classification, for the planting of forests and shelter
belts. for the forming of the basic livestock herd, major overhauls and certain
others. As a consequence of what has been stated above, the need arises to define
the volume of all outlays on the reproduction of fixed capital, that is, the plan-
ned capital investments plus the expenditures not reflected in the capital invest-
ment plan. Thus, in the USSR, over the period from 1918 through 1978, the capital
investment volume was 1,833,400,000,000 rubles. and considering all expenditures on
fixed capital reproduction, 2,023.000,000.000 rubles. Around 10 percent of all ex-
penditures on fixed capital is for outlays not accounted for as part of capital in-
vestments.

1n the given example (see Table 11.2), the actual amount of expenditures on fixed
. , sncin sources was: 1,607.81—5.2+-166 - 1,777,000
rubles.

53. Basic Groupings in Capital Investment Statistics

The grouping method assumes important significance in studying many questions of
capital investment statistics and primarily in aggregating the builders' data and
in assessing the fulfillment of capital investment plans. The capital investment
groupings make it possible to gain a notion of the diversity of the fixed capital
reproduction process, to detect the formed and insipient forms of this process, to
describe the structure of the studied object using features expressing the qualita-
rive features of fixed capital reproduction under the conditions of the socialist
manngenwnt of the economy as weil as carry out other tasks of economics and statis-
ELCS.

Let us examine the basic grnupings employed in summarizing, in planning and super-
vising the fulfillment of capital investment plans. From the national economic
ulnndpuint among the must important are the capital investment groupings by eco-
unmic purpose, national economic sectors and then for subsectors and types of pro-
duction. for the direction, forms of ownership, for the financing sources and for
other features. For a correct understanding of each type of grouping it is essen-
tial to disclose its purpose, the essence of the grouping features. the nature of
the aggregate and the methodological features of the groupings.

or great interest in studying the economic development of a nation and the conform-
ity of this dcvelopnent to the economic and political tasks posed in the given
pvriud is a Classifiunllun nr the capital investments. This is a sort of complex

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFNHAI.USEGDNLY

grouping formed according to several economic features: according to the spheres
and sectors of the national economy, the subsectors, types of production and activ-
ity. In terms of the national economic spheres, two groups are formed: capital
investments into production-end projects and capital investments into nonproduction
projects. Among the production-end projects are those which are involved in creat-
ing any products and production services, for example, power plants, mines, rail-
roads and so forth. The nonproduction projects are destined for serving state inr
stitutions and public organizations, the cultural, educational and other needs of
the public, for example, housing, schools, theaters, hospitals and so forth.

Capital investments into the production and nonproduction spheres of the national
economy are in turn allocated over the national economic sectors. In the first in-
stance these are industry, agriculture, transportation and other sectors, and in

the second instance these are housing construction, municipal construction and other
sectors. Subsequently the capital investments of each national economic sector are
distributed in terms of types of production and activity.

The designated complex capital investment grouping has been organized in accord with
the national classifier of national economic sectors as approved in 1972. Its ap-
plicatnxlhas made it possible to supervise the observance of correct proportions in
national economic development and ensure the more rapiu development of the leading
production sectors and the systematic rise in the material and cultural level of

the workers.

The allocating of capital investments over the sectors of their classification is
ordinarily carried out in the process of summarizing the statistical data. Here
not the capital expenditures and not the builders are subjected to grouping but

2-ks the information can be found for the construction projects as require or

this grouping. In instances when the construction project consists of a number of
installations which differ in terms of economic purpose or sectorial affiliation,
these are classified in one or another sector or group according to the predominant
purpose of the project as a whole

From what has been stated it follows that a construction site is a consolidated unit
of an aggregate which in the grouping will lead to an inaccurate allocation of the
capital investments in terms of sectorial purpose. For this reason in the given
capital investment grouping it is advisable to use an individual construction proj-
ect as a unit of the aggregate. However, the appropriate data cannot be found in
the reporting and they can be gained from the accounting carried out by the build-
ers. In order to fill out this grouping, it is essential to formulate precise sta-
tistical concepts of the construction site and the construction project. By the
construction site in planning and statistical practices one understands the aggre-
gate of construction projects the erection, expansion and reconstruction of which
are carried out according to a single plan and estimate. For example, construction
sites include the construction of a power plant. plant, mine, sanitorium and so
forth. A construction project is considered to be a separate standing building or
installation with all related equipment, additions. utilities for the erection of
which a plan and estimate have been drawn up.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
D'UK UPIILIAL Ubl'. UNLY

Also known in the practice of a statistical smmmary is a grouping of capital invest
ments by the areas of fixed capital reproduction, and as a consequence of this it
is also termed a reproduction grouping. In terms of purpose. all capital invest-
ments are divided into the following groups: New construction, expansion, recon-

struction, technical reequipping of operating enterprises and the maintaining of ex-
isting capacity.

The erection of buildings, installations, enterprises and so forth is considered to
be new construction (a new construction site) when this is carried out at new con-
struction sites according to the initially approved plans, for example, new mines,
power plants, plants and so forth. The expansion of operating enterprises means
the building of new shops, installations, stages and so forth at operating enter-
prises, for example, a new assembly shop at a motor vehicle plant. The reconstruc-

prises, for example, the reequipping of a foundry for employing new piece-casting
technology. The technical reaquipping of operating enterprises includes the carry-
ing out of a range of technical measures provided for by the technical development
plan for introducing new equipment, for mechanizing and automating existing produc-
tion as well as for replacing old worn out equipment with new, more productive and
economic equipment. The maintaining of capacity at operating enterprises includes
measures to replace fixed capital which has been withdrawn as a consequence of com-
plete wearing out and decrepitness. In this grouping the construction site must be
Considered as the unit of the aggregate and this facilitates the summarizing of
capital investments using the reporting data.

In the various historical stages of the nation's development, the party and govern-
ment have given varying significance to one or another area of capital investments.

At the present stage of our nation's economic development, a large portion of the
cap ta . e n t ... ical ree ui ing of
existing enterprises thereby making it possible to obtain the greatest economic

effect with the same expenditures.

Under LL- --niitions of a socialist state, the grouping of capital investments by
forms of ownership is of important significance. According to this principle, a
distinction is made between the capital investments of the state enterprises and
organizations, the cooperative and public organizations and by the public for in-
dividual construction. This grouping is made by the data of the builders which
legally represent one or another form of ownership.

but also in studying their reproduction structure by formation sources and the role

oi nntlnnal income and the amortization fund in fixed capital reproduction. Among
the basir sources of assets for capital investments are: funds from the state bud-

not (the centralized source) and various noncentralized financing sources (the
funds of enterprises and the amortization fund). In addition to these groupings,
data on capital investments are summarized in a territorial breakdown (for the re-
publics, oblasts and so forth), in terms of subordination (to the ministries, de-
partments) and by forms of subordination (Union. Union republic, republic).

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
56. Methods of Studying the Dynamics of the Capital Investment Volume

For studying changes in the capital investment volume over time or space. statis-

tics employs the index method. The aggregate formula for the index of the capital
investment volume has the following form:

tqlpc.
zﬂoPcm '

 

I

where qo and q1--capital work and purchases in physical units, respectively, in the
base and report period;

pcm--estimate prices taken for comparison.

The observance of comparability of the compared levels is s fundamental methodolog-
ical question for constructing the time series and for calculating the index of the
capital investment volume. This is achieved by meeting two basic requirements: in
the first place, the composition of capital investments in terms of the types of
compared periods should be the same; secondly, the capital investments of the com-
pared periods should be expressed in the same (comparable) estimate prices.

In order to bring the composition of capital investments to a comparable form, one
should proceed in the following manner. From the capital investment volume of the
preceding period (periods), those types of investments are excluded which accord-
ing to the adopted planning procedures are not entered as part of them for the re-
port date. Conversely, to the capital investment volume of the previous period
(periods) one should add those types of investments which according to the adopted
planning procedure are part of the capital investments on the report data but were
not considered as part of them in the previous period (periods). In instances when
the necessary information is not available, only those capital investment elements

For reducing the capital investment volumes to a comparable form from the viewpoint
of prices it is essential to recalculate them in estimated prices adopted for the
comparison. In statistical practices the capital investment volumes are recalcu-
lated by estimated price indexes (previously these were called conversion factors)
which ordinarily are set for the basic types of capital investments, including:
construction-installstion work, equipment which does and does not require installa-
tion and design-research work. The estimated price index is calculated from the
formula of the aggregate index:

qupclﬂl

I .—
Y qup¢m°

where p m and p --new and previous estimated prices.
c] “'0

The price index is ordinarily determined for the year preceding the year the new
estimated prices come into effect. and for this information on capital investments
in the old and new estimated prices is given in Form No 2-ks or a special form.
Using these data. the price indexes are calculated for the types of capital invest-
ments broken down for the ministries, republics and so forth. In statistical

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-UK Ufl'lt'lAI. USE UNI."

practices the recalculating of the capital investments in estimated prices used for
the comparison is frequently done by multiplying the volume of the given type of
capital investments by the appropriate estimated price index. Theoretically, sucha
calculation is not beyond reproach as the requirements of methodological compara-

bility are violated. But the use of other procedures leads to even greater condi-
tionality.

It is possible to calculate the index of the capital investment volume directly us-
ing the above-given formula without any adjustments and constraints over a period
of time that the same estimated prices are in effect and under conditions of a
stable composition of capital investments according to the adopted planning pro-
cedure. For calculating the index of the capital investment volume when either
changes do occur, it is essential: in the first place, to bring the technological
composition of the capital investments to a comparable form; secondly, to establish
the estimated price indexes for each type of capital investments; thirdly, using the
estimated price indexes to recalculate the capital investment volume for a compar-
able composition in estimated prices adopted for the comparison; fourthly, using the
above-given formula to calculate the index of the capital investment volume.

During the 1960's and 1970's. the composition of capital investments was not changed
and for this reason the methodology for calculating the indexes of the capital in-
vestment volume was simplified. However, during these years there were repeated
general or partial changes in the estimated prices and this somewhat complicated
the calculating of the indexes and a comparison of the time series for the capital
investment volume. In these instances, the capital investment volumes in estimated

prices adopted for the comparison (usually current prices) are recalculated by the
chain method, that is. according to the formula:

Qpc =1 on ' IPl ' 1P2...,

where Qpc--the capital investment volume of the base period recalculated in com-
parable estimated prices;

on--the capital investment volume of the base period in estimated prices of
this period;

1p], lpp, ...—-estimnted price indexes for the corresponding time segments of the
' overall period.

Table 11.3 gives an example illustrating the methodology for calculating the index
of the capital investment volume using data for one of the RSPSR oblasts.

The volume of capital investments (col. 7) was established by multiplying the data
nr rnls. &, 5 and 6. The index of the capital investment volume in 1978, in com-

purisun with 1953. will be: 5133541“ -100 - 489:. Since there are no data on the

 

expenditures for research and design in 1953, for the observing of comparability
expenditures on this work have been excluded from the capital investment volume.

In addition to the designated demands which ensure compatibility of the capital in-
vestment volumes, in constructing time series and calculating the indexes it is es-

sential to clarify the limits of the studied aggregate (the number and composition
of builders in a ministry, department, rayon and so forth).

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 11.3

  
     

 
  
 

Capital in- Capital invest- Estimated Capital
vestments in ments for 1953 in price in- investments
1978 in es- 1950 estimated for 1973 in
timatedul969 prices, million portions 1969 esti-
prices, ' of a unit mated prices,
million million
rubles rubles

(col. 4 a
col. 5 3
col. 6)

    
  
 
  

Technological composition
of capital investments

           
    
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Construction-installation

work 60.7
2. Equipment, tools and
supplies 42.6

3. Geological prospecting
6. Design-research work

5. Other capital work and
expenditures

  
 

Total capital investments

  

In statistical practices, for characterizing the developmental intensity of the cap-
ital investment time series, frequently the average absolute increase, the average
increase rate and increment are determined. Usually the average absolute increase
is calculated for the formula of the arithmetic average and the average growth rate
for the formula of the geometric average. However statistical theory does not con-
sider these indicators universal. In particular, the designated method for calcu-
lating the average indicators for a time series is related solely to the growth rate
which is common to the entire period and this is determined by the ratio of just

the beginning and end levels of the series and does not depend upon the intermedi-
ate levels of the series while the total calculated levels of the time series does
not equal the total of its actual levels.

At the sane time, in studying capital investment dynamics, very often one encounters
the problem of determining the average absolute increase, the average growth rate
and average increase rate which would be related to the overall capm'al investment
volume during the period limiting the time series. For example, in a five-year plan
it is important to monitor not only the fulfillment of the plan over the years but
also the annual growth rates of capital investments and their absolute increase in
order to see what indicators have been achieved and what ones must exist for the use
of capital investments to carry out the five-year plan as a whole.

31

FOR 0FF"JAI.USEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

For calculating the average absolute increase of capital investments (5) which
would satisfy the above-advanced condition. theory recannends the following

formula:1

n
2 2 yi-nyo

- 1-1
G ' n(n+l) ' (1)

n
where X y1--the total of all the terms for the levels of the time series with the
1-1 exception of the base one;

yo--the base (initial) level of the time series;
n—-the number of terms in the series with the exception of the initial

(base) level.

Statistical theory recoumends that the average growth rate satisfying the above-
advanced condition be defined as the parabolic average which is the positive root

of a n-order polynomial:

n

In
¥+¥2+...+7f" - 1'1 .

Yo

 

where TL-average parabolic growth rate.

It is possible to cetermine the sought root of this equation only by approximate
methods.2

Let us give an example which illustrates the calculation for indicators showing the
average rate and intensity of change in the time series for the volume of Soviet
capital investments in the Ninth Five-Year Plan. According '9 the plan, the Soviet

capital investment volume for the Ninth Five-Year Plan was to be a total of 501
billion rubles. In actual terms over the years of the five—year plan. capital in-
vestments were allocated in the following manner (billion rubles):’

1970 1971 197? 1973 1976 1975

1'1
1'1
32 88.0 94.3 98.7 105.7 116.9 501.6

=See: L. S. Kazinets, "Tempy rosta i absolyutnyye prirosty" [Growth Rates and
Absolute Increases], Moscow, Statistika, 1975, p 84.

2Ibid., pp 104, 105.

3See: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1975 g." [The Soviet National Economy in 1975],
Moscow. Statistika, 1976, p 502.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWJR10F1HCJAI.lﬂSEZCNVLY

Let us calculate the average absolute increase and the growth rate of capital in-
vestments as correlated to the overall absolute increase and growth rate for the 5-

year period:

- yn’yo 114.9-82

63? n - 5

5
— _ 7Y1. _ /11t..9 _
Ts yo 82 1.0698.

It is easy to check that y5 - 82 '1.06985 - 114.9 billion rubles and the total of
the calculated levels for these data over the five-year plan will be 508.7 billion
rubles and this is 7.1 billion rubles more than the actually used capital invest-
ments. However, in studying the dynamics and the fulfillment of the capital invest-
ment plan such more often in practice the task is set of determining these same in-
dicators but correlated to the overall capital investment volume for the five-year
plan. Let us calculate the average annual absolute increase of capital investments

over the Ninth Five-Year Plan:

 

- 6.58 (billion rubles);

according to plan Egg - 2 50;:Z.82 - %§% - 6.067 billion rubles;

 

actual 6f - 2 5013:?” - 183362 - 6.107 billion rubles,

that is. the actual average annual increase in capital investments during the Ninth
Five-Year Plan was above the planned.

Let us deternine with these sane condition; the average rowth rate of capital in-
vestments. We have according to the plan T + T2 + T3 + I + is - 501/82 - 6.1098.
Hence, using the_table of average parabolic rates for n - 5 given in the book of
L. S. Kazinets, T - 1.067.

In actual terns

T+T2+T3+T“+T5-i%12'—6-6.117.

hence T - 1.068, that is, above that envisaged in the plan.

Let us check the conformity of the average growth rate to the capital investments
volume for the five-year plan and for this we determine the calculated levels of
the series and add them up. We have: 87.576 + 93.531 + 99.891 + 106.086 + 113.938

- $01.62 billion rubles. that is. the error is 0.02 billion rubles, or 0.006 per-
cent.

Let us formulate the problem differently. The capital investment volume carried
out over the first 3 years of the Ninth Five-Year Plan was 281 billion rubles.

What average annual increase and growth rate of capital investments must be ensured
during the last 2 years of the five-year plan in order to carry out the 5-year plan?
The capital investment volume over the last 2 years will be 220 billion‘rubles (501
- 281). The average annual absolute increase will be:

33

FOR¢MHHCJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

— _ 2(220—2-98.72 _
Gap 2.3 7.533 billion rubles,

while the average annual growth rate will be

¥+¥2 -9—282% - 2.229,

hence T - 1.075, that is, 107.4 percent. This means that for carrying out the five-
year capital investment plan, during the remaining 2 years, the average annual
growth rate must be increased by/O.7 percent in comparison with the planned.

As a consequence of the fact that the fulfillment of the capital investment plan
for the five-year plan as a whole and not the achieving of a set level for its last
year is of the greatest importance for the national economy, the designated method-
ology for calculating the average indicators of the time series assumes predominant
significance for studying the dynamics and fulfillment of the capital investment
plan. In instances when the intermediate levels of the series are of no importance
in analyzing capital investment dynamics and the achieving of the end level, on the
contrary, is seen as the chief condition of the economic problem. the indicators
for the average absolute increase and growth rate must be figured, respectively,
using the formula for the arithmetic average and for the geometric average.

55. Incomplete Construction and Its Composition

The enormous. ever-growing scale of capital construction requires significant and
annually increasing capital investments. Under the conditions of a protracted con-
struction cycle, in the country's national economy a large number of incomplete
buildings. installations, production capacity and other fixed capital objects is
formed. The aggregate of incomplete and not operating projects and construction
sites in planning. accounting and statistical practices is termed incomplete con-
struction. The task for statistics is to work out the indicators describing the
absolute amount of incomplete construction, its relative level and the conformity
of the actual absolute aml relative amounts of incomplete construction to the es-
tablished plans and standards, to study the composition of incomplete construction
and to detect and prevent the scattering of capital investments.

Incomplete construction is among the momentary indicators, that is, its absolute
amount is determined as of a certain date, usually at the beginning (end) of a re-
port period. The volume of incomplete construction can be expressed in physical
and monetary units.

The accounting for incomplete construction in physical terms is carried out in vari—
oua units of measurement the choice of which is determined by the aims and tasks of
research. In form they are analogous to the units employed for describing the com-
pletion of projects. For general purposes the volume of incomplete construction is
characterized by the number of sites or projects as of the end (start) of a report
period. However, the significant conditionality of this measurement narrows the
limits or its use. Information on the number of incomplete projects and sites is
given in the reports in Form No Z-ks at the beginning and end of the report year

and in the appendices to it.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The amount of incomplete construction is also expressed in units of production
capacity, volume capacity or the dimensions of the buildings and structures under
construction. For example, for industrial enterprises under construction this is
expressed by the annual product output, for railroads and highways by their length,
for housing by the total and net living area and so forth. The use of such physical
measurements for summary indicators is restricted to structures of the same type.

In statistical and planning practices the most widespread is the indicator of incom-
plete construction in monetary terms, as this makes it possible to generalize data
on any organizational and territorial level regardless of the degree of complete-
ness of the projects. Incomplete construction in monetary terms is the actually
used capital investments for construction projects which have been commenced but
have not been completed to any degree or are in operation as of a certain date.
usually in practice this cost indicator is simply termed incomplete construction.

It characterizes only the capital investments into fixed capital created as a result
of construction and does not encompass the expenditures on equipment outside of the
construction estimates.

Incomplete construction can be expressed both in terms of estimated and actual cost
for the builder. The latter estimate is established from bookkeeping data and dif-
fers from the estimated by the amount of expenditures (compensation and benefits
above the estimated cost) which are formed because of changes in wholesale prices,
wage rates and other circumstances not accounted for in the estimate.

Incomplete construction is determined primarily at the lowest element of a sector,
the builder. However, the information contained in the builder's accounting on in-
complete construction is not sufficient to establish its full volume. Because of
the new forms of payment, the builder's accounting reflects only the portion of con-
struction product represented by the value of the construction-installation work on
work stages which have been completed and turned over to the clients. The remain-
ing portion of the construction product, that is, the amount of work on incomplete
projects, stages and groups of work, is shown in the accounting of the contracting
construction organizations. Consequently, the full amount of incomplete construc-
tion can be obtained by adding up the two components: 1) the volume of capital in-
vestments accounted for by the builder for incomplete projects as of the report
date, and 2) the amount of incomplete construction work accounted for on the balance
sheet for basic operations of the contracting organizations as of the same date.
The contracting organizations submit information on incomplete construction work to
the builders each month in the statement of Form No 3.

In planning and statistical practices, an indicator is employed which describes the
relative level of incomplete construction:

U _ incomplete production at end of period _ g
or volume of capital investments for period K '

In this indicator, incomplete construction and capital investments are accounted
for in the same prices. that is, according to the estimated cost or according to
the actual cost for the builder. The relative level of incomplete construction is
of no use determining for an individual construction site and particularly for a
project. It gains economic importance only in assessing an aggregate of construc-
tion sites for builders (sector, department and so forth). In the dynamic

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comparisons it is essential to consider the dependence of the indicator upon the
size of the period for which the capital investments have been taken. Hith an in-
crease in this period the indicator declines while with a shortening of the period

its amount rises. In practice most often incomplete construction is compared with
the annual volume of capital investments.

Table 11.4

1975 1976

  
  

Indicators

  

1. Capital investments [or year, billion rubles 108.7
2. Incomplete construction at year's end, billion

rubles 92.4
3. Relative level of incomplete construction

(line 2:line 1), Z 85

In Table II.lo. from an exasple of hypothetical data on capital invest-ents and in-
complete construction, the result has been shown of calculating the relative level
of incomplete construction.

Incomplete construction represents an aggregate of diverse projects and sites which
have not been completed for various reasons. For this reason a study of the compo-
sition of incomplete construCtion is an independent task for statistics. By group-
ing the projects. sites and builders it is possible to investigate the incomplete
construction structure and disclose actual disruptions of the normal course of con-
struction, the scattering of capital investments and other particular features of
their use. The composition of incomplete construction can also be studied from the
previously examined capital investment groupings (see 53, Chapter II). In addi-
tion, statistics recon-nends grouping them according to features showing the varying
state of the construction projects and sites.

in terms of the state of production activities at the projects and sites the latter
can be distributed into the following groups:

Projects under construction which encompass projects or sites where construction is
underway. This grOup also includes the projects which have been put into operation
but the acceptance statement has not been drawn up;

Temporarily halted construction. This includes projects and sites where construc-
tion and installation work has been halted temporarily upon instructions of the de-
p-urtments and construction organizations;

Nuthballed construction is comprised of projects and sites where construction has
been halted and financ lng ceased for an indeterminate time upon a ruling of the
ministries. the USSR Council of Ministers or the Union republics and the projects
have been mothballed;

l‘utnlly halted construction is comprised of projects the further erection of which
he cont idered ill-advised for various reasons and all the expenditures made for

those projects upon a decision of the departments are to be written off and are net
losses for the national economy.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0f the above examined groups of incomplete construction, only the first one de-
scribes a normal state in capital construction. The presence of the last three
groups within incomplete construction shows serious shortcomings in planning and de-
signing.

In terms of the time for commencing construction, the aggregate of projects or sites
is distributed into two groups: a) carryover from previous years, b) newly started
in the given year. An analogous grouping of incomplete construction is made in
terms of the time of completing construction and this also is comprised of two
groups: a) nearly completed projects, that is, projects which are to be put in op-
eration in the report year, b) construction of projects which is to be carried over
to the following year. This grouping is employed in planning capital construction
and in studying the supply of the sites with material and labor resources as well as
financing. The composition of incomplete construction is further studied in terms
of the length of construction, in terms of the degree of completeness and other
feature characterizing particular questions in the process of utilizing the capital
investments.

Statistical information on incomplete construction is found in two basic sources:
reporting and censuses. The statistical reporting on capital investments found in
Form No 2-ks with the appendices to it in their annual version is a stable source
of data. The program for this reporting provides information on the volume of in-
complete construction in monetary terms broken down for the technological composi-
tion of capital investments and in physical terms for the individual groups charac-
terizing the state of the projects and sites. Prior to 1968, in the aim of obtain-
ing the data necessary for long-range planning, the USSR TsSU periodically carried
out specially organized surveys (censuses) for incomplete construction in following
very extensive programs.

56. A Statistical Study of Plan Fulfillment, the Dynamics and State of Incomplete
Construction -

A task for statistical study of incomplete construction is a description of the
conformity of its actual volume to the level set by the plan or norm. In the work—
ing out of capital investment plans by the departments. the volume of incomplete
construction is set as an obligatory indicator and in practice this is called the
production backlog. The volume and composition of the backlog are determined by
the procedure set in the plan on the basis of standards which ensure the completion
of the fixed capital at the dates stipulated by the plan. Here capital investments
by the builder for the acquisition of equipment and machinery which are not part of
the site estimates are not considered nor are the expenditures that do not increase
the value of the fixed capital. The planned volume of incomplete construction also
does not include expenditures on projects the erection of which has been temporarily
or permanently halted or mothballed or those put into operation but without the
proper documents drawn up.

The above-examined planning features should be considered in assessing plan fulfill-
ment for incomplete construction and this can be characterized by a relative indi-

cator, the index and absolute ratio of the planned volume, that is:

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urrn nu. vat. mild

to the production backlog and thereby the support for the programs to complete
capacity and fixed capital in the following report period. The specific interpreta-
tion of the plan fulfillment results in terms of incomplete construction is such
that the overfulfillment of the plan, like its nonfulfillment, is considered a vio-
lation of planning and production discipline. In observing the established tech-
nology, the rational organization and rates of construction duration and with car-

Let us give an example. Let us assume that for an oblast at the end of a report
year the incomplete construction according to the plan is 228 million rubles (accord-
ing to the estimated cost). Actually this indicator according to the data of Form
No 2-ks on th same date reached 263.5 million rubles. including 17.3 million

The percentage of plan fulfillment for incomplete construction without correcting
its actual volume equals: §g%;%' 100 = 115.6. that is, the production backlog was
exceeded by 15.6 percent or by 35.5 million rubles.

Thu percentage of plan fulfillment for incomplete construction in accord with the
adopted planning procedure equals:

263.5~ (17.3+2.4+16.7+1.2 . 225.9. _
“W400 ———228 100 99.1,

that is. the planned backlog for the end of the report year actually was not
achieved.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nomically unjustified capital investments into incomplete construction is determined
by the total expenditures not caused by production necessity, for example, expendi-
tures on projects the construction of which has been temporarily or permanently
halted. mothballed and so forth. In our example this amount is: 17.34-2.6-+l6.7~+
l.2 - 37.6 nillion rubles, or 14.2 percent (37.6:263.5). The difference of 100-
14.2 - 85.8 percent characterizes the share of the production backlog which had
actually formed by the year's end in incomplete construction.

estimated cost and the second on data on normed labor expenditures. In the first
instance the indicator is termed simply the degree of completeness and in the

In statistical practices the most widespread are the indicators calculated using
estimated cost since the builders, departments and statistical bodies have available
all the initial data needed for the calculation by this method. The degree of com-
pleteness is calculated for the individual projects and sites as well as for the
aggregate of projects and sites. The semantic and methodological differences of
these indicators are caused by the fact that in certain instances a project has
been used as the unit of observation (counting) and in others it has been the site
as a whole.

39

ROR‘OIWWCJAI.lﬂHE(MVLY
I’UK UI'I'IQJAI. Ubl'. ONLY

Table 11.5

   
  

Fixed capital Incomplete
estimated investments put into construction
operation at end of

from start of report year
construction construction

 
 

Name of sites and projects

      
 
     

. Text 1 1e mill--

     
    
 
     

total - 2,270
1) Main building - 2,003
2) Boiler shop 1,116 -
3) Administrative building temporarily 267

halted
II. Motor pool-

total -- 460

1) Garage 2,537 --

 
 

2) Machine shop 460

Total for sites

Let us calculate the completeness indicators in which a project has been adopted as
the counting unit.

capital investments made from start

' -
Degree of project's completeness - w

estimated cost of project

We have: for site I, respectively, for the projects: No l %%%%’°100 - 63.3 2,
267. _ _
No 2 1002, No 3 960 100 27.8 2,
460
For site 11, respectively. for the projects: No 1 1002, No 2 I-533--100 - 36.9 X.
D

Degree of completion of _ incomplete construction at and of report period

incomplete construction Estimated cost of projects in incomplete construction'

2,270 4
We have: for site 1 371323636' 100 - 55:; for site No 11 Tngi' 100 - 36.9%; for
2 27o+460
—_L.—_u -
the two together 3,16a+960+1,245 100 50.81.

Backlog for projects under construction
Degree of completion of - at ear's end
production backlog for projects Estimated cost of projects under
construction at year's end

660

We have: for site I 3‘292' 100 - 63.31; for site II 1 245
I

3,164
2,003+460 ,
3.164+1,2as

 

~100 - 36.9%; for the

two sites together 100 - $5.91.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IWIR13FFKHAI.USE1DNLY

Let us determine the completion indicators in which the site as a whole is used as
the counting unit.

Capital investments since start of construction

Percentage of completeness _ for all projects of the site (sites)

of site (sites) Estimated cost of site (sites) '

3 386 2 997
o _l__. s - . _’_o - s
We have. for site I 4.250 100 64.6%, for site II 3,782 100 79.22. for the
3 386+2 997

5,260+3.782 '100 - 70.71.

two sites together

In contrast to the first group, all the projects of the sites regardless of their
state have been considered in the base of comparison (the denominator) for the in-
dicators of the second group. For this reason they describe, in essence, the shale

of used capital investments in their total volume for building the entire fixed
capital complex.

For analysis indicators are also calculated for the completeness of the sites in
terms of the projects completed and put into operation. These include the complete-
ness percentage of the site in terms of putting into operation and the coefficient

for the output of end construction product; these can be determined for the indi-
vidual sites and their aggregate.

Estimated cost of projects put into

Percentage of completeness for _ operation
putting site (sites) into operation Estimated cost of site (sites) '

This indicator expresses the share of the estimated cost of a site (sites) which is
represented by completed projects. In the example it will equal: for site I

lll£§° 100 - 21.32 and for site II 3‘221‘ 100 - 67.1%; for the two sites together
5.240 3,782

1,116+2,537

S,260+3.782 ’100 - 60.52.

Coefficient for output of end _ Estimated cost of projects put into operation

construction product Capital investments since start of construction‘
In the example this indicator equals: for site I %‘%%%° 100 - 332 and for site II
D
2 537 l 116+2 537
_l—0 u s _L_—l—.o -
2.997 100 84.61. for the two sites together 3,386+2,997 100 57.21.

The calculated indicator characterizes the share of capital investments nade for
the projects completed and put into operation.

In addition to the examined questions, the constructing of time series and the cal-
culating of analytical indicators are part of the problem of a statistical study of
incomplete construction. Indices hold an important place among these indicators.

For calculating the index of the volume of incomplete construction, the same formula
and methodological principles are employed as for the capital investment volume (see

#1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rvn UrI'ILIAL no: vnl.‘

Chapter II. 55). Here incomplete construction can be taken in terms of estimated
cost and in terms of actual cost for the builder. In the first instance this will
reflect the dynamics of the volume of incomplete construction and in the second.
the dynamics of actual expenditures. In either instance it is essential to observe
the conditions of comparability as was already mentioned in 55 of Chapter II. In
particular, for eliminating the influence of the seasonal factor it is essential to
compare the levels of incomplete construction on the same date.

In analyzing plan fulfillment and the dynamics of incomplete construction it is very
important to bring out the reasons and influence of various factors on its devia-
tions from the base conditions. In instances when these factors can be expressed by
statistical indices correlated into a system of comultipliers, it is always possible
to construct a system of factor indexes and on their basis to establish in absolute
and relative terms the impact of each factor. For example. incomplete construction
(U) can be represented as the product of the estimated cost of all the projects ac-
counted for in incomplete construction (C) and the degree of its completeness (F -
U:C),that is. U - C-F. Hence the influence of a change in the total estimated cost
of projects under construction on the change in incomplete construction can be de-
termined from the formula Ac - (C1-Co)Po, and the influence of a change in the de-
gree of completeness of incomplete construction by the formula by - C1(Pl-Fo).

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER III. THE STATISTICS 0P PUTTING CAPACITY AND FIXED CAPITAL INTO OPERATION
§1. The Tasks of Statistics for Putting Capacity and Fixed Capital into Operation

The completion of construction on enterprises, roads, canals, housing and other in-
stallations and their putting into operation are the ultimate aim of capital con-
struction and, in particular, the use of capital investments. The decisions of con-
gresses and plenums of the CPSU Central Committee, the sessions of the USSR Supreme
Soviet and the governmental documents have repeatedly emphasized the enormous im-

portance of the prompt completion of construction on the dates stipulated by the
plan.

The great attention shown by the party and the socialist state to the above—
examined economic questions gives great importance to a statistical study of the
completion of capacity and fixed capital. The range of statistical problems in-
cludes: the elaboration of the indicators which characterize the amount of com—
pleted capacity and other fixed capital projects in physical and monetary terms;
the studying of the fulfillment of the plans for the completion of capacity and
fixed capital and the dynamics of their volume; the elaboration of indicators for
the construction time of fixed capital projects and installations; the carrying out
of comprehensive analysis for the fulfillment of plans and the dynamics of comple-
tion in the aim of disclosing reserves for accelerating construction rates, reduc-
ing its cost and improving the quality.

Before moving on to an examination of these problems, it is essential to bring out
the economic content of the completion of projects. In accounting and statistics
completion is characterized by the fact of the concluding of construction on the
projects and their installations and the putting of them into operation as fixed
capital in accord with their purpose as provided by the plans. The designated level
of completion means that at the given project or group of projects, the construction
and installation work envisaged in the plans has been fully carried out, the tech-
nical and other production equipment has been installed and has been provided with
the supplies, production tools and attachment envisaged in the estimate. For ex-
ample, a grain elevator has been built, if all the construction work of erecting it
is carried out, the production equipment installed, the supplies and other articles

 

lSee: "Haterialy XXV s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
Politizdat, 1976, p 211.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hut UFI'IL'IAL USE ONLY

envisaged in the estimate acquired and the utilities attached, the grain elevator is
ready to receive and store grain.

In capital construction practices a distinction is made between complete and partial
putting into operation. Complete putting into operation means that all the projects
of the site envisaged in the plans have been completed and put into operation.
Partial putting into operation means that the plans envisage different times for
putting individual projects of the site into operation, for example, the starting up
of a sulfuric acid shop before completing the construction of a superphosphate plant
as a whole. In the power industry, the extracting, metallurgical and other indus-
trial sectors, the completion of a construction stage is considered to be partial
putting into operation and by this one understands the planned portion of the enter-
prise or group of installations which ensure the output of the product. For exam-

ple, in designing the construction of thermal power plants. two, three and more con-
struction stages are designated for the power units.

In the practice of constructing large industrial. transport, agricultural and other
national economic enterprises it is far from always economically advisable to com-
plete all the projects of the site by a single date in order to begin producing the
product or operating the fixed capital. In designing an enterprise often provision
is made within the projects of the site for a group of production projects in basic
and auxiliary activities which ensure the production of the product under normal

labor conditions. Such a group of projects at a site is termed the starting-up

group and the finishing of its construction marks the putting of production capacity
into operation.

The accounting for fixed capital which has been completed and put into operation,
like capital invescments, is carried out by the builder. In accord with the provi-
sions of the Construction Standards and Rules on the procedure for accepting and put-
ting buildings and installations into operation,2 the projects Which have beedn com-

pleted for construction and are ready to operate are submitted by the builders to
the state acceptance commissions.

The statement of the state acceptance commission is the accounting document which
varifies the fact that the project (group) is in operation. This statement is ap-
proved by the authority which appointed this commission. The date of signing the

statement is officially considered the date for putting the project or group of
fixed capital into operation.

Along with the putting of projects and groups into operation, in practice there are
instances when at operating enterprises machinery and equipment which are not in-
cluded in the construction plans and estimates are put into operation, for example.
agricultural machines. means of transport, equipment requiring installation but
designated for inventory (reserve). Such equipment is considered as put into oper-
ation as it is received at the operating enterprise. Here the entry of the equip-
ment on the balance sheet of basic operations as fixed capital is considered to be
the formal indication of its putting into operation.

 

2See: "Construction Standard and Rule III-3-76," Moscow, Stroyizdat, I977.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

52. Accounting for the Putting of Fixed Capital Projects into Operation in Physical
Units

The putting of capacity and fixed capital into operation is the main indicator for
the national economic capital investment plan. In order to assess the fulfillment
of the plan for this indicator, it is essential to correctly determine the amount
of fixed capital projects put into operation.

The amount of projects put into operation can be characterized in physical and
monetary terms. Each of these methods of measuring the amount of completion is of

independent significance in solving the economic problems of capital investment
statistics.

An accounting of the putting of capacity and fixed capital projects into operation
in physical units is essential for planning and supervising the observance of pro-
portional development for the sectors in the production and nonproduction spheres

of the national economy. For these purposes it is important to know in what amounts
and at what pace capacity should be increased for the output of electric power,
metal, motor vehicles. machine tools, agricultural machinery and so forth, how many
highways and railroads must be built and have been built and how much housing,
schools, hospitals and other nonproduction projects have been built. A physical

accounting for putting into operation makes it possible also to run international
comparisons.

In planning and statistics different scales and units of measurement are employed
for physically expressing the completion of capacity. From the above-examined gen-
eral provisions in the methodology for accounting for putting into operation it fol-
lows that the project, starting-up installation and site as a whole are the primary
units of observation in the statistics for putting into operation. For precisely
this reason in statistical practice these are also employed as a unit for measuring
the amount of putting into operation in physical terms. In determining the summary
data for putting into operation, the projects and enterprises are grouped according
to features of sectorial purpose, departmental affiliation, size and other features
adopted in the capital investment grouping (see Chapter II, 53). For example, ac-
cording to the data of the USSR TsSU, in 1978, 230 new major state industrial en-
terprises went into operation.

Regardless of the simplicity and clarity of accounting for the putting of projects
and enterprises into operation, it far from always provides an exhaustive descrip-
tion of the true amounts of completed construction, since the aggregates formed in
the summary bring together enterprises which differ in terms of purpose, capacity,
size and other features. More accurate information on the amount of putting into
operation in physical terms is provided by measurements of production capacity,
length, volume capacity and other consumer properties of the projects.

For expressing the capacity of production-end projects more often the annual (daily
or shift) product output or the quantity of processed basic raw material in physi-
cal units is employed and more rarely this is done in cost terms. For example, the
putting of capacity into operation for the production of iron, steel and rolled
products is characterized by metal production over the year in tons, while the com-
pletion of capacity for producing sugar (granulated) is by best processing per day

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu UI'HL'IAL use ONLY

in tons. For determining the amount of production capacity for a project or group
to be put into operation, it is possible to adopt a certain technical parameter or
directly use the capacity of the basic equipment, for example, the construction of a
railroad or its electrification can be characterized by the length in kilometers or

its daily traffic capacity, the completion of a power plant is expressed by its
capacity in kilowatts and so forth.

For nonproduction-end projects and in a number of instances also for production-end
ones, measurements for the volume and area of projects as well as indicators of
their volumetric capacity are employed as physical units of measurement. For ex-
ample, the construction volume of hospitals is characterized by their capacity,
that is, by the number of beds, school construction is described by the number of
student seats, theaters by the number of seats and so forth.

Since production— and nonproduction-end buildings are one of the predominant forms
of product in construction, an opportunity arises to employ measurements of area
and volume for a general description of putting into operation. This is also wide-
ly employed in practice. Thus, the capacity of buildings is characterized by their
total and effective volume. The total volume is determined by multiplying the area
bounded by the external perimeter of the building by its height from the floor of
the first floor to the ceiling of the top story. In practice the indicators of the
effective volume of a building are employed and this is the total volume of the

basic and auxiliary spaces of the building, for example, in housing, the cubic vol-
ume of dwelling rooms and auxiliary quarters.

The area of buildings is measured in an analogous manner. A distinction is drawn
between the built-up area which is bounded by the external perimeter of the build-
ing walls and the effective area which describes the inner area of the building
without counting the stair landings, that is, the floor area of all stories of the
buildings. In production buildings, the area of the space allocated directly for
the production process is termed the production area; the putting of enterprises in—
to operation in the machine building industry is often expressed in units of this
area. As part of the effective area of housing, the dwelling area is considered
apart, that is, the area of the dwelling rooms.

The accounting of completed projects in physical terms carries an element of some
conditionality. For example. in adding up the production capacity for iron casting,
we bring together, in essence, projects which are the same in terms of purpose but
which differ in their design, size, in the composition of the projects and the
amount of work performed. In permitting such conditionality, we are able to calcu-
late general indicators for putting into operation in physical terms. Detailed in-
formation on the putting of capacity and fixed capital projects into operation is

round in the statistical reporting on state capital investments in Form No 2-ks and
the appendices to it.

53. Indicators for the Amount of Fixed Capital Put into Operation

The accounting for putting into operation in physical terms, regardless of its im-
portance, does not make it possible to fully carry out the statistical and planning
tasks using general indicators. The cost of the projects is the sole all-

incompassing measure of diverse construction projects making it possible to obtain

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

general indicators. The putting of projects and sites into operation in monetary
terms is usually called the putting of fixed capital into operation. Accounting in
monetary terms makes it possible to establish the volume of fixed capital put into
operation for any aggregate of builders and, consequently. to determine the summary
indicators for plan fulfillment and dynamics on a varying organizational level and
to obtain diverse general quality characteristics for the fixed capital put into
operation.

The putting of fixed capital into operation in accounting and statistics is ex-
pressed both in terms of the estimated and the actual cost for the builder. The
estimated cost is the base estimate which is used as the basis for determining the
actual cost for the builder. This is kept in the summary estimate for the techni-
cal construction plans. The plans and the estimate contain information on the labor,
material and monetary expenditures for construction as a whole and its individual
projects. They reflect the socially necessary expenditures on construction and.
consequently, the estimated cost of the individual projects and the site as a whole
performs the function of the price for the fixed capital to be created.

whole. For an individual project the full estimated cost and the so-called esti-
mated construction costs are determined. The former reflects all the expenditures
which are made directly in erecting and equipping the given project, considering the
general site and other expenditures related to the entire site as a whole in a share
proportional to the estimated construction cost of the project. The general site
expenditures include the leveling of the construction site, the building of various
utilities, the landscaping of the territory, the erection of temporary buildings
and structures and so forth. Most often in practice the estimated construction cost
of a project is employed and this is set by the estimate as the total expenditures
provided directly for its erection. These total expenditures are formed by the
estimated cost of the construction work, the work of installing equipment, equip-
ment and not requiring installation. attachments and supplies provided for in the
estimate for the project.

The estimated cost for the fixed capital of the site as a whole is characterized by
the expenditures on erecting the basic. auxiliary, service and temporary projects
of the site as well as all general construction expenditures provided for in the
summary estimate. This cost can be determined by adding up the estimated construc-

tion cost of all the projects, the general site expenditures, the expenses for the
support of the administration and technical supervision and the estimated cost of

design and research.

Let us give an example. Let us assume that we know the following data for a produc-
tion association from the summary estimate for the construction of a footwear mill
consisting of three projects (Table Ill.l). The general site work and expenditures
on the mill are 146,000 rubles, expenditures for the support of the administration
and technical supervision are 68,000 rubles, design and research are 184,000 rubles
and the training of operating personnel is 152,000 rubles.

The estimated construction cost of each project is represented by the total of the
table’s corresponding column. The full estimated cost of the main building is:

47

FOR OFTWCIAL.U551MNLY
I‘ll Ul'l'l‘ IA]. "3". UNI.‘

Table 111.1

Ccnstruction projects, 1,000 rubles

 

Types °f ""k ”‘1 Purcha‘“ Main building Raw materials Boiler
‘ warehouse plant and
garage
Construction work 436 192 102
Installation work 87 19 114
Equipment requiring installation 663 134 193
Equipment not requiring installation 102 -- 107
Production tools and supplies 18 2 b
Total 1,286 347 520
1 286 1 286
o __—I——— I o J— . 0
1,286+ (146+68+181o) 1,286+3lo7+520 1,286+398 2.153 1,523,700 rubles,
for the raw materials warehouse 367-+398-52%%§ - 411,100 rubles;
9
520
boiler plant and garage 520+ 398 “2—H I 616,100 rubles.
9

The full estimated cost for the fixed capital of the footwear mill is: 1,286+-347+
520 + 166 + 68 + 184 - 2, 551,000 rubles.

The volume of capital investments according to the estimate for the construction and
putting of the footwear mill into operation is: 2,551-+152 - 2,703,000 rubles.

From the given example it follows that the estimated cost of the projects and the
fixed capital of the mill as a whole does not include the so-called expenditures
which do not increase the cost of the fixed capital (in this example, expenditures
on personnel training), although these are carried out from the capital investments.

The expressing of the putting of fixed capital into operation according to the esti-
mated cost makes it possible to characterize its physical volume and, consequently,
to provide an estimate for plan fulfillment and dynamics for this indicator. How-
ever, in a number of instances when the estimated prices change in the course of
construction, an important condition of the methodology is violated. The problem

is that the capital investment volume at projects put into operation is accounted
for by the builder in estimated prices of the corresponding years and namely, be-
fore the change, in the old estimated prices and after their change in the new ones.
For this reason the total cost of the fixed capital put into operation in this in-
stance in essence is a mixed estimate. Such a methodology ensures the commonness of

the bookkeeping and statistical data on the estimated cost of fixed capital put into
operation. But since these changes are reflected both in the plan and in the re-

port, the estimate for the carrying out of the plan for putting fixed capital into
operation is virtually not distorted.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But in studying the dynamics of this indicator. the designated features of the
methodology for determining estimated cost complicate the calculating of indexes

for the putting of fixed capital into operation and the compared levels of the time
series. In order to obtain an estimated cost of the fixed capital calculated ac-
cording to the uniform price methodology, in the program for the statistical survey
(Form No l-ef), the volume of capital investments (projects put into operation) used
prior to the date of the change in the estimated prices is recalculated in new
prices by the index for the estimated capital investment prices. The estimated
price index in the given instance is determined by the relating of the new (recalcu-
lated) estimated cost of the capital investments remaining after the change in the
prices to the estimated cost of the investments before the recalculation.

Let us give an example. Let us assume that initially the approved estimated cost
for a textile mill which started construction in 1975 was 3.72 million rubles. As
of 1 January 1976, the estimated cost was changed as a consequence of introducing
new prices for equipment and the reduction factors. Prior to the change in prices,
1,246,000 rubles had been used on building the mill. The remaining total of capi-

tal investments was recalculated and considering the new prices and correction fac-
tors was 2,721,400 rubles.

In the report from the builder. the estimated cost of the mill put into operation
(the mixed cost) was set at l,246-+2,721.4 - 3,967,400 rubles. For the recalcula-
tion let us determine the estimated price index for the capital investments as a
2 721.4
0 —’—— I -
whole. 3,720-l,246 1.1. hence the estimated cost of the mill in the new (recal

culated) estimated prices will be: 1,246 °l.l-+2,721.4 - 4,092,000 rubles.

The initial data for recalculating the estimated cost of the projects are found
only in the builder's figures. They do not exist in the statistical reporting.

After the completion of construction and the fixed capital is in operation, the ac-
tuai cost for the builder is determined and this describes the real total of expend-
itures made by the builder in the construction period. The need to determine this
is caused primarily by the fact that as a consequence of various circumstances the
actually developing construction conditions differ from those envisaged in the
plans and estimate. Consequently, the amount of the builder's expenditures is
changed. The accounting for putting into operation at the builder's actual cost is
also important for supervising the observance of estimate and financial discipline
in construction as well as for establishing the full initial value of the fixed
capital. For this reason in accounting and statistical practices, the actual cost
for the builder is termed the inventory cost.

The inventory cost is usually determined for each project built and put into oper-
ation and is given in the statement of the state acceptance commission. For an in-
dividual project its amount can be represented as the total of the following three
components: 1) The project's estimated construction cost; 2) the estimated expend-
itures related directly to the given project but not incorporated in its estimated
construction cost; 3) the general site expenditures, compensation and benefits

above the estimated cost, losses, the cost of temporary structures and other ex-
penditures of a general construction nature considered in the proportional estimated
construction cost of the project, with the exclusion of the expenditures that do

not increase the cost of the fixed capital.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'ﬂl IAI. llhl'. ONLY

Let us calculate the inventory cost of fixed capital put into operation using the
data in the example shown on page 48 supplemented by the following information:
Compensation above the estimated cost for building the main building was 89,000
rubles and losses for construction as a whole were -21.000 rubles. Hence the in-
ventory cost of the main building put into operation will be:

l,286+89+ (146+68+184+21) ”15% - 1,625,300 rubles.

The putting of fixed capital into operation is determined by the builder using ac-
tual and estimated costs on the basis of the established documents. The total vol-
ume of fixed capital put into operation is obtained by adding the following: a)
The cost of the enterprises. starting-up complexes, installations, buildings and
other projects which have been provided for in the plans and estimate and have been
completed and put into operation (completely or partially); b) the cost of equip-
ment and machinery acquired by operating enterprises, organizations and institu-
tions outside the construction estimates (means of transport, agricultural machin-
ery. equipment requiring installation but earmarked for reserves and so forth). In
those instances when the acceptance statements have established uncompleted con-
struction and installation work (unfinished work) and their cost has been given,
then the full estimated or actual cost of the projects put into operation (the first
component) should be reduced by the estimated cost of the unfinished work. If the
projects or capacity are actually in operation but their putting into operation has
not been formalized by the proper documents, then their cost is not to be included
in the volume of fixed capital put into operation.

Using the data from builder reports, these statistical bodies on various levels de-
termine the sumary indicator for putting into operation the fixed capital which has
been created and acquired by capital investments. At the same time according to the
existing planning and financing procedures, fixed capital can be acquired and pur-
chased also using other funds aside from capital investments (see 2, Chapter 11).
Consequently, in order to establish the full volume of fixed capital put into opera-
tion in a report period, it is essential to add the expenditures made on the crea-
tion and acquisition of fixed capital from funds of the state budget and other
sources aside from capital investments to the value of the fixed capital put into
operation from capital investments. mgardless of the seeming simplicity for de-
termining the sought indicator. the methodology of calculating it in actuality en-
counters difficulties caused by the presence of expenditures which are only partial-
ly linked to the given volume of fixed capital put into operation (the plans for the
layout and building up of residential districts and so forth).

Let us assume that in the preceding example it has become known that in putting the
mill. in to operation. the statement of the state acceptance comission pointed to in-
complete work and incomplete supply of production tools (according to the estimate)
totaling 310.000 rubles. During the report year for the association, out of capital
investments motor vehicles and machine tools were acquired for reserves (outside of
the construction estimates) at prices envisaged in the plan and for a total of
6210.000 rubles. In addition, equipment and supplies under Article 12 of the budget
eStimate worth 74,000 rubles were purchased for the vocational training school and

the nursery. Then the volume of fixed capital put into operation (according to the
estimated cost) from capital investments for the association as a whole will be in
the report year 2,551- 310+624 - 2,865,000 rubles, while the total volume of fixed

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY

capital put into operation from all financing sources will be 2,865‘t76 - 2,939,000
rubles.

Information on the putting of fixed capital into operation from capital investments
will be found in statistical reporting in Form No 2-ks and the appendices to it.

In these reports the data on the putting of fixed capital into operation are given
in terms of estimated cost broken down for the sectorial purpose of the fixed capi-
tal projects and their structure and as a whole also for actual cost.

56. Studying Plan Fulfillment and the Dynamics of Putting Capacity and Fixed
Capital into Operation

The carrying out of the grandiose tasks to develop the Soviet national economy to a
significant degree depends upon the successful implementation of the capital con-
struction programs. The task for statistics is to thoroughly describe the result of
plan fulfillment and namely to give a general estimate and disclose the structure
for carrying out the plan for putting projects into operation, to disclose the rea-
sons impeding the prompt and complete finishing of construction for capacity and
projects and to disclose reserves for accelerating and reducing the coat of con—
struction.

A most general notion of the studied question can be gained by determining the per-
centage of plan fulfillment for putting capacity and fixed capital into operation
and the absolute deviations from the plan. The indicators calculated for data in
physical units make it possible to disclose the material and physical content of
fulfilling the plan for putting projects into operation. However the opportunity

of obtaining general descriptions on the basis of physical measurements is extremely
limited. An overall approximate estimate for plan fulfillment can be gained by com—
paring the number of projects actually put into operation (starting-up complexes,
enterprises and so forth) with that provided in the plan during the report period.
The conditionality of such an indicator is obvious as one is comparing aggregates
which consist of projects which are extremely different in terms of purpose, size,
capacity and other features.

The total percentage of fulfilling the plan for putting capacity into operation is
calculated only for groups of projects and starting-up complexes which are the

same in terms of purpose and functions performed and as expressed in uniform units
of their capacity. For example, the fulfillment of the plan for putting into oper-
ation power plants, blast furnaces, rolling mills, housing and so forth is described
in this manner. In determining the indicators for plan fulfillment it is essential
to consider the capacity and the projects which are included only in-the given ag-
gregate of builders (a department, republic, economic region and so forth) and,
naturally, those which were envisaged by the plan in the report period.

The methodology of calculating the relative and absolute indicators for the fulfill-
ment of the plan for putting fixed capital into operation is analogous to the one
examined above for capacity with the sole difference that in the given case the es-
timated cost of the projects put into operation is compared, that is:

and A - £q1p¢.-£szpcm,

51

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
I'll“ OtHCIAI. “3!; ONLY

where qpp, q,-—the projects put into operation in physical units according to the
plan and actually;
pen-estimated prices (estimated unit cost).

These indicators, in contrast to the ones examined above (in physical units), can be
calculated for any aggregate of projects. starting-up complexes or builders (in
terms of affiliation, sectorial jurisdiction, territorial placement and so forth)
and, consequently, they are applicable for a general description of the fulfillment
of five-year as well as annual plans in a running total. In turn, the high degree
of commonness in these indicators raises a number of demands in terms of observing
the comparability of the actual and planned amounts of fixed capital put into oper-
ation. The provisions of the methodology for calculating the indicator of plan ful-
fillment are given in the instructions on drawing up the plan and for filling out
the statistical reporting forms. In particular, in observing the principle of com-
parability for the range of objects under study, the actual volume of fixed capital
put into operation should include the projects (starting-up complexes and so forth)
which are designated in the plan for the report period. However, in practice, for
the purposes of encouraging accelerated construction, a deviation from this princi-
ple is permitted and namely the projects put into operation ahead of time are ac-
counted for in the fulfillment of the plan but the plan itself is not changed here.

The builder is the primary element in which plan fulfillment is determined for com-
pleting capacity and fixed capital. Let us show a calculation of the designated in-

dicators using the example of a production association for the report year (Table
111.2).

Table 111.2

.____________________———————————-——

Putting of fixed capital into operation,
1,000 rubles of estimated cost

_________—________.———-——-——-————

According to plan

 
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 

Name of Projects

!
|

   
  

Including
ahead of
time

Previous
years

 
  

 

Report year

 

_.—... ——_—__————

Compressor station
Raw materials warehouse

Boiler plant and garage
Liquid fuel warehouse

Model shop

The percentage of fulfilling the plan for putting fixed capital into operation dur-
ing the report year for the production association will be:

274+212+ 1,298 _ 1,784

1,713 1.718 . 1.038, or 103.8 percent,

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
which means the overfulfillment of the plan by 3.8 percent or 66,000 rubles (1,784-
1.718). The calculated indicator is a balance one and it has been obtained as a
result of adding the deviations from the plan for putting fixed capital into opera-
tion in the direction of overfulfillment (212,000 rubles) and nonfulfillment
446,000 rubles). that is, 1,781. - 1,718 - 212 + (271. - 286)+(1,298 - 1,314) + (0 - 118);
21211-146) - 66.

The result of the calculation made can be used in analyzing the fulfillment of the
plan for putting fixed capital into operation by the builder. Here it is important
to draw attention to the total nonfulfillment of the plan at the expense of the

cost of work provided in the estimate but not carried out at the project put into
operation and because of the incomplete delivery of equipment. The nonfulfillment
of this portion of the plans is the reason for the discrepancy in the estimated cost
of projects put into operation according to the plan and the actual one. The cost
of the unfulfilled work and undelivered equipment is usually indicated in the state—
ment of the state acceptance commission but it can also be determined by calculation
as the difference of the full estimated cost of the completed project as given in
the plan and the estimated cost of the fixed capital actually put into operation for
this project. In our example this amount will be (286-274)+-(l,314-l,298) -
28,000 rubles.

The evaluation and analysis of fulfillment of the plan for putting fixed capital in-
to operation for the aggregate of builders differ from the above-examined method-

ology in the more complicated calculations since in a summary description there are
additional factors which are not of significance in evaluating the work of an indi-
vidual builder. The task of summary analysis consists not only in an overall esti-
mate of plan fulfillment but also elucidating the role of the component parts (de-
viations from the plan) characterizing the result of the specific organizational
actions of the builders. From an example let us demonstrate the possibilities of
summary analysis for the fulfillment of the plan to put fixed capital into opera-
tion on a departmental level (Table 111.3).

The percentage of fulfilling the plan for putting fixed capital into operation for
the department as a whole is determined by comparing the fixed capital actually
put into operation and planned for the builders during the report year and that
completed ahead of time with the volume of putting into operation according to the
plan, that is,

21 4724-1 793 23 265
—l—_l_.o I o I
25,486 100 ing§§ 100 91.3 percent,

or the nonfulfillment of the plan by 2,221,000 rubles which is 8.7 percent.

In analyzing the overall result for fulfilling the plan for putting fixed capital
into operation, it is advisable to determine its component parts formed from the
deviations in the direction of an overfulfillment and nonfulfillment of the plan by
each builder. For this let us separately add up the results of the same-sign devia-
tions from the plan, that is, with the sign (+) and with the sign (-). 1n the ex-
ample (col. 8) the volume of nonfulfillment of the plan for putting fixed capital
into operation is: 1,694,000 rubles, that is, (1,015-t679), while the volume of
fixed capital envisaged by the plan but not put into operation is -3,915,000

rubles (-814)4-(-1,601)4-(-l,500). The total deviations equal the balance indi-
cator, that is, l,694-+(-3,915) = -2,221,000 rubles.

53

FOR 0F?1C1AL.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 111.3

    

1 llauospatosnaa 5 M
mPTH 2
nVaoOpemIﬂ
o Comm-nous
p naamuc

  

q Bcero

Key: a--Name of builders (plant); b--Putting of fixed capital into
operation according to plan in report year, 1,000 rubles of
estimated cost; c--Fixed capital actually put into operation
in report year, 1,000 rubles of estimated cost; d-Cost of work
envisaged in estimate but not carried out, 1,000 rubles of
estimated cost; e--Tota1; f--1ncluding planned for first time;
g--Envisaged in plan of report year; h--1ncluding for first
time; i--Ahead of time; j--Inc1uding for the first time for
planned projects; k-Deviation from plan for putting into
operation (col. 3-col. l-+col. S); l-Paint; m-1ndustrial
rubber products; n--Fertilizers; o--Sanitary-hygiene; pa-
plastics; q--Tota1.

The absolute deviations from the plan can be shown in a relative expression if they
are compared with a common base, that is, with the amount of fixed capital put into

operation according to the plan. In the example, we have:

-3 915 l 694 -2 221
_L__- _J___- -—J._- c _ I— .
25,686 loo-+25,486 100 25,686 100, lS.34-6.6 8.7 percent

From the analytical calculations it can be concluded that, as a consequence of the
early putting of the projects into operation, the overall plan fulfillment was in-
creased by 6.6 percent and because of the nonfulfillment of the plan by individual
builders this was reduced by 15.3 percent. This led to an overall nonfulfillment

of the plan for putting fixed capital into operation of 8.7 percent for the depart-

ment .

In using the accounting data of the builder, it is possible to go further in analyz-
ing the fulfillment of the plan for putting fixed capital into operation. In par-
ticular, in possessing information on the composition of the projects and starting-
up complexes completed in the report period, similar to that given in cols. 2, 4,

5, 6 and 7 of Table 111.3, it is possible to disclose additional component elements
in the deviation from the plan and thereby disclose certain common factors for this

Sh

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
phenomenon and the force of their action which are of importance for managing the
department's activities. A balance sheet comparison of the composition of the plan-

ned and actual completion of fixed capital lies at the basis of this analytical cal-
culation.

The composition of the fixed capital put into operation (q) in capital construction
planning practices includes, in the first place, the cost of the projects the com-
pletion of which is envisaged for the first time in the plan (a), and secondly, the
cost of projects the completion of which was planned for previous years (b). The
actual putting of fixed capital into operation is formed from the same component
parts and, in addition. it can also include projects put into operation ahead of
time (c). Under the conditions of scientifically sound planning and normal produc-
tion operations in capital construction, the putting of fixed capital into operation
should consist solely of the first group of projects. The presence of projects from
the second group shows violations in planning, designing and construction. The ac-
tual putting of fixed capital into operation can also deviate from what was estab-
lished by the plan by the value of the work provided for in the estimate for the
projects but not carried out as well as by the cost of undelivered equipment, tools
and supplies also envisaged in the estimate (d).

Let us solve the posed analytical problem in a general form. For this in addition
to the previously indicated let us adopt the following index designations:

A3 and Ab--the estimated cost of projects not put into operation in report period
and included, respectively, in the plan for the first time and repeatedly;

da and db--the estimated cost of incomplete work for projects put into operation in

the report period and included, respectively, in the plan for the first
time and repeatedly.

By the symbols "0" and "l" we will designate, respectively, the plan and report
data. Let us represent the putting of fixed capital into operation by the component
parts needed for analysis. According to the plan we have qo - ao-tbo, and actually

ql"—'0I+61"":=(‘0+Aa+dg)+(bo‘i'4n+(lp)+0.-

In the given algebraic expression, the deviations from the plan (Aa~ Ab, d3, db)
theoretically can be accepted as both positive and negative values. However, in
practice these deviations can either equal zero (the plan was fulfilled by 100 per-
cent) or characterize the nonfulfillment of the plan, that is. assume negative
values. The overfulfillment of the plan, that is, the early putting into operation,
in the given expression is represented by an independent, always positive value (c).
Let us subtract the planned from the actual indicator and let us regroup the terms
into a combination which makes economic sense. Here it is essential to bear in
mind that depending upon the quantity of data, the problem of analyzing the fulfill-
ment of the plan for putting fixed capital into operation can be carried out with a
varying degree of detailing. Let us show several variations.

The first variation:

qu—4.=l(0.+6.+d.)+(b.+A.+d.)+€.—(¢n+b.)l=
—(A,+A,)+(d.+d,)+c.=a+d+c..

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UH'ILIAI. use ONLY

In this instance, A characterizes the full estimated cost of the projects envisaged
in the plan but not put into operation during the report period; d expresses the
overall estimated cost of the work envisaged in the estimate but not carried out and
the undelivered equipment, supplies and so forth for the projects put into operation;
cl—the cost of the projects completed ahead of time and put into operation. These
component parts of the overall deviation from the plan can easily be determined:

c1 is the total of col. 5, d is the total of col. 6, while A - (ql-qo)-c1-d,

L's-‘t is. [-2,221- 1,793- (-569)] - 3,445,000 rubles.

The second variation:
4,—an(A‘+d‘)+(A.+d,)+€.=ha+h,+€..

In this expression, ha - A‘i-da characterizes the overall estimated cost of fixed
capital not put into operation (completely and partially) for projects the comple-
tion of which is planned for the first time, hb - Ab+db—the overall estimated cost
of fixed capital not put into operation (completely or partially) for projects the
completion of which was already planned in previous years, that is, for them the
first planned date for the completion of construction has already been passed. In
the example, the absolute value ha which is a part of the deviation from the plan
is defined as the difference between the actual and planned putting of fixed capital
into operation for the projects envisaged in the plan for the first time, that is,
col. 4-col. 2, or ha = 14,991- 17,506 - -2,515,000 rubles, while the absolute
amount hb is determined from the example's data as (the total of col. 3 - col. 4)

- (result of col. l-col. 2), that is:

hb I [(21,472- 14,991) - (25,486 - 17,506” . -1,499,000 rubles.

The third. most developed variation for analyzing the fulfillment of the plan for
putting fixed capital into operation for the aggregate of builders is represented

by five components which make economic sense:

gl_qu=Aa+Ab+dm+dD+‘-l'

Regardless of the fact that all the remaining parts of the general deviation from
the plan are simple indicators. they can be directly determined only from the ac-
counting data of the builders. In our example, there are no direct data for each

of the five components but they can be obtained by calculation. We will determine
the value of “a if, from the total value of the fixed capital envisaged in the plan
for the first time but not put into operation (ha - Aa+da) equal to -2,515,000
rubles (14.991- 17,506) we subtract the value of the work envisaged in the estimate
but not carried out (db) with this cost being a component part of the overall devia-
tion and equal to (-434,000 rubles) (col. 7), that is. (-2.515) - (-434) - -2,081,000

rubles.

The total cost of projects not put into operation but repeatedly provided for in the
annual plans (Ab) can be determined by subtracting from the expression hb - Ab+db
the value db which is also a component part of the general deviation. The value of
db is obtained as the difference of the total of col. 6 and col. 7, that is, (-569)
- (-434) - -13S,000 rubles. Hence Ab - (-1.499) - (-135) - -1,364,000 rubles.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF1f1AL USIZCNULY

Thus, in our example, the complete breakdown of the total deviation for the compo-
nent parts is as follows:

-2,221 . (-2.081) + (-1.364) + (-6310) + (-135) + 1,793.

A study of the dynamics of the volume of putting capacity and fixed capital into
operation is an independent problem in statistics. In solving it, statistics dis-
closes the scale and rate of fixed capital reproduction, the role of capital con-
struction in this and its impact upon the development of the material and technical
base of all national economic sectors.

The time series and indexes (growth rates) provide an overall notion of the change
in the volume of putting capacity and fixed capital into operation over time. The
methodology for calculating the relative indicators for the dynamics of the amount
of putting capacity and fixed capital into operation is not fundamentally different.
In particular, the volumes for the fixed capital put into operation for comparable
periods in calculating the index and in the time series should be expressed in the
same estimated prices, usually in the current ones (see 53, Chapter III). In this
indicator it is essential to consider all the projects which have been completed
and put into operation and which relate to the given aggregate, regardless of the
adopted planning procedure. Depending upon the set task, it is essential to also
consider the other statistical requirements for the comparability of time series
levels (comparability in terms of the unit of measurement for capacity, territorial,
departmental and methodological comparability).

The dynamics of putting capacity and fixed capital into operation, like the fulfill-
ment of the plan for these indicators, is better described in various aspects, and
namely within the limits of construction as a national economic sector, from capital
investments, for fixed capital created and acquired from all financing sources, that
is, capital investments, the state budget and the personal funds of the public taken
together. An evaluation of plan fulfillment and the dynamics of putting fixed capi-
tal and capacity into operation in statistical practices is made in a breakdown for
the major capital construction groupings in terms of economic purpose and national
economic sectors, areas of fixed capital reproduction, according to affiliation and

the territorial placement of the_builders, according to forms of ownership and
others.

55. The Statistical Study of the Duration and Intensity of Construction

Important statistical characteristics for construction are the indicators for the
duration and intensity (rate) of carrying out the process itself. A rise in the
intensity and a shortening of the construction time have a direct impact upon in-
creasing the volume of capacity and fixed capital put into operation, on lowering
the cost of erecting the projects and on increasing capital investment effectiveness.
The task for statistics is to elaborate a system of indicators which characterize
the duration and speed of construction both for the individual projects, enterprises
and so forth as well as on an average basis for their aggregate. There must also be

a methodology for determining the impact of these indicators on capital construction
effectiveness.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
tUK UI‘HLIAL U31: ONLY

A solution to this problem requires a clarification of the concept of the construc-
tion duration. The overall calendar time of the entire investment cycle, from the
start of research to the moment of complete operational readiness of the project or
enterprise (starting—up complex) characterizes the duration of construction. This
period encompasses the time of research, designing, construction, installation and
the starting up of equipment, that is, the putting of the project into operation.
The time of construction work is considered to be the most important, crucial peri-
od in the investment cycle, that is, the period from the moment (day) of starting
construction work in the preparatory period to the putting of the project, capacity
or enterprise as a whole into operation. The duration of construction is viewed
precisely in this sense in planning and statistical practice.

The duration of construction can be accounted for in days, weeks, months and years.
In practice a distinction is made between the normative, design, planned and actual
length or duration of construction. The normed duration of construction is set
from standards approved by the USSR Gosstroy (Construction Standards 460-72). The
design and planned duration of construction is determined on the basis of approved
standards. Statistics records the actual duration of construction.

The date for the actual start on construction is set by a bilateral statement of the
builder and general contractor. The date the state commission signs the statement
for putting the project (enterprise) into operation is considered to be the end of
the construction period.

In solving many questions related to capital construction planning and statistics
the need arises to determine not only the duration for erecting individual projects,
Starting up complexes and enterprises but also the average length of construction
for their aggregate. Regardless of the seeming simplicity in solving this problem,
in 1972-1976, on the pages of the journal VESTNIK STATISTIKI there arose a major
discussion over the methodology of determining the average duration of construc-
tion.3 This made a number of important scientific clarifications for selecting the

type of average and for elucidating the tasks to be carried out using various types
of averages.

For a general description of the length of construction, statistical theory recom-
mends the calculating of several types of averages for the given aggregate of proj-
ects. These averages differ not only in the method of calculation and numerical
value but chiefly in their economic meaning, the essence of which also determines
the choice of the problems for their use. Let us take up certain types of averages
for the duration of construction, illustrating their calculation from the example
of building reinforced concrete products plants (Table 111.6).

From the data in Table 111.6 it is possible to determine the arithmetic average and
the harmonic average, both simple and weighted. As the “weights" it is possible to

use the capacity or cost of the plants. A multiple-valued solution to the problem
confronts statistics with the need for scientifically establishing the choice of

the type and method for calculating the average duration of construction. Here.

 

’vm'rmx smusnxr. No 9. 1972, has 6-9, 1973; No a and 8, 1974.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Duration of plant
construction (I)

Table 111.6

    
  

 

Annual plant
capacity,
1,000 a of
products (N)

Estimated
cost of
plant,

1 .000
rubles (QP)

  
 

 
  
    
 

    
      

Rate of plant

Plant construction (V)

number

    
  

UNH

along with other provisions, it is important to consider the requirements of sta-
tistical theory about the homogeneity of the units in the aggregate in relation to
the feature to be averaged. the presence of a goal for which the average is being
determined, the economic sense of the formula for calculatinz it and their conform-
ity to the determining property of the average.

Let us calculate the average duration of plant construction in years using the for-
mula of the simple arithmetic average (see the designations in the table), that is,

- er

‘1', - n
where n—the nunber of plants (projects).

"Ea _ 2.2+332+3.6 _ % _ 3 years.

In this average, the determining property is expressed by the total calendar dura-
tion for erecting the three plants. This means that a simple aritIIsetic average can
be employed for solving problems in which it is essential to establish the total
duration of building the projects. In other words, it characterizes the average
duration of construction from the technical and organizational aspects. This aver-
age will make sense only for an aggregate of projects (plants) which are uniform in
terms of capacity, cost, composition and other features, since in the given instance
the constructioa project itself and not its consuler property is the measurement of
the aggregate.

The average duration of construction calculated for the formula of the arithmetic
capacity-weighted average in the example equals:

Calculating an average using this formula has the following economic sense: the
numerator describes the conditional product output by the plants over all the years
of their construction (if the duration is expressed in months and not in years, then
capacity and duration will be measured by different units of time). while the

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

denominator gives the total annual capacity of the plants. After dividing this
produces an average duration of plant construction. In contrast to the simple
arithmetic average, this calculated average is oriented at a different determining
property, that is, at the total product output by all plants during the years of
their construction. For this reason the given average can be employed in economic
calculations where it is essential to determine product losses or its additional
output as a consequence of the extending or reducing of construction times. This
method for calculating the average duration of construction is frequently applied
in planning.

If in the formula for the weighted arithmetic average the estimated cost of the
enterprises is used as the "weights," then the formula for the average is difficult
to interpret economically. Its numerator stop does not directly express any eco-
nomic concept. as is not the case in the previous instances. The absence of a clear
economic sense does not make it possible to formulate the conditions of the problem
in the solution to which the arithmetic average weighted for estimated cost could
be applied. However, what has been stated does not completely exclude the use of
this average.

The average duration of construction using a formula for a simple harmonic average
in our example equals:

1,, =__.i-=-I————I-= 2.87 years.

This average will make sense if all the projects in the aggregate are of the same
type. Under the conditions of our example. like a simple arithmetic average. its
use is not applicable due to the heterogeneity (in terms of capacity) in the studied
aggregate of new construction sites. It is oriented at a number of simultaneously
erected projects and, consequently, is applicable in problems which take this con-
dition into account.

The harmonic average for the duration of construction when weighted for plant capac-
ity in the example equals:

— ‘ 0 .
Thw 1%um=%= 3.1 years.
.rr ﬁ+ﬁ+ﬁ

The economic sense of calculating the average using this formula is obvious. This
average is related to the total amount of plant production capacity put into opera-

tion and this is also its determining property and, consequently. the chief condi-
tion for the economic problems solved with its aid. The designated method for calcu-

lating the average duration of construction has been adopted in the practice of the
USSR TsSU.

For calculating the weighted harmonic average, it is possible to proceed from the
estimated cost of the projects (enterprises). In the example. such an average will
equal:

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

f _20u= tmo+2mo+2mo _.mo__ 6
hw"‘TQ_, m-m- 3-° Yea"-
u—r Tr+17r+Tr

In contrast to the previous one, the obtained average is oriented at the total vol-
ume of capital investments for building all the enterprises. This is also its de-
termining property which is the main condition of the problems solved by the given
average. In the practices of the USSR TsSU, this average is calculated in instances
when it is necessary to determine the average duration for projects having a differ-
ent unit of measure-ent for capacity. The use of various methods for calculating
the average duration of construction in planning and statistical practices compli-
cates a comparative evaluation of the construction results. For this reason an im-
portant conditions for the comparability of the average actual construction times
with the design. planned and normed ones is a uniform methodology for determining
the averages. A clear formulation of the conditions for the economic problem must
be considered an essential prerequisite for correctly choosing the type of average.

In analyzing the duration of construction it is advisable to compare individual
projects, starting-up complexes. enterprises as well as their various groups for
this indicator. For this the actual length of construction is ordinarily compared
with that approved by the plan and the normed and in addition the last two indi-
cators are compared between each other. In this manner the absolute and relative
deviations are calculated as is shown in Table 111.5 using the example of three
chemical fiber plants.

Table 111.5

  
  

  
  
 

 

Deviation of actual

length of construction
from planned

Actual Months

Pull capacity actually
put into operation,
1,000 tons of fiber

per month

  
 
  
 

Length of construction,
months

  

Plant
number

     
 

   

  
 

Planned

UNH

 

Average

Information on the length of construction for enterprises and their production
capacity can be used for determining the amount of conditional losses in product
output as a consequence of exceeding the construction times of the plants. The
solution to this problem is provided by the capacity-weighted arithmetic average
which is calculated in the table. As is seen from the calculations, the average
actual duration of plant construction (66.3 months) was increased in comparison
with the average planned length (43.3 months) by 3 months or 7 percent. The amount
of losses as a consequence of extending the construction times is obtained by multi-
plying the total volume of production capacity for the enterprises under construc-
tion (calculated per unit of time as adopted for expressing the duration of con-
struction) by the deviation of the average length of construction. that is,

61

IWJR 0FF1CJAI.lEHE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Q . NATab' 1n the example this is 3'05 - 135,000 tons of chemical fiber. The same
amount can be obtained by a direct calculation (10'54-15-3-t20-2 - 135).

To a certain degree the duration of construction is a synthetic indicator the
amount of which is influenced by numerous factors related to construction work,

the organization and designing of enterprises, the area of their construction and
so forth. The use of statistical groupings in factor analysis for the duration of
project and enterprise construction makes it possible to establish in a general form
the nature of its dependence upon the individual factors, for example, upon the
amount of production capacity (Table 111.6). its composition by projects, technical
and design features of the projects, territorial placement and so forth. A more
thorough study of the duration of construction can be carried out on the basis of
correlation regression analysis making it possible to measure the closeness of the
link of the resulting and factor features as well as to obtain multifactor models
for the construction duration of the projects.

Table 111.6

  
   
    
 

 
   
   
   

   
   
     
 

   
    
    

Total length of Rate of construction,

Capacity actually

    
        

Plant put into operation, construction, capacity in 1,000 Growth
groups 1,000 tons of months tons per month rate for
by pro- product per year speed of
duction I construc-
volume tion

     
    

 

Total 225
Key: a--Previous five-year plan; b--Current five-year plan

   

In a statistical study of the duration of construction, the characteristics of the
intensity or speed of carrying out this process are of importance. The indicator
for the rate of construction is expressed by the amount of capacity put into opera-
tion per unit of time (the direct value of the speed or rate), that is. v - NIT.
These indicators can be calculated not only for individual projects but also for
groups of projects which are similar in terms of the features of purpose or amount
of capacity, design and production solutions and so forth (see Table 111.6).

The methodology for calculating the average speed of construction for projects does
not differ from the one examined for individual projects. The table gives an exam-
ple of building bakeries in a republic during the current (report) and previous
(base) five-year plans.

Information on the duration of project construction is contained in the builder's
accounting documents (the statement of the state acceptance commission) as well as

in a number of statistical reports (forms No 8-ks, l-ef and others) and in the
planning documents (title lists of the projects and the intrasite title lists).

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

56. The Relationship of the Basic Indicators in Capital Construction Statistics

in a statistical study of capital construction, various indicators are employed
which reflect the process of fixed capital reproduction. From the viewpoint of im-
portance there stands out the group of basic indicators which most fully describe
the results of this sector's operations in fixed capital reproduction. These in-
clude: the putting of capacity and fixed capital into operation, capital invest-
ments and incomplete construction. An isolated evaluation of capital construction
results from the basic indicators at the present level of statistical economics
analysis is insufficient and a comprehensive and systematic approach to solving
this problem is required. An elucidation of the relationships between the basic
capital construction indicators also creates a theoretical premise for employing a

use of capital investments, their distribution and concentration, and in ensuring
the fulfillment of quotas related to the putting of fixed capital and production
capacity into operation.

The relationship between the basic capital construction indicators is expressed in
variOus forms. Under present-day conditions, the balance relation and the ratios
of the basic indicators have assumed the greatest importance. 0n the basis of the
balance method it is possible to construct several schemes for the relationship of
the indicators using data in physical and cost terms. In the first instance this

will be a balance for the number of construction sites the simplest scheme of which
is shown in Table 111.7.

Table 111.7

  

  
   

Resources Distribution

       

1. Construction sites on hand
at year's start (Fa/s)

1. Sites put into opera-
tion in report year

(to)
including starting-up

     
  

241.6
224.6

 
 

including starting-up

    

2. Newly commenced sites in
report year (Ynew)

 

2. Sites on hand at
year's end (fa/e)

  
  
 
 
   

716.0

  

including starting—up including starting-up

of report year

   
  
 
   

  

Total

Key: a--Number of construction sites; b--Pu11 estimated cost of sites.
million rubles

The relationship of the indicators in this balance can he represented by the expres-

sion ra/s-O-rnew - r°-+ra/e. For the purposes of analysis, the positions of the bal-
ance can be differentiated. For example, the total number of construction sites at

the beginning of the period is represented by groups formed in terms of the features
of the state of the construction sites, the dates of their beginning and completion,

purpose, cost and so forth. From the data of a multiposition balance it is possible

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul‘l‘l‘. IA]. l-Sh UNI.)

to determine the indicators for the structure of the total number of sites in the
report period in the aim. for example, of disclosing the dispersion or concentra-
tion of capital construction and other tasks. In the example the share of the num-
ber of starting-up projects in the total number of those in operation during the

year was 29.9% 1233137400 I, while the share actually put into operation was

-25.7z gig duo] that is, it declined. In turn, the share of the number of projects

not complete at the year's end rose in comparison with their number at the beginning
of the year, respectively. from 69.10 to 71.8 percent. The nonfulfillment of the
quotas for putting starting-up projects into operation and the increase in the abso-

lute and relative expression of incomplete construction show a dispersion of capital
investments.

0n the basis of this same scheme, it is possible to construct a balance for the
sites in terms of the full estimated cost. lts difference from the balance in phys-
ical terms consists solely in the cost orientation of the same balance positions and
this makes it possible to unite them in one table (see Table 111.7). This balance
solves analogous problems but now in a cost aspect. This makes it more homogeneous
and eliminates the conditionalities related to the numerous different features of
the projects and sites. The structure indicators worked out from the data of the
cost balance more accurately reflect the existing conditions in the capital con-
struction proportions. Thus, in the example. the proportional amount of sites at
the year's start according to the estimated cost is 72.6 percent and this is higher
than the proportional amount of the number of construction sites (69.4 percent).
This shows the presence of larger sites in the composition of incomplete construc-
tion at the year's start than in the composition of the newly commenced ones.

The capital investment balance“ is of independent significance and it can be con-
structed both in terms of the estimated cost (Table III.8) as well as in terms of
the actual. The relationship of the cost indicators for capital construction in it
is characterized by the expression U5+Kc - VC+C+Ue. The scheme for the capital
investment balance can be modified on the basis of the previously examined groupings
and this will make it possible to study the structure of incomplete construction.
capital investments and putting of capacity into operation as well as obtain ratios

for these indicators reflecting the particular features of the capital construction
process.

The second form for a quantitative expression of the relationship for the basic
capital conscruction indicators is characterized by their ratios in the form of
relative units of plan fulfillment, intensity and so forth. Under the actually
.-xisting conditions of deviation from the plan, each basic indicators can have a
vary ing direction and value and this creates a number of variations each of which
leads to certain economic conclusions. Here. as a consequence of the balance link
between the indicators, the levels of fulfillment and the directions of their devia-
tions from the plan cannot develop m'bitrarily and this must be considered in

"ln the given case it is a question of a statistical balance and not a bookkeeping
one.

64

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

million
rubles

Table 111.8

 
 
      
 
   

 
 
 
      
     
       
     
 

million

Resources rubles

Distribution

1. Incomplete construction at 1. Fixed capital put into

year's start (Us) operation over year (Vc) 278
2. Volume of capital investments 2. Written off by established
carried out over year (Kc) procedure (C) 14

3. Incomplete construction at
year's end (Ue)

analyzing the fulfillment of the capital construction plan. For example, if the
capital investment plan in the report year has not been fulfilled. then under no

conditions is it possible to fulfill or overfulfill the plan for putting fixed
capital into operation or the plan for the incomplete construction on hand at the
year's end simultaneously.’

0n the basis of the examined capital construction cost indicators it is possible to
calculate intensity indicators and in particular to construct three pairs (direct
and inverse) of relative values:

K v v "C. "c K
Vandi, —and . Kanduc.

where V—the volume of fixed capital put into operation over the report period;
K--the volume of capital investments over the report period:
Ucnincomplete construction at the end of the report period.

Since each pair of relative values (direct and inverse) in essence reflects the same
relationship of economic phenomena. in the system of indicators it is enough to ex-
amine one indicator of each pair. One of the properties of this sysyem of indi-
cators is that the product of the three relative values for intensity equals one,
that is:

K.V."c. 2.32.5.
VUCT l (l), or K V "c 1- (2)

This property makes it possible to use it primarily for control purposes in check-
ing the correct calculation of the indicators.‘ Each of the three indicators in
this system has a specific economic sense and at the same time can be viewed as the
normed amount of one basic capital construction indicator in relation to the second.

5It is assumed that the plan and its actual fulfillment have been determined in ac-
cord with the planning and statistical principles.

‘Below we will use formula (1).

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a consequence of the balance relation in the basic capital construction indica-
tors, the relative values of intensity cannot assume arbitrary values and this makes
it possible to use them in elaborating norms. in particular for incomplete construc-
tion.

The relative indicator expressed by the value % characterizes the ratio of the value

of all material, labor and financial expenditures going to the reproduction of fixed
capital during the given period and the amount (value) of fixed capital which has
completed construction in this period and gone into operation. Under the conditions
of simple and even fixed capital reproduction this amount equals one. However, in
actuality, these conditions do not occur as socialist production is expanded produc-
tion and the projects being created differ in terms of the duration and cost of con-
struction and for other features. Here one group of factors, for example, technical
progress and industrialization of construction. tend to reduce this indicator, while
another, for example an increase in the capital investment rate or a greater number
of large projects with a long completion date, leads to the growth of this indicator.
For this reason the amount of the ratio will be greater or less than one depending
upon what production conditions have been dominant in the report period.

The relative indicator expressed by the value 6L characterizes the ratio of the
c

tal construction backlog. An increase in this indicator or the maintaining of it on
the previous level, in following the planned conditions and growth rates for the
capital investment volume. means successful capital construction activities.

U
The relative indicator expressed by the amount 7? characterizes the ratio of assets

diverted for fixed capital reproduction at the end of the period and the amount of
capital investments used in the given period. This indicator which is calculated
for an annual period can be conditionally interpreted as the average duration of

utilizing the assets (in years) as embodied in incomplete construction at the year's
end. In practice this same indicator is adopted as the normed value in planning
calculations.

The above-examined relationships can be employed in factor index analysis and in
regression correlation analysis of capital construction activities.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER IV: THE STATISTICAL STUDY OF CAPITAL INVESTMENT ECONOMIC EFFECTIVENESS
51. Basic Areas in the Statistical Study of Economic Effectiveness

The enormous scope of capital construction being carried out in our nation puts in
the forefront the problem of increasing capital investment effectiveness. The deci—
sions of the 25th CPSU Congress state that “in capital construction the basic task

is to increase capital investment effectiveness and to ensure the further growth

and quality improvement of the fixed capital, the rapid completion and development
of new productive capital in all the national economic sectors by improving planning.
designing and the organization of construction work, shortening the time and lower-

ing the cost of construction.1

Statistics has been confronted with the important task of working out a system and
methodology for the indicators characterizing the levels of the actual economic
effectiveness of capital investments into national economic fixed capital. The im-
portance and timeliness of this task are determined by the need of monitoring the
achieving of the efficiency levels set in the designs and plans, by the need for a
scientific basis for the normed and planned effectiveness indicators and by the im-
portance and the analysis of the disclosure of reserves for raising capital invest-
ment effectiveness. The task of statistics is also to improve the observation of
the actual capital investment effectiveness. in particular sampling surveys of indi-
vidual enterprises and production complexes.

In the statistical study of capital investment effectiveness it is advisable to dif-
ferentiate two areas which have independent systems of indicators and various evalu—
ation criteria. One area encompasses the aggregate of indicators reflecting the
effectiveness of the reproduction cycle in which capital investments operate as an
element of society's expenditures in the expanded reproduction process and expresses
the national economic aspect of their effectiveness. For this reason in the given

instance the increase in national income (net product) as well as the product or
profit created as a result of applying the fixed productive capital into which the
funds were invested is adopted as the economic effect from the capital investments.

The other area unites the indicators which characterize capital investment effective
ness as expenditures in a specific national economic sector, that is, construction,
and thereby reflects the sectorial aspect of effectiveness. In this instance the

____———-——-—

“'Haterialy xxv s"yezda loss," 1) 211.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

end result of production activities in the given sector, that is, the completion of
construction and the putting of fixed capital into operation, is the economic ef-
fect from the capital investments made in capital construction. A study of the
effectiveness of construction work and design-research activities comprises inde-
pendent component parts of this area.

52. A Statistical Study of the Economic Effectiveness of Capital Investments in
the National Economic Aspect

The economic effectiveness of capital investments, in being viewed within expanded
socialist reproduction, reflects the national economic approach to solving the giv-
en problem. Por this reason, the indicators and methodology in a statistical study
of actual capital investment effectiveness are based upon the common theoretical
principles given in the Standard Procerdure2 and which are required in the calcula-
tions and establishing of capital investment effectiveness in all national economic
sectors. Let us examine these indicators and the methodology of calculating them.

Capital investment effectiveness is expressed by the ratio of effect and expendi-
tures. Here a distinction is drawn between the indicators for the overall (abso-
lute) and comparative capital investment effectiveness. The indicators for overall

capital investment effectiveness for the national economy, its sectors and the Union
republics are calculated using the formulas:

zca-— or Tea-E,

where lean-the coefficient for the overall (absolute) capital investment effective-
ness;
Tcauthe capital intensiveness or capital-output ratio of national income;
AD--the increase in the annual volume of national income (net product);
K--capital investments causing an increase in national income (net product).

For the individual sectors and types of production in industry, transportation, ag-
riculture and so forth as well as for the ministries and departments, if net prod-

uct is not calculated for them, the economic effectiveness of capital investments
can be determined on the basis of profit using the formulas:

ch . T or TCP - —

where ZcP--effectiveness coefficient;

Tc --the repayment time of capital investments;
ABnthe increase in annual profit;

2Sec: "Tipovaya metodika opredeleniya ekonomicheskoy effektivnosti kapital'nykh
vlozheniy, utverzhdennaya 8 sentyabrya 1969 g. Gosplanon SSSR, Gostroyem SSSR 1
AN 8558" [Standard Procedure for Determining Economic Effectiveness of Caiptsl In-

vestments as Approved on 8 September 1969 by the USSR Gosplan, the USSR Gosstroy
and the USSR Academy of Sciences], Moscow, Bkonomika, 1969.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K-capital investments into building production-end projects causing an
increase in profit.

The overall economic effectiveness of capital investments into the construction of
individual enterprises as well as for individual measures is determined on the basis

of profits using the formulas:

.E ._K_
Zcp K or Tcp H-C ,

where Zcp-effectiveness coefficient;
Tc --repayment time for capital investments;
8--the value of annual product output according to the plans (in enterprise
wholesale prices);
C-the costs of annual product output.

In instances when the enterprises operate at a planned loss, the effect is character-
ized by the savings established as a result of reducing product costs as a conse-
quence of employing the given capital investments.

The comparative economic effectiveness of capital investments is characterized by a
comparison of different variations of new construction and reconstruction of exist-
ing enterprises. The minimum adjusted expenditures is the indicator for the high-
est comparative effectiveness for capital investments into different construction
variations. The latter expressed the total current expenditures and capital invest—
ments adjusted for the same unit. In terms of the production volume per year the
adjusted expenditures are determined using the formula Pe - C-fEnK and for the capi-
tal investment repayment time using the formula Pr - K-fThC,

where Bn-the normed effectiveness coefficient;
Tn--the normed repayment time. For the national economy these are equal, re-
spectively. to 0.12 and 8.3 years.

In the formulas for the adjusted expenditures, the costs of the product and capital
investments for projects which are equal in capacity are set in the full amounts and
for different-capacity projects in the form of proportional expenditures per unit of
product. In instances when the compared variations differ not only in terms of con-
struction times but also in the distribution of the share of capital investments

over the years and current expenditures change over time, the need arises of adjust-
ing these expenditures made at different times to the initial moment of time by mul-

tiplying them by the reduction factor B - (1+;n) . equal to 0.08 for the national

economy as a whole. where t-the period of the reduction time in years.

The designated indicators of the Standard Procedure for Determining Economic Effec-
tiveness have been well worked out for the stages of construction designing and
planning. However, the direct application of these same indicators in studying
actual captial investment effectiveness encounters difficulties related to obtain-
ing the initial data and mainly to observing the demands of their statistical com-
parability. for example, in terms of the object of observation (the aggregate of
enterprises. measures and so forth). in terms of the time of making the capital

69

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
l-UK Ul'l'lt'lAL Ubt. ONLY

investments and obtaining an effect, in terms of the methodology of prices and cal-
culating the cost indicators and so forth. At present these difficulties have been
partially overcome and statistical theory and practice possess a methodology for
measuring the level of actual economic effectiveness for capital investments.

In 1973, the Capital Construction Administration of the USSR TsSU and the USSR TsSU
Scientific Research Institute for the first time worked out a "Procedure for the
Statistical Study of Capital Investment Economic Effectiveness." Since 1974, the
USSR TsSU using this procedure has begun each year to make one-shot samplings of the
actual economic effectiveness of capital investments into industrial production ca-
pacity which has been put into operation. Subsequently the system of indicators em-

ployed by the statistical bodies like the work itself of conducting the samplings
have been improved and enlarged.

The repayment (recoverage) time and the effectiveness coefficient of capital invest-
ments are among the basic indicators reflecting the level of actual capital invest-
ment effectiveness. The former indicator characterizes the length of the period
during which the total actually earned profit reaches the amount of the actually
made capital investments. The latter indicator expresses a relative amount charac-
terizing that portion of the actually used capital investments which on an annual
average has been repaid out of profit. This amount is inverse to the length of time
for capital investment repayment. Thus, in determining actual effectiveness one
considers the actually obtained profit and not its fixed amount as is done in de-
sign and planning calculations.

The economic sense of the actual effectiveness indicators predetermines the area of
their application and the particular features of the methodology involved in calcu-
lating them. The actual repayment time of capital investments is directly deter-
mined for the individual enterprises and production capacity which have already been
paid off in the operating period. In the instances when the capital investments
have not been repaid, it is possible to determine only the anticipated date of their
repayment. The methodology for calculating the actual repayment date differs also
depending upon the nature of construction and the procedure for putting the capacity
and projects into operation. The least conditionality is permitted in calculating
the indicators for the actual effectiveness of new construction sites while the
greatest is permitted for reconstruction and expansion of existing enterprises with

their partial putting into operation. Let us take up the individual fundamentally
important provisions of the methodology.3

it is recommended that the capital investment repayment time be expressed in years
but shorter units of time are also possible. The overall formula for calculating
this indicator is as follows:

f . l H
Ti T1+T1+T1 ,

3"Hctodikn statistichcskngn izucheniya ekonomichcskoy effektivnosti kapital'nykh
vlozheniy" [Procedure for a Statistical Study of Capital Investment Economic Effec-
tiveness], Moscow, NII TsSU SSSR, 1973.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
where Ti--the duration of the enterprise's operation during the year it was put into
operation (in years);
T1-the number of the enterprise' s complete operating years during the period
of repaying the capital investments;

T1—-the duration of the repayment period during the year this is completed
(in years).

The amounts of time T1 and T2 are insignificant and as a total they comprise not
more than 2 years. However, the determining of them provides the greatest diffi-
culty in calculating the recovery time. One of the existing methods for establish-
ing these component parts consists in the following. The amount T1, as a portion of
the first operating year, is obtained by dividing the number of months the enter-
prise operates during this year (T' ) by 12, that is, T':12. The second component
part of the recovery time (T1) is also expressed in years and is determined propor-

tionately to the profit during the year the recovery is complete, that is, accord-
ing to the formula:

11-22,

H
T1 - Pr ,

 

where tPt--total profit (including losses) over the period from the putting of the
enterprise into operation to the year of recovery;
Pr--profit during the year of recovery.

In the aim of eliminating the influence of prices in calculating the repayment time,
the initial data, that is, the capital investment volume and the profit, are ex-
pressed in fixed prices, namely: capital investments, including unfinished work,
according to the estimated cost, and profit according to data on commodity product
and its costs in prices in effect during the survey year. For this, for recalculat-
ing commodity product and costs into comparable prices, the chain price indexes for
each year of recovering the capital investments are employed.

The expected time for the recovery of capital investments (T3) is calculated from
the formula:

12- Ti ”2”,”,

where T?--the number of complete years during the enterprise's operation to the
critical moment of the survey, that is, the date at which the survey was
made;

Trem" -the conditional duration of the period after the critical moment of the
survey to the end of the recovery period.

Since the amount of Trem is calculated on the basis of a fixed profit level usually
for the last year of the enterprise' s operation. the expected time for recovering
the capital investments assumes a certain conditionality. The greater the value of
Trem the greater the indicator's conditionality. This part of the recovery time
can be calculated by the formula

K—
Tr- . P5P I

 

71

IWJR‘OFF1CJAL USIZCNULY
I'UK Ufl'lt IA]. Uhl'. ONLY

where tP--tota1 profit over enterprise operating period after being put into opera-
tion (including losses);

Ps--profit in survey year.

Let us give an example which illustrates the calculating of the designated indies-

tors. Let us assume that for an administration in the woodworking industry we know
data on the construction and operation of three sawmills (Table IV.l):

Table IV . 1

 

Key: a--P1ant 1: Estimated cost of 5.2 million rubles, annual output
115,000 :13, put into operation on 28 April 1973; b--P1ant 2:
Estimated cost of 4.6 million rubles, annual output 110,000 133,

put into operation 1 October 1973: c-P1ant 3: Estimated cost
3.10 million rubles, annual output 87,000 m3, put into opera-

tion 26 August 1973; d—Profit in comparable prices, 1,000
rubles; e--Por year; f--In running total

The capital investment repayment time was:

for Plant 1

f 8 5 200-4 450 .
T1 -- 3+3+-J——L—2,370 - 0.67+3+0.32 - 6.0 years,

for Plant 2

E _ ‘1 1. 600-3 520 _ _
T1 12+2+-‘—'—2.110 0.2S+2+O.Sl 2.8 years.

For Plant 3 the expected capital investment repayment time is determined since over
the years of its operation the capital investments have not been repaid. Re have:

0
r, - ﬁ+4+;4%& - o.33+4+o.69 - 5.0 years.

Correspondingly, the coefficients for actual capital investment effectiveness equal:

l l
for Plant 1 z - 0.25, or 25 percent; for Plant 2 2—.8 - 0.357, or 35.7 percent; for

Plant 3

uh—

- 0.2 or 20.0 percent.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Let us compare tne calculated indicators between themselves and with the equivalent
normed (design) indicators of capital investment effectiveness. In the example,
for Plant 2 the capital investments are recovered the most rapidly of all and, con-
sequently. they have been most effectively used.

The above-examined indicators are directly employed for expressing actual capital
investment effectiveness for individual enterprises. However, statistics is con-
fronted with the equally important task of obtaining general indicators which char-
acterize expenditure effectiveness for the aggregate of enterprises and capacity.
This problem can be solved by various methods. First of all the sought answer is
provided by the coefficient for the overall (absolute) capital investment effec-
tiveness as recommended by the Standard Procedure. However, in practice its compu-
tation is very difficult due to the impossibility of determining net product for
the groups of enterprises and production projects the capital investment effective-
ness of which has been determined as well as due to the complexity of realizing the
principle of comparability of effect and expenditures. The actual coefficient for
absolute capital investment effectiveness can be determined only for the national
economy as a whole by comparing the increase in national income over the year with
the capital investments of the report or another previous year. In an analogous
manner it is possible to calculate the actual effectiveness coefficient on a basis
of the annual increase in profit for the national economy as a whole and for its
sectors. These two indicators with great conditionality characterize the level of
actual capital investment effectiveness since the capital investments of neither
the report year nor any other year adopted as the basis of comparison in practical
terms are used in fixed capital projects completed during the report year. At the
same time these factors are not an obstacle in studying the dynamics of capital in-
vestment effectiveness on the basis of the same indicators.

A general description can be provided on a basis of the average actual capital in-
vestment repayment time (the actual effectiveness coefficient) calculated by the
formula:

1 IN '

where T1--the recovery time of capital investments at an individual enterprise;
N--production capacity of an individual enterprise.

From the data of the example, the average capital investment recovery time for the
three enterprises will be:

-n _ lo-llS+2.8-110+5-87 _ 1,203 _
‘1 ‘11s+11o+a7 312 3'9 ”“3'
A general indicator for actual capital investment effectiveness can also be deter-
mined using the formula of the weighted harmonic average, that is.

‘K 3K 5K
Tin-£3:
T1 2?

9

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Er-capital investments into enterprise;
P--average annual profit over period of recovering capital investments for
enterprise.

The actual average recovery time for this formula for the three plants as a whole
will be:

'1'" _ slzoo+4lsoo+3,aoo _ 13,200
1 5,200+42,620+3,;00 3,667

- 3.6.

The average repayment time calculated in this manner differs from the indicator ob-
tained using the formula for the arithmetic average. But this does not mean that
either indicator describes the phenomenon incorrectly. Both the first and second
indicators make economic sense. The first indicator is oriented at the overall
volume of product output over the capital investment repayment period while the
second is focused on the total capital investment volume for the three enterprises
as a whole. From the economic content of the averages derive also the conditions
for applying one or another indicator. For example, if the first indicator (the
arithmetic average) can be calculated only for a group of similar enterprises, the
second indicator (the harmonic average) theoretically can be applied to any eco-
nomically analyzable aggregate of enterprises since the average is oriented to a
cost indicator. In instances when the analysis and conclusions are linked to prod-
uct output, the repayment time must be calculated as the weighted arithmetic aver-
age, but if the study of effectiveness is linked to the capital investment volume,
than the harmonic average must be calculated.

As a general indicator it is possible to determine the level of capital investment
recovery describing in percent the portion of capital investments recovered by
profits in the total amount of investments, that is:

591'100
1" 2K '

where P1--enterprise profit over the repayment period in percent of capital invest-
ments used for its construction.

In the example the capital investment recovery level for the enterprises as a whole
was:

5 2004-14 600+2 775 _ 12,575

L I 13,200 13,200 ' 0-953. or 95.3 percent.

in the indicator's numerator. the profit obtained over the years of operation has
been added up as follows: for Plants 1 and 2 within the limits of their estimated
cost (as already repaid) and for Plant 3, fully, since its repayment time is not
over. This indicator has a limit of 100 percent which means the full recovery of
the capital investments. This can be calculated for any aggregate of enterprises
and projects, for example, for a sector's enterprises which have been put into oper-
ation in individual years, in a five-year plan and so forth.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFT1C1AL USEZCNULY

The rate of capital investment recovery can serve as a description which comple-

meats an assessment of actual capital investment effectiveness. This is expressed
by the indicators:

2K _ ET1
vk 2T1 or (k [K .

The first of them describes the average total capital investments recovered in a
unit of time (in a year) while the second reflects the time required as an average
for recovering a cost unit of capital investments. These can be calculated both
for individual enterprises and also for their aggregate. In the example the rate
of capital investment recovery for the three enterprises as a whole was:

_ a+2.s+5 11.8_ .
(k 3751FZTETFETZ - 13.2 0.89 year per million rubles put into

operation;

Vk - %%$% - 1.12 million rubles put into operation per year.

The indicators for the rate of capital investment recovery can also be used in fac-
tor index analysis of actual effectiveness. For example. if the actual capital in-
vestment recovery time is viewed as the pioduct of the rate of recovery (1) and the
volume of capital investments, that is, T - 1K, then the influence of each of the
two factors on the change in the basic in icator (A) in an absolute expression can
be determined respectively from the formulas Ag - K1(£1-£o) and Ag - £o(K1-Ko),
where A - A£+Ak.

By this method it is possible to study the influence of the factors on the change in
the basic indicator both in comparing individual enterprises as well as for an ag-
gregate of enterprises as a whole which have been put into operation in different
periods (years, fixe-year plans) as well as separately for new construction sites
and existing enterprises which are being reconstructed and expanded. Here in the
latter instance the total length of capital investment recovery of all the enter-
prises in the aggregate is used as the general index.

53. A Statistical Study of the Economic Effectiveness of Capital Investments in
Construction

A study of economic effectiveness in the process of utilizing capital investments in
the investment sphere is a general description of the result of production activi-
ties in capital construction as a national economic sector. The indicators of cap-
ital investment effectiveness in this sector in terms of their economic content dif-
fer from the analogous indicators of the national economic aspect (see 52), but
their constructive form remains in the form of the relationship of effect and ex-
penditures.

The economic goal of capital construction consists in the creation and putting into
operation of production capacity and other fixed capital projects. This is the end

product of the sector, its economic effect which undoubtedly can be adopted in
measuring the capital investment effectiveness level in construction.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UK 0"“ [AL USE. ONLY

The general indicator which expresses the end effect of the sector is the volume of
fixed capital put into operation (in terms of the estimated or actual cost) and
which has been created solely in the construction sphere. The cost of acquired
production equipment and supplies outside the construction estimates should not be
included in this indicator. The expenditures allocated for the creation of fixed
capital, depending upon what aspects of effectiveness are being studied, can be
represented by the capital investment volume over the period, by the incomplete con-
struction, by the amount of all advanced funds or by other indicators. The actual
capital investment effectiveness in construction is characterized by a series of
indicators among which the most essential are the proportional capital investments,
the rate of their turnover, the construction lag, the coefficient for the output of
end construction product and certain others.

Proportional capital investments are a widespread indicator in designing, planning
and statistical practices. These describe the average amount of expenditures (cap-
ital investments) for creating a unit of production capacity at new enterprises or
an increase in capacvuy at an existing enterprise which is being reconstructed or
expanded, or per unit of size (capacity, length) of a fixed capital project. The
economic sense of the indicator predetermines its purpose. It can be applied not
only in evaluating sectorial effectiveness but also in the national economic effec-
tiveness of capital investments.

Proportional capital investments are calculated using the formula

K
Kpr-ﬁ,
where K--the capital investments for creating the given fixed capital complex
(project);
N—-production capacity, volumetric capacity, length and so forth of the given
complex (project).

in practice a distinction is made between the normed, design, plan and actual propor-
tional capital investments. In terms of principles the methodology of calculating
them differs only little. The differences are only in the initial data for calcu-
lating the proportional capital investments. Let us examine the particular features
of calculating the actual indicator. The numerator in the formula for this indica-
tor is the volume of capital investments according to actual cost for the builder
considering expenditures on incomplete work for the fixed capital complex (project)
put into operation. The denominator of the indicator's formula expresses the amount
of production capacity actually put into operation or the amount of a certain con-
sumer value of the project. Actual product output cannot be used as the denominator
as this changes the economic content of the indicator. The indicator'a economic
sense allows its computation only for instances when the construction site has been
completed and full designed capacity reached.

The sense of the indicator will change somewhat depending upon the method for ex-
pressing completion. If the production capacity put into operation is expressed by
product output over a stipulated period (ordinarily for a year), then the propor-
tional capital investments. along with the construction conditions, will also re-
flect the enterprise's operating conditions figured in the plans (the number of

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
shifts and so forth). when the fixed capital complex put into operation is charac-
terized not by product output but rather by capacity (a school), by length (a canal
or road) or by power (a power plant), then the proportional capital investments will
reflect the effectiveness of the design solution and construction work as well as
the production equipment manufactured by industry. For these reasons the indicator
calculated as the ratio of the value of fixed capital and the product actually pro-
duced over the period describes the effective use of fixed capital (its operation)
and not the capital investments into the investment sphere.

Proportional capital investments are determined both as an individual indicator for
a project, capacity, enterprise and so forth as well as a general indicator for
their aggregate formed for types of production, sectors and so forth. As a general
one this indicator is calculated by dividing the actual cost of the fixed capital
put into operation by the total capacity (volumetric capacity, length and so forth)
of the same type of projects for this capital. For planning purposes norms have
been worked out for proportional capital investments for the building of individual
projects and new enterprises, for the reconstruction and expansion of existing en-
terprises as well as consolidated standards for types of production and sectors as

a whole. These norms are applied not only in capital investment planning but also
in the analysis of their effectiveness.

In practice, along with the designated indicators, on the sectorial level propor-
tional capital investments are also determined per ruble of product increase over

an established period (usually a year). Thus, this indicator for machine building
and metalworking as a whole has declined from 1.2 rubles in 1966-1970 to 1.17 rubles
in 1971-1975 while for electric power over this five-year plan it increased from 3.8
rubles up to 4.08 rubles.~ However, it must be remelbered that the given indicator
expresses not only capital investment effectiveness in construction but also the
degree <f fixed capital utilization during the period of its operation.

As an illustration of the methodology for calculating proportional capital invest-
ments and certain analysis procedures let us examine the example of enterprises in
the building materials industry. Table IV.2 gives the initial data and a calcula-
tion of proportional capital investments for the individual plants. The actual

proportional capital investments per ruble of annual product output for the sec-
tor's enterprises as a whole will be:

f _ 64 650 I .
KP? m 2.24 rubles,

according to the plan the proportional capital investments equal:

200‘68+90‘263+24°235+5.4 05° 63 160
P - —___________ . , _ -
KP? 28,873 55:37} 2.19 rubles.

 

 

‘See: A. Belyakov, "Capital Construction in the Tenth Five-Year Plan and the Tasks
of Statistics," VESTNIK STATISTIKI, N0 7, 1976.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table IV. 2

 
   
  

 
  
    
  
    
  

Proportional
Capital capital investments,

    

 

I Annual production
i
capacity Deviation.

Plants rubles

   

1,000—toils
of product

  
 

prices,
1,000 rubles

  
 
 
 
 
  

Prefabr ica ted re-

inforced concrete 3
Building materials 10
Installation stock 7

Aluminum struc-
tural elements

 

Total

The actual and planned proportional capital investments are always intercompa'rable.
In the example for the three plants there is an exceeding of the design standards
and this shows a decline in capital investment effectiveness. As a whole for the
four plants there has been an overexpenditure of funds in building new enterprises
and this has reduced their effectiveness for the sector by 0.05 ruble per ruble of
product (2.24-2.19).

The proportional capital investments can be calculated as particular indicators for
individual consolidated types in the technological cosposition of the capital in-
vestments corresponding to the specific stages of the investment process. For ex-
ample, proportional capital investments into design and research activities, into
construction work and into manufacturing production equipment. Since the plans
(norms) give analogous data, there is an opportunity by a comparison with the actu-
al partICular indicators to analyze capital investment effectiveness.

The deviation of the actual average sectorial proportional capital investments from
the planned (normed), like the dynamics of these indicators, depend upon changes in
the individual indicators (Kpr) and the capacity structure for the enterprises or
their groups dN - N/EN. The influence of one or another factor can be determined,
rcspcctively, by indivcs for proportional capital investments of a fixed composition
and the influence of structural shifts, that is:

zxgilau‘ thr d" 2K9, d“

_ . ,
EKprodNO ZKProdNo {Kprlduo

(if significant interest for practice is an elucidation of the influence of a change
in tin- proportional ('npitnl investments on the overall amount of capital investments
the relationship of which can be expressed by the product of the capacity of the

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
enterprise under construction (N) and the proportional capital investments, that is,
K - KprN. Hence, on the basis of index calculations it is easy to determine the in-
fluence of each individual factor, namely: due to a change in the proportional cap-
ital investments this amount equals: AKpr - "1(Kpr1'xpro) and due to changes in
production capacity or Au - (NI-N0)Kpro- The absolute amount of the change in cap-
ital investments with the "~" sign describes a savings and with a "+" sign an over-
expenditure. In the example, the influence of an increase in the actual proportion-
al capital investments in comparison with the planned led to an increase in their
total volume by 1,443,700 rubies, 28,873(2.24-2.19).

Capital investment effectiveness in construction can also be characterized by the
turnover of the investments in the investment sphere by which one understands the
rate of "converting" the capital investments into projects that are fully completed
and ready for normal operation. The numbcr of turnovers of capital investments in
a given period and the average length of one capital investment turnover can serve
as indicators describing capital investment turnover.

The number of capital investment turnovers over a studied period (n) is determined
by the ratio of the value of the fixed capital put into operation during this

period (V) to the average balance of incomplete construction over the given period
(U), that is. n - V/U. The numerator of the formula shows the fixed capital put
into operation and which has been produced solely in the capital construction

sphere as well as considering the expenditures written off in the report period

in the established procedure (abandoned work and so forth). The average carryover
of incomplete construction is determined according to the formula of the chronologi-
cal average. Either indicator should be expressed in the same prices: either at
the estimated cost or at the actual cost for the builder.

Let us give an example. Let us assume that in the rayon during the report area ore
mining fixed capital was put into operation valued at 14,240,000 rubles while the
carryover of incomplete construction during the year was as follows: 15,620,000
rubles on 1 January, 13,836,000 rubles on 1 April, 14,110,000 rubles on 1 July,
15,247,000 rubles on 1 October and 15,118,000 rubles on 1 January of the following

year.

The average balance of incomplete construction for the report year is:

 

_ 15-12‘ﬂ+13,836+1:..110+1s.2z.7+2&2l-1-8 15 562
u = - _._ - 14,640,000 rubles.
5-1 a

The number of capital investment turnovers during the year equaled:

14 240
-—l—-
n 14,640 0.97.

A particular feature of the designated indicator is its dependence upon the length
of the period for which it is calculated. The longer this period the greater the

number of capital investment turnovers. Consequently, in comparing this indicator
over time it is essential to proceed from a uniform length of the compared periods.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR UH‘ILIAL USE ONLY

In order to eliminate this shortcoming, in studying capital investment effective-
ness. it is advisable to determine an average period of their turnover (T;) by di-
viding the calendar length of the studied period (Tc) by the number of capital in-
vestment turnovers. that is:

- Iu'li
Tc I Tc.n - T .

Depending upon the time unit adopted for measuring the length of the calendar peri-
od, the sought indicator is expressed in days, weeks, months and years. In the

example the duration of a capital investment turnover will be:

12 14.640
in months -Tz:7za—-- 12.33 and in years 14,640:14,240 - 1.03. Consequently, one
capital investment turnover as an average equals a period of a little more than a
year.

Proceeding from the content and the procedure for calculating the obtained indica-
tor, it can be interpreted as the average length the assets remain in incomplete
construction. Under this name this indicator figures frequently in economic calcu-
lations.

The average length of a capital investment turnover can also be defined as a partic-
ular indicator for various stages of the investment process, that is, separately

for the design-research, construction-installation and even industrial activities
involving the manufacture of production equipment. For calculating such indicators
the initial data are to be found in the statistical reporting (Form No 2-ks) while
the method of calculating them is analogous to the examined one, that is:

- TU
T .42,
p Q“

where Up--the average balance of incomplete construction for the given type of
activity;
Qw--the value of the design-research or construetion-installation work turned
over to the builder or the value of installed equipment at projects put

into operation.

Since the cost of all the amounts of work and equipment turned over to the builder,
considering the other capital outlays, equals the cost of the fixed capital put into
operation. that is. £0" - V, then an opportunity appears to analyze the effect of
the rate of capital investment turnover for each stage of the investment process on
the overall capital investment effectiveness expressed by the average length of
capital investment turnover as a whole. In an absolute expression. the influence
of the particular turnover indicator on the overall one is determined from the for-
mula:

_ '1‘ Q“

Tt/p - —%_ o

The final relationship of these indicators with the general one will assume the
form [Tr/p a It and this makes it possible to employ the designated methodology in
analyzing the average duration of capital investment turnover. A calculation of the

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particular indicators for capital investment turnover and their impact on the over-
all indicator can be illustrated using the example of putting ore mining capacity

into operation during the report year (Table IV.3). Information for col. 2 is tak-
en directly from Form No 2-ks and for col. 1 is calculated fros the data of the same

form. Here for balancing the volume of fixed capital put into operation with the
component parts of the capital investments it is essential to add to this indicator

the total expenditures written off in the established procedure as well as gratis
financing.

Table lV.3

     
   
   
 

     
   
    
   
 
  
    

Average Fixed capital Duration of Influence on

   
   
  

    
     
  

  

balance of put into capital in- total length of
incomplete operation, vestment capital invest-
construction, 1,000 rubles turnover ment turnover
“Pug; gym” 1,000 rubles col 1x12 col 3 col 2
col 2 ’ total of c012
months

    
 
 

  

   

 
 
 
 
 
 

Construction—installation

work 7.09
Production equipment 3.95
Design-research work 0.37

Other capital investments

From the table it follows that the stages of construction work and industry have the
greatest importance in shaping the length of capital investment turnover. In carry-
ing out such calculations for a number of years for the ministries, departments and
the sector as a whole, it is possible to obtain a notion of the dynamics of capital
investment effectiveness in the various stages of the investment process and their
roll in changing the overall indicator.

The rate of capital investment turnover. as an indicator of investment effective-
ness, has a direct impact upon the amount of the funds advanced to create fixed
capital. For this reason, in analyzing effectiveness, the need arises to establish
the amount of this impact, that is, the savings or additional expenditure of financ-
ing. A solution to this problem can be obtained by the index method. Here the
average balance of incomplete construction (the advanced funds) is viewed as the
result of multiplying the amount inverse to the number of capital investment turn-
overs (A)_by the volume of fixed capital put into operation over the studied period,
that is. U - AV.

The influence of the change in the rate of capital investment turnover on the total
amount of investments advanced is determined by the formula AA - (AD-A1)Vl, while
the influence of a change in the volume of fixed capital put into operation is de-
termined by the formula Av - A0(Vl-Vo). In either instance the amount obtained
with a minus sign means a savings in funds in capital investment turnover and

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK UIDILIAL 03E. UNLY

leading to a declinein incomplete construction. A plus sign means the additional
involvement of funds in turnover and this leads to a growth of incomplete construc-
tion. Let us assume that in the above-given example, the fixed capital put into
operation in the previous year was 13.1 million rubles and the number of capital in-
vestment turnovers was 0.92. Hence, as a consequence of the acceleration in capital
investment turnover, the amount of assets advanced for construction declined by

l l _ _ -
AA ' [0.97"0.92]l4.240 797.800 rubles. However. as a consequence of the in

 

 

creased amount of fixed capital put into operation, it was necessary to increase

1
0”(14,240 -
13,100). Under the effect of the two factors. the average balance of assets in in-

complete construction increased by (—797.8)+-(1,239.l) - 441,300 rubles.

 

the funds advanced for construction by 1,239,100 rubles, that is, Av -

The construction lag is an indicator that is close to the economic content of the
one examined above. This is the period that capital investments are diverted from
the accumulation fund from the start of their use until the obtaining of an effect
from these assets. The construction lag differs from the length of construction in
its economic content and in terms of amount it is significantly shorter (approxi-
mately 2-fold). The amount of the lag depends upon the length of construction, the
volume of capital investments and their allocation over the years of the construc-
tion period. The influence of the latter factor is determined by the fact that the
expenditures of the first year are tied up for the entire construction period while
in the last year they are virtually not diverted from the accumulation fund. Con-

sidering what has been said, the construction lag of an individual enterprise can
be defined from the formula for a weighted arithmetic average, that is:

tom-0.5) +K2(T2-0.5) +
K1+K2+... ’

 

T1 -

where K1, K2, ...--the capital investment volume, respectively, for the first,
second and subsequent years of construction;
Tl, T2, ...--the length of tieing up capital investments of the first. second
and subsequent years of construction.

A reduction in the number of years the capital investments are tied up by a half a
year reflects the condition of the even use of capital investments during the year
of their making as employed in calculating the indicator.

For an aggregate of projects, the average construction lag can be determined from
the formula of a weighted harmonic average using the estimated cost of the fixed
capital put into operation, that is:

— V 2F
TC'ZV°ZE1'TK'

From the transformed formula it follows that the average construction lag can be
calculated as the quotient of dividing the total volume of actually utilized capital
investments for the aggregate of enterprises (projects) put into operation by the
average annual amount of funds diverted to the given construction (E). The 1ag is
employed in determining the amount of losses for the savings of assets (the affect)

related t6 an increase or decline in construction times. This effect is determined
by the formula

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 051WC1AL.USE|DNLY

Z ' K°£n(T£1‘Tlo) v

where T11 and Tzo-the lag under the conditions of a reduced or lengthened construc-
tion time.

The lag can also be employed to describe the level of capital investment concentra-
tion.

Capital investment effectiveness can be described by an indicator which reflects the
amount of fixed capital put into operation per cost unit of capital investments ad-
vanced in the report period. This indicator which in practice is termed the co-
efficient for the output of end construction product is determined by the formula:

v
K° Us+Kp '

 

where Kp-the volume of capital investments used during the given period;
Ug--incomplete construction at the start of the given period.

The denominator of the fraction (Ug'FKp) describes the full amount of the consumed
resources (capital expenditures) for construction and the projects and sites fixed
in the given period. For this reason the ratio of the volume of fixed capital put
into operation in the given period to this amount reflects the relationship of ef-
fect and expenditures, and consequently, capital investment effectiveness. The
numerical value of this indicator fluctuates within the limits from 0 to 1. that is.
0‘<Ko‘<1. describing. respectively. the intensity of the output of projects and
starting-up complexes completed and ready to go into normal operation.

Under the conditions of the even reproduction of fixed capital and the use of capi-
tal investments, the coefficient for the output of end product in a sector equals
0.5. A systematic increase in capital investments and an acceleration of construc-
tion have an opposite impact on the change in the coefficient. At present, for the
Soviet national economy as a whole its value is somewhat greater than 0.5.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UK UH'ILIAL U55 ONLY

CHAPTER V: THE STATISTICS 0? CONSTRUCTION PRODUCT
51. The Tasks of Construction Product Statistics

The production of a product is the aim of construction like any other sector of the
production sphere. For precisely this reason the product indicators hold a central
place in the system of construction statistics indicators and the study of the pro-
duction activities of the sector's organization and enterprises starts with them.

The result of production activity in constructioa is the production capacity, tech-
nical complexes, buildings, installations and other projects designed to function
as fixed capital in various national economic sectors.

In studying construction product, statistics solves a number of problems, including:

1) Determining in physical and cost terms the volume of product produced at each
construction organization, association, department and the sector as a whole;

2) Assessing the fulfillment of current and long-range plans for putting capacity
and fixed capital projects into operation as well as plans for commodity construc-
tion product;

3) Studying the dynamics of the construction product volume;
4) Characterizing the rhythmicalness of construction work;

5) Studying the quality of construction product and the work quality of the con-
tracting organizations;

6) Comparing the volume and growth rate of construction product in the USSR and in
foreign countries.

The Decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Im-
proving Planning and Strengthening the Effect of the Economic Mechanism on Raising
Production Efficiency and Work Quality" has outlined a system of measures to com-
plete the economic reform in construction. This iuportant decision confronts con-
struction produ ‘ statistics with additional tasks. Among them an important place
is held by improving the system of indicators for construction product and the meth-

odology of calculating this so as to ensure economic incentives for construction
work and a rise in its efficiency.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
52. Construction Product as an Object of Statistical Study

The product of construction, as a national economic sector, represents a portion of
social product created by the labor of workers and with the aid of the means of pro-
duction in the given sector. Regardless of the apparent simplicity in describing
construction product and determining the volume of production, this statistical task
as been very complex and does not have a uniform solution. Under the conditions of
the diversity of consumer values created in construction and their vividly expressed
individual differences, construction statistics should find the most advisable meth-
ods for measuring product volume. This can be carried out if consideration of the
product, as is said, will be statistically organized, that is, the very object of
statistical study, the sector and its result of activity (product) will be defined

with maximum clarity and the accounting units for construction product correctly
set.

Since construction is an aggregate of design-research and construction—installation
organizations as well as other enterprises included in the sector's system, all the
sector's product can be viewed as the aggregate result of their production activi-
ties. Relying on such an understanding of the sector and its product, it is pos-
sible to form a system of general indicators for construction product which reflects
their relationship with social product and national income as well as the intrasec-
torial structure of construction as an object of statistical study (Fig. v.1). This
also determines the content of the general indicators of the sector's product, the
methodology for calculating them and the sources of statistical information on the
product.

The end product of construction is the production capacity and technical complexes
which have been put into operation and duly accepted, for example, new, expanded

and reconstructed plants, factories, oil and gas lines, railroads and highways as
well as housing and other different-purpose projects which serve the production and
nonproduction spheres of the national economy. Also among the general indicators of
the sector's product as a whole are the net and gross product of construction as
component parts of aggregate social product and national income.

The sector’s system of indicators includes physical and cost indicators for the
product of design-research activities and construction work. The product from the
individual types of production activities in the sector assumes a varying physical
form. In research this is the aggregate of engineering and technical data on the
terrain, the state of the ground and so forth for construction, in designing it is
the plans worked out in drawings and mark-ups for the future projects and technical
complexes of fixed capital and, finally, in construction work this is the erected
projects such as building, installations and so forth.

An important feature in the above-given product cost indicators is that their amount
does not contain the cost of production equipment installed or assembled at the
project. This is due to the fact that installed and preassembled production equip-
ment does not participate in the economic circulation of the organizations compris-
ing the sector and expenditures for its acquisition and delivery to the construc-
tion site are not accounted for on the balance sheet of basic operations for the or-
ganizations. Consequently, the cost indicators for the sector's product should not
and in practice do not include equipment costs.

85

FOR 0FFNJAL.USE¢DNLY
I'D“ 0|- HCIAL USE ONLY

general construction indicators

indicators for product of design indicators for product of con-
and research activities struction work
physical cost physical cost
indicators indicators

 
   

 
     
   
         

indicators . indicators

   

        

    

m
a u
.4 o
m o u
m o u an o
0 H o a :!
q-a 1: u 'u cl
'0 a , s: O- -o o 0 I:
D U a. O l. H v. o
u m u v. a > n. g H 'H
a o u u '0 0 u
a 3 o h a : 0‘8 5 o
.3 ‘° u. 8 :1 8 ° 3.. b“ =‘
a
s 5 o o o n. u 'v n. m '8
a .4 s.- s a o 0 g u
.4 p. I: u n. s. o no -
n. o o s 0-0 0
0.! a a o o o u v! o
'0 UL: Hu 8 u u a mu > u
o oo oo o 0 on 00 u q.
u .43 >3 u H u H9 3 «d H
O O- O- 0 0 o -
a 3» Ha H o u :
a. 0 no 'u o a. 0-H 'u 0 o
o 0'5 3 8 '3 8 o o 8 " '3 S o u
0 So an to v: o .59. 8 >0 0 5

       

Pig. v.1. System of general indicators for construction
product

Along with the above-given notion there is also another understanding of the prod-
uct of construction as a national economic sector. Construction is the concluding
stage in the process of fixed capital reproduction. .In this stage the construction
workers, on the basis of their own product created, bring together the end product
of other national economic sectors, and primarily heavy industry. into unified
technical complexes. Here capital investments are expended on fixed capital repro-
duction and a significant portion of them is used as a result of construction.
Consequently, here construction acts as an investment sector which completes the
reproduction of fixed capital in the form of technical complexes which bring to-
gether the active (equipment) and passive means of labor (buildings and installs-
tions). In this instance a monetary indicator of the sector's end product volume

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
is the full cost of the fixed capital put into operation created in construction as
a national e onomic investment sector. An important feature of this indicator is
in the full conformity of its cost form to the physical form of expression. The
cost of the equipment to be installed and preassemhled according to the plans and
estimate is a component part of the cost of the fixed capital put into operation
but this does not occur in the system of general product indicators adopted in the
practice of the construction organizations.

The builder is the primary economic unit in which end construction product is ac-
counted for in physical and cost terms. In the given instance the builder operates
as the report unit for capital investment statistics (see Chapter I, 55). In the
contracting construction organizations, the fixed capital put into operation is not
determined. The possibility and necessity of accounting for the fixed capital put
into operation appear only an the level of the builder who, along with the func-
tions of the client. exercises managerial and economic functions in construction.

From what has been stated above there follows the conclusion that in calculating
the general cost indicators for the product, it is essential to distinguish the
dual notion of construction .3 a national economic sector. In the broad sense of
the word it is an investmer' sector of the economy which completes the process of
fixed capital production an; 'ur this reason includes in its product coats all the
expenditures (cost) including .sstalled and preassembled equipment. In the narrow
sense of the word, it is an aggregate of organizations comprising the sector while
the overall result of its production activity is seen as the aggregate product of
all these organizations. The most significant in terms of the volume and propor-
tional amount in the sector is the product of construction work, that is, the con-
struction product dhich comprises a predominant portion in the construction indus-
try. For this reason in the following sections of the chapter basic attention will
be given to a statistical study of construction product.

93. The Concept of Construction Product

The construction industry is the production basis for construction as a national
economic sector. It is comprised of the state contracting organizations and instal-
lation organizations as well as the interkolkhoz construction organizations. The
production activities of the contracting organizations as a whole and its result
have an intersectoriai nature. The goal and basic result of these activities are
to create a construction product expressed by erected buildings, installations and
its other types. But, in addition, a contracting organization can create a product
which is related to other national economic sectors such as industry, transporta-
tion, agriculture and so forth. In this product the largest proportional amount is
taken up by industrial product manufactured in the so-called subsidiary types of
production, for example, the production of sand, atone, clay and the manufacturing
of structural and other prefabricated elements.

For the accounting for construction product it is essential to delimit it from the
product of the other sectors created by contracting organizations. In order to

meet this condition. statistics should have a clear definition of what must be con-
sidered as construction product.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Construction product is created chiefly by the contracting organizations which con-
prise the construction industry per as as well as by the internal forces of indus-
trial and other enterprises (OKs or UKS), that is, by the so-called direct-labor
method of construction. The contracting organizations perform over 91 percent of
the construction-installation work and the remaining 9 percent of the work is done
by the direct-labor method. The product created by the contracting and direct-labor
methods as a total forms the product of construction work and this, in turn, is a
component part of the aggregate product of construction as a national economic sec-
tor. In 1978, the share of the sector's product reached 10 percent of the total
gross social product of the nation.

T.om the economic viewpoint, the direct useful result from the basic production ac-
tivities of construction organizations must be considered the construction product}

The given definition contains four specific features which indicate what must be
considered as construction product. if the result of the work done by a construc-
tion organization has all the features of the given definition, then it can indis-
putably be considered as construction product. A product which lacks even one of
the four features of the definition is not a construction product. Let us take up
the essence of each feature individually.

In the first place, the product of a construction organization includes the result
of only its production activities, that is, the m terials created by the labor of
the employees and by this organization's means of production. According to this
feature of the definition, the materials acquired by the organization but not used
by it in production or sold outside cannot be considered as the product of the con-
struction organization. Of course, the result 01 the activities of the nonproduc-
tion units of the contracting organization, for example, the housing and utility
systems and so forth, are not a product.

Secondly, construction product includes the result of not all the organization's
production activities but only the basic one, that is, the construction activity

as a result of which the construction and installation work has been carried out.
The product from the various production but not construction subdivisions of a con-
tracting organization is not a construction product. for example, the output of
stone, clay and sand. the manufacturing of structural elements in subsidiary produc-
tion lines, the result of the work of transport systems, subsidiary farms, tele-

phone exchanges, dining rooms and so forth.

Thirdly, the construction product includes only the direct result of the basic
activity. that is, the construction-installation work aimed at erecting buildings
and installations, the installation and assembly of equipment as envisaged by the
plans and estimate. The assembly and disassembly of construction machinery (power
cranes, overhead cablcways and so forth), the erecting of temporary (nontitle)
structures, for example, sheds and other effects at a construction site paid from
the overhead and expenditures accounted for in the estimate unit rates are not the
direct result of construction work and are not considered as a construction product

1See: D. V. Savinskiy, "Kurs promyshlennoy statistiki" [A Course on Industrial
Statistics], Moscow, Gosstatizdat, 1960, p 36.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR:0FFKJAL.USEGDNLY

although the work done here does have a construction nature. All sorts of wastes
from construction work, even when sold outside (used lumber, broken brick and so
forth),are not considered as construction product.

Fourthly, the construction product includes only the useful result of construction
work, that is, that which corresponds to the purpose of the given product and meets
the demands made by the Construction Standards and Rules on the quality of
construction-installation work. All work carried out with deviations which exceed
the accepted tolerances are not considered as product but rather are considered re-
jected work and must be redone.

The construction product is embodied either in a physical form or in the form of
production services (work). The most widely spread physical form of construction
product is the objects wfich have a material form and permit the description of
them by physical measurements of length, height, area, volume. capacity, power and
so forth. Buildings and installations are specific types of construction product
(see Chapter III, 52).

In order to erect a building or structure it is essential to carry out construction
work. Among the most widely found types of them are the forming of the walls of
buildings or the installation of buildings and structures from prefabricated pieces,
assemblies and modules, the building of foundations and support elements under
equipment; the lining of boilers and furnaces; sanitary-technical work and others.
This work directly expresses the characteristics of construction work. However the
term construction work is much more frequently employed not to designate actions but
rather their result, that is, the construction product.

The construction product which assumes the form of production services includes the
work leading to an increase in the previously created consumer value or Cu the re-
storing of a lost consumer value. In the first instance it is a question of work
to install production equipment and in the second a majnr overhaul on projects of
construction origin.

The work of installing equipment represents a range of jobs to install production,
power and -ther equipment at the place of its operation. This includes the assem-
bly of the equipment, the fastening of it to the supports, the connecting of
pipelines and other utilities, painting and insulating, the setting up of assembly
areas and ladders which are design-related to the equipment. From what has been
stated it follows that the installation of equipment in terms of the nature of the
jobs performed comes close to work of an industrial nature. A number of economists
have rightly felt that with great justification the installation of equipment could
be considered among industrial product rather than construction product, viewing
it as the completion of the production cycle involved in manufacturing the equip-
ment.’ In statistical practices equipment installation is considered among the
construction product if it is done by specialized installation organizations which
are part of the system of contracting construction organizations. If the equip-
ment is installed at the site of its operation by the manufacturing plant and the

 

2See: H. P. D;yachkov, "Statistika kapital'nogo stroitel'stva" [Capital Construc-
tion Statistics], 3d Edition, Moscow, Statistika, 1977, p 89.

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-UR Url-lClAL USE ONLY

cost of installation has been considered in the product's wholesale price, then
this work is considered among industrial product.

Major overhaul, as a type of construction product, represents a range of construc-
tion jobs to replace individual worn out structural elements of buildings and in-
stallations with new ones, their internal and external finishing, as well as other
jobs to rebuild fixed capital projects of construction origin. For example, a major
overhaul on the building of a weaving shop would be considered among construction
product while a major overhaul of the looms would be considered among industrial-

type jobs, that is, as an industrial product. As a consequence of the specific
nature and purpose of major overhaul and the sources of financing it, the account-

ing for major overhauls is distinct from the remaining types of construction prod-
net.

54. The Stages of Construction Product in Terms of the Degree of Its Completeness

In construction work, at each given moment the product is in varying stages of com-
pleteness depending upon the volume and composition of the work performed since the
start of erecting the projects. In order to correctly determine the volume of con-
struction product under these conditions, it is essential to account for it at each

stage of completeness. For this purpose in statistics and accounting only individu-
al stages of completeness are selected which meet the demands of organizing con-

struction product accounting, control over the result of production activities, the
current procedure for paying for construction product and cost accounting.

The formation of product stages in construction is much more complicated than in
industry and this is caused by the duration of the production cycle, by the indi-
vidualism of the created product, by the shopless organization of production and by
other particular features of construction. The completion of production for all
work for the project as a whole, for stages or work complexes and so forth has been
adopted as the basis for dividing construction product into stages according to the
degree of completeness. In addition, the interests of the construction industry

as a whole and the individual construction organization are taken into account.

Considering what has been said above, all product of construction work (the con-
struction industry) can be represented by the following stages of completeness: a
finished projeCt (groups of projects), incomplete product of construction work, a
work stage, a complex of special construction and installation work and incomplete
construction work.

The completed projecrs (groups of projects) are the end product of construction work
and represent the fully complete projects which can perform the fixed capital func-
tions envisaged in the plans. A completed project acquires social recognition only
after it has been accepted by the state acceptance commission and put into opera-
tion. For precisely this reason the given stage of completeness is reflected in

the accounting for the putting of capacity and fixed capital projects into opera-
tion of the general contractor and builder (see Chapter III).

From the viewpoint of the individual construction organization, and in particular
from the position of its cost accounting. the concept of a completed project can

also be viewed in the narrow sense. In this instance, the buildings and installs-
tions as such are considered as the completed projects of construction work and not

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the production capacity of which they are a part as a passive portion of the fixed
capital. Here it makes no difference whether the project has received the planned
equipment or not. However. regardless of such a narrow understanding of a completed
project, its specific representatives. the buildings and installations. do not lose
their importance of consumer values for the construction organizations inside the
sector and beyond it.

The incomplete product of construction work encompasses all projects which have
been commenced but not completed. The distinction between an incomplete product of
construction work and its end product, in essence, is the full completion of con-
struction and inStallation work in the amount and composition envisaged by the plans
for the given project. The statement of the state acceptance commission is the ac-
counting feature which designates the transition of an incomplete product to a com-
pleted project. The incomplete product of construction work in terms of volume is
the mosc significant component of incomplete construction, that is, the volume of
capital investments estimated on a certain date.

Under the conditions of an extended production cycle or the specialization of the
contracting organizations in performing individual types of work, the accounting

reflect the result of the work over a relatively short interval of time (10-day

period or month) or for small sections (a brigade or project) and thereby carry out
payments with the client for a fulfilled product.

At present these stages of construction product include the completed project, work
stage, complex of installation and special construction work, incomplete construc-
tion work as well as structural elements and consolidated types 0: work. Let us
examine these stages of product completeness with the exception of the completed
project which was spoken about above.

installation work, as a result of which a design-distinct portion of a building or
installation is created and which has been assigned an independent position in the
plans and estimate for the construction of the given project. For example, in
building housing using standard plans, two stages are established: stage l--pre-
paratory work, the foundation stage, with the work of building the utility leads
as well as the water. sewage. heating, gas and electrical networks and so forth;
stage li--the above-grOund portion of the building including the internal sanitary-
technical installations, electrical wiring, the installation of low-voltage net-
works and other work not included in the foundation work.

The stage is considered fulfilled if the entire complex of construction-installation

work has been carried out in the composition and volume envisaged in the plans for
the given stage. The completeness and the meeting of the set requirements should

be approved by the statement of the Form No 2a.

91

FOR O'TICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Url'll .l‘.. URI. UNI.‘

A complex of installation and special construction work is considered to be a por-
tion of a stage created as a result of the performing of an aggregate of special
construction and installation work by a subcontracting organization for the general
contracting organization through subcontracting ties. At times this can also be the
portions of a construction progect which has not been divided in the plans into work
stages. The inside sanitary-technical facilities, the installation of production
and other equipment. finishing work at the project and so forth could serve as ex-
amples of these complexes. A complex of installation and special construction work
is considered completed if the subcontracting organization has performed the entire
aggregate of jobs in the volume and composition envisaged in the contract and its
acceptance by the contracting organization has been confirmed by the statement of
Form No 2a.

Incomplete construction work includes the incomplete stages and complexes of instal-
lation and special construction work, that is, those parts of buildings and instal-
lations or parts of stages for which not all the work has been performed (in terms
of volume and composition) as stipulated in the plans or in the subcontract. For
example. if the upper slab or roof has not been installed in erecting the shell of

a residential building (a work stage), then the created work stage is considered
incomplete. Work whirl has not been turned over or accepted by formalized state-
ments is also considered to be incomplete stages and complexes of installation and
special construction work.

For determining the volume of produced construction product, as yet it remains es-
sential to account for it in terms of complete and incomplete structural elements
and consolidated types of work and these represent the smallest parts of construc-
tion product. By a structural element (K5) in accounting one has come to understand
the parts of a building or installation the creation of which requires the execution
of a range of simple operations stipulated by the Construction Standards and Rules.
Among the structural elements of a building are, for example, the foundation, walls,
interfloor slabs, internal partitions and so forth. By consolidated types of work
(UVR) in construction product accounting one understands a range of simple jobs and
operations as a result of which the structural element assumes new qualities or a
portion of the work involved in creating it is simply completed. For example, the
oxenvutlon for a foundation, the digging of ditches for laying pipes, the work of
inatnlning equipment and so forth. Such structural elements and consolidated types
of work or parts of them are considered complete when all the operations envisaged
by the technology (estimate standard) have been performed. The acceptance of this
work is formalized by the Statements of Form No 2b and 2c and by the monthly infor-
mation of Form No 3.

The designated stages of construction product are represented in Fig. v.2 which de-
scribes their place and relationships.

:5. Accounting for Construction Product in Physical Units

in construction the product volume is measured by two ways: in physical and mone-
tary units. Each of the methods of product measurement is of independent signifi-
cance in solving the economic problems of construction statistics. Accounting for
construction product in physical terms makes it possible to determine the production
scope of the most important types of construction work in the USSR and to compare

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR‘OFF1CJAI.lﬂSE(MNLY

Product of construction work
Incomplete product of construction work Completed

projects
Completed stages
and work
complexes

        

   
 
   
 
 
   

  

Incomplete construction work

Completed Incomplete
parts of parts of
KB and UVR KB and UVR

    
   

 
   

Completed
KB and UVR

  

Fig. v.2. Stages in the completeness of construction product

this with analogous indicators in the capitalist nations. Accounting for products
in physical units holds an important place in the organization, planning and con-
trol of construction work. It makes it possible to obtain an evaluation of plan
fulfillment in the individual units, worker brigades. in the foreman sections and
so forth. The volume of construction product in physical terms is the basis for
accounting for construction product in monetary or cost terms.

Accounting for construction product in physical terms is essential for calculating
worker wages in accord with the quantity and quality of labor expended by them and
for figuring the various quality indicators which describe, for example, labor pro-
ductivity for the employees, the level of mechanization of construction-installation
work, the degree of utilizing construction machinery and so forth.

Accounting for product in physical units consists in determining the construction
product volume in units which describe its basic consumer property. Construction
product is accounted for in physical units during 5L1 stages of its completeness,
starting from simple work and ending with the completed projects. Individual sim-
ple construction or installation jobs, s:ructura1 elements and types of work are ac-
counted for in ordinary physical units. We can find information on such types of
work in the work orders, work logs. the cumulative journals and so forth.

In calculating the volume of work performed in physical units it is essential to
bear in mind that in these indicators the data have been generalized for far from
always uniform products. In particular, such differences occur not only in labor
expenditures but also in the composition of construction work and operations for a
given type of structural element. For example, the same volume of a foundation can
be erected from various preassembled structural elements and pieces requiring vari-
ous operations and labor expenditures for their installation. However, in general-
izing the volume of the same types of work in physical units for the aggregate of
construction organizations, these differences in practical terms are disregarded.

Finally, physical units are employed to determine the volume of end construction

product, that is, the completed projects or. in other words, the putting of them in-
to operation and this holds an important place in the system of construction product
indicators. Chapter III or the textbook described in detail the methods for measur-

ing the volume of completed projects put into operation.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

56. Accounting for Construction Product in Cost Units

The cost can serve as the sole measurement for construction products of different
quality. For this reason, a general description of the result of construction work
presumes the presence of accounting for the product in monetary or cost terms. The
general importance of accounting for product in cost terms consists in the fact that
on this basis control can be exercised over production and the measure of consump-
tion. In construction, this makes it possible to bring together in a single summary
indicator the diverse results of production activities and this, in turn, provides
an opportunity for all the construction organizations to plan the volume of
construction-installation work in cost terms for any period and to monitor its ful-
fillment. Accounting for product in cost terms makes it possible to study the dy-
namics of its production volume on any level of the organization and management of
construction.

In construction a product can be estimated by its costs or by using the estimated
prices. But only by using prices which reflect the full amounts of the expendi-
tures of socially necessary labor is it possible to correctly express the volume of
construction product. However, in construction it is extremely difficult to estab-
lish ex-factory prices for the product and, in particular, for completed projects in
an analogous manner as is done in industry. This is prevented by the specific fea-
tures of construction product and its production expressed in the individual nature
of the projects created and, in particular, in the unique conditions of construc-
tion work. For precisely this reason product costs in construction are determined
on the basis of the expenditure estimate which, along with the plans, is drawn up
for each construction project or group of projects (site) and is termed the esti-
maced coat.

The estimated cos: of construction-installation work is the basic type of monetary
expression for the volume of construction product and consists of three parts:
direct expenditures. overhead and planned accumulation. The methodology for deter—
mining the estimated cost of the work comes down to establishing the listed compo-
nent parts for the specific types of construction and installation work. For this
normative and estimate manuals have been worked out and put into effect in construc-
tion and the most important of these for determining estimated cost are the follow-
ing: the estimated standards of expenditures for carrying out construction work or
Part IV of the Construction Standards and Rules (SNiP), the regional unified unit
rates (YeRYeR), the price lists for the installation of equipment, and the listed
prices per unit of completed construction product.

The methodology for calculating the estimated cost of construction and installation
work varies. Thus, for calculating the estimated cost or just construction work,
the unified rates are employed which have been brought together and published in the

collections for the types of general construction and special construction work
(YeRYeR).

The rates given in the YcRYeR are averaged amounts of direct expenditures (the cost
of materials, expenditures on operating construction machinery and basic wages of
workers employed in basic and ancillary production) per unit of structural element
and consolidated types of work, for example, per m3 of brickwork, per m2 of flooring
and so forth. The unit estimates are based upon sector-wide estimated standards for
the consumption of materials, labor expenditures and operating time of construction

91.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

machinery as well as calculated wage rates of employees for the various natural re-
gions, the ex-factory wholesale prices for materials and the rates for transporting
them. The estimated norms are given in Part IV of the SNiP. and this is the basic
document which controls estimate calculations in construction. They were first put
into effect in 1955. Since 1 January 1969. revised estimate standards for the ex-
penditure of production resources have been employed for the unit rates. As prices
for materials ordinarily fixed wholesale prices as of a certain date are employed
and these are termed estimated prices. At present (from 1 January 1969). these are
the ex-factory prices as of 1 July 1967 with certain supplements and amendments made
after 1 January 1969. in particular in line with the introduction of new wholesale
prices on 1 January 1975.

Prior to 1969. for compiling the estimates the prices of various years were employed.
Thus. in the 1937-1945 period, 1936 prices were in effect, 1945 prices in 1946-1949.
1950 prices in 1950-1955 and 1955 prices in 1955-1969.

The YeRYeR have been differentiated into 19 groups for territorial regions (zones)
with approximately equal construction conditions. This means that the level of
estimated prices, strictly speaking. is not uniform for the entire nation but rather
reflects the actual difference of expenditures for performing the same type of jobs
under different construction conditions. This important feature of estimated prices
should be considered in comparing the construction product volumes in different eco-
nomic regions of the nation. In the instances when the construction conditions go
beyond the limits adopted by the YeRYeR norms. corrections are made in the unit
rates or. as they say. the unit rates are "tied" to the local construction condi-
tions. Such corrections are made for wages, for the cost of buildings materials and
for other expenditures.

The estimated cost of construction work is determined in the following manner. For
each project. the volume of construction work to be carried out is determined in
physical units and using the YeRYeR the rates are found for each type of structural
element or type of work. By multiplying the volume of work in physical units by the
corresponding unit rates. the amount of direct expenditures for the given work is
determined. Then the total overhead is figured using the established norms in per-
cent of the direct expenditures. The current rates for overhead were introduced as
of January 1969 within limits from 12.5 to 19.0 percent for construction work and
from 70 to 144 percent for installation work. depending upon the departmental affil-
iation of the contracting organizations. The total of planned accumulation. in

other words. the planned profit. for all construction organizations was set on
1 January 1969 on the same level. namely 6 percent of the total of the direct ex-
penditures and overhead.

Having added up the direct expenditures. the overhead and planned accumulation. we
will obtain the full estimated cost of construction work. Let us assume that for
the construction of a shop building the external walls were erected from sawdust
concrete with a volume of 700 I3. For the given construction organization, the
overhead rate is 14 percent. According to the YeRYeR collection the cost of erect-
ing 1 m3 of Such walls is 18 rubles. Hence:

Direct expenditures for erecting walls 700-18 - 12.600 rubles;
Overhead 12.600 ~0.14 - 1,764 rubles;

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol- FICMI. USE ONLY

Planned accumulation (lZ,600-+i,766) 0.06 - 862 rubles;
The estimated cost of erecting the exterior walls equals: lZ.600-+l,7644-862-
15,226 rubles.

For determining the estimated cost of work related to equipment installation, price
lists for these jobs have been compiled in the USSR. The presently employed price
lists for equipment installation were put into effect on 1 January 1969. These doc-
uments contain the rates for installing various types of production and other-
purpose stationary equipment. The rates for equipment installation, in contrast to
the YeRYeR, give the full estimated cost of installation work for each calculation
unit of equipment or individual units of large-size equipment. For calculating the
estimated cost of the performed installation work, one has merely to multiply the
number of units of installed equipment or the installed assemblies of a unit by the
correspondinc rates found in the approved installation lists.

At present, more advanced price lists are being worked out for equipment installa-
tion and these will be based upon consolidated units for the measurement of in-
stallation work and their estimated cost, for example, the installation of indi-
vidual types of equipment per unit or per unit of capacity at the given shop or
starting-up complex.

Under the conditions of the complete transition to payments for a completed project
as well as the continuing indu3trialization of construction and the use of standard
plans. the optimum methodology for determining the estimated cost of construction
product will be the one which is based upon listed prices for completed projects or
a unit of their capacity, volume capacity and so forth. In construction they have
begun elaborating and employing such prices starting in 1959, simultaneously with
the introduction of payment for the fully completed project where these are most
effective. In practice listed prices are used for the construction of mass-built
housing per m2 of total area; for school buildings, hospitals. movie theaters and
other cultural and service projects the unit is per place; in individual production
buildings add installations it is for the project as a whole, a unit of capacity or
other consolidated unit of measurement for the completed project.

57. Indicators for the Volume of Produced Construction Product

For studying and assessing the results of produccion activities carried out by con-
tracting organizations. statistics employs a system of construction product indi-
culurs in which the construction activities of the contracting organizations are
viewed as a single process of producing and selling the construction product. For
this reason the result of the work carried out by the contracting organizations is
primarily characterized by two interrelated indicators: by the volume of the pro-
dured construction product and by the volume of the commodity construction product.
These have "iierent purposes and a differing methodology of calculation. Infor-
mation on the volume of produced construction product is required to describe the
volume of construction work, for planning calculations for the need of the contract-
ing organizations for labor resources and means of production and, consequently, for
planning and managing the construction industry.

The volume of produced construction product can be represented in physical or cost
terms. in the former instance the physical and material composition of the product
produced by the organization will be described in the form of an aggregate of

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicators expressing the number, capacity or volume of the comleLed projects and
the amount of construction—installation work performed. In the latter instance a
single general indicator will be obtained for the result of construction work in
cost terms and this makes it possible to correlate the volt-1e of produced product
with other indicators in the system.

in accounting and statistics, the volume of the construction-installation work per-
formed by the organization over the report period according to the estimated cost
is used as the cost indicator for the produced construction product. The economic
sense of this cost indicator is that it describes the entire result of construction
production activities by the organization and only for the given period regardless
of the degree of completeness which the product has achieved by the end of the
period. As a consequence of the fact that the construction cycle, for example. in
building the foundation of a house or the erecting of a building as a whole, is
very extended and may not coincide with the report period or may go beyong its lim-
it. a portion of the construction and installation work for the projects and con-
struction stages can be performed prior to the report period and, consequently, will
not be considered among the amount of construction product produced over the report
period.

The volume of produced construction product (the volume of performed construction
and installation work) over the report period can be calculated either by totaling
its component elements or by the balance method. The composition of the volume of
produced construction product includes the estimated cost of the work performed in
the report period: 1) for projects, work stages and complexes commenced and com-
pleted in the report period; 2) for projects, work stages and complexes commenced

in the report period but incomplete; 3) for projects, work stages and complexes com-
menced in the previous period and completed in the report period; a) for projects,
work stages and complexes commenced in the previous period and not complete in the
report period.

Let us examine an example illustrating the methods of calculating the indicator of
produced construction product in a construction administration during the third
quarter (Table v.1). The table gives information on the work performed by the con-
struction administration at projects having different periods for the start and com-
pletion of their construction. In calculating the indicators let us assume that all
the work has been done in full accord with the plans and the estimate. If in the
accounting there are direct data on the work performed over the third quarter, then
the volume of produced construction product over this period will correspond to the
total of col. 6.

Information on the estimated cost of the work for the first and second components
can be found in the acceptance and delivery statements as well as in the construc-
tion estimates. It is more difficult to determine the amount of work for the third

and fourth components of the produced construction product as the accounting may not
include the corresponding direct data. In such instances it is advisable to deter—

mine the work carried out over the report period by selecting the data from primary
accounting documents for small stages of product completeness, for example, a struc-

tural element or consolidated type of work. This information is to be found in the
acceptance and delivery statements, the accounting logs for the performed work and
the cumulative ledgers. These show the amount of work for each construction proj-
ect, work stage or complex in both physical units and estimated cost.

97

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
 

I? 03—15.“

IZOD—20. l 2
”TI—30.09
6.0! -4.l I

total '

Key: a--Project number; b--Date and month of actual start and
completion of construction; c--Full estimated cost of work.
1,000 rubles; d--Incomplete construction work at start of
third quarter; o--Volume of work carried out; f--Since
start of construction; g-0ver third quarter; h--Incomplete
construction work at end \E third quarter

The estimated cost of the work performed in the report period for projects, work
stages and complexes started in the previous period and completed in the report
period (the third component) can be obtained if one subtracts the estimated cost

of the work performed on these projects, stages and complexes in the previous peri-
od from the estimated cost of them (the incomplete construction work at the start
of the period). In the example an analogous case is shown for project 1 for which
the volume of work performed is 92,000 rubles (456-364).

The last component, the estimated cost of the work carried out in the report period
on projects, work stages and complexes commenced in the previous period and incom-
plete in the report one, is determined either directly from the primary accounting
data or as the difference in the incomplete construction work on such projects at
the end and beginning of the report period. In the example this case occurs in

project a {or which the volume of work performed over the third quarter equaled
31,000 rubles (510-a79).

Since a contracting organization accounts for the volume of incomplete construction

work at the end of each report period, the method of calculating the volume of pro-
duced construction product is simplified. It can be based on a balance scheme for
the relationship of produced and completed construction product and from which the
volume of product produced over the report period is the total volume of work on
the projects, work stages and complexes completed in the report period and the

change in the balance of incomplete construction work at the beginning and end of
the report period (U), that is:

0:1- (Jami-0:) - new.

where Qgi--estimAted cost of the work performed in the report period;

Qc--e5timated cost of the projects. work stages and complexes completed in
report period;

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Q: and Q3-—the estimated cost of incomplete construction work at the beginning and
end of the report period.

The volume of construetion-installation work completed in the third quarter as cal-
culated by this method will be: (6564-117)4-(6l3‘-863) s 343,000 rubles.

An important methodological feature of the designated indicator which determines the
area of its use is the absence of double counting of the construction product within
the entire sector. However, the cost of the raw products and materials produced in
industry and consumed in construction, in determining the cost of produced construc-
tion product, is double counted. Such double counting of the product is completely
justified since it is a consequence of the social division of labor and cooperation
among the national economic sectors. In this regard the volume of work carried out
over the given period is applicable for calculating a number of derivative indica-
tors which describe the degree of utilization for the labor resources and means of
production, for example. the output level of the employees, the output-capital
ratio, materials utilization and so forth.

Information on the volume of produced construction product is given in the statisti-
cal reporting in Form No 3-t in the section on employee output where this indicator
is termed the volume of construction—installation work considering changes in the
balances of incomplete construction work. as well as in Form No 2-9.

Along with the volume of produced construction product, an indicator describing the
overall volume of contracting work is calculated in the practices of the contract-
ing organizations and in statistics. In contrast to the one examined above, the
volume of contracting work, in addition to the produced construction product (the
volume of construetion-installation work) includes the so-called other contracting
work. In the latter are the work carried out using the funds for the basic activi-
ties of the contracting organizations but the results of this work are not of the
nature of a construction product. For example, such would be the manufacturing of
boiler and other nonstandard equipment at the construction site, landscaping on the
grounds, the creation of forest belts and so forth. The volume of contracting work
is set by the superior organizations as a calculated indicator in the plans of the
contracting organizations under the ministries and departments. Form l-ks gives
the data on the carrying out of the contracting work plan.

£8. Indicators for the Fulfillment of the Construction Product Plan

In the variOus stages of national economic development, for assessing the operation
of the construction organizations a system of construction product indicators linked
to specific economic conditions has been employed. Prior to the economic reform,
the results of the production activities at construction organizations was assessed
according to the production capacity and projects put into operation as well as in
terms of the volume of performed construction-installstion work. After the carry-
ing out of the economic reform in construction (1969), the following were adopted

as the indicators to be approved in the plan: the putting of capacity and projects
into operation and the volume of sold construction product.

In the contracting organizations the putting of production capacity and projects
into operation is planned and accounted for in physical units. The importance of

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \nrn nu. U-‘L UNI-I

At the same time, for a general assessment of the results of production activities
by a contracting organization, the need arises to supplement the designated indica~
tor by employing a unified cost indicator of the type of sold or commodity con-
struction product. Prior to the economic reform, such an indicator was the volume
of construction-installation work completed and turned over to the client using the
estimated cost, that is, an indicator analogous in its content to the volume of the
produced product. The difference of these indicators was merely that the former

ing organizations to carry out these quotas. After the economic reform, the sold
construction product was adopted as a general cost indicator and this was expressed

by the estimated cost of construction-installation work on the projects, stages and
complexes of the special construction and installation work completed and turned

over to the clients in the report year. However, the indicator of sold construc-
tion product has not assumed its proper place in assessing the work results of the

activities by construction organizations has adopted the following as among the
basic indicators: the putting into operation of production capacity and projects

up projects and, consequently, to best ensure the prompt putting of fixed capital
into operation.

Commodity construction product is the estimated cost of the construction and instal-
lation work at enterprises, starting-up complexes, stages and projects which have
completed construction and have been turned over in the report year in the

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

established procedure for operation and ready to turn out product and provide
surviccs. The commodity Construction product also includes work on completed
stages and complexes of special construction and installation work to be turned
over to the general contractor (to the basic subcontractors) and performed by the
given organization under subcontracting arrangements. Moreover, the commodity
construction product includes the so-called "other contracting work" as well as
work the volume and methods of execution of which are clarified only in the course
of construction, for example, dredging and mine-sinking work. The incorporation
of work stages and complexes on incomplete projects as part of the commodity con-
struction product,along with the end product of the sector, is a certain divergence
from the basic payment principle adopted in the decree (that is, for the end prod-
uct). At the same time, this exception makes it possible to solve the problem of
accounting for commodity construction product no: only for the general contracting
organizations but also for the specialized and general construction organizations
performing work under subcontracting arrangements.

In the payments of the construction organizations for the completed project, the
esrimated cost of the work on the project is included in the commodity construc-
tion product after the full completion of its construction in the volume and compo-
sitiOn.of work envisaged by the plans and estimates and after being turned over to
the client. The turning over and acceptance of the completed project are carried
out depending upon its significance by state or worker acceptance commissions and
are formalized by statements in the established procedure. The value of work on
stages of construction and work complexes is included in the commodity construction
product of the organization after they are fully complete in the volume and composi-
tion envisaged by the estimate and after they have been turned over to the general
contractors under the statements of Form No 2a. The "other contracting work" is
considered as commodity construction product under the condition that it has been
carried out in accord with the plan and the turning over to the client has been
formalized by the statements of Form No 2b and 2c. The above-mentioned documents
(statements) confirm the completeness of the construction product required for turn-
ing over and at the same time serve as the basis for the client to pay for the ac-
cepted product. However. payment for the turned over product is not considered as
an essential condition in determining commodity construction product.

The volume of commodity construction product includes the full estimated cost of

the work carried out on the completed projects, starting-up complexes and so forth,
regardless of when they were started, and not just the cost of the work carried out
in the report period. Here the volume of work on a project turned over to the cli-
ent with unfinished work is included in the commodity construction product in the
actual amounts. that is, for the full estimated cost of the work on the project
minus the value of the unfinished work. Consequently, commodity construction prod-
uct reflects not only the result of the work carried out in the report period but
also to a significant degree the result of the work carried out in previous periods.
This particular feature of the indicator makes it practically applicable in calcu-
lating the indicators for labor productivity, the output-capital ratio and so forth.

In the plans of the ministries and organizations, the overall volume of commodity
construction product is set along with the volume to be carried out by their own
forces. In assessing plan fulfillment for commodity construction product, the vol-
ume of work on completed sites, starting-up complexes and projects will be con-
sidered in the plan fulfillment if they are a component part of the plan approved

101

FOR OWTWCJAL.USEiJNLV
PU“ UrflLIAL Ubt. UNLY

by the superior organization. in instances when the construction organizations
carry out work on projects not envisaged in the approved plans. their value is not
considered in estimating plan fulfillment, with the exception of projects put into
operation ahead of time. In the latter instance, the plan for commodity construc-
tion product is not changed and this serves as an additional condition for encourag-
ing the organizations to shorten the construction time.

Let us give an example of determining the volume and degree of fulfillment for the
plan of commodity construction product according to the data of a trust for the
report year (see Table v.2). In calculating the indicators, we will assume that
the construction—installation work has been carried out and assessed in accord with
the plans and estimate. The total volume of work turned over to the client during
the report year was 2,75&,000 rubles, including 2,574,000 rubles for the volume of
conmodity construction product (the total of the last colume). The commodity con-
struction product did not include the work which, although completed (and even
turned over to the client) did not satisfy the procedural requirements for the
sought indicator, that is: the volume of work on a coal storage facility which was
incomplete and not turned over to the client and the amount of work on the founda-
tion of an apartment building which was turned over to the general contractor under
a subcontracting arrangement (not provided in the plan of the report year). The
percentage of plan fulfillment for commodity construction product by the trust dur-

ing the report year was: 3‘213 .100 - 104.51.
2,464

Table v.2

  
  

Actually performed work,
1,000 rubles

 
 
  

 

Commodity construction
product by plan for
year. 1,000 rubles

 
    

Name of starting-up complexes,
projects and work stages

 
  
 

Including

 

Included in

 

 

Hunting plant (by sub-
contracting)
Coai storage facility

Cooling tower 686
Club building (finished

.ilmml of time) 320
urhcr contracting work 230

Foundation of apartment
building (by subcontracting)

_ _______——#—_—

Total

in individual periods. when the plans of the construction organizations do not en-
visage quotas for pu:t1ng projects into operation and for commodity construction
product, as an exception the evaluation of the result of production activities is

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON! Y

made in terms of the fulfillment of the contractor- and client-approved schedules
for carrying out construction-installation work on individual projects and instal-
lations.

The introduction of payments between the clients and contractors for enterprises,
starting-up complexes, stages and projects which have completed construction, been
put into production and are ready to produce products and provide services as well
as for commodity construction product is planned for the start of the 11th Five-
Year Plan.

59. Indicators for the Volume of Construction Product Under the Conditions of
Specialization and Cooperation of Contracting Organizations

Under the currently existing construction conditions the indicators for produced
and commodity product are determined in accord with the established forms of spe-
cialization and cooperation among the contracting organizations. Thus, considering
the different types of contracts reflecting the production tics of the contracting
organizations and the builders. in planning and statistics the volume of construc-
tion product is calculated broken down for the general, direct and subcontracting
contracts.

The first two indicators describe the volume of construction product which has been
turned over to the builder and. consequently, is eliminated from the sphere of con-
struction work. In totaling the volune of work carried cut for all the general and
direct contracts, we will obtain the total amount of contracting work for the sec-
tor. The third indicator describes the volume of construction product realized
within the sphere of construction work, that is, between the construction organiza-
tions.

In erecting large, industrial transport and other complexes through production co-
operation, scores of subcontracting organizations are involved. Here the subcon-
tractors bear responsibility only for the work assigned to them while the general
contractor is responsible for all the work on the project and site, that is, for the
work carried out both by its own forces as wall as by the subcontracting organiza-
tions. The particular features of the production ties between the construction or-
ganizations and the nature of the functions performed by them in joint construction
are expressed in the system of construction product indicators. Thus. the plan of
the general contractor approves the following two indicators for commodity construc-
tion product: the overall volume of commodity construction product and that done
by the organization's own forces; in addition. the volume of commodity construction
product carried out by other involved organizations is determined. Analogous indi-
cators are also calculated for contracting work.

The volume of construction product carried out by the contracting organization's own
forces over a given period describes the result of the production operations of just
the given organization. This indicator in no degree repeats the production result
of the other construction organizations which cooperate with the given one and, con-
sequently, in calculating an analogous summary indicator for a trust, glavk [main
administration]. ministry and sector there is no product double counting. The
designated feature is very crucial and it distinguishes this indicator from the cost
indicators of industrial product (gross, commodity and so forth) in thc summarizing

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of whicr product double counting within the enterprises and the sector is inevit-
able.

Table V.3

 

 
 

Volume of work carried out by outside
organizations, 1.000 rubles

 
 

Total volume Volume of work
of turned carried out by
over work. own forces,

    
  
   

   
 

   
    
     
 
 
 

SU-S [con-
struction
administra-
tion]

SU-6

 
 
 
 

  
 
 

Total for
Trust No 1
80—7
SU-B

500
50

 
 
  

  

Total for
Trust No 2

 
 
   
 

Total for

glavk 670

For an illustration of calculating the product indicators, Table V.3 gives a sim-
plified example for an aggregate of contracting organizations from a glavk over the
report year. From the data of the example the volume of the work performed by the

organizations' own forces equale_ R ".llion rubles for the glavk.

The volume of work performed by associated organizations characterizes that portion
of the construction product which has been produced by contracting organizations

for the general one due to the responsibility of the general contracting organiza-
tion for all the work related to erecting the project. it must consider that por-
tion of the construction product which is included in the overall program of con-
tracclng work as approved by the superior organization. Construction-installation
work under subcontracting arrangements is usually performed by specialized contract-
ing organizations. A characteristic feature of the construction product produced by
these organizations is that as a rule it assumes the form of not a completed project
but rather a work stage or complex at the project.

The amount of work carried out by the associated organizations for the given aggre-
gate of construction organizations is an amount which depends upon the scale and
structure or the construction organization assuming the role of the head one and in

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

terms of which all remaining organizations may be considered associated. Here the
summary indicator for the aggregate of organizations, the volume of construction
product of the associated organizations, will be reduced as one moves from a small-
scale organization to a larger one recognized as the head one, for example, from
the administration to the trust, from the trust to the glavk and so forth. Such a
pattern is caused by the fact that in moving to the larger scale organization, a
number of organizations previously considered associated ones are dropped out of
the calculation. In a general form this pattern can be represented by the follow-
ing inequality:

Qadministration 30"“: ; leavk >Qministry k'Qsector’

where Q-the volume of construction work performed by associated organizations for
the entire aggregate of contracting organizations while the subscript word
designates the type of construction organization adopted as the head one
and on the level of which the given indicator has been calculated.

The designated pattern of the indicator can easily be traced from the data of our
example. Namely: the volume of work performed by associated organizations equals:
on the administration 1eve1-l,400+-1,0304-670 - 3.18 million rubles; on the trust
1evel—-1.030-+67O - 1.7 million rubles; on the glavk level--670,000 rubles.

From the given calculations it is not difficult to see that the numerical differ-
ence between these indicators is characterized by the amount of work carried out
within the structural subdivisions of the construction organization accepted as the
head one. In practice this value is usually termed the internal production turn-
over. Thus, the total volume of work delivered (the total of col. 2) contains the
"internal trust turnover" totaling 1.68 million rubles (the total of col. 3) and
the "internal glavk turnover" totaling 1.03 million rubles (the total of col. 6).

The total volume of construction-installation work is determined as the total of
the first two indicators, that is, the volume of work performed by the general con-
tractor's own forces and the volume of work performed by the associated organiza-
tions. This describes the aggregate volume of work turned over by the general con-

tractor to the builders. In the example this is the total of col. 1, that is, 11.18
million rubles.

The examined methodological features in the system of construction product indica-
tors are of importance in their statistical summarizing for the aggregate of con-
tracting organizations. All the above-examined indicators for construction product
are given in the statistical reporting under Form No l-ks.

510. The Relationships of the Indicators for the Construction Product Volume
The indicators examined in the preceding paragraphs for produced and commodity con-
struction product are interrelated and comprise a system of indicators. This sys-

tem's indicators and their relationships can be studied by various statistical
methods.

The balance method provides the fullest understanding of the diversity of the rela-
tionships between the construction product indicators and primarily in the stage of

105

FOR 0FF“JA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

its production and sales. The balance of product production and sales (the turning
over of the work) is comprised of two parts, each of which is assigned to one stage
or the organization's production activity. Each part of the balance represent the
basic construction product indicators which reflect its differences in terms of de-
gree of completeness, the production ties of the organizations, the types of con-
tractual relations between them and other features. Depending upon the nature of
the tasks of economic research, in constructing the Lalance it is possible to use a
greater or lesser number of indicators. A amplified scheme of a balance for con-
struction product is shown in Table v.4.

Table VJ.

  

Production of construction product “Allocation of construction product

    
     

1. Work turned over to clients in
report year, total

1. Incomplete construction work at
year's start, total

   

6,772

  
        
    
      
  
 

Including: Including:
a) For projects turned over in a) For projects put into
report year operation 4,870

b) For projects carried over to
following year

b) For work stages and complexes 1,902

 
 

2. Incomplete construction work at
year's end, total
a) For projects to be turned
over in following year
b) For projects carried over to
following years

 
 

2. Production of work over year,
total
Including:
a) For projects turned over in
report year
b) For carryover projects

2,031

   
       

1,486

  
        
 

5105

    
 
    

Key: a--Estimated cost of work, 1,000 rubles

The balance can be constructed for the purposes of analyzing plan fulfillment or for
Studying the dynamics of the construction product volume. In this instance, in addi-
tion to the initial data on product volume, in its predicate it is advisable to give
the deviations from the plan or the previous period in absolute and relative terms.
Schematically the produced (Q r and comodity Qc) construction product can be repre-
sented by the following equation:

03w,” - Qc+Qﬁ.

where Q: and Qﬁnestinated cost of incomplete production of work at beginning and
end of report period (year).

The relationship of the product indicators within each portion of the balance is
-;xpressed in the form of the components of the construction product. For example.
the total volume of produced construction-installation worI' over the report year

according to the data of the second section on the lefthand side of the balance can
he represented by the total volume of work for the two positions of this section,

that is, 3,758+2,609 . 6,376,000 rubles.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relationship of produced an. commodity construction product and the role of the
individual factors can be established if one proceeds from other forms of the rela~
tion, in particular when the system's indicators can be depicted in the form of the
product of comultipliers. The index method in the given instance is the theoretical
basis for studying the impact of the factors on the overall result. Let us take up

the method of the interrelated study of the impact of the factors and for illustrat-
ing this we will use the basic indicators of produced and commodity construction

product the relationship of which can be presented in the following manner (Fig.5.3).

Total volume of produced construction product (volume of contracting work)
Volume of sold construction
product

Volume of work for projects
completed and turned over to
clients

 
 

 
 
     

Change in balance of incomplete
construction work

 
 
 
 
  
  

 

Volume of work on carryover
projects

   

  
      

Fig. v.3. Relationship of cost indicators for construction product

In order to form a system of product indicators, we will establish two coefficients
or comultipliers by which it is possible mathematically to move from one indicator
to the other. The first is the coefficient for the work turned over and this is the
ratio of the volume of sold construction product to the volume of the produced over
the given period. This indicator characterizes the amount of the sold construction
product per ruble of work carried out in the report period. With other conditions
being equal, an increase in the volume of work in the projects, work stages and
complexes sold to the clients leads to an increase in this coefficient. The second
is the coefficient of the output of end construction product. This is the ratio of
the volume of commodity product (work on projects put into operation) to the volume
of sold product. A rise in the amount of work on the projects put into operation,
in comparison with the plan or the previous period, with other conditions being
equal is accompanied by an increase in this coefficient.

In applying the designations for the indicators introduced in Table v.5, it is pos-
sible to present the volame of work on the projects put into operation in the form
of the following product of the comultipliers: Qo - QKdKO. Consequently, depend-
ing upon what volume of work the contracting organization carries out and whether
attention is facused on the nearly-completed or carryover projects. the fulfillment
of the plan for the amount of work on projects put into operation will be respec-
tively more or less. Let us examine the influence of these factors iron the exam-
ple of a construction administration (Table V.S).

107

FOR OFFKJAI.USE‘ONLV
I'UK UI'I'ILIAL USE. ONLY

Table v.5

    
    

By plan
for year

Actual
for year

 

  

1. Volume of produced construction

product, 1.000 rubles 618
2. Volume of sold construction product,

1,000 rubles o
3. Including for projects put into

operation, 1,000 rubles 930
6. Coefficient of work turned over

(line 2:line l) -0.1
5. Coefficient for output of end

construction product (line 3zline 2) -0.lh

The basic factor influencing a change in the volume of work on the completed proj-
ects is the total volume of construction-installation work carried out over the
period and to some degree this reflects the volume of construction work. The in-
fluence of a change in this volume factor can be determined under the condition that
all the remaining factors or quality indicators remain on the level of the base
period, that is, according to the formula AQ - (Q1-Qo)Kd°K° . In the example, the
influence of this factor will be: A0 I 618'1.0S°0.71 - 461,800 rubles. In figuring
the influence of the subsequent factors, we may proceed from the assumption that a
change in the preceding factors occurred and for this reason they should be taken
on a level of the report period. Thus, the influence of a change in the coefficient
for turned-over work can be determined from the formula Aka - 01(Kdl"Kdo)Ko ; the
influence of the change in the coefficient for the output of end construction prod-
uct can be determined from the formula 4&0 - Qle,(Kol-Koo). In the example, the
influence of the corresponding factors will equal? 0K4 - 6,820(-0.1)-0.7l -
-484,200 rubles, while Ago - 6,820'0.95‘(-0.14) - -907,100 rubles.

An assessment of the influence of these factors can also be given in a relative ex-
pression, having divided for this the result of the influence of each factor by the
planned volume of work on projects completed in the report year. In the example we

have: for the Q factor 99L;1991 - +9.92, for the Kd factor iéﬁﬂilelQQl I -10.41,

b.650 6,65
and for the K0 factor 07616géoo - -l9.SZ. Thus, the overfulfillment of the plan

lar the volume of work on projects completed and put into operation during the re-
port year is formed under the influence of the designated factors in the following
manner: in absolute terms 661-+(-486.2)4-(-907.l) - -930,300 rubles; in relative
terms 919-+(10.4)-+(-l9.5) - -201.

On the basis of the relationships between the construction product indicators it is

possible to carry out analytical calculations for the influence of a larger number
of factors, that is. the indicators which reflect different conditions of construc-
tion work.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬁll. indicators for the Volume of Construction Bork

The cost indicators for the produced and sold construction product are employed in
solving many planning, accounting and statistical problems. However, the use of
the product volume in cost terms for solving these problems is not always uncondi-
tionally applicable since the coat of construction product reflects the influence
of factors which have no bearing on the product volume. For example, the estimated
cost of the construction product and its change over time depend, with other condi-
tions being equal, upon the change in the ratio of live and embodied labor in prod-
uct cost. The result of previous labor is embodied chiefly in the materials con-
sumed in construction work.

For example. if in laying parquet flooring. oak or yew is used instead of the or-
dinary (maple or ash) wood. then the estimated cost of a unit of such parquet floor-
ing will be much greater than the cost of flooring made from maple. Thus. the use
of the estimated cost of the work to describe the dynamics of the physical volume

of construction product, the changed level and dynamics of labor productivity, the
output-capital ratio and other indicators can produce a distorted notion of the
dimensions and dynamics of product volume. All of this has led to the search for
and practical experimental testing of production volume indicators.

The volume of production is an indicator characterizing in cost or labor terms the
amount of involvement in producing a certain product for the labor of workers from
a given organization (live labor) and the labor embodied in the organization's im-
plements of production and material expenditures needed for the functioning of
these means of labor in production. Thus, by concept the production volume should
reflect the amount of participation of each enterprise, construction organization
or its individual sections in creating the product.

For expressing the production volume in construction practices several indicators
have been employed of which the best known were the following: the production vol~
ume for the normed cost of the work (NSR), for the normed labor intensiveness (NT),
for the estimated normed labor intensiveness (SNT). the conditionally net product
and others.

0f the above-listed indicators the features of the given definition are best met by
the production volume according to the normed cost of the work as this is an indi-
cator in which all types of the performed construction and installation work are
correlated to the normed cost of their production. The component elements of this
norm are the estimated expenditures on the wages for the workers in basic produc-
tion, expenditures on Operating construction machinery and overhead. In contrast
to the estimated cost, the NSR does not include expenditures on raw products, ma-
terials and other subjects of labor as well as the profit incorporated in the esti-
mated cost, being, in essence, the incomplete normed production costs. For pre-
cisely this reason the NSR to a certain degree makes it possible to smooth over the
influence of certain factors which are not directly related to producing the given
product and chiefly the influence of the material intensiveness and profitability
of the work. Consequently, the NSR can be employed for assessing the work results
of the organizations and for calculating output, the output-capital ratio and the
other indicators for the effectiveness of construction work. and in particular
labor-intensive work. Here it is essential to bear in mind that the NSR does not
eliminate all the shortcomings of a cost indicator caused. in particular. by price
formation features.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1‘!“ Off“ IAI. “at. \ll‘l.‘

The conditional net product of construction organizarions is an indicator close in
content to the production volume but not equal to it. The sense of this indicator
is that in addition to the newly created value, the total amortization on fixed
capital is also included in it. In order to determine this indicator, it is essen-
tial to deduct from the estimated cost of construction-installation work the cost
of the fixed and auxiliary materials, fuel, electric rower and other material ex-
penditures consumed in production with the exception of fixed capital amortization.

Conditional net product does not fully describe the volume of construction work
since the profit of the contracting organization does not always correspond to the
results of its operations.

Recently, normed net product has begun to be used as an indicator for evaluating the
operation of the organizations. This includes all types of wages and deductions for
social security. The net product norm or rate for each type of work can be deter-
mined as the difference between the estimated cost and the cost of material expend-
itures for producing a unit of work. An experimental verification of this indi-
cator has shown its advantages over the other product indicators.

The production volume in terms of normed labor intensiveness is determined by multi-
plying the amount of work (Q) by the normed labor intensiveness (tn). The total
labor intensiveness of all the work carried out will be obtained by totaling these
products, that is, eqn and expressed in units of normed working time (man-days,
man-hours and so forth). In contrast to the NSR, the designated indicator reflects
the participation of just live labor in the given production and as a consequence
of this it is also termed the volume of production work. This indicator is widely
employed in the practices of planning construction work at individual organizations
to figure output, to assess the fulfillment of the output standards and for other
purposes. The calculation of the normed labor intensiveness of work can be carried
out on a basis of estimated labor intensiveness norms which are uniform for all
construction organizations as well as the planned norms worked out in the individu-
al organizations. However, the latter are not uniform for the sector and cannot be
employed to obtain a general indicator of the production volume for an aggregate of
organizations as well as for comparison in other organizations.

As a variety of the normed labor intensiveness of the work, the contracting organi-
zations as an experiment have employed the production volume according to the esti-
mated normed labor intensiveness of the work (SNT) and this describes the volume of
construction-installation work according to the estimated cost given in the normed
lnhnr intensiveness.3 It is calculated in the following manner: the normed labor
intensivencss of construction—installation work is determined in man-days and the
nhininud amount is multiplied by the average output for the estimated cost of one
norm-day in the base period, that is:

—-——‘—_

1See: A. N. Gol'dberg, V. S. Kozlov and D. G. Dolgushevskiy, "Proizvoditel'nost'

trudn v stroitel'stve" [Labor Productivity in Construction], Moscow, Statistika,
1970. pp 30-32.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FHC]AL.USE(MQLY

zqopcm
Iqotn

 

iqltn ' ' qutcscn '

The estimated normed labor intensiveness, like normed labor intensiveness of the
work, does not consider the complexity and quality of the labor and responds poorly
to a change in the work volume caused by an increased degree of work mechanization.

The above-examined indicators for the production volume are particular and condi-
tional. They help in solving the problems of economic analysis. planning and opera—
tional leadership over the work of a given organization. A number of construction
ministries are continuing to experiment with different measurements for the volume
of construction work for the purpose of improving the indicators to assess the re-
sults of activities at the contracting organizations.

512. Gross and Net Construction Product

Along with the examined indicators for construction product, on the sectorial scale
statistics determines gross product as a portion of the aggregate social product in
the nation and net construction product as a part of national income. In the indi-
vidual contracting organizations these indicators are not calculated or employed.
Sometimes the volume of produced construction product or contracting work is equated
to the gross product of a contracting organizations. However. the term “gross prod-
uct" has not become established in the accounting of an individual contracting or—
nanization.

Gross construction product is the total volume of product created by the basic ac-
tivities of the research, design and construction organizations in the sector and
by the population in individual construction. In accord with this notion, gross
construction product includes the following components: 1) the product of design
and research activities paid for out of capital investment funds, 2) geological
prospecting paid for out of capital construction funds. 3) the product of construc—
tion work, 4) individual construction by the public.

however, the statistical reporting of contracting construction and design-research
organizations does not provide for the full breaking down of gross product both for
the nation as a whole as well as for the economic and administrative regions, the
sectors and forms of ownership. The volume of gross construction product can be
most fully calculated only on a basis of comprehensive information obtained from
the reports on capital investments, construction and other sectors as well as from
the materials of specially organized statistical surveys.

Information on the volume of construction product produced by the contracting or—
ganizations and by the direct labor method, the product of the design-research or-
ganizations as well as the work on deep exploratory and operational drilling for

oil and gas are to be faund in the reporting on capital investments submitted by

the builder enterprises and organizations (Form No 2-ks). Since the builder partic-
ipates in construction work (the concluding of contracts, the accepting of equip-
ment, technical supervision and so forth). the result of this participation is a
component part of the gross product of the sector in the form of the expenditures on
technical supervision, the support of the administration and so forth. These data

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H”! Ul'Fli'lAL UM: ONLY

are found in the report of Form No 2-ks in the line "Other Capital Work and Expend-
itures." Data on major overhauls carried out both by the contracting and the
direct-labor method as a whole are taken from the summary reporting of the minis—
tries and departments. For the individual conscruction of the public, the data
needed to calculate gross product are obtained from the annually conducted one-shot
counts of individual housing and other construction by the public and from samplings
of the cost of this conscruction.

Under the conditions of payments for a completed project and work stage, in the con-
struction, design and research organizations large amounts of incomplete construc-
tion work are formed and this is not fully reflected in the accounting of the build-
era but should be included in the gross product. Information on incomplete con-
struction work is submitted by the appropriate construction and design-research or-
ganizations to the builders in the statement of Form No 3 at the end of each month.

Along with gross product, in statistical practice the net product is also deter-
mined for construction as a national economic sector. For this the cost of material
expenditures is subtracted from gross construction product. In this calculation the
main difficulty is related to determining the amount of material expenditures in the
sector's gross product. The problem is that the accounting of the builders contains
no information on the expenditures for carrying out construetion-installation and
design-research work. The contracting and design-research organizations do account
for the expenditures but only in terms of comprehensive items and not in terms of
expenditure elements as is done in industry. As a consequence of this, in statisti-
cal practices the material expenditures in gross construction product are determined
indirectly on the basis of data from the reporting of the contracting and design-
research organizations on the costs of their product as well as by sampling surveys
for production expenditures in these organizations as carried out by the USSR TsSU.

Gross and net construction product are calculated in current and fixed prices. For
studying the dynamics of these indicators, their amounts are expressed in fixed
(comparable) prices. At present these are 1973 prices. Gross and net construction
product is recalculated using price indexes which reflect the ratio of the actual
and estimated cost of the work performed.

§13. Methods of Studying the Dynamics of the Construction Product Volume

A study of the volume of construction product over time is a traditional and im-
portant task for statistics. In carrying out this task. statistics constructs time
series and calculates the product volume indexes for the sector as a whole and for
the types of its activities. The relative dynamic indicators calculated on the
basis or a physical product count, the so-called individual indexes, are more often
used to describe changes in end construction product, that is, the putting of
capacity and fixed capital projects into operation. For example, in the Ninth Five-
Ycar Plan. the state and cooperative enterprises built 007.3 million m3 of total
housing area and this was 115.5 percent of the housing construction volume in the
Eighth Five-Year Plan.

For a general description of product dynamics in construction, the product cost in-
dicators are employed, that is: gross and net construction product, the volume of
construction-installation work, the volume of design-research work and others. The

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OWFWC1AL USEICHULY

construction product volume used as the level for the time series is expressed by
the estimated cost making it possible to measure the physical product volume and its
change. The index for the construction product volume is determined by the formula:

Nope]. '

 

where q), qo-volume of the work carried out by the sector's organizations in
physical units, respectively, in the report and base periods;
pc.-fixed estimated prices.

In the index for the product volume, the prices for obtaining its cost expression
should be uniform for the compared periods. Ordinarily in practice, for the comp
parison estimated prices in effect during the report period are employed. It is
possible to calculate the index for the volume of construction product directly
using the above-given formula without any corrections and limitations solely in the
period the sane estimated prices were in effect. However, during the time fixed
estimated prices are in effect there often are particular changes in the price for-

mation elements. For example, after the introduction of the new estimated prices
on 1 January 1969, changes were made in the prices for individual types of materi-

als and the overhead rates for individual types of construction; the wages of the
medium—paid employee categories were increased. Such changes did not involve the
general price formation base in construction and did not entail a change in the es-
timated prices, but at the same time they led to adjustments in the estimated cost
of the work, that is. to a recalculating of the work volumes.

For recalculating the work volumes in statistical practices price indexes (conver-
sion factors) are used in employing the following formula:

on ' [00' 1p-

where Qn and Qo-the work volumes, respectively, in the new and old estimated
prices.

In addition to the indicators for the work volume dynamics. statistics also calcu-
lates territorial indexes for the physical work volume, that is, statistical indi-
cators. The methodology of calculating these indicators is analogous to the calcu-
lating of the product volume indexes under the conditions of applying different
prices. Since the nation has estimated prices which are differentiated by regions
(zones). the same physical volume of construction-installation work expressed by
the estimated cost can have a differing amount for the various geographical areas
of the nation. For example, the volume of work carried out in the Far East (the
fifth territorial zone) comprising 2.5 million rubles in the estimated prices of
this region would be only 2.12 million rubles in the estimated prices of the first
territorial zone.

For calculating a territorial index for the volume of construction-installation
work, it is essential first to recalculate the compared work volumes in the esti-
mated prices of the same territorial zone used for the comparison. Most often the
estimated prices of the first territorial zone are used as the comparisons. The
work volume in the prices of the first territorial zone is recalculated by dividing

113

FOR!051NCIA1.USE¢DNLY
I‘UK Ul'l'lLlAL USE ONLY

the work volume in the estimated prices current for the given territorial zone by
the deviation ratio for the estimated prices in the given territorial zone from
the estimated prices of zone one. For calculating the territorial indexes one
should clarify the boundaries of the compared areas and the range of construction
organizations the products of which should be considered in calculating the index.
Both questions are settled considering the specific aim of the economic research.

516. A Statistical Study of the Steady Output of Construction Product and Its
Quality

The carrying out of construction-installation work over each segment of time in

the report period in accord with the established plan is one of the most important
conditions for completing the construction of each project on tﬂme and also for
achieving high economic indicators for construction work. The steady pace of con-
struction is studied by statistics in two areas: in the first place, in terms of
carrying out the construction-installation work in accord with the established plan
(schedule) for the volume and composition of work over equal time intervals; second—
ly, the evenness and steadiness of completing construction of the projects and their
putting into operation are assessed.

For measuring the steadiness of producing construction product the product cost in-
dicators are most often employed. However, an assessment of the steady operation
of the primary production sections of a construction organization is possible by
physical product measurements, for example, for the individual types of construc-
tion and installation work. Only physical measurements are employed in assessing
the steadiness of putting projects into operation.

The most widespread method of observing the steadiness of pace in construction is
the calculating of the proportional amount of the work volume carried out over each
time segment of the overall period. For example, if the volume of construction-
installation work is carried out over a year, it can be represented as the total of
the component work volumes over the four quarters or 12 months. By dividing the
completed work volume for each quarter (month) by the annual work volume we will
obtain the sought relative indicator. that is, the proportional amount of work in
the quarters (months). Table v.6 gives an example of calculating these indicators
for a construction administration during a report year. From a comparison of the
actual and planned indicators for the proportional amount in each quarter it is pos-

sible to obtain an idea of the disruption in the steady pace of the given organiza-
tion.

Table v.6

_______—__—___———————-————

 

    
 
 

Volume of construction work by quarters
Indicators

 

By plan in Z of annual volume

Actual:
1,000 rubles 1,015 5,660
X of annual volume 18 100

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Precisely this method can provide a description of the influence of the seasonal
factor of climatic conditions on the scale and dynamics of construction work and
its steadiness. The industrialization of construction which has developed in re-
cent years which has made it possible to overcome the seasonality in this area.
But this does not mean that in individual periods of the year the influence of the
seasons on the work volume has been oompletely eliminated. Ordinarily the season-
ality index (1,) is figured to disclose and numerically describe seasonal fluctua-
tions. In the given instance this is the percentage of the actually completed
amount of work over each month (quarter) of the year (0,) to the average monthly
(or quarterly? work volume (Qm), that is, Is - anqm. In the example the season-

ality indexes are for the first quarter 1,015 :§‘%59 '1001 - 722, for the second

quarter 92:, for the third quarter 1282 and for the fourth quarter 1081. A graphic
depiction of the results of producing construction product provides a visual idea

of the steadiness and seasonality of carrying out the work over adjacent segments
of time.

For a general description of the steady execution of work, statistics calculates
indicators based upon a direct comparison of report and plan data on construction
product output. Here the information on the fulfilled amount of work is best taken
for short time intervals such as months, 10—day periods, days or even hours. The
shorter the unit of measurement the fuller the evaluation will be for production
steadiness. The indicators of this group are termed steadiness factors. For calcu-
lating them, methods have been proposed based upon absolute indicators,for the work
volume or on relative amounts of plan fulfillment.

Such an indicator is the steadiness coefficient calculated by the formula:

where qf--the volume of actually completed work in the individual time intervals
within not more than the plan;

qp£--the amount of work according to the plan for these same time intervals.

The formula of the steadiness coefficient for relative data provides virtually the
same result but the conditions for its use are different as only equal intervals of
a period are used:

. .131.
K' lOO'n '
where p--the percentage of plan fulfillment over an individual period but not more
than 100 percent:
n--the number of individual periods for which the relative indicators of plan
fulfillment have been calculated.

The basic principle for,ca1culating the given coefficient is the assumption that the
amount of steadiness cannot be more than one (or 100 percent). For this reason in
determining this indicator the volume of work within the plan is figured in the ful-
fillment of the plan for steadiness. Let us show the calculating of this indicator
from an example. We will assume that the following data are known on the

115

IWJR 0F11C1AL USEECHdLY
I'UR Ul' FICIAL USE ONLY

fulfillment of the work plan by a construction organization for the individual
months of a year (Tnhlu v.7). With the fulfillment of the work plan over the year

20 475 19 905
—_l—a - -_I—v I
by 100.17 1 [20,440 100]. the steadiness coefficient will be. Kr 20,640 100

0.976 or 97.42.

Table v.7

            
           
  
     
         
     

    
    
 

   
  

     

”——
upon-um» W 5 6 o, n . n I
I wt. pyt- un-us. II n 3 “m. I “'c:'nun‘:' . A .1
no. Ium I lawman '
Her-U! an an“ no
unner- muss poms-mach! sass-unsw- annulus-

 

no I!!! (I II

 

I I50 I 020 88.70 I020 0.II30
I I“) I0” 90.9: I000 0.0909
I 2!) I 240 90.88 I 240 0.05."?
I III) IMO 97.“ I360 0.0980
I rm I K!) 95.62 I 530 0.0438
I W l 690 I051!) III“)
2 I!!!) 951” I 900 0.0500
' 0l0 2Il)5 9.0.75 200') 0.0025
' III) 2200 lll1.ﬂ'_’ 2 Ii!)

I 950

2WD

2000

0. 3625

Key: l--Months; 2--Production of work in 1.000 rubles of estimated
cost; 3--Planned; 4~-Actual; S--Percentage of plan fulfillment;
6--Pigure in fulfillment of plan for steadiness; 7--Deviations
from plan in fractions of a unit; 8—-Positive; 9--Negative

The unsteadiness of producing construction product is described much more complete-
ly by the unsteadiness number recommended by Prof V. Ye. Adamov for studying the
steadiness of industrial production.“ In order to calculate these indicators, one
determines the relative deviations in the volume of the actually completed work
from the work volume according to the plan in fractions separately for the in-
stances of the fulfillment and overfulfillment of the plan and for the nonfulfill-
ment of the plan. The total deviations of the first type provide positive numbers
for unsteadiness while the total deviations of the second type produce the negative
unsteadincss numbers. The result of adding the negative and positive numbers pro-
vides the overall unsteadiness number. In the example the calculating of the un-
steadiness numbers has been given in the last two columns of the table. For the
report year the overall unsteadinesa number will be: 0.2862-+0.3625 - 0.649. If,
for example, in the previous year the overall unsteadiness number (calculated for
the monthly data) equaled 0.686, then one can conclude that the steadiness level has

"Sec: V. Ye. Adamov, "Statisticheskoye izucheniye ritmichnosti promyshlennogo

prolzvodstvn" [A Statistical Study of the Steadiness of Industrial Production],
Moscow, Statistika, 1965.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR OFTWCJAL.USEZ(NHLY

declined by 5.1 percent (0.669:0.686). In construction, an assessment of steadi-
ness using an hourly schedule has still not been widely used due to certain fea-
tures of the given sector. However the rapidly developing industrialization of
construction has raised the task of carefully observing the steady Operation of an
organization not only by quarters and months but also in terms of daily and hourly
schedules. The use of the "off the truck" installation method by housing construc-
tion combines and the assembly-line construction method have posed the compulsory
demand of strictly observing the hourly work schedule not only in terms of volume

but also in terms of the quality, composition and sequence of construction-instal-
lation work.

An important task for statistics is to study the quality of construction product.
The importance of improved product quality for the national economy is very great
as this leads ultimately to a decline in the labor and material expenditures and to
the growth of production efficiency. At present, in all the national economic sec-
tors and. in particular, in construction, a struggle has started to improve product
quality. In this movement a special place is held by increasing reliability and
raising durability of the product. The latter are becoming important indicators
characterizing the quality of the construction product.

The construction product quality indicators should numerically describe the ability
of the created fixed capital projects to satisfy the consumer properties envisaged
in the plans and give an overall assessment of product quality. Statistics should
also bring out the degree to which various factors influence the change in product
quality.

The basic consumer properties of construction product and their conformity to the
technical conditions are disclosed in the process of technical control or inspec-
tion and the forms and methods of these in construction are diverse. In accord
with the organization of technical inspection and the particular features of con-
struction work. the quality of construction product is determined in the process of
the construction work and for the completed fixed capital projects in the process
of their operation as well.

It must be pointed out that the product quality indicators and the methods of calcu-

lating them in construction have not yet emerged from the development stage and are
only separate indicators which have not been linked into a system.

A point assessment of the quality of construction-installetion work is one of the
widespread product quality indicators. 0n the basis of this system, statistical
reporting has been worked out and is employed by the contracting organizations for
the quality of construction on the projects accepted for operation (the Appendix to
Form No l-ks and Z-ks). The quality of the projects turned over and the work per-
formed in this reporting is described by three estimates: excellent. good and sat-
isfectory, and here data are given on the number of projects, their estimated cost,
and for production projects, on the value of the work performed. Having assigned
an appropriate number of points to each assessment, it is possible to obtain a
general description of construction product quality in the form of an average num-
ber of points calculated from the formula for the arithmetic average weighted for
the number of projects and their estimated cost.

117

FOR‘OHHCJAL.USE(NNLY
FUR!3FFKJAL.USEZONLY

Another indicator which is employed in the practice of the construction organiza-
tions describes the volume of construetion-installation work which does not meet
the requirements of the technical conditions and must undergo redoing. Information
on such work can be obtained both in physical measurements as well as in cost units
(according to the estimated cost). The volume of such work when related to the
total volume will show the relative amount of work produced which does not satisfy
the required consumer properties.

The quality of the work performed can be described by the estimated cost of the un-
completed work on projects which have been put into operation and this in practice
is termed "unfinished work." Such an indicator is given in the statistical report-
ing on the construction quality of projects. The designated indicators, strictly
speaking. describe the work quality of a construction organization for the unfin-
ished work and work to be done are not products.

In this same group of indicators is the amount of losses from the redoing of work
both in an absolute form (in terms of cost) and in a relative one. The latter in-
dicator is calculated by dividing the total losses (at the estimated cost) related

to the redoing of work by the estimated cost of all the construction-installation
work over the given period.

A description of the quality of end construction product can also be given using
the above-examined indicators. Moreover, for studying the durability of buildings
and installations. the scientific research institutes in practice calculate the
average lives of construction projects using a formula for the arithmetic average
weighted for the number of projects. Certainly such indicators are determined for
uniform construction projects grouped by different features (purpose. design. size,
wall materials and so forth).

For a study of reliability which is a second important quality feature of construc-
tion product, indicators are calculated which describe the average lives of a con-
structinn project without major and medium overhauls. In the process of the de-
scription it is important to estimate the total additional monetary expenditures to
eliminate any sort of flaws in the performed work, to reinforce struCtural elements
and so forth, as well as to determine the relative amount of these expenditures in
the estimated cost of the given project. In construction the methods of statisti-
cal product quality control for the purpose of preventing defective products have
been little worked out.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER VI: LABOR AND RACE STATISTICS
51. The Tasks of the Statistical Study of Labor and Wages in Construction

Labor is the basic factor in the production process. The correct placement of
workers in the construction sections and their rational utilization have a sub-
stantial impact upon the successful fulfillment of the construction plans in terms
of volume and quality. At present, the following are set as approved indicators in
the construction plan: the growth of labor productivity, the limit on the number
of employees and the total wage fund. A statistical study of labor encompasses the
statistics of labor resources, labor productivity and wages.

The labor resources of construction are formed by the aggregate of workers employed

in the construction, installation, design-research and other organizations compris-
ing the sector. The tasks of statistics in studying labor resources are to describe

the number and composition of workers, to determine the supply of workers for con-
struction, to study the movement of the number of workers and to determine the
amounts of the actual labor expenditures and the utilization of work time.

Increased effectiveness of the employed labor, that is, higher labor productivity,
is an important condition for increasing the construction volume. In studying

labor productivity, statistics poses and solves the following problems: measuring
the level of labor productivity, describing the fulfillment of the plan and dynamics
of labor productivity in the various production areas, assessing the fulfillment of

the output norms by workers, analyzing the influence of factors on a change in labor
productivity and elucidating reserves for its further rise.

The concluding section of labor statistics takes up the questions of wages for con-
struction workers. Among the tasks of wage statistics are the following: Studying
the amounts, composition and use of the wage fund, a description of the average wage
levels and their dynamics. a study of the ratio of the growth rates of labor produc-

tivity and average wages and a description of the distribution of wage forms and
systems in construction.

52. A Statistical Study of the Size, Composition and Movement of the Workers

Depending upon the economic tasks, the composition of workers at construction or-
ganizations is studied in different ways. The most important of these is a study

of the composition of workers by areas of their work and by the production functions
performed by them. By production areas all personnel at an organization is

119

FOR Ol- FICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distributed into the workers engaged in basic production, in subsidiary production
and in service systems.

The first group includes all the workers employed directly or indirectly in basic.
that is. construction. work. Here are the workers who carry out construction and
installation work in erecting the buildings and installations, the workers from the
personnel of the construction organizations, the 0K5 and UKS, the workers of service
systems but employed in running construction machines and so forth. The se' nd group
includes the workers from subsidiary production which is organizational.1 istinct
but does not have an independent balance sheet and produces industrial-type prod-
ucts (quarries, concrete and cement centers, sawmills, construction yards, power
plants and so forth). The third group includes the workers from the numerous
production-end service systems (transport offices, assembly supply administrations,

design-estimate groups and so forth) and of a nonproduction nature (the housing and
utility svstem, polyclinics, clubs, nurseries, trachea and so forth).

In terms of the production functions performed, all personnel of the organizations
is divided into the following categories: workers or persons employed in manufac-
turing the product. students or persons learning worker professions, engineer and
technical personnel (ITR) or persons employed in preparing and supervising the pro-
duction process, directing production and carrying out other functions requiring
special technical and economic knowledge, white collar personnel or persons perform-

ing office, accounting. supply and other functions, junior service personnel (HOP)
or persons employed in cleaning or heating the rooms and so forth, and security

workers or persons employed in guard and fire security for the construction sites.

Statistics pays particular attention to the most numerous and important personnel
category in terms of their role in production, that is, the workers. The propor-
tional amount of worker in 1978 was around 80 percent of all construction employees.
The composition of workers is studied by sex, age. length of employment. profes-
sions, skills and many other features. The initial data for such worker groupings

are usually obtained as a result of one-shot surveys which are periodically conduct-
ed by the statistical bodies (twice every 5 years).

A notion of the general skill level of the workers can be gained on the basis of the

average worker rate categories as a whole, for the work areas, professions and so

forth. These are calculated by the formula:
-.&
R in ,

whcrc Ru-the rate category;
n--the number of workers with the given category.

here the degree of skill homogeneity in the composition of the workers can be judged
from the variation indicators.

In the analysis of manpower. of interes; is the result of comparing worker skill
levels in different construction areas and professions and the work performed by

them. Here the compared average worker rate categories and the work performed by
them must be calculated by the same method, that is, weighted with the number of
workers from the given aggregate. A more complete notion is provided by a combina-
tion table or a matrix for the distribution of the workers in terms of their skill

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

level and the performed job, as has been done in the example of surveying 286 work-
ers from a trust (Table V1.1) and the conformity indicators calculated on its basis.

Table V1.1

worker work cate;o

category

  

_ 1-18+ 2o31+3~37 +a'7S+S-38+6'35 .

According to the data of the table, Rworker 286

1°21 + 2'27 +3.84+-’o-83+5'l¢7 +6.22
3.67. while Rwork ---—----—-§§z-------—-- 3.61. that is, the average

skill level of the workers is higher than the average difficulty level of the work
performed by them. The proportional amount of the number of workers performing a

job of a higher category than their skill will be: “His?” 100 - £3?- 100-

11.62, the proportional amount of workers performing a Job under their category
3+lo+8+1+l3+l3

 

equals: 284 = 16.9%, while the total proportional amount of the
number of workers performing a job not conforming to their skill is 33;;28 -100 -

28.51. The coefficient of rank correlation or the concordance coefficient can serve
as an overall measure of the conformity of the workers and their jobs, since the
values of the features are given in a natural series of numbers, that is, they are

ranked. In the example, the coefficient of rank correlation calculated by Spear-
man's formula is:

p - 1~ 6£d2 and e uals 0 916
“(02-1) t q o I

where d--the difference in the skill levels of the worker and his job;
n--the number of feature pairs.

This points to a high level of the conformity of worker skill and his job.
A study of the composition of employees is closely related to the determining of
their number. In statistics and accounting a distinction is made in the following

categories of the number of employees: the listed number, the present number and
the number of persons who actually worked. The listed number of workers (listed

121

FOR OFF1CJAI.lEﬂE(NHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

composition) encompasses the aggregate of all the permanent, seasonal and temporary
employees hired for work for one day and more. The including of the employees in

the listed composition does not depend upon whether or not the person has reported
for work or begun it or not. Employees hired by an organization in the capacity of
a second job are not included in the listed personnel and this makes it possible to
prevent double counting in a summarizing of the number of workers. The present num-
ber characterizes the number of workers who have appeared for work. The number of
persons who have actually worked indicates the number who have appeared and gone to
work. The inequality of the last two categories for the number of employees is
caused by the presence of entire-day stoppages. The accounting for employees by
number categories is carried out daily on the basis of a table or time board and on
holidays and days off the listed number of employees is considered equal to the num-
ber of employees on the previous work day.

For describing the number of employees over a period, the average listed number is

determined (for a month, quarter or year). For a month this indicator is obtained
from the formula:

where C1--the number of listed employees for each day and
Tc--the calendar length of the month in days.

Since the listed number of employees over a day equals the number of those present
Cp and those absent C, on a given day, the formula for the average assumes the fol-
lowing form:

_ {cﬁc
Cl—PT———a.
C

In calculating the average listed number of employees over an extended period
(quarter, 6 months or year); it is possible to proceed from the averages calculated
over the previous periods (C1). using for this the formula of the weighted arith-
metic average, that is. _

{T1

E-—

1
T1’

where Ti~-the calendar lenggh of the period (in days or months) for which the inter—
mediate average (C1) was obtained.

In instances when there are average listed numbers for the same calendar periods, in
practice a simple arithmetic average is calculated. According to the USSR TsSU in-
structions, in calculating the average listed number of employees, one should exclude
from the count the persons who are on extended supplementary leaves (for example,
women after completing pregnancy leaves during the period of caring for the child
until it reaches the age of 1 year, employees who are studying in evening and corres-
pondence higher and specialized secondary schools and who have been given additional
unpaid leave and so forth).

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table V1.2

    
 
 

indicators

1) Cocmnn muons: s
rum-sax

) s um «use we

Manchu-Ix a

pm weasel

Key: l--Listed workers; 2-lncluding those not counted in figuring
the average

Let us examine an example of calculating the average listed number of employees for
a trust which began operating on 24 December with 2 days off a week (Table V1.2).
The average listed number of employees at the trust in December will be:

2L1§¥223 - §‘%%Z - 166.5 persons (man-months), while the average listed number of

166.5°l+0.2

workers for the fourth quarter will equal: 3 - 55.5 persons (man-

quarters), and the average listed number of workers per year is l§§;2i%JLQ;£l -

13.9 persons (man-years). The difference in the average values is caused by the
differing length of the periods for which they are figured. In other words, each
average corresponds to the calendar time fund of the workers expressed, correspond-
ingly, in man-month, man-quarters or man-years.

An important question in the study of labor resources is a description of the avail-
ability of employees for a construction organization in the necessary quantity and
composition for carrying out the production program. For this, for each employee
category. the actual average listed number of employees is compared with the plan-
ned and in terms of the workers this is compared with the planned number (Cpl) cor-
rected by the percentage of plan fulfillment for construction product (If/pt). that
is, C llc - CPLIf/pt. Let us assume that in September the trust fulfilled the work
plan by 105 percent, having the following number of employees (Table V1.3, cols. l
and 2). The table shows the calculation of the availability of workers for the
trust not counting the fulfillment of the work plan. But considering the fulfill-
ment of this plan, the absolute deviation in the actual number of workers from the
plan (corrected) will be: l,642-—l$é%%élg§ - 1,662- 1.680 - -38 men. The discover-
ed savings in manpower has been caused by the corresponding rise in labor productiv-

ity in comparison with the plan. Consequently, the total savings of employees for
the trust will be an men (384-6).

The study of the change in the number of employees or the movement of their number
is another task of labor resource statistics. It is possible to judge the movement
of the number of employees from the growth rates and the absolute increase determin-

ed by comparing the data on individual dates of different periods. A fuller picture
of the dynamics is provided by the indicators showing the movement of the number of
workers and namely the manpower turnover as a consequence of hiring and firing. In

123

FIHICNWNCJAI.USE(MVLY
I-OK UI-l-IL'IAI. USE ONLY

    

 

  

Table V1.3
_Average listed Percentage
number of employees Absolute of plan
Categories of trust personnel fulfillment

    
  

Total personnel of trust

  

Including:
Workers 102.6
Employees of other
categories 98.5

statistics a distinction is drawn between hiring turnover and firing turnover and
these are expressed, correspondingly, by the number of persons hired and the number
of persons let go over the period. Here the movement of the employees from one cat-
egory to another is not taken into account.

The fullest notion of the movement of the number of employees is provided by the
manpower balance which, on the one hand, shows the available employees at the start
of the period and the number of employees hired with a distribution according to the
sources, and on the other hand, the distribution of the number of workers let go for
various reasons and their available number at the end of the period. From the bal-
ance scheme information are given on the number of workers and the changes in their
number in the report for Form No 3-t (quarterly). 0n the basis of these data, the
absolute amounts of the hiring and firing turnover are calculated as well as the
relative indicators for turnover coefficients calculated, correspondingly, as the
ratios of the absolute turnover amounts (Tu) for hiring and firing to the average
listed number of employees over the given period, that is, K: - Tu:C.

The most detailed study is made of the reasons for the loss of employees. The dis-
missal of employees for reasons of a production or general state nature.(completing
the term of a contract, induction into the Soviet Army and so forth) as well as re-
lated to age and state of health comprises the necessary turnover while dismissal
for reasons of a personal nature, for example, due to the failure to meet skills,
leaving at own request and so forth, comprises the excess turnover or manpower turn-
over. The ratio of the number of persons let go for reasons causing personnel turn-
over tn the average listed number of workers is termed the turnover coefficient.
High personnel turnover points to serious shortcomings in the organization of labor,
wages and so forth. The frequent change of personnel leads to a situation where un-
skilled or persons not having the needed specialty are hired and ultimately to a
decline in labor productivity and work quality.

The labor reporting gives the number of workers who are part of the listed personnel
for the entire year. This indicator characterizes manpower stability. The ratio
of the number of workers on the lists for the entire year to the listed number of
workers at the start of the year is termed the personnel constancy factor. In con-
struction, depending upon the season, there are seasonal changes in the number of
workers. Thus, at the Komaomol and other construction sites of the nation during

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the period of summer vacations large student detachments are employed. For estab-
lishing the numerical nature of the seasonal changes, seasonality indexes are cal-
culated as the percentage ratio of the average listed number of employees for each
month to the average monthly number of employees over the year (or equated to the
annual levels).

53. Accounting for Working Time and the Indicators of Its Use

Labor resource statistics is closely tied to the study of working time which de-
scribes the amounts of the available and actual expenditures of live labor. Work-
ing time is accounted for basically only for the worker category and chiefly in man—
days and man-hours. The presence and absence of employees on the job are expressed
primarily in man-days. Here each day of a worker's presence or absence is recorded
as a corresponding man-day. Absent workers are accounted for in terms of the rea-
sons for absence (regular leave, day off, sick leave and so forth). The day when
the worker has reported and begun to work or has been on an official mission is con-
sidered to be a worked man-day. A worker who has reported for work but who has not
worked during the day due to factors not depending upon him is considered in the re-
porting as a man-day of a whole-day stoppage.

0n the basis of working time accounting in man-days. in accord with the work condi-
tions and hours, different available working times are determined and their content
and relationship with one another can be seen from the diagram. The total attend-
ances and absences for all reasons comprises the worker available calendar time.
Thus, for a worker who has been on the lists for a full month, it equals the calen-
dar length of the month, and for all workers the total of the listed numbers for
each day of the month. Using the data on the composition of available working time,
indicators are figured for its use and these are expressed by indicators for the
structure of the available calendar time and by the ratios of the various components
of the available time (the available time use factors).

 

    
 

Available calendar time

    
 
 
  

'I'Imcsllccl available time

   
    

Maximum availalbe possible
working time (MVP)

Absences
Reports for work from MVP
Entire-day
stappages

Diagram VI.l. Composition of available worker calendar time

Regular
leaves

   

   
  

Worked man-days

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us assume that in a trust during the report quarter some 62,266 man-days were
worked, absences during days off and holidays were 20,106 man-days, absences due to
regular leaves were 6,683 man-days, other absences were 1,168 man-days and whole-day
stoppages were 36 man-days. The available worker calendar time for the trust over
the quarter was: 66,266+20,106+6,683+1,168+36 - 90,235 nan-days, while the use

factor of this available time will be: %%*%%% - 0.712. The maximum possible avail-
9

able working time over the quarter is: 90,23S-20,106-6,683 - 65,668 man-days and

correspondingly the use factor of the MVP will be: %%*%%% - 0.98.
0

More precise accounting for working time is kept in man-hours. One hour of actual
work by a worker is considered a worked man-hour. However, in practice the worked
man-hours also include brief breaks in the work. The worked man-hours are divided
into regular. that is, those worked in a work shift, and overtime, that is, those
worked above its limit. The time not worked during a shift (the intrashift breaks),
in particular stoppages, are also accounted for in man-hours. In construction or-
ganizations, worker stoppages are studied in terms of the reasons of their occur-
rence, among which one must mention first of all the lack of a workfront, materials,
electric power, malfunctioning machinery and others.

In accounting the intrashift stoppages are not always fully shown due to the diffi-
culty of detecting them. For this reason, for a thorough study of working time, and
in particular, its losses special studies are run, for example, the photographing
and self-photographing of the workday, the essence of which consists in recording
working time and work breaks by special observers or by the workers themselves.
Recently, the-statistical method of moment observations has become widespread. The

essence of this sampling method is that the observers over certain intervals of time
go around to the work areas and record the state of the work or the reasons for work

breaks. The number of observations needed to obtain confident data can be deter-
mined from the formula of a random repeat sampling observation

- :22; 1-u2 .

where t--the confidence coefficient which depends upon the probability that guaran-
tees the maximum sampling error (a);
u--the sampling fraction (working time use factor).

From the number of observations it is possible to determine the fraction of work and
unworked time and them their absolute amounts.

For example, during a shift (8 hours or 680 minutes) a group of 70 workers made 900
observations and in 776 instances recorded "work” and in 126 instances intrashift

stoppages. Hence the share of worked time was 1&5 - 0.86, and the share of stoppages

900
126

555 - 0.16. Consequently, the intrashift stoppages were: 70:680:0.l6 - 6,706 man-

minutes or 78.6 man-hours while the actually worked time was 70°680'0.86 - 28,896
man-minutes or 682 man-hours. An assessment of the representativeness of the sam-
pling can be determined using the reanmpling formulas.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tribution of the available time comprises the second and basic portion of the bal-
ance which contains three sections: 1) actually worked time, 2) working time not
used for valid reasons (provided in the labor legislation) and 3) working time
losses caused by whole-day and intrashift stoppages, by violations of labor disci-
pline (absences without leave. tardiness and so forth). The overtime worked by the
workers is shown off the balance. In the predicate of the balance, in addition to

the absolute amounts of working time, the indicators of its structure and devia-
tions from the plan are also given.

In analyzing the labor resources it is advisable to employ the interrelated indi-
cators for working time utilization. Most often this is the coefficient for the
utilization of the number of workdays of a worker. the coefficient for the utiliza-
tion of the length of the workday and the integral coefficient (complete) of working
time utilization. The initial data and the methodology for calculating the indica-
tors for working time utilization are given in Table V1.4 using the example of the
operation of a trust for 2 months. A diagram_of_the_relationship between the indi-
cators of working time utilization is: T; - Td'Tudoc; their coefficients are analo-
gously related. In the example 1.048 - 1.044'0.986-l.018. The relationship of the

indicators is used in factor index analysis of a change in working time expenditures
over time or in comparison with the plan.

Table V1.4

    

Dynamics
Indicator coefficient

. Average listed number of workers
. Han-days worked by workers

1
2
3. Total man-hours worked by workers
4. Including overtime

5

6

. Average number of workdays per worker
(line 2:11ne 1)

. Average full duration of workday
(line 3:line 2)

7. Average regular duration of workday
(line3- line 4):line 2

8. Average number of work hours of one
worker (line 3:linc l)

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Construction organizations have different work schedules including one, two or three
shifts. In this regard for planning and other purposes the need arises to study the
load factor of the work areas over the shifts. The load factor for the work shifts
is characterized by the shift factor or the shift utilization factor. The shift
factor is figured by relating the worked man-days to the number of man-days worked
on the biggest shift. The second indicator is obtained by dividing the shift fac-
tor by the number of work shifts established for the organization. Let us assure
that in a trust operating on two shifts in September, 5,243 man-days were worked on

the largest shift, and then the shift factor will be %I% - 1.9 while the shift
.9 '

utilization factor is -1— - 0.95. The first indicator describes the average load
factor for each work area during the shifts while the second shows the evenness of
shift loading. If the latter equals 1.0, then this means that there is an even dis-
tribution of the workers over the shifts. In the administrations of a trust, glavk
or ministry, most often variOus shifts are the most filled and for this reason in
the denominator of the shift factor it is essential to use the total of the worked
man-days in the fullest shifts of each administration. Since there is no informa-
tion in the statistical reporting for calculating the shift factors, these are de-

termined from the data of accounting by the organisations or from special observa-
tions.

M. The Statistical Methodology for Measuring Labor Productivity in Construction

Labor productivity is a most important quality description of the labor process ex-

pressing its efficiency and fruitfulness. A constant rise in labor productivity
is an economic law of socialist production.

The labor productivity level is expressed by average product output per unit of
working time (the direct amount) or by the labor intensiveness of a unit of product
(the inverse amount). Having designated the volume of construction product by q
and the working time expenditures on producing it by 1‘, average product output per
unit of working time can be determined as w - q/T, while the labor intensiveness of
the product is expressed as t - T/q. Average output and labor intensiveness are
reciprocal amounts, that is, w - l/t. For this reason, in knowing how average out-
put changes, it is possible to determine the dynamics of labor intensiveness. At
the same time the coefficient for the dynamics of labor productivity will be calcu-
lntod for output in terms of the ratio 1 - ”NW and for labor intensiveness i -
to:tl. that is, as the ratios of the base and report levels. This principle is main-
tained in construcring aggregate labor productivity indexes. Let us assume that
over a month a worker brigade has carried out 750 In2 of painting, having spent 150
man-hours on this. Average output per man-hour is 750/150 - 5 m2, while the labor
intensiveness of l m7 is 150/750 - 0.2 man-hours. Let us assume that in the pre-
vious month average output per man-haur was lo In2 while labor intensiveness of l m2

was 0.25 mam-hours. Then the coefficient for labor productivity dynamics is i -
5:4 - 1.25, or i - 0.25:0.2 - 1.25.

In calculating labor productivity levels, the question arises of the categories of
the worker aggregate and the working tine units which are to be employed in the cal-
culation as well as the question of the methods of measuring the product. Due to
the fact that various worker groups and categories are involved in the creation of
construction produCt, the question of the choice of the aggregate is determined

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

depending upon the specific economic task of the research. Theoretically output can
be defined both for the workers and for all the employees of the construction organ-
izations engaged in basic production or in the basic and auxiliary production to-
gether and even for all the organization's production subdivisions. In planning and
statistical practices it has become the rule to calculate output for the employees
of basic and auxiliary production and in describing labor productivity this makes it
possible to consider the role of all employee categories engaged both in basic and
the closely related subsidiary production.

Worker labor productivity is studied in the greatest detail. Depending upon the
scale of the unit of measurement for working time, a distinction is made between the
average hourly, daily and monthly output of the workers and these have a varying con-
tent and purpose. Average hourly output (”5) is determined by the ratio of the vol-
ume of construction product to the worked man-hours. This describes the labor pro-
ductivity level on which the worker worked without stoppages and intrashift losses
of working time. The average daily output (Nd) is obtained by dividing the volume
of construction product by the worked man-days. This depends upon the hourly output
and the utilization of the length of the working day. Average monthly output 04.)
is determined by dividing the volume of construction product by the average listed
number of workers. It reflects the influence of average daily output and the utili-
zation of the work month. The larger the unit of working time the more factors and
conditions reflected in output.

The designated types of average worker output are interrelated and can be repre-
sented in the form of thg product_of comultipliers or indicators, for example, the
following ones: «5 u uthdeI-uth. The corresponding dynamic coefficients are in-
terrelated in an analogous manner. Like the average monthly output, proceeding from
the corresponding data, the average quarterly, semiannual and annual output of work-
ers and employees can be calculated. The multiplicative form of the dependence of
the indicators is the basis for carrying out factor analysis on labor productivity
using the index method.

The volume of construction product can be expressed by different measurement units.
Depending upon this. a distinction is made between the physical. labor and cost
methods of measuring labor productivity. The labor productivity level in physical
units is the simplest and least subject to distortion. This is described by the
quantity of construction—installation work carried out in physical units per unit of
work time, for example, by the amount of dirt moved in m2 or tons of installed metal
structural elements per worked man-day. 0n the basis of the labor productivity
levels in physical units, indicators are calculated for its dynamics using the for-
mula of the so-called average level index, that is. I - ﬁh:uh. Here it is essential
to observe a number of conditions which ensure compamahility of the levels. First
of all. the construction product used in calculating the output levels should be
uniform in terms of its consumer properties and this does not always happen in con-
struction work. For example, earrnmoving is considered all the same although in ac-
tuality the earth to be moved differs in terms of density. Moreover, the construc-
tion product should be uniform in terms of the composition of the work performed.
For example. painting, in addition to spackling and priming, can include one, two or
more coats on the surface of a building's walls. In a majority of instances, in the
accounting for construction product consideration is not given to these differences
in consumer values. To a certain degree this gives rise to conditionality in

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

measuring labor productivity in physical units. The presence of specialized organ-
izations which perform the same types of construction and installation work (mech-
anization, finishing and other trusts) creates the prerequisites for employing this
method in construction.

Since the labor productivity levels are characterized by average output, a change in
it over time depends upon a change in output in the individual areas 00) and in the
structure of the aggregate for the areas (d) and can be expressed in the following

manner 2

z 'Idr, T

a 5.35%," ’ ¥9=W° "hm "‘1'!“

The obtained expression in statistical theory is called the natural index for labor
productivity of varied composition. The dynamics of average output is analyzed by
constructing a system of interrelated indexes.‘ Most often in textbook literature
on statistics, a system of indexes is recommended constructed according to the

chain method:
2 '|dr' z .|dr‘ z .ldr'

a‘uW‘r. = Ear. . E'udr.'

In this system, the first comultiplier is the index for the labor productivity of a
fixed composition and it describes the average change in labor productivity in indi-
vidual areas and reflects the effect of internal production factors (labor skills
and the capital-to-labor ratio. the quality of the subjects of labor, working condi-
tions and so forth). The second comultiplier is the index for the influence of
structural shifts and it characterizes the change in average output as a consequence
of a change in working time structure in the work areas considering the interrelated
influence of two factors (covariance). The designated system can be applied under
construction conditions as many specialized trusts have subsidiary administrations

which perform uniform types of work.

For obtaining a general description of labor productivity the labor method for mea-
suring this is employed. 0n the basis of the labor method, the fulfillment of the
output standards and the indicators for labor productivity dynamics of the workers
are determined. The fulfillment of the output standard can be determined by the
direct and inverse labor productivity levels. In practice the latter method has be-
come widespread, that is, in terms of labor intensiveness as it makes it possible to
obtnin general indicators. In the simplest instance, when one worker performs the
same type of job, the percentage of fulfillment for an output standard is determined
by the ratio of the average actual labor intensiveness (tf) and the normed (tn),

[hut is, i - tn:tf. For instances when the percentage is determined for the fulfill-
ment of an output standard for a group of workers employed in different jobs, the in-

dex is calculated by the formula:

‘See: "Ohshchaya tcoriya statistiki" [The General Theory of Statistics], by V. S.
Kozlov, L. H. Erlikh, F. c. Dolgushevskiy and others, 3d Edition, Moscow, Statis-
tikn. 1975, Chapter X, 53, pp 382-387. '

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11ftn {ﬁfth

we“: ﬁt ’

 

 

If/n '

where qf-the volume of the given type of performed work;
Tf-actua1 working time expenditures.

From the data of the example (Table V1.5), the percentage of output standard ful-

 

fillment in the installation of columns will be in February 0-25 :‘9330 '100 -
,

108.6, in January [0.25:-119- ' 100 - 103.9. As a whole for the two types of

3,200
work the fulfillment of the output standard in January is:

3 200.0,25+1. 600-o.12 1 352
_2—_.l—__ . _.|__ -
77o+zz) 1.320 1-024. or 102.42.

But in February " 3°°°°5§3I 22300.0.12 - ﬁ% - 108.61.

Information on the fulfillment of the output standards is given in the statistical
reporting in Form No a-:.

Tacin V1.5

  
     
   
  

    

   

Labor
intensiveness

by standard.
man-hours

per ton

January

   

February

    

Type of work

   
   
   
    
    

worked
man-hours

Worked
man-hours

 
 

 

Installation of columns

4,300 990
Installation of floor slabs

3,800 420

For studying labor productivity dynamics. an aggregate index for the actual labor
intensiveness levels is calculated, that is.

__ §__ E§V
I _ 'I‘I— I.'

where to and t1-labor intensiveness of the individual types of work in the base
and report periods.

 

4,300 - 77° +3.800 -&
——l—L_

, 3 200 6 600 _ 1 é89 _
In the example, this index equals. 9904_420 11315 1.056. or

105.6 percent.

The increased labor productivity caused a savings in working time of 79 man-hours
(l.489—1,610). The use of this index in construction practice is limited as the
composition of the work as a rule does not coincide in the base and report periods.

131

FOR 0FF"3A[.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Labor productivity dynamics can be characterized by normed working time expenditures
having calculated the index for the average level by the formula:

mltn tqotn t‘htn “0%

I. ”I ' £1'o .2qm EQoto

 

 

 

 

The first index compares the average output expressed in norm-hours, while the
second compares the fulfillment of the output standard in the report period with
the base. In the example the labor productivity index for the workers equals:
1.086:1.024 - 1.06 or 106 percent.

Labor indexes are employed only for studying the labor productivity of piece work-
ers. An essential feature of these indicators is their low sensitivity to work
mechanization since the labor intensiveness of performing mechanized jobs is many

times less than the labor intensiveness of manual work and for this reason its
amount is less significant in calculating the index.

The most general evaluation of labor productivity dynamics for the workers of con-
struction organizations can be provided only on a basis of a cost expression of the
product. Average output in this instance is described by the volume of produced
construction product in estimated prices per worker or per unit of work time. The
labor productivity index according to the cost method is calculated as the result of
comparing average output, that is, by the formula:

where qo and ql--the volume of work carried out in physical units of the base and
report periods;
To and T]-—the average listed number of employees (or working time expendi-
tures) of the base and report periods;
pcm--estimated prices.

in calculating the cost index of labor productivity it is essential to proceed from
the volume of produced construction product, that is, the volume of the construc-
tion and installation work carried out, considering the incomplete construction
work. The value of the work carried out in the base and report periods is expressed
in the same estimated prices. In planning and statistical practices, output in
cost units is determined per worker of basic and auxiliary production. This indi-
tutor is given in the report of Form 3-t. In instances when construction employs
persons not on the lists of the organization, their number must be considered in
calculating average output. For this the average number of workers not on the lists
is added to the average listed number of employees for the period of work.

The cost index of labor productivity, as an index of variable composition, reflects
the influence of all the factors in construction work. In addition, this indicator
is influenced by factors of a cost nature, that is, the change in the ratio of live
and embodied labor related, as a rule, to a change in the work structure. For pre-
cisely this reason in a cost form the output of one worker from construction organ-
izations having different purposes and specialization is not comparable. Even with-
in one organization, labor productivity dynamics can be determined by the cost
method only under the condition of a relative stability in the structure of the

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

workdone in different periods. This method provides a more or less reliable notion
of a change in labor productivity in comparison with the plan, as in this instance
the structure of the work, as a rule, is the same. The use of the cost index for
labor productivity is methodologically justified for a larger aggregate of organi-
zations, for example, for a glavk, ministry and sector as a whole where the work
structure as a whole remains more or less stable over several years.

At present an experiment is being carried out in construction to apply normed net
product (see Chapter V, 511) in the planning and accounting of labor productivity.
This eliminates individual shortcomings in the methodology of measuring the labor
productivity level and its change in comparison with the plan and over time.

55. The Statistical Methodology of Analyzing Labor Productivity

The main task in analyzing labor productivity in construction is to make a maximum
full disclosure of the internal production reserves for increasing labor produc-
tivity in all work areas for the purpose of increasing the construction volume,
saving working time and expenditures and accelerating the time for erecting the
buildings and structures. Important areas in the analysis of labor productivity
are, in the first place, a comparative description of labor productivity levels for
the individual construction organizations and their change in relationship to the
plan and over time for the purpose of disclosing the better organizations and re-
serves for increasing labor productivity; secondly, determining the influence of a
change in labor productivity on the fulfillment of the plan and the dynamics of the
construction product volume, the savings (over expenditure) of working time expendi-
tures. a reduction (rise) in product costs and other general indicators of construc-
tion; thirdly, a disclosure of the influence of production factors, its organiza-
tion and so forth on the level and dynamics of labor productivity. The tasks of
labor productivity analysis in these areas are carried out by various statistical
methods and most often the index method, grouping and regression correlation anal-
ysis. The choice of one or another method is determined primarily by the content

of the specific research task.

In an analysis of individual organizations and their groups it is essential to re-
menber that the cost indicators of construction product cannot express labor produc-
tivity levels. They make it possible only with a varying degree of conditionelity
to judge plan fulfillment and dynamics of labor productivity. It is possible to
measure the labor productivity levels of the individual construction organizations
and compare them with one another only by the direct and inverse amounts in physical
units. However, the use of the physical method of measuring labor productivity is
limited to the conditions when the same construction or installation jobs are per-
formed in the work areas, for example, in organizations specialized in finishing
work or earth moving.

In a comparative analysis more often the inverse amounts of labor productivity are
employed, that is, the labor intensiveness of a unit of the individual types of

work and completed projects. Thus, in practice there is frequently a comparison of
the production labor intensiveness of building the projects and its component ele-
ments by types of work. An example of this sort is given in Table V1.6 which shows
the average actual labor expenditures per m2 of effective area for various types of
apartment buildings as a whole and for types of work. From the data of the table

133

IN)R‘0FIW(1AI.IJSEZ(NVLY
I'UIC UH‘ILML USE ONLY

Table VI. 6

  

 

  
   
 

Man-days per m2 of effective area

Including for

 
  

I-605
IMO-601
Rolled panel

it follows that labor intensiveness per m2 of area rises with an increase in the
number of stories in the building.

In describing the role of labor productivity in carrying out the plan for construc-
tion product and its dynamics. it is advisable to employ the index method which re-
flects the functional dependence between the analyzed phenomena. For this purpose
one utilizes the form of the relationship between labor productivity and product
volume and this is expressed as follows:

QP a W'T,
where QP--the cost of construction product;

w--average output per worker and
T--avcrage listed number of employees.

Table V1.7

 
   
 
 
  

Indicator

Volume of performed work. 1,000 rubles

Average listed number of employees in basic and
auxiliary production

Including workers

Average daily output. rubles

Average number of workdays per worker

Share of workers in total number of employees

Average 6-month output of one worker, rubles

0.979
1.013
1.115
0.984
1.037
1.138

In relying on the known provisions of index theory, it is possible to carry out an
arithmetic expansion of the entire increase in product volume due to the change in
average output and the number of employees. From the data of the example of a con-
struction trust (Table V1.7), the index for the volume of work performed in the
second 6 months in comparison with the first was 111.3 percent while the absolute

product increase was 282,900 ruoles. The influence of the rise in average output
per worker on the increase in product is: Aw I (wt-won, . (6,066-5.330)°458 -
336,200 rubles, while the influence of the reduction in the number of employees is:

131.

FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A1- - mom-To) - 5,330(458-468) - -53,300 rubles. The total is 336.2+'(-53.3) -
282,900 rubles. '

In an analogous manner it is possible to establish the influence of a change in
labor productivity on the saving or overexpenditgre of work time and for this a
dependence of a different type is used: '1‘ - Qp-t,

where t--average labor intensiveness of a cost unit of construction product.

The saving (overexpenditure) of goth time under the influence of labor productivity
will be shown by the formula At(t1'to)Qp and for the volume of work AQ - ”(on'qpﬁ-

The use of the grouping method in analyzing the impact of labor productivity on the
resulting indicators of production is advisable only in the instance when there is
no strict dependence between these indicators. For: example, in studying the influ-
ence of the fulfillment of the output standards or the labor productivity plan for
the aggregate of the construction organizations on the deviation of actual costs
from the planned ones or the amount of expenditures per ruble of estimated cost of
the work and so forth. In these instances the grouping feature is the output level
in physical units or its relative value (index) for the construction organization.

The reserves for increasing labor productivity are disclosed by an analysis of its
factors. In solving this problem an important role is played not only by the index
method and the groupings but also by the regression correlation research method.

Analytical groupings make it possible to obtain only an approximate idea of the
nature of the dependence of employee labor productivity on one or another factor
without any numerical expression. For this reason it is advisable to employ them
for studying the dependence of labor productivity upon factors which do not have a
functional relationship to output when it is difficult or completely impossible to
express them by a statistical indicator. For example. the factors characterizing
the form of management organization, production, labor, technical progress and in-
dustrialization, equipping with the means of labor and so forth. In the studying
of these factors, the number of workers and most often the aggregate of contracting
organizations are grouped. Such factor features as, for exalple, the types of spe-
cialization of the organizations, methods of production, the form of payments for
completed work and so forth are used as the grouping features. -

In factor analysis the index method assmnes great importance. As a consequence of
the methodological features, its application is limited to the possibility of con-
structing multiplicative models for the indicator dependences. However, in practi-
cal terms those of them which reflect the objective economic dependence of the phe-
nomena and not the formal mathematical one are suitable for index analysis. For
precisely this reason the use of the index method in analyzing labor productivity
to a significant degree involves the use of working time, the change in the struc-
ture of the number of organization employees and certain others. The choice of the
system of interrelated indicators and their number is determined by the specific
research task.2

 

2A. G. Kazachenok and V. A. Tarlovskaya, "Ansliz proizvoditel'noati truda v
stroitel'stva" [Analysis of Labor Productivity in Construction], Moscow,
Stroyizdat. 1977.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI-1-‘ICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, in analyzing plan fulfillment and the dynamics of labor productivity in a
construction trust or main administration for an annual period, of interest is the
following system of factor indicators for annual output per worker in basic and
auxiliary production: .

we - Mrﬁadpdbp.

where wh--hourly output;
dp-the- -share of workers in the total number of basic production employees;
dbP--the share of employees in basic production in terms of basic and auxili-
ary production together.

In narrowing the task of analysis. it is possible to consolidate the factor indi-
cators as has been done in the example (see Table V1.7). According to the symbols
adopted in the table, the constructing of the system of interrelated indices is
based on the following dependence: w - abc. In accord with the order of fixation
adopted in statistical theory (in terms of volume and quality indicators), we ob-
tain the following system of interrelated indices:

9: ‘lbl‘l = “I'M: . 0051‘: .. l-J'J'I
=u. =35; «7&7. 03:. W”

In the example. the intensity in the change of the annual 6-month output'per em-
ployee as caused by the change in each factor is characterized by particular in-
dexes which numerically are equal to the individual indexes of each factor (see the
last column of Table V1.6). The influence of each factor on the change in the over-

all output average is determined by the difference in the numerator and denominator
of each interrelated partial index, namely:

influence of the a factor Aa - (al-ao)blc1 . (58-52) 123 0.85 - 627. 3 rubles;
influence of the b factor Ab - ao(b1-bo)c1 . 52(123-125)0. 83 . -88. 6 rubles;
influence of the C factor Ac - dob 0(c1-co) I 52 123(0. 85-0. 82) . 195.0.

 

TOTAL increase in output 733.9 rubles

If the designated system of indicators is supplemented by the average number of em-
plnyees in basic and auxiliary production (d). then it is possible to analyze plan
fulfillment for the dynamics of the volume of construction product proceeding from
the dependence QP - abcd.

Recently the regression correlation method has also become widespread in analyzing
labor productivity factors. A number of economists have made successful attempts
.li constructing a multifactor linear regression model for labor productivity.’ One
of the important stages in elaborating such a model is the choice of the labor
productivity factors and the equivalent statistical indicators which conform best

to them. In leaving aside the statistical methodology for calculating regression

’Scc: V. A. Balan, "Ekonomiko-matematicheskiye modeli proizvoditel'nosti truda"
[Mathematical Economics Models of Labor Productivity], Moscow, Nauka, 1979.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table V1.8

 

Key: a--Symbol of factors in model; b-Significance of factor
indicators; c--Average for ministry; d-Por trust; e--Devia-
tion in indicator significance (col. 3-col. 2); f—Regression

coefficients; g--Change in average output, rubles (col. lox
col. 5)

equations,“ we would point out that they make it possible to establish a measure of

change in the resulting feature (the regression coefficients) depending upon a
change in the feature factor by one. In using this particular feature, it is pos-
sible to construct a table for calculating reserves for increased labor productivity
(average output) for each factor (see Table V1.8). For an illustration of what has
been stated, let us use a simple linear multifactor regression model for labor pro-
ductivity obtained for an aggregate of organizations in one ministry:

y,‘ - 1,708+ 20.4x, - 13x2+133.ax3+83.3x..+o.2x5.

where yx--average annual output of work at estimated cost per employee of basic and
auxiliary production;
Inn-material intensiveness of construction—installation work (2);
X2--personnel turnover coefficient (2);
X3--proportiona1 amount of HR in total number of workers (2);
Xn—proportional amount of worker bonuses in worker wage fund (I);
X5--snnus1 work volume (1,000 rubles).

The indicators for the second and third columns in the table have been taken from
the statistical reporting, respectively, of a ministry and a trust. The last column
shows the effectiveness of each factor. Here the sign "+" means the achieved re-
sult in increasing output per worker while the sign "-" is the possible reserve for
increasing output for the given factor. As the comparison basis (col. 2) it is pos-
sible to use the indicators for a better trust in terms of operating results or
better indicators achieved in various trusts over the previous year and so forth,

"See: 1. G. Venetskiy and G. S. Kil'dishev, "Teoriya veroyatnostey i matematiches-
kaya statistika" [Probability Theory and Mathematical Statistics], 3d Edition,

Moscow, Statistiks, 1975.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ul'l'lt IAL USI'. UNLY

depending upon the specific analysis task. In our example, the positive effect (the
increase in output) from exceeding the base factors was: 64.9-f628.2«t90 - 563.1
rubles. The reserve for increasing annual output per employee in achieving the best
indicators of the ministry (for x2 and x.) equals: (-352.3)-+(-25.0) - -377.3
rubles.

The use of regression models is possible only for organizations which are part of
an aggregate for which the regression equation has been calculated.

56. A Statistical Study of the Wage Fund

The wages of enterprise employees in the production sphere are the portion of na-
tional income expressed in a monetary form and figured in accord with the quantity
and quality of the labor expended by the workers. Construction statistics studies
wages primarily as an element of expenditures on creating a product as well as a
level of the material well being of employees from construction organizations. In
1978, the share of wages for the employees of construction organizations was 32 per-
cent of the total expenditures on construction-installation work. Under the condi-
tions of the economic reform, the employees of construction organizations are ma-
terially interested in achieving high work indicators for the organization as a
whole, in receiving remuneration from the material incentive fund formed from the

organization's profit.

By the wage fund of construction organization employees one understands the total
money provided for by the plan and actually paid as wages. In addition to the money
the wage fund also includes the value of various gratis or reduced-cost services

provided by the construction organization for its employees. for example. the pro-
viding of housing. utility services and so forth. All information on the wage fund

is found in the bookkeeping office and labor and wage departments of the contract-
mgommuutmm

Statistics studies the composition of the wage fund in terms of the production
areas, worker categories and wage elements. In terms of the production areas, the
wage fund for all the personnel of a construction organization is divided into the
fund of the workers in basic, that is, construction-installation, production, the
fund for the employees in subsidiary production and the fund for the employees of
the service systems. Each of these funds is then divided in terms of employee cate-
gories. Information on the composition of the wage fund in terms of work areas and
employee categories is given in an abbreviated form in the statistical reporting of
the construction organizations (Form No 3-t).

The types of wages have been used as the basis of the element distribution of the
wage fund. For the various employee categories, the types of wages (elements) will
differ substantially. The composition of the wage fund has been studied in great-
est detail for the workers and the IIR. Thus, for the worker category the elements
include, for example, wages by piece rates, bonuses to piece workers, time wages by
wage rates, additional payment for overtime and so forth. For the ITR the component
elements will be the earnings for the basic salaries, bonuses, remuneration for the
number of years worked and so forth. The element composition of the wage fund

makes it possible to obtain a notion of the distribution of various forms and sys-
tems of wages and of the ratio of wages for basic salaries and wage rates and the
remaining elements which make up wages, to disclose the absolute and relative amount

138

FOR'OFFKJAL.USE(MHLY
INDRIDFFTCJAI.IEHECNVLY

of unproductive expenditures, for example, payment for stoppages, damaged products
which are not the fault of the worker and so forth. -

As was said above, in addition to the wage fund, the employees of construction organ-
izations have an additional source of income, the material incentive fund, which is
designed to encourage the employees for collective efforts in the work of the organ-
izations. In studying the material incentive fund, statistics describes the amounts,
composition and dynamics of this fund and the distribution of it over the production

areas and employee categories as well as in terms of the types of material incentives.

It determines the ratio of payments from the material incentive fund and from the
wage fund .

In calculating the indicators for the structure of the material incentive fund [FHP],
it is important to isolate such sources of its formation as profit deductions and
the receiving of money from clients to pay bonuses to employees, for example, for
completing projects on time and ahead of time. The indicator for the use of the

FHP is the proportional amount of the funds paid to the employees during the report
period in the total amount of money transferred in the given period to the PHP. For
a corparative description in practice they calculate the ratio of the amounts paid
from the PM? and the bonuses from the wage fund. For the same purposes the indi-
cstors for the bonus structure from these two funds in the total amount of bonuses

are determined. The initial data for calculating the designated indicators are
given in Form No 3-t and in the Appendix 2 to Form No l (contractor).

Under the conditions of the economic reform, the wage fund is among the plan indi-
cators to be set for the construction organizations. This is determined by the im-
portance of supervising the expenditure of the wage fund. The statistical method-
ology for assessing plan fulfillment in terms of the wage fund differs somewhat
from that adopted in industry. For all employee categories, the conformity of the
actual wage fund to the planned limits is set by a comparison (by dividing or sub-
tracting) the actual fund with the planned (Table V1.9).

Table V1.9

 
 
  
  

   
  
 
  

  
   
 

Percentage
of plan
fulfillment

wage fund, 1,000 rubles

“-

Absolute
deviation

All employees of basic and sub-

sidiary production 2.6
Including:
Horkers 2.8
Employees of remaining
categories -0.b

The deviation of the actual wage fund from the planned one for all employee cate-
gories, with the exception of the workers, will be caused by changes in the number
of employees and their wage level. For the workers this deviation is due primarily
to the fulfillment of the plan for the volume of construction product as well as to
a change in the number of workers and their wage level. For this reason in terms

of the workers the methodology for assessing plan fulfillment for the wage fund is
altered.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHI(MNHCJAL USE¢NVLY

Instead of the established (calculated per 100 percent of plan fulfillment for con-
struction product) wage fund according to the plan (sz) a new corrected planned
fund (Pc 3) is calculated and the actual one is compared with this. Here in the in-
stance of the overfulfillment of the plan for the volume of work, the corrected
wage fund is determined by the formula:

AK

where A—-the percentage of overfulfilling the plan for contracting work, and
Kr-the reduction factor for each percentage of overfulfilling the work plan
equal to 0.93.

The use of the reduction factor is caused by the unproportional dependence between
the increase in the cost of the work performed and the wages. Let us assume that
in the example the plan for contracting work has been fulfilled over the year by
106.2 percent by the trust. Then the corrected annual planned wage fund for the

6.2'0.93
100

quently, the percentage of plan fulfillment for the wage fund for the workers is

:32': ~100 - 95.9, or a savings of 8,300 rubles (196.3 - 206.6) and not an over-

expenditure as was established without considering the percentage of overfulfilling
the work plan. As a whole for the wage fund of all the employees there is also a
savings of 8,700 rubles (8.3-t0.6) and not an overexpenditure. In instances when
the plan for construction product has not been fulfilled, the wage fund is adjusted
without the reduction factor, that is:

workers will be: 193.54-193.S - 193.54-ll.l . 206,600 rubles. Conse-

 

Fptipi
Fcpl ' 100 '

 

where Ip£--the percentage of fulfilling the work plan.
57. The Study of Average Wages and Their Dynamics

From the viewpoint of studying the material prosperity of construction employees and
analyzing expenditures on production, a description of the wage level expressed by
average wages is of importance. Under the conditions of the economic reform. the
average earnings of employees are determined. in the first place, considering the
payments from the wage fund and the PM? and. secondly, as average earnings solely
from the wage fund. The wage level in the latter instance is viewed as a factor in
the formation of the wage fund as well as in analyzing expenditures on producing
construction product. The wage level of the workers has been studied in most de-
tail.

Depending upon the unit of measurement for working time, a distinction is made be-
tween average hourly. daily and monthly wages. The average hourly wage (fh) is de-
termined by dividing the hourly wage fund by the man-hours worked over the given

period. The hourly wage fund (Fh) encompasses the wages for the actually worked
man-hours or the direct work (without overtime) and the corresponding level de-

scribes wages under these conditions. The average daily wages (fd) are obtained
140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table V1.10

    
  

Indicator

1.126
1.222

1. Hourly wage fund, 1,000 rubles
2. Daily wage fund, 1,000 rubles

3. Monthly wage fund, 1,000 rubles 1.083
6. Monthly wage fund, including payments from FHP, 1,000

rubles 0.076
5. Average listed number of workers 1.057
6. Han-days worked by workers 1.071
7. Han-hours worked by workers 1.084
8. Average hourly earnings (line 1:1ine 7), rubles 1.038
9. Average daily earnings (line 2:line 6), rubles 1.067
10. Average monthly earnings (line 3zline 5), rubles 1.024
11. Full average monthly earnings (line Azline 5), rubles 0.988

by dividing the daily wage fund by the man-days worked. The daily wage fund (Pd)
encompasses all types of payments for the worked nan-days, including additional pay-
ments for unworked man-hours. The average monthly wage of a worker (f.) is calcu-
lated by dividing the monthly wage fund (Fl) by the average listed number of workers
for the month. The average quarterly, semiannual and annual earnings in terms of
the content of the elements comprising them do not differ from the monthly. How-
ever, the full average earnings (ff) from the wage fund and the material incentive
fund (Pf) are best determined for the annual period, as payments from the incentive
fund are not characteristic in construction for an individual month. Table V1.10
gives the initial data and the methodology for calculating the examined wage levels.
The wage levels of the workers and the indicators for the use of working time are
interrelated in a system which in an expanded form has the following appearance:

fr " thdedw-fdl‘wxfmpv

where de - Pd:Fh-the coefficient for surpeyments to the daily wage fund;
Km" - F.:F4-the coefficient of surpayaenta to the monthly wage fund;
Kg“, 8 Fszm--the coefficient of payments from the material incentive fund.

These interrelated indicators can lie at the basis of constructing a system of in-
terrelated individual indexes and calculations for the impact of the corresponding
factors on plan fulfillment and the dynamics of average wages. Here, depending
upon the tasks of analysis, the indicator factors can be consolidated or represented
by various complexes, for example:

fm ' dedwiwdxmw or fd ' thwdxdw

and by other systems. The corresponding dynamic indicators are in an analogous de-
pendence. From the data of the example, the index for the average daily wages will

equal:

_ . 17 750.16 375 . 15 075,13 “0 _ . . _
1 1.038 [m.m [—I——.—-I—— 1.038 1.012 0.996 1.006.

161

IN)R C“ﬂﬂ(1A|.lﬂSll(MﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Average employee wages are studied for their categories, production areas and for
worker wages also for professions, skill level, length of employment and other

groups characterized by varying levels of the capital-labor ratio, its organiza-
tion, industrialization of construction and so forth. 0n the basis of the distribu-
tion of employees by wage level and the share of payments from the various incen-
tive funds, the degree of wage uniformity is studied for the various categories and
grOups of employees (the variance indicators), the particular features in the struc-
ture of the employee aggregate in terms of the wage level (the modulus is the ascer-
rained wage level which is most often received by the employees and the median which
is the wage level dividing the aggregate of employees into equal parts. the series
asymnetry indicators which determine what portion of the employees, large or small,
receives a high or low wage relative to the average).

Since the wage level is expressed by an average amount, in analyzing its dynamics

or plan fulfillment it is possible to employ a system of interrelated indexes which -
reflect the influence of the earnings of employees in individual groups, categories
and so forth as well as the structural shifts on a change in the overall average

wage. In accord with the provisions of statistical theory, this system can be rep-
resented as follows:

:m, - 21.4., :m. r
'_ -=___. ' u :.-: _
“‘7". .41. am. EM. he“ “' T7

The result of the interaction of the factors (the covariance) is considered by the
index for the influence of structural shifts. The establishing of the third co-
multiplier (the covariance index) provides little in practice as it is difficult to
mention a measure which would influence the interaction of the designated factors.
In an analysis of plan fulfillment or the dynamics of the wage fund it is of inter-
est to describe the influence of changes in average wages and the number of em-
ployees also on a basis of an index method, using the known dependence of the indi-
cators F - fT for this and

where F--the wage fund.

In successively employing the chain method, we will obtain the influence of each
of these two factors. namely Af - (f1-fo)T1 and AT - fo(T1-To). The combined in-
fluence is A - (if-HST,

A study of the ratio of the growth rates of average wages and average employee out-
put is an important question in wage analysis. Labor productivity should outstrip
a rise in average wages. Only in this instance will an important condition be met
for reducing product costs. for obtaining socialist accumulation and an equal allo-
cation of the consumption fund. The lead factor for average wages is the indicator
which describes the ratio of the growth rate of labor productivity (T ) and the
growth rate of average wages (Tf). This is defined as Kl - Tw:Tf. I Kg > 1,

then there have been economically sound growth proportions for labor productivity
and the wage level. Naturally in calculating the lead factor it is essential to
proceed from full wages, that is, considering payments from the material incentive
fund. In an analogous manner it is possible to compare the coefficients of plan
fulfillment for output and average wages for the employees of a contracting organ-
ization.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

CHAPTER VlI: FIXED CAPITAL STATISTICS
51. The Tasks of Fixed Capital Statistics and Its classification

In the process of production, along with labor, an important role is held by the
means of production which consist of the means of labor and the subjects of labor.
The main features by which these economic categories are differentiated are the role
and place of them in the labor process, the nature of the circulation of the value
of fixed and working capital and the conditions for recovering their cost and con-
sumer value. The means of labor are the aggregate of objects by which and with the
aid of which people create aaterial goods in the labor process. Among them the
leading role is played by the implements of labor. In construction, for example,
these are excavators, erection cranes, dump trucks and so forth. A subject of labor
is a material which man transforms with the aid of the means of labor into the
products needed by him. Under the conditions of the socialist economic system, the
means of production form the material content of fixed and working capital.

in maintaining that physical fore in which they entered the production sphere.
Fixed capital circulates only in its value. and this value is gradually, piecemeal,
in keeping with its production consumption, to the products over the entire time of
its functioning. As a result of the circulation of the value of fixed capital,
money is accumulated (the amortization fund) needed for its reproduction.

The economic particular features of fixed captial nabs it possible to differentiate
this from working capital. however, in practice articles are encountered which in
terms of their functions would be considered as means of labor but which also have
a low value or brief service life. Such articles are complex and for this reason
it is not advisable to consider than as part of fixed capital. In accord with the
Regulation Governing Bookkeeping Reports and Balances as approved by the 083R
Council of Ministers, the following cannot be considered as fixed capital and
should be considered as part of working capital: a) articles which are used for
less than 1 year. regardless of their value; b) articles with e value under 50
rubles per unit. regardless of their service life.
90'! 0|- I’ICIAL USE ONLY

construction organization or site (builder). In a number of instances the balance
sheets of the organizations (builders) include temporary projects which comprise a
separate group of the means of production and serve construction but only during
one production cycle (after the completion of the project they are liquidated). In
accounting these are termed temporary title objects and expenditures on them are
included in the first part of the construction estimate. For example, these would
be the buildings of warehouses, stock "construction lumber," bypass canals, tem-
porary barriers (dams) and so forth. The temporary title projects in accounting and
statistics are considered among construction fixed capital.

Fixed capital accounting in the construction, design and research organizations is
carried out by the bookkeeping office. Among the tasks of fixed capital statistics
in construction are: a description of the volume and composition of the fixed capi-
tal, a study of fixed capital dynamics, characteristics of the state of the fixed
capital, a study of the effective use of fixed capital, and a study of the amount

of fixed capital available to the construction workers.

The extreme diversity of the means of labor employed in construction leads to the
necessity of studying their composition and structure using a fixed capital classi-
fication which is an important condition for successfully carrying out the tasks
confronting statistics as well as for correctly organizing fixed capital accounting
for the construction organizations. A construction organization as an economic
unit, along with construction and production activities, encompasses other types of
production as well as nonproduction activities. The dividing of the entire aggre-
gate of fixed capital into two large groups is the consequence of such an organi-

zational structure for the construction organizations. These groups are: fixed
productive capital and fixed nonproductive capital.

Among the production capital a distinction is drawn between the construction-end
fixed productive capital and this is the leading capital and holds the largest part
(around three-fifths) in the total aggregate of the fixed capital of the construc-
tion organizations, as well as the fixed productive capital of the other national
economic sectors. The construction-end fixed capital comprises the aggregate of
the means of labor which directly or indirectly participate in the carrying out of
construction and installation work and, consequently, transfer their value to the
construction product. The production capital of the other sectors consists of the
means of labor utilized in industrial, supply, agricultural and other systems which
are administratively separate but carried on the balance sheet of the construction
organization, with the exception of the construction-end capital. The,fixed non-
PPOdUCtiVE capital of the construction organizations is used to satisfy the social,
cultural and domestic needs of the construction organization employees. For exam-
ple, this includes the housing with all types of amenities, bath houses, buildings
occupied by clubs. children's institutions and so forth.

The construction-end production fixed capital, depending upon its functional role
in production and physical form. according to the standard classification in effect
since 1972, is divided into the following groups: I. Building; II. Installation;
lil. Transfer devices; IV. Machinery and equipment, including: power machinery and
equipment, operating machinery and equipment, metering control devices and labora-
tory equipment, computers; V. Means of transport; VI. General purpose tools; VII.
Production supplies and sppertenances; VIII. Office supplies; 1x. Other types of

fixed capital. In statistical reporting, the fixed capital of groups VI-IX is com—
bined into one common group.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The current classification is employed primarily to describe the specific structure
of the construction-end fixed capital. A notion of this is provided by the values
for the proportional amount of individual types of fixed capital. It is also used
to study the technological structure of the fixed capital in the form of the pro-
portional weight and ratio of its active and passive parts. Among the active
construction-end fixed capital are usually put operating machinery and equipment
(construction machinery and mechanisms) and power machinery and equipment, means

of transport and production tools. In this instance the buildings. installations
and other fixed capital comprise the passive part.

52. A Study of the Volume, Dynamics and State of Fixed Capital

For solving many problems in fixed capital statistics it is essential to have infor-
mation on its amount both as a whole as well as for the component parts. The volume
of the individual types of fixed capital can be expressed in physical and cost
terms. The total volume of the different means of labor can be given only in cost
terms. In accounting and statistical practices, depending upon the goals and tasks,
the following four types of fixed capital evaluation are used:

1) In terms of full initial value which is determined by the actual price paid for
the given new object in its acquisition, including expenditures on the delivery and
installation of the object. Fixed capital is entered on the balance sheet for the
basic activities of the organization at this estimate and it is also used in setting
the amortization deductions and the amount of the capital payment;

2) According to the initial cost considering wear and equal to the full initial
cost of the object minus the total wear on the fixed capital (residual value). The
total wear is given in the liabilities of the bookkeeping balance for the basic ac-
tivities of the organization while the residual initial value of the fixed capital
is carried in Form No 11 (construction) "Report on the Presence and Movement of
Fixed Capital and the Amortization Fund";

3) For the full replacement value measured by the expenditures required to purchase
a new object (including delivery and installation) in the prices and under the pro-
duction conditions when the reestimate is made;

a) For the replacement value considering weer which corresponds to that amount at
which the given object could be estimated proceeding from the present conditions
for its reproduction and taking into account its actual wear.

In comparing the economic importance of the various fixed capital estimates, it is
possible to draw a conclusion on the advantage of an evaluation using the replace-
ment value over the initial one in solving many economic problems, and in particular
in studying the fixed capital volume and its dynamics. For obtaining date on the

replacement value it is essential to carry out an across-the-board reevaluation of
the fixed capital.

1n the USSR national economy a reevaluation of fixed capital has been carried out
several times but this has far from always involved construction fixed capital.
Prior to 1960, only one instance was known of carrying out an across-the-board
reevaluation of fixed capital and this was on 1 October 1925. 0n 1 January 1960,
a second one was carried out and on 1 January 1972. a third general inventorying

145

FOR OFFICIAI.USE‘OFHJV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and reevaluation of fixed capital in all the national economic sectors, including
construction. The 13st reevaluation was based on wholesale prices in effect on

1 July 1967 as well as the estimated standards, prices and rates in construction
introduced on 1 January 1969.

Using the accounting documents of a construction organization the amount of fixed
capital can be determined on any date but usually it is figured for the end of each
report period (month, quarter and so forth). This information is given in the bal-
ance sheet for the basic activities of a construction organization in Form No l
(Contractor). The statistical reporting in Form No 11 (Construction) contains
data on the am0unt of fixed capital at the start and end of the report year in
terms of the full value and residual value at the year's end in the amount at

which it is carried on the balance sheet of basic activities. Here the fixed cap-
ital objects which have been revalved are entered on the organization's balance
sheet at the full replacement value while new projects put into operation since the
reevaluation are carried at the full initial value. Thus, the balance sheet esti-
mate of the fixed capital is mixed.

The volume of fixed capital for the contracting organizations over time can change
and for this reason, along with the moment indicators, statistics also calculates
the average value of fixed capital over a calendar period, usually for a year. The
average annual value of the fixed capital can be calculated using the formula of
the chronological average from the data on the first of each month (this is the
practice followed) or quarter, that is:

r rn
_ 5hr2+...+rn-1+7
Fch ' """"‘;:I""“"‘

where F], 2, ..., n--the value of fixed capital at the end of each month (quarter);
n--the number of moment indicators from which the average is
calculated.

In those instances when the construction organization has not operated a full year,
in calculating the average all the components are used (data on the available fixed
capital at the end of each month or quarter), including that which equals zero.

Over time, because of many faCtors, changes occur not only in the volume but also

in the composition and condition of the fixed capital. For obtaining these charac-
teristics of the fixed capital, statistics uses data on its value. In order to
construct time series or calculate indexes for the fixed capital volume it is essen-
ilul to express the fixed capital volume in the same prices. more often in the
rrirus of the lasr reevaluation. However, the possibility of employing the replace-
munt value in studying the fixed capital volume lasts only as long as the prices

and conditions for producing the means of labor do not change. Since the new fixed
capital reveivud since the reevaluation is carried on the construction organiza-
tion's balance sheet at current and not replacement prices, the problem arises of
eliminating the influence of the various estimates on the indicators of fixed capi-
tal volume and its dynamics.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In practice several methods are known for eliminating the influence of price
changes on the fixed capital volume. One of them consists in a direct evaluation
of the newly acquired fixed capital at prices employed as replacement ones in the
last reevaluation. Another method is to recalculate the value of the fixed capital
by using price indexes. In this instance two price indexes are employed corres-
ponding to the two parts of the capital investments in creating the fixed capital,
namely a price index for equipment and a price index for the construction of build-
ings and installations. In practice either each index is used independently and
the value of the fixed capital of industrial and construction origin are recalcu-
lated separately or an average arithmetic price index is employed for fixed capital
as a whole.

A notion of the reasons for a change in fixed capital over the year is provided by
the fixed capital balance given in the annual report of a construction organiza-
tion in Form No 11 (Construction). The fixed capital balance of contracting organ-
izations is compiled both for the complete value (Table VII.1; data in 1,000 rubles)
as well as for residual value. In the latter instance the scheme of the fixed capi-
tal balance is somewhat altered, namely to the value of the withdrawn fixed capital
carried at residual value is added the total amortization deductions earmarked for
fixed capital rennovation and this should correspond, according to the adopted ac-
counting procedures, to the wear on fixed capital over the period.

Table VII.1

"scrum a aromas- roay ._ luduas a arm may

 

Key: a--0n hand at year's atart; b--Received during report year;
c--Totel; d—-Including; e--Putting of fixed capital into
operation; f--Gratis receipt from other organizations;
g--Hithdrawn in report year; h-Capital liquidation; i-Turned
over gratis to other organizations; j--0n hand at year's end;
k--0n hand at year's end minus wear (residual value)

The data of the balances can be used as the basis to draw conclusions on the abso-
lute and relative amounts of the delivery and withdrawal of fixed capital. The
relative indicators describing the movement of fixed capital are the replacement
coefficient and the withdrawal coefficient. The fixed capital replacement coeffi-
cient is calculated as the ratio of the value of new fixed capital put into opera-
tion during the given period to the value of the fixed capital at the end of the
period. This coefficient characterizes the degree of fixed capital replacement.
From the example's data (see Table VII.l), the fixed capital newly put into opera-

tion in the year was 18.11[-—5&. 100];

2,850

167

FOR OFTWCJAI.UBE<ONLN
tux urrIuAl. tar. URL!

The coefficient of fixed capital withdrawal is calculated as the ratio of the value
of the means of labor withdrawn over the given period to their value at the start

of the period. If the withdrawal coefficient is calculated using data on the value
of the fixed capital withdrawn solely as a consequence of wear and decrepitness, it
will show the intensity of withdrawing the means of labor that have completed their
circulation. that is. those consumed in the production sphere. In the example all

280
2".” -100] , while the fixed

capital withdrawn as s consetluence of the completion of the process of its circula-

191 .
2.1.30 100].

 

the fixed capital withdrawn over the year was 11.31[

 

tion in production was 7.72

An important indicator for the condition of fixed capital is the degree of its wear.
The physical wear on fixed capital depends directly on its service life or the
amount of work performed by it. In using this dependence, in statistical practice
the degree of physical wear is established for the individual fixed capital objects
in proportion to their actual service life or the volume of work performed. A more
accurate notion of an object's physical wear is provided by an expert evaluation of
the technical state of its structural elements and mechanisms. But this is involved

and difficult work carried out only with the general inventorying and reassessment
of fixed capital.

The wear coefficient and the fitness coefficient are general indicators describing
the condition of fixed capital at a certain moment of time. The calculating of
these coefficients is based on the assumption that a cost expression of fixed capi-
tal wear expresses the measure of its physical wear and partially its obsolescence.
The total wear on the means of labor since 1977 has been considered equal to the
total of the portion of amortization deductions earmarked for renovation.

Amortization deductions are determined by the amortization rates in effect since

1 January 1975. These rates consider the physical wear and obsolescence of the
means of labor. The amortization deduction rates have been differentiated for the
groups and types of fixed capital and set in percent of the initial (balance sheet)
value of the fixed capital. Along with the overall annual amortization rate, de-
duction rates have been set separately for the full replacement (renovation) of the
fixed capital and for major overhaul and the modernization of the means of labor.

The total fixed capital wear as a whole can also be determined from the data of
statiStical reporting (Form No 11) as the difference of its full and residual value
at the year's end. The fixed capital wear coefficient is obtained by dividing the
total of its wear by the full balance sheet value of this fixed capital. In the
example, the total wear is 2.850-2.069 - 781,000 rubles and hence the wear coeffi-

cient at the year's end will be: 272:0 ~ 100 - 27.42. The difference of 100 percent
0

 

and the wear coefficient provides the amount of the fitness coefficient for the
fixed capital, that is. lOOZ-ZLAZ - 72.62. The fitness coefficient characterizes
the share of the fixed capital value which has not yet been transferred to the
product and not its operability. These coefficients should be calculated both as
a whole and for the individual groups and types of fixed capital. as there are sub-
stantial differences between them in terms of the intensity of wear.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR()FFNHAL.USEZONLM

53. Indicators of Fixed Capital Utilization

The problem of increasing the efficiency of social production holds a central place
in the development of the socialist economy. 0f great significance in solving it

is to improve fixed capital utilization. In this regard construction statistics is
confronted with a number of tasks in improving the system of indicators for fixed
capital utilization and the employment of this system in a statistical economics
analysis of construction organization operations. In the practices of construction
statistics, a number of indicators for fixed capital utilization are calculated
among which the most widespread are the output-capital ratio, the capital-output
ratio, the coefficient of absolute effectiveness and the coefficient for the profit-
ability of fixed productive capital.

The output-capital ratio or capital productivity ratio is a cost indicator express-
ing the degree of efficient use of fixed capital in the production of a product.

Its level is determined by the ratio of the estimated cost of the construction
product produced over the given period (Qp) to the cost of the fixed capital emr
played in producing this product (F), that is, f - Qp:F. Ordinarily the level of
the output-capital ratio is the volume of construction and installation work carried
out by own forces over the year calculated per 1, 100 or 1,000 rubles or value for
the construction-end fixed productive capital.

Fixed capital must be taken at full cost, since the cost considering the wear does
not correspond to the change in production capacity with which the means of labor
each time enter into production. The calculating of the output-capital ratio at
the estimated cost of the work and the replacement value of the fixed capital
makes it possible to eliminate the influence of price changes. However in practice
fixed capital is accounted for according to the mixed (balance sheet) estimate and
for this reason the output-capital ratio is usually figured per unit of the balance
sheet value of the fixed capital. Here it is essential to proceed from the average
value of the fixed capital over the report period, as a rule, over a year.

Since the individual organizations in the process of carrying out the work employ
not only their own building machines and mechanisms but also rented or leased
equipment from other organizations, the calculation of the average annual value of
the fixed capital (PP) for the output-capital ratio must consider these particular
features. that is, be determined by the formula

Pp ' P1+F°‘F£,
where F1--the average annual value of the organization's own fixed capital;
F0 andFZf-the average annual value of fixed capital which has been, correspondingly,
brought in from outside or rented or leased to other organizations.
In determining the output—capital ratio for a glavk. ministry or the sector as a

whole, the differences in the forms of operation are not of importance and. conse-
quently, these corrections need not be made.

1&9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rust Ufl'lLlAI. USE. UNLY

In addition to the output-capital ratio, statistics also employs its inverse value,
the capital-output ratio.‘ The capital-output ratio characterizes the value of
the fixed productive capital per unit of the value of the product produced by the
construction organization or the sector over the given period (ordinarily a year).
A decline in the capital-output ratio in a general form describes the saving of
labor embodied in fixed capital participating in production. The capital-output
ration is chiefly of significance in solving analytical problems, making it pos-
sible to establish the demand for fixed capital as a whole and for its individual
types.

For describing construction fixed capital utilization, as the criterion of its ef—
fectiveness, net product can be employed. The output-capital ratio measured by the
amount of the net product (in fixed prices) per unit of fixed capital value is
called the coefficient of absolute fixed capital effectiveness. This indicator
can be determined only on a sector-wide scale. In studying fixed capital utiliza-
tion it is possible to proceed from the profit, calculating the coefficient of
fixed capital profitability for this. This is obtained by dividing the annual
profit from the organization's basic operations by the average annual fixed capital
value. This indicator in its economic nature is close to the capital investment
effectiveness coefficient for which the rates have been worked out and this provides
a basis for comparing the fixed capital profitability coefficient with these rates.

Improved fixed capital utilization in construction is an important source for the
growth of production. The influence of an increased output-capital ratio on the
growth of product output can be calculated by the index method. Proceeding from
the ratio in which product volume equals the product of the average annual fixed
capital value and its productivity, that is, Qp I Ff, it is possible to construct a
system of factor indexes and determine the effect of the absolute amount of the cor-
responding factors on this basis. From the example's data on the operation of the
trust for 2 years (Table VII.2) we have: the influence of a change in the output-
capital ratio on the change in the amount of work will be Af I F1(f1-fo) I
1,42b'0.03 = 42,720 rubles, while the influence of the change in the fixed capital
volume will be: A; - fg(F1-Fo) I 0.92-(-ll) - ~10,120 rubles. As a whole, the in-
fluence of the two factors is: 42.72-+(—10.12) I 32,600 rubles.

Also of practical interesc is a study of the impact of fixed capital utilization on
the total demand in construction for this_capital. Here it is possible to use the
following dependence of the indicators: F I Qp'h. A calculating of the influence
of the factors in absolute terms is done using the above-examined methodology. In
the example. the influence of an increase in the amount of work in the change in
demand for fixed capital will be: AQ I ho' (Qp1"Q 2) I 32.6' 1.087 I 35,600 rubles,
that is, the additional need for fixed capital equa a 35,400 rubles. The influence

‘The amount of the capital-output ratio. like the output-capital ratio, is influ-
enced by the length of the period. For this reason we assume that it would be more
accurate to call this indicator not the level of the capital-output ratio but
rather the coefficient for the allocation of fixed capital by analogy with the
working capital coefficient (see Chapter Xi, 53). The capital-output ratio, like
the lnhor- or materials-output ratios, should not depend upon the length of the
period and it must be calculated as the ratio of the total amortization deductions
over the period to the volume of work carried out in the same period.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table VII.2

    

    

Absolute

Indicators deviation

     

Previous

   

Estimated cost of construction-
installation work, 1,000 rubles
Average annual value of fixed
productive capital, 1,000 rubles
Output-capital ratio, rubles
Capital-output ratio

of the reduced capital-output ratio on the change in the need for fixed capital will
be: Ah - QP (h1-h2) - 1,352.8(-0.036) - -46,000 rubles, that is, the demand for

l as a consequence of its improved utilization declined by 66,000
rubles. As a result, the total demand for average annual fixed capital has de-
clined by 11,000 rubles. The reduced need for fixed capital expresses a hypotheti-
cal savings in capital investments for obtaining an increase in product volume.

By analogy with the designated methodology, it is possible to study the influence
of various factors on the dynamics of the output-capital ratio. For example, in

practice a study is often made on the influence of a change in the use of the active
means of labor (Ea) and their share (d.) on the dynamics of the overall output-
capital ratio, relying on the following relationship of the indicators: f - fada.
The problem of a more thorough analysis of the output-capital ratio is better
solved by constructing multifactor statistical mathematics models based on the re-
gression correlation method and the apparatus of production functions.

Under the conditions of the continuous growth and strengthening of the physical
plant of construction organizations, the task of a statistical study made on the
level of fixed capital available to the workers has assumed great significance. For
solving this problem the indicators for the fixed capital available for workers are
calculated; this can also be done for the individual types of capital. The amount
of fixed capital available per worker as a whole is the ratio of the value of
construction-end fixed capital to the number of workers in basic production on the
fullest shift. This is determined by the fact that the same means of labor are em-
ployed by workers on different shifts and most fully during the fullest shift. For

calculating the coefficient, for the considerations given in 2, one proceeds from
the data on the balance sheet value of the fixed capital.

In statistical practice, due to the absence of information on the shift factor'and
the initial data for calculating it, a different methodology is employed for calcu-
lating the amount of capital available per worker. This is figured as the ratio of
the average annual value of fixed capital'to the average annual number of workers.
An indicator calculated by this method distorts the level of fixed capital avail-
able per worker, as it depends upon the number of operating shifts in the organiza-
tions. Under the conditions of a stable shift system, it can be applied in study-
ing the relationship between the fixed capital available per worker (v) and labor
productivity 00) and the output-capital ratio, that is, w - fv, in the aim of de-
termining the influence of a change in the corresponding factors on a change in out-
put.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'IILIAL U3: UNI-i

In addition to the designated indicator, statistics also calculates the machinery
available per worker. This is determined as the ratio of the value of construc-

54. Accounting for the Number, Power, Composition and Condition of Construction
Machines

Over the period that the Soviet state has existed, construction has been turned into
a major economic sector equipped with modern technology. The technical base of con-
struction by the beginning of 1979 numbered some 156,900 excavators, 196,600 mobile
cranes, 161,800 bulldozers, 63,300 scrapers and so forth. The construction machin-
ery and mechanisms, called operating machinery and equipment in the fixed capital
classification, hold a leading place in terms of their role in production and in
terms of the proportional amount in the value of the fixed productive capital. They
include those types of the means of labor which are designed for directly carrying

In the statistical study of construction machines there are the following tasks:
accounting for the number and composition of the machines, describing the capacity,
condition and renewal of the machines, studying the utilization of the machines and
disclosing reserves for increasing production by improving machinery use.

Construction machines and mechanisms employed in the organizations for carrying out
the work differ in terms of purpose, power, method of operation and other features.
A classification of the construction machines is essential for solving many of the
problems of construction machine statistics. The basic feature for classification
is the type of construction and installation work for which the machine is to be
used. By this feature all construction machines can be divided into groups, among
which the most numerous are machines for earthmoving, freight-lifting machines and
mechanisms (power, truck-mounted and other types of cranes), road-building machines
(steamrollers, graders and so forth), machines for mixing concrete and Other materi-
als (concrete mixers, pumps and so forth), loading machinery, mechanized tools
(electric drills, pneumatic drills and so forth) and others. Each of the groups of
conStruction machines is then divided into smaller positions for other features.
For example, in terms of the method of performing the work, in the group of earth-

equipment; in terms of the design features of the working parts of the machines,
in the group of earthmoving machines a distinction is made between single-bucket
and multibucket excavators. The degree of detailing for the classification posi-
tions of construction machines is determined by the aims and goals of the economic
research. here the closer one is to analyzing the study of the production process
the more one feels a need for the most detailed classification.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with an engine, accessories, mountable equipment and a set of tools. For example,
a tower crane with a set of attachments for lifting various shapes and types of
loads. A special stock card is kept for each stock object.

In the machinery accounting practices, a distinction is made between the following
categories of their number: all on-hand machines at the disposal of the construc-
tion organization, that is, the organization's own machines as well as those rented
and leased from other organizations; own on-hand machines. that is, kept on the
balance sheet of the given construction organization; actual operating machines (own
and outside), that is, those which during the given period were used in production,
regardless of the length of operation, and including own machines. The power of
the machines is expressed, as a rule, by the amount of the basic operating parame-
ter of the machine, by its productivity, engine power and so forth. For example,
the power of excavators and scrapers is characterized by shovel capacity in cubic
meters. the capacity of cranes by their lifting capacity in tons. Information on
the number and power of own construction machines can be obtained from Form No 12

of the annual report "Availability and Composition of Fleet of Basic Construction
Machines."

For describing the number and capacity of machines over a period. the following
values are calculated: the average listed (daily) number of machines, the average
(daily) power of the machines and the power of one average listed machine.

The average listed (daily) number of machines is obtained as the result of dividing
the number of machine-days that all the on-hand machines are available to the con-
struction organization (the available calendar time of the machines) by the calen-
dar number of days in the period. From the data in the example (Table VII.3), this

27.181 + 18-151 + 36-53 _ 9,513
181 181
that is, each day the trust had 53 excavators available.

indicator for the half-year equals: - 52.6 machines.

Table VII.3

   

Number of days

 
  
 
 
 

       
 

  

machines
Power of excavators in terms Period machines stayed stayed in
of shoval capacity, m3 in organization operation

   

 
     

0.5 from 1 Jan thru 30 Apr
0.75 from 1 Jan thru 31 May 151
2.5 from 9 Hay thru 30 Jun 53

The average (daily) power of the machines over a period is figured by dividing the
total power of all available machines for all the days they are available to the
construction organization by the number of calendar days in the period. The total
power of the machines is the total of the products of the power of one machine, the
number of machines of this power and the time they remain at the construction or-

ganization. In the example the average power of the excavators over the 6 months
equals:

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK Vl‘l'll [AL \ISI'. UNI-I

27°0.5°181-+l8°0.75'151-+36-2.5'53 . 9 252 _ 3
_—m_——_ ‘3'? 51.1 I -

This means that each day over the 6 months the construction organization had avail-
able an average of more than 51 m3 of excavator capacity.

The power of one average listed machine over a period is determined by dividing the
average power of the given type of machines over the report period by their average
listed number over the same period. In the example the power of one average listed

51.1

. 3
52.6 0.97m .

 

excavator in terms of shovel capacity over the first 6 months equals:

The productivity of construction machines and the degree of their utilization de-
pend upon their condition and this is described by the wear on the machines, their
age, technical condition and other features. The wear indicators for construction
machines are analogous to those examined in 2 of this chapter for fixed capital as
a whole. For describing the age condition of machines. groupings are employed in
terms of the years of their output or for the number of years they have been operat-
ing. In addition on the basis of these data the indicators of average machine age
are also calculated. A notion of the technical condition of the machines can be
gained from their grouping in terms of degree of readiness to work. In terms of
this feature a distinction is made for the following: machines ready to work;
machines requiring a major overhaul; machines unfit for work as a consequence of
complete wearing out or breakdown where repair expenditures are economically unjus-
tified. In the statistical reporting (Form No 12) information is given on the num-

ber of machines which have served their life and have been withdrawn as a conse-
quence of wear.

An independent area in describing machine condition is a study of the reliability
and durability of equipment employed in construction, particularly under the condi-
tions of the mechanization for full mechanization of construction work, when
trouble-free operation of the machines is an essential condition for the continuity
of the production process. In order to gain a notion of the level of operational
reliability of construction equipment, statistics calculates a number of indicators
which describe the reliability. durability and repayahility of machines.

The general indicator for the reliable operation of machines is the share of the

number of reliably operating machines in the total number of all the machines which
have been operated during the given period. Correspondingly, the share of the num-
ber of machines having even one breakdown in work over the given period in the total
number of machines operated during this period will show the frequency of construc—

tion equipment breakdowns.

Table VII.6

 

-——_

  

Indicators Report year

 

 

 
 

Actually worked machine—hours 12,600
Time spent on repair, machine-hours 840
Number of breakdowns in operation 140

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Indicators for the reliable operation of the machines has calculated using data on
their operating time provide a more accurate assessment of machinery operational

reliability. These indicators include: the average number of operating hours of
one machine until one breakdown (average operation until failure) and the coeffi-
cient for the intensity of equipment failures in operation. The first of them is
determined by dividing the time actually operated by the machines over the given
period by the number of breakdowns in their work over the same period. This indi-
cator characterizes the average length of machine operation between two shutdowns
as a consequence of failure. The second indicator (the failure frequency coeffi—
cient) is an amount which is inverse to the first indicator and describes the num-
ber of failures as an average per 10. 100 and 1,000 operating hours of one machine.
A failure in the operation of a machine is considered to be its halting because of
any breakdown. According to the data in the example on the work of hoisting cranes
in a trust over a 2-year period (see Table VII.4), we have: the average number of

operating h0urs per failure in the previous year was £91999 - 60 and in the report

12 600 8°°
year _-135_ - 90, that is, the average length of operating a crane between two

failures increased by 1.5—fold (90:60) in the report year in comparison with the
preceding one. The failure frequency coefficient in the operation of the tower

cranes during the previous year equaled 138300 - 0.017 and in the report year
9

140
12,600
year there were 17 failures and in the report year 11.

 

 

- 0.011, that is, for every 1,000 hours of crane operation in the previous

For describing the repairability of construction machines, by which one understands
the actual speed of their servicing in eliminating malfunctions and restoring their
workability (repair), the average length of eliminating one failure is determined.
This is calculated by dividing the total time required to eliminate the causes of
failures, that is, to repair the machines over the given period. by the number of
failures in the operation of the machines over this same period. In the example
the average length of eliminating one failure on a power crane in the previous year
810

was 135 a 6.5 hours. but in the report year %%% - 6 hours, that is, it increased.

55. A Statistical Study of the Extensive Use of Construction Machines

For ensuring control over the use of construction machines, the contracting organi-
zations account for the worked and unworked time for the machines. Various units
are employed in accounting for this time, including: machine-day, machine-shift
and machine-hour. As a rule, machine-days are used to account for the time the
machines stay in construction organizations as well as the operating and stoppage
time of the machines. A machine-day for the remaining of machines at an organiza-
tion is considered to be the day when the machine was listed by or available to the
given organization. A worked machine-day is considered to be a day when the machine
was employed in work regardless of the length of its work. A worked machine-shift
is considered to be a shift during which a given machine was employed in work re-
gardless of its duration. An hour of actual work by a machine must be considered a
worked machine-hour.

155

FOR OFTWC]AL.US£GDNLY
I'UK UI'HLIAI. Ubl'. ONLY

These same units are used to account for the time of work interruptions for machines
and, in particular, the stoppage time during which the machine should have operated
according to the plan but actually stood idle. Here the machine-day, machine-shift
or machine-hour of interruption (stoppage) in the work of the machine describes ex-
clusiVely the time the machine stood idle. Intrashift stoppages and interruptions
are accounted for in machine-hours while the remaining time machines stand idle is
given in machine-days and machine-shifts. The shift report of the operators is used
as the basis for calculating the worked and unworked time of construction machines.

The designated elements of time comprise the various available machine times and
the initial amount used to construct these is the available calendar machine time.
This is the time during which the given machine is available to a construction or-
ganization. For example, during a month consisting of 30 days the machine stays at
the given organization. the available calendar time equals 30 machine-days or 270
machine-hours (30 24). The calendar available time for the aggregate of machines
is determined as the total machine-days (hours) the machines stay in the organiza-
tion over the given period. The contents of the other available machine times is
represented by the scheme of the available calendar machine time given below.

 
   
 
 

Available calendar time

 
 
  

Nominal time available

  

Time for moving,
installation and
disassembly of

equipment

  

Available operating time

  
  
    
    
 

  

Stoppage

I Actually worked time 'time

    

Diagram VIl.1. Composition of available calendar machine time

The structure of the available calendar machine time is of significance not only in
organizing machine time accounting but chiefly for describing the use of construc-
tion machines and mechanisms. In the statistical reporting (Form No l-NT ”Report
on the Mechanization of Construction and the Use of Construction Machines") there

is information on the available calendar machine time in machine-days and on the
worked time for a number of machines in days and hours.

A study of machinery use is an important task for the statistics of construction

fixed capital. Improved use of machinery is one of the essential factors for rais-
ing worker labor productivity and. consequently, one of the factors for increasing

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

the efficiency of construction work. Construction statistics studies machinery use
in three arena: extensive, intensive and in terms of the volume of work as a whole.
in the extensive use of construction machines, statistics differentiates the char-
acteristics of machine utilization in terms of the number of machines and the use
of the machines in time. A notion of the use of machines by number can be gained
by comparing the number of the different categories of machines. Thus. in comparing
the number of actually operated machines with the number of the total available

machines in an organization, we gain an answer to the question of the use factor
for the fleet of construction machines available to the given organization.

The machinery operating shift factor holds an intermediate position between the in-
dicators for machinery use by time and by number. This describes the load factor
on the machines over the shifts, that is, it indicates how many shifts as an average
each machine was operated during the work day. In construction this indicator is
calculated both for the operating and for the available machines. The machine
shift factor for a day is determined as the arithmetic average of the number of
shifts weighted for the number of machines operated in them. For the operating
period (month, quarter and so forth), the machine shift factor is determined in the
following manner: for operating machines, as the result of dividing the number of
actually worked machine-shifts by the number of worked machine-days for the report
period; for available machines. by dividing the number of actually worked machine-
shifts by the maximum possible number of machine-days of work for all the avail-
able machine (the nominal available time for the available machines).

Let us assume that in a construction trust during April there were 18 excavators
available. With three-shift operating conditions and 23 workdays, these machines
worked 298 machine-days or 1,070 machine-shifts. The shift factor for the excava~

tors at the trust in April will be: for the operating excavators 133%9 - 2.7; for

the available excavators %§g§% - $ﬁ¥%2 - 2.6.

If the machine shift coefficient is divided by the number of shifts operating in the
organization. we will obtain an indicator for the use of the shift system. In the

example this indicator for operating excavators was 331 - 0.9 and for the on-hand

one 232 - 0.87. The numerical discrepancy of these indicators, like the shift co-
efficients for the operating and on-hand machines, is caused by the incomplete util-
ization of the fleet of available machines.

An improvement in the use of construction machines over time is a major reserve for
increasing labor productivity and for raising the production volume in construction.
A statistical description of machine use over time is given, as a rule, for operat-
ing machines. The uniqueness of studying machine use over time is that here it is

a question of the fact of the operation or idleness or the machines and the amount
of time the machines remain in one or another state. For precisely this reason the

indicators of machine use over time can be generalized for any machine aggregate.
The machine load factor over time is described by the amount of worked time for one
machine over a given calendar period. For an aggregate of machines this level is
determined by dividing the time worked by all the machines by the average listed

157

FOR 0F11CLAL USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

number of machines over the given calendar period. Since machine operating time is
accounted for in different units, the machine load factor over time can be expressed
by an average number of worked machine-days or machine-shifts or machine-hours per
average listed machine. The methodology for calculating these load factors is shown

using the example of operating bulldozers in a trust (Table VII.5). Of all the
types of load factors, machine use over time is most fully shown by the one expres-

sed in machine-hours and less fully in machine-days.

Previous Report
year year

"—-

Table VII.5

    
   

 
  
  

Dynamics

Indicators coefficient

1. Time machines remain in organization

(available calendar time). machine-days 1.50
2. Machine-days worked by machines 1.56
3. Machine-shifts worked by machines 1.59
4. Machine-hours worked by machines 1.56
5. Average listed number of machines

(line 1:365) 1.50
6. Average number of workdays per listed

machine (line 2:line 5) 1.04
7. Average number of work shifts per listed

machine over year (line 3:11ne 5) 1.06
8. Average number of operating hours per

listed machine over year (line 6:1ine 5) 1.04
9. shift coefficient for operating machines

(line 3:11ne 2) 1.01
10. Average length of shift in hours (line 4:

line 3) 0.99

The machine load factors over time are interrelated in a system of indicators which
can be used as the basis for factor index analysis. Thus, the average number of
worked machine-hours per listed machine over the given period can be represented by
the following expression: Uh - deecho In other words, the average number of oper-
ating hours per listed machine equals the product of three indicators: the average
number of operating days per listed machine, the shift coefficient for the operat-
lng machines and the average length of time the machines operate a shift. The
machine load factors over time are of significance in working out operating time
standards for various types of construction machines and for describing their ful-
fillment. The percentage of fulfillingutse machine operating time standards can be

h
EUnh '
the total time worked by all machines over the given period while the denominator
shows the total operating time of these same machines according to the standards for
the same period.

 

determined by the index formula Ifn - The index numerator is composed of

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For describing the use of machine time overtime it is possible to calculate a dy-
namic coefficient (growth rate) using the formula

K“ - 01:00,

where u] and uo--the amounts of worked time by one listed machine, respectively,
in the report and base periods.

In calculating the dynamic coefficient it is essential that the compared periods be
uniform in length. An illustration of the calculations for all the above-examined
indicators is given in Table VII.5.

Along with the designated indicators for machinery use over time, statistics also
employs relative indicators which describe the degree machines are used over time
during a given period. The basis for calculating these is the structure of the
available machine calendar time. The indicator which most fully reflects the re-
sult of machine use over time is the coefficient for the use of calendar machine
available time. This is calculated as the ratio of the time actually worked by
the machines to their available calendar time. According to the data of the exam-
ple, the coefficient for the use of available calendar time (in machine-hours) for

the machines over the previous year is 33%3%%%z - 0.279 and for the report year
I

z2%3%%%z - 0.292. As the basis for calculating the indicators for the degree of

9

machine use it is possible to employ the nominal machine time or the available oper-
ating time. In the current statistical reporting (Form No l-NT) data are found only
for calculating the coefficient for the use of the available machine calendar time.

In addition to the general indicators for the use of machines over time, in the
construction organizations attention is given to studying machine stoppages. For
this relative amounts (proportional amounts) of machine stoppage time as a whole
and for the reasons of their occurrence are calculated. Among the most frequently
encountered reasons for stoppages are the absence of electric power, awaiting for
repairs, the absence of a workfront and the absence of a worker.

56. Indicators for the Use of Construction Machines for Capacity and Hork Volume

The intensity of construction machine utilization reflects the second area in the
use of the active means of labor in production. The level of the intensive machine
load factor usually is expressed by the amount of work performed in a unit of time
actually worked by them for a machine-hour, machine-shift and so forth. The coef-
ficient for the dynamics of intensive machine use can be obtained by comparing the
corresponding levels of the report and base periods, that is:

—*:—:-4Er.

where ql and qo--the amount of work performed by the machines in the report and
base periods;

T.l and T.°--the time worked by the machines in the report and base periods.

159

FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE(HULY
I'VE UI'I'ILIAI. var. UNLI

For the construction machines which are of the same type but differ in power, the
level of their intensive load factor is determined considering the power differ-
ences. This is expressed by the amount of work per unit of capacity (the basic
operating parameter) for the given type of machine as performed over a unit of

worked time, that is:

. .1.
v Tiﬁ .

For example, for excavators this level is characterized by the amount of dug (moved)
dirt per m3 of shovel capacity per worked machine-hour. Hence the dynamic coeffi-
cient for the intensive use of the machines (in terms of power) is figured using

the formula:
K =+:—%—.
' ha I no 0 '

where E; and ﬁb—-the power of one average listed machine in the base and report
periods.

Information necessary for the calculation can be found in the reporting of Form No
l-NT (Construction). Using the data of the example on the operation of scrapers at
a mechanization trust during two quarters (Table VII. 6) with an average capacity of
one listed machine in the first quarter of 3.2 m3 of shovel capacity and 3.5 m3 in
the second quarter, the coefficient for the dynamics of the intensive use of the

199,396 , 165,826

scrapers will be: l,596°3.5 . 1,606-3.2 - 35.7 :36.86 - 0.968, or 96.81.

Table VII.6

       
  
 

 
 

worked man-days Barth-moved, m3

2d quarter 1st quarter 2d quarter

866 962 93,060
560 634 72,836

   
 
 

Type of machine

  
    

lst quarter

     
     
   

110,634
88,762

Scrapers with 3 m: shovel
Scrapers with 4 m3 shovel

199,396

The indicators for the use of machinery over time and for power characterize indi-
vidual aspects of a single economic phenomenon, the use of the machines in terms of
the volume of their work. An indicator expressing the overall result of utilizing
the machines in terms of the volume of their work is termed an integral one. In
the instance when the same type of construction machines with the same power are em-
ployed. the integral use level is expressed by the amount of work carried out in a
unit or the maximum possible time of one machine and is determined by the formula
w = q/T. As the maximum possible time of the machines (T) the available calendar
time, the nominal time or even the available operating time of the machines can be
used. The level calculated per unit of available machine calendar time most fully
describes machine utilization in terms of the volume of work. The coefficient for

160

FOR 0511C1AL USE(MVLY
the dynamics of the use of machines in terms of the volume of work is calculated by
comparing the integral level of machine utilization in the report period with the
analogous level of the base period, that is,

.il.3_n
Kw Ti'To

where T] and To-the calendar, nominal or available time of the machines for the re-
port and base periods.

For construction machines of the same type but with different capacity, the integral
level of machine utilization can be measured by the volume of work performed per
unit of maximum possible machine time calculated per unit of capacity of the given
type of machines. This is determined using the formula:

. ._<1_
"’ 'rcn '

where Tc--the calendar length of the period and
N--average daily machine capacity.

The initial data for calculating the integral level is to be found in Form No l-NT.

On the basis of the integral levels of machine utilization, dynamic coefficients are
calculated using the formulas:

 

q Q
ql 90 (l) or K” - l : __Q__ (2)
“w ' ﬁ‘ﬁ ° W ’ W“ ‘°°"°

Let us assume that in our example the total time the scrapers remained in the con-
struction organization (the calendar time) was 1,894 machine-days in the first
quarter and 1,720 machine-days in the second. Then the dynamic coefficient of
machine utilization for the volume of work as calculated for the data in machine-
days will be:

199,396 . 165,896

1,720.3,5 ' 1,894.3.2 - 33.12:27.37 - 1.21 or 121:.

In construction for the basic types of machines directive output rates have been
set calculated per listed machine or per unit of its capacity per year. The carry-
ing out of the directive output rate is determined by comparing the actual integral
level of utilization for the given type of machines (Hf) as calculated over the re-
port period with the directive standard corresponding to this period (Rn). that is,
according to the formula:

If,“ .- Hf :Hn .

The above-examined indicators for machine utilization for time. power and the volume

of work are interrelated in a system: the levels W - uv, the dynamic coefficients
K" - Kqu. In the example, the relationship of the dynamic coefficients is as
follows:

161

FOR OFI1CJAI.USEICNVLY
I'UB VI I'I\ In.- 09"- UI‘LI

1.25-0.968 - 1.21, where l.25--the dynamic coefficient for machine utilization over

1 596

time, that is [W : %'-[8'(9)—2]. The given relationship makes it possible to carry
1 9

out factor analysis on machine utilization using the index method.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF11CJAL.USEZCNVLY

CHAPTER VIII: A STATISTICAL STUDY OF THE SUBJECTS OF LABOR IN CONSTRUCTION
51. The Tasks of the Statistics of the Subjects of Labor

An important condition for the carrying out of the production program by each con-
struction organization is the continuous and complete supply of it with the essen-
tial subjects of labor and their rational utilization in production. In construc-
tion the subjects of labor comprise such material elements as the construction and
other materials, structural elements. parts, fuel, electric power and so forth which.
in the production process. operate in the form of working productive capital.

A statistical study of the supply of the construction organizations with the sub-
jects of labor and their use in production is of important significance as con-
struction is among the most material—intensive national economic sectors. A study
of material and technical supply, as a national economic sector, is a subject of the
corresponding sectoriel statistics. For this reason in a course on construction
statistics. only those questions of material supply statistics will be examined
which bear directly on the production and economic activities of construction organ-
izations.

Construction statistics in the area of the supply and utilization of the subjects of
labor carries out the folloaing tasks: a study of the availability and composition
of materials and other subjects of labor in the construction organizations; a study
of the receipt and expenditure of materials; a description of the availability of
materials for construction work; a study of the use of materials in production and
an analysis of the influence of the factors on the dynamics and fulfillment of the
material consumption rates.

52. A Statistical Study of the Availability and Composition of Materials

The subjects of labor employed in construction work are extremely diverse in terms
of their role in the labor process, their purpose and their physical, chemical and
other properties. The heterogeneous composition of the subjects of labor necessi-
tates a classification of them in the process of study. In construction all sub-
jects of labor in terms of their role in the production process are distributed
into three groups: equipment for installation, materials and inexpensive and rapid-
ly used up articles.

Equipment for installation is among the subjects of labor for a number of reasons
and primarily because this is assembled and installed by workers in the process of

163

FOR OFIWC]A[.UEIICNVLY
I'UK UI'HLIAL Ubl'. ONLY

construction work as a component part of the sector's end product. For example,
lathes, drilling machines, milling machines and other metalworking machine tools
installed in a machine shop under construction. However, as a consequence of the
specific procedures for the planning, acquisition, storage and financing of equip-
ment requiring installation, it is accounted for only on the balance sheet of the
builder regardless of the method for carrying out the installation work. The con-
tracting organization which installs the equipment merely receives it under respon-
sible custody until the object is put into operation. Consequently, equipment for
installation can be viewed as a specific representative of the subjects of labor
which. in contrast to materials, is not included in the economic turnover of a con-
struction organization.

Materials are the aggregate of subjects of labor forming the physical content of

the product and participating in its manufacture. In terms of the nature of the
function performed in production, materials are divided into basic and auxiliary.
The basic materials include the subjects of labor which in the labor process direct-
ly undergo processing and are physically part of the created product, for example,
blocks, panels, lumber, slate and so forth in erecting a building. within the basic
materials, two subgroups are established: a) ordinary or traditional building
materials which are almost always employed in construction, for example, sand, stone,
brick, cement, lumber, metal and so forth; b) structural pieces, elements and assem-
blies used in prefabricated industrial construction. These include large structural
elements manufactured at industrial enterprises (wall units, panels, beams, stair-
ways, bathroom assemblies and so forth).

Auxiliary materials are comprised of the subjects of labor for diverse production
and operational needs of the construction organizations. These help to create the
product, for example, welding and lubricating materials, fuel, explosives and so
forth. Subsequently, the basic and auxiliary materials are classified by types,
grades and so forth in accord with their physical, chemical and other properties.

Inexpensive and rapidly used up articles comprise a separate group of production and
economic assets which in their role in production more often perform the function of
the means of labor and not subjects of labor. In accounting and statistics, this
group of articles includes tools, office supplies, attachments, special clothing and
other articles which cos: under 50 rubles per unit regardless of their service life
and articles which are used less than 1 year regardless of their cost.

In construction organizations materials are accounted for in physical and cost units.
As the physical units of measurement the physical measurements of weight, length,
area and volume are used. Materials are accounted for in cost terms at the plan-
calculation prices given in the price list for the construction site and at the ex-
fnctory (wholesale) prices adopted in drawing up the estimates (at present, in 1967
prices).

Information on the availability, composition and movement of materials is contained
in the documents of operational warehouse and bookkeeping accounting of the con-
struction organization (the accounting ledgers, inventory statements, waybills and
material reports). At the end of each month for the construction areas, material
reports are drawn up according to Form M-l9 and for the construction organization as
a whole using Form M-29. 0n the basis of these primary documents, each quarter the

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction organization compiles the statistical "Report on Balances, Receipt and
Consunption of Materials in Capital Construction" using Form No 2-8“. For obtain-
ing more detailed information on the quantity, composition, condition and movement
of material resources, state statistics conducts censuses and one-shot surveys of
the materials and equipment balances in construction.

53. Indicators for the Movement of Materials

Material supply within a construction organization is a process the individual stages
of which entail the receipt of materials and other subjects of labor at the contract-
ing organization's warehouses and their consumption in production. These stages
form a unified process for the movement of materials and a quantitative description
of this is one of the tasks in the statistics of the subjects of labor.

A general and fullest idea of the availability and movement of materials in the
sphere of activities of contracting organizations is provided by the building
materials balances. A8 a rule, these are drawn up in physical units for the most
important types of building materials. for example, for cement, prefabricated re-
inforced concrete products and elements, aetal, slate and so forth. Under the con-
ditions of socialist production, plan and report (actual) balances are made up and
these make it possible to describe the particular features of carrying out the
material and technical supply plan of capital construction. The balance consists
of two parts: resources and distribution of materials. An idea of the contents of
each part of the balance can be gained from the below-given Table VIII.l using the
example of the delivery and consumption of slate in a trust during April.

Table VIII.1

  
 
    
  

  
  
  

  
    
 

1 .000 units
of standard
sheet

I .000 units
of standard
sheet

  
   

Resources Distribution

 

   
 

   

. Balance at start of period 1. Expanded over period-

    

 
         
     
     
     
     
 

2. Deliveries—total total 2.240
Including: a) For construction-
a) From centralized stocks installation work by
b) From noncentralized own forces 2,100
stocks b) Dispatched to sub-
c) From own subsidiary sidiary production --
production c) Turned over to other
d) Received from other organizations 160
organizations (construc- 2. Balance at end of period 960

  
 

tion)

  

The building materials balance is used in a somewhat abbreviated form in Form No
2-SN. In this report information on the movement of materials is given in physical
units for the established range of building materials numbering some 81 items. The
data of the balances can be used not only to describe the movement of materials but
also in calculating other derivative indicators for the availability of materials
in construction work and the indicators of their use.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-UR UH-‘IL'IAI. USE ONLY

In studying the individual aspects of material supply of importance are the indi-
cators describing the evenness, intensity and steadiness of this process. The even-
ness of materials deliveries can be shown by indicators for the variation of inter-
vals between deliveries as well as by the scope of the minimum and maximum values of
the intervals. A notion of the intensity of materials supply is provided by the
average frequency of deliveries, by the average volume of one delivery and so forth.
The average frequency of deliveries (receipt) for a material is calculated in days
using the formula:

Tn
1171

3- ,

where Tn--the calendar length of the period from the first to the last delivery of
the material in the report period;
n--the number of material deliveries in the report period.

This indicator, in essence, describes the average amount of the interval between two
deliveries of material.

The average actual volume of one delivery (receipt) of a material is determined as a
simple arithmetic average, that is,

ﬁ-L“,
n

where £H—-the volume of material delivered over the report period.

Let us give an example. Let us assume that in September a construction trust had
the following deliveries of wall modules (units): 160 on 2 September, 84 on 6 Sep-
tember, 28 on 11 September, 162 on 18 September and 76 on 29 September. According
to the plan there were to be 6 deliveries with an interval of 5 days between them.
In the example, the length of the period for all the deliveries is 30 - 2 - 28 days
and the number of deliveries in September was 5. Hence the average frequency of
delivery was 28/(5-1) - 7 days. This means that the actual average interval between

deliveries exceeds the planned delivery interval by 1 day and, consequently, the in—
tensity of supply slowed down in comparison with the plan. The average volume of

160+8h+28+162+76

5 - 98 units.

one de livery was:

An idea of the steadiness of materials receipts can be gained from the coefficient
of supply steadiness (K9) and this can be obtained from data on their number, that
is, according to the formula

{Hf

K'P-Zﬂpt’

where {Hf--the quantity of the received given type of material within the plan and
on the planned delivery days;

{Mp(--the volume of materials received according to the plan for the report
period.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR13FFHJAI.USE(MVLY

Let us examine an example for calculating this indicator, the initial data of which
are given in Table VIII.2 for a construction trust in April.

Table VIII.2

888|888l

20
30
22
23
2|
28
30
34
206

month average

 

Key: l--Delivery date; 2--Receipt of lumber. m3: 3--Counted as
steady supply

According to the data of the table, in the trust the lumber supply plan was ful-
filled for April. However, during the month there were two overdue lumber deliver-
ies, that is. one-quarter of all the planned deliveries. The steadiness coefficient
for the supply of materials during the month equaled: 152/206 - 0.74, or 74 percent.
This means that under the existing production conditions, 76 percent of the volume of
of lumber deliveries according to the plan were carried out in accord with the es-
tablished delivery dates within the planned delivery volume. The remaining portion
of material deliveries according to the plan which represents in relative terms the

The overdue delivery of materials is also considered an infraction of supply plan
conditions. Thus. the designated coefficient describes the steadiness of the supply
process over time and in terms of the volume of materials received together. In
studying the steadiness of material deliveries it is possible to employ the method
of unsteadiness numbers as proposed by V. Ye. Adamov (see Chapter V, 514).

54. A Statistical Study of the Availability of Construction Materials

A continuOus construction process is achieved by the planned. steady and complete
supply of materials for the construction organizations. For this reason a descrip-
tion of the level of their supply for construction work is an important task in
statistics. The amount of the stocks of material resources is set in accord with
the volume and composition of the planned construction and installation work. Con-
sequently, the supply of materials to each construction organization can be judged

primarily from the degree of fulfilling the material supply plan as well as from the
number of contracts signed for the delivery of materials.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The indicator for the fulfillment of the material delivery plan is calculated by
the index method and for an individual type of material using the data on its quan-
tity in physical units while for an aggregate of types of materials by using data
on their quantity in monetary units, that is, respectively by the formulas:

 

“I “19
1 . _ d I . ’
Mp: ‘“ "p0

where H; and Hp£--the quantity of the given type of material in the report period
and according to the plan;
p—-estimated or planned-calculation prices for materials.

Having determined the fulfillment of the delivery plan for each type of material
over a report period, it is possible to gain a certain notion of the comprehensive-
ness of material deliveries to the construction organizations and to the construc-
tunwﬁuu.HueutMowmnimuuwfmcmﬂuemmuuddhumsn
is possible to use the least of the calculated indicators for the fulfillment of
the delivery plan for the individual types of materials. Since there can be inter-
changeable materials among those delivered to the site. it is logical to count the
above-planned delivery of the given material during the report period in fulfilling
the plan in the place of a lacking material but one interchangeable with the given
material. The designated indicators should be employed for describing the complete-
ness of fulfilling the material supply plan in prefabricated construction.

The degree of carrying out planned material deliveries under constracts with sup-
pliers can be described for each type of material by the ratio of the volume of de-
liveries carried out by contract in the given period to the planned delivery volume.
By subtracting the latter indicator from the former it is possible to show that
portion of the planned deliveries which was not covered by contracts with suppliers.
Table VIII.3 shows the result of calculating the designated indicators for a con-
struction trust during the report year. Information on the volume of material de-
liveries according to the plan, including those covered by contracts with suppliers,
is to be found in the report of the construction atganization's supply department
while the methodology for calculating the remaining indicators is given in the
table. In the example with slate and beams, the planned demand for the report year
was not fully covered by contracts with suppliers and this can be the reason for
the nonfulfillment of the plan for construetics-installation work in the report
period.

Table VIII.3

   
   

Volume of material deliveries X of planned
deliveries covered
by contracts

(col. 3:cpl. 2) 100)

Name of materials

 
 

Covered by Not covered

   
   
 

with suppliers
(col.2-col.3)

 
   

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For obtaining a full idea of the supply of materials for construction work, in con-
structing the corresponding indicators, it is essential to consider the daily need
of production for materials to carry out the construction-installation work in the
report period. For example, if the daily need for brick to carry out the
construeciao—installation work equals 16,000 pieces and its supplies at the con-
struction site at the end of the given period are 96,000 pieces, then in the fol-
lowing report period the construction organization has a brick supply of just 6
days (96:16). If these indicators are calculated for each type of planned basic
materials, then the least of them can be used as the general index for the supply
of materials for construction work in terms of volume and completeness.

For judging the supply of production with materials over the report period it is

not enough to have information on the fulfillment of the material supply plan. The
plan during the report period can be fulfilled and overfilfilled while during the
period production stoppages may occur due to shortages of materials. For this
reason for studying the supply of materials during a period it is important to con-
sider not only the quantity of the delivered material but also the date of its
delivery as well as the daily need for this material. Let us assume that in Sep-
tember. according to the plan, 6,000 wall blocks should be received with an average
daily requirement of 200 pieces (6,000:30). Actually in September 7,200 wall blocks
were received and, consequently, the supply plan for these materials was fulfilled

by %L%%% '100 = 1202. however from this one must not conclude anything about the
9

degree of supplying wall blocks for construction by the trust in September. In
order to obtain an answer to this question. it is also essential to consider the
prompt delivery of materials to the construction site. Below, in Table VIII.h,
data are given on the deliveries of wall blocks as well as the calculations for the
indicators of their supply for construction by the trust considering the material
delivery date.

Table VIII.6

      
       
  

Avail. Dates of receiving wall block in Sep
on Her demand
1 III-In

Indicators in Sep

 
  

Number of wall blocks, units
Number of days of month
supplied with received

material 27
Amount of material cor-

coresponding to number

of days supplied with it

in report month 5,400

The calculation of the number of workdays in a report period supplied with the giv-
en material (in the example, with wall blocks for a month) is carried out in the
following manner. The balance of the wall blocks on 1 September. with their daily
need of 200 pieces, ensures the carrying out of construction and installation work
for 3 days (600:200), that is. up to 3 September inclusively. The first delivery

of wall blocks was on 3 September and this ensured the operation of the construction

169

FOR OFIICJAL.USE1)NLY
I'UK UthJAI. USI‘. ONLY

trust for another 6 days (l,200:200), that is, until 9 September inclusively. On
10 September the trust was without blocks. The delivery of wall blocks on 11 Sep-
tember provided for the operation of the trust for another 7 days, that is, from

11 through 17 September inclusively. The delivery of material on 16 September pro-
vided for construction for another 4 days, that is, through 21 September inclusively.
On 22 and 23 September the trust was without blocks. The delivery of blocks on

24 September provided for the operation of the organization up to the end of the
month, that is, for 7 days. The last delivery of wall blocks was of no importance
for ensuring the continuity of construction in September. Thus, during the report
period, production in the trust was supplied with the given material for 27 days.
In other words, of the 6,000 wall blocks needed for work in September, in fact only
5,400 were actually delivered on time. Consequently, the supply level of construc-

tion, in fulfilling the material supply plan by 120%, was: giggg° 100 - 902.

The computed indicator can be used as a general one for the given type of material
during the report period. In knowing the consumption of material per unit of con-
struction product and the amount of material promptly delivered to the construction
organization, it is possible to determine the amount of work not carried out because
of disrupted supply for the iven material. Let us assume that in our example two
wall blocks are used for l m of wall laying. Then the volume of incomplete con-
struction over the report period due to the shortage of this material would be:
(6.ooo-s,400):2 - 300 m3.

55. The Statistical Study of Materials Utilization in Construction

A study of the use of material resources in construction is an important and timely
task of materials statistics. Statistics should describe the use level of the ma-
terials in construction, determine the relative and absolute change in this in com-
parison with the standards and over time and establish how this influences the sav-
ings of materials. The material use level in construction is characterized by the
average amount of material consumption per unit of construction product. This in-
dicator usually termed the proportional consumption of material (m) is determined
by dividing the quantity of material expended on producing the construction product
(M) by the volume of construction product created in the report period (q), that is,

by the formula m - § .

Depending upon the indicator adopted in the calculation for the construction product
and the method of measuring it, proportional expenditure can be calculated per unit
of capacity, power or any other unit for measuring the completed construction object
as well as per unit of executed construction and installation work. In the first
Instance the indicator expresses the complete or partial material intensiveness of
the end construction product for an individual type of material and for this reason

it describes the influence of factors related to the design decisions and the con-
struction process jointly.

The proportional consumption of material per unit of completed object can be calcu-
lated not only as a whole for the object but also individually for the stages, work

complexes and so forth. For example, the proportional consumption of cement, metal
or other materials for building just the exterior walls, interfloor slabs, roof and

170

POKOFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

so forth, calculated per m3 of effective housing area. This indicator, in contrast
to the one examined above, can be calculated in the construction process and for
this reason is of operational significance. A general level for the use of the
material can be gained from the total proportional expenditures of material accord-
ing to the stages, work complexes and structural elements per unit of measurement
for the completed project 03', m" and so forth), that is, m - m' +m"+... +m“.

In the second instance, the proportional consumption of material is calculated per
unit of construction-installation work. This describes the use of the material for
the specific type of work done in erecting the project. Information for calculating
the proportional consumption of material per unit of performed work is to be found
in the material reports of Form No “-19 and “-29.

For generalizing the results of materials utilization, in carrying out many types

of construction work, the need arises to calculate the proportional consumption of
material not in physical but in cost terms. Thus, in planning and statistical prac-
tices, the proportional consumption of material is determined per 1,000 or million
rubles of estimated cost of construetion-installation work. In contrast to the
above-examined indicators, this one, along with purely production factors which de-

In the struggle to save material resources, of important significance is the monitor-
ing of the consumption of materials in accord with the established standards. In
construction estimated standards and planned production standards for the consump-
tion of materials are employed. For all construction organizations uniform esti-
mated standards have been set and this creates the basis for generalizations on any
organizational levels of construction. These standards have been worked out in

great detail for the type of construction-instsllation work and structural elements

contrast to the estimated standards, these have been set for large units of con-
struction product, for example, per km of road, per m3 of housing, and so forth.

0n the level of the glavks, Union republic ministries and the national economy as a
whole, material consumption standards are employed per million rubles of estimated
cost of construetion-installation work.

the consumption of one type of material to perform one type of work. In this in~

stance the index for the proportional consumption of material is calculated by the

formula 1 - m1:mo,

where m1 and mo-proportional consumption of material, respectively, in the report
or base periods (or according to the standard).

171

FOR<OFFKJAI,USB(MNLY
I'UK UPI'ILIAI. Ubl'. ONLY

1n the example given in Table VIll.5, the index for the proportional expenditures of

lumber for flooring equals: 2;€:-100 - 1052, that is, in comparison with the stand-

 

ard there has been a 5 percent overexpenditure of lumber; this is 0.01 m3 of lumber
per m2 of flooring (0.21-0.2). For the entire amount of this work, the savings or
overexpenditure of the material in contrast to‘the standard is determined using the

formula Am - q1(u1-mo).
where q1--the actually completed volume of work in the report period in physical

units.

In the example. as a consequence of exceeding the proportional consumption stand-
ards. an owerexpenditure of 3.2 m3 of lumber has occurred, or 320-(0.21-0.2).

Table VIII . 5

- ﬂoss Haste:
' .- 'f'
,0. ' ' Ins-u.

     
   

    
  

luau mu-
". III-mun

    

[loan (a

uaau

«nan
[lo a- 560 llama e- .
"Pt?” 3... c

soult(d 0.l5 67.2 ;0.8

   

Key: 1--Type of structural element; 2--work performed, m; 3--Types
of expended materials; 4--Unit; 5--Price of material, rubles;
6--Consumption rate per unit of work; 7-Actual; 8-Total
material consumption; 9--Proportional material consumption;
10--lndex for fulfillment of standard, 1; a--Floors; b-Parti-
tlona; c--Lumber; d—Nails

In the second instance when one type of material is spent to carry out several
types of work. the index for the proportional material consumption can be calculated

by the formula:
I=_§.ﬂ_l.' " =fﬂ-
Vﬂh ﬁ'h'

where 84 - [qlmluactual consumption of material for fulfilled amount of work of
given type.

The influence of a change in the proportional consumption on the saving of material
can be determined by subtracting the denominator of the index from its numerator,
that is, according to the formula Am - 2H1-£q1mo. In our example, the index for
the proportional consumption of lumber for flooring and for building partitions,

. . . 67.2-+156.8 _ 22$ _
taken together, Ulll uc. iiajarfjfgaajats 232 0.966. or 96.6 percent, that is,

for the entire volume of work performed there has been a savings of lumber of 3.5
percent, or 8 m3 (226- 232) in comparison with the standard.

172

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FINI¢3FF1C1AL.USE(NNLY

The above-examined methodology lies at the basis of compiling the reports for Porms
No "-19 and H-29. Information on the savings (overexpenditure) of materials as
given in these reports can subsequently be generalized for the types of materials
within an individual construction organization and within departments.

In the third case, when the use of several types of materials for carrying out one

type of work is being studied, the index for the proportional material expenditures
is determined by the formula

In calculating this index the need arises to comeasure different types of materials
by using prices and for these the estimated or plan-calculation prices are usually
employed. The difference between the numerator and demoninator of the index shows
the amount of savings (overexpenditure) in materials as a consequence of a change
in the proportional consumption of materials per unit of construction product, that
is, 4.1 - Emlp-Emop, and for the entire volume of work performed A..- (amlp-

tmop)q1. In our example, the index for the proportional material consumption for
flooring will be:

0.21o5+o.11-2 1.os+o.22 1.27 _
o.2-s+o.1o‘2 ' 1.o+'o.2' " 1.2" 1'°58' °' ”5'87“

Consequently, in laying l m2 of flooring the standard for proportional material ex-
penditures was exceeded by 5.8 percent, or by 0.07 ruble, and for the entire value
of this type of work, 22.6 rubles (320°0.07).

In the fourth, most general instance, when the use of several types of materials
for performing several types of construction-installation work is being studied,
the index for the proportional expenditures can be calculated by the formula:

The saving or ovarexpenditure of materials for all the performed volume of work, as
a consequence of the change in the proportional expenditures, is determined analo-
gously to the third case, that is, by the formula:

A. — 2 '"uNu -- Bowen.

From the data of the example, the overall index for proportional material consump-
tion equals:

(67.2+1se.s)-s+ g35.2+67.22-2 _ 1,326.8 _
320-0.2»s+320-o.1~2+sao-o.3-s+sso-o.1s-2 1,392 ”517' °’ ”'3'

Thus, as a whole a reduction has been achieved in the proportional material expendi-
tures in comparison with the established rates by 6.8 percent while the savings of
all materials in all the work in cost terms has been 67.2 rubles (l,32&.8-1,392).

173

FOR‘OITHCJAI.USE(NHLY
I‘UI Ul'flt IA]. 03!. ONLY

Subsequently the study of the use of materials is to be developed in a direction of
elucidating the factors which have caused deviations in the proportional material
expenditures from the base level. In this regard it is advisable to study the de-
viations from the material consumption standards in terns of the component elements.

171.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICNWWC1AI.I£SE(NNLY

CHAPTER 1x: STATISTICS OF TECHNICAL PROGRESS IN CONSTBDCTION
51. The Tasks of Technical Progress Statistics

Technical progress is a most important factor in increasing the efficiency of
social production and in developing all the national econoaic sectors, including
construction. The realization of technical progress in construction is inseparably
linked with its industrialization. The main technical eleaent in industrializing

construction at the present stage of its development is the broad use in production
of standardized elements, assemblies and other prefabricated pieces manufactured

under plant conditions. The introduction of industrial methods and, in particular.

prefabricated construction is closely tied to the develop-ant of standardized de-
signing.

The characteristic areas of technical progress in construction are the introduc-
tion into production of advancrd production methods and new advanced methods for
carrying out the construction and installation work. the use of new construction
equipment and efficient materials as well as full mechanization and automation of
the production processes. The economic conditions for technical progress and in-

dustrialization in construction are specialization, cooperation, integration and
concentration of construction work.

Statistics plays an important role in studying the areas and conditions of techni-
cal progress and industrialization in construction and it is confronted with the
following specific tasks: describing the elaboration of standard designs and de-
cisions and their introduction into construction; studying the use of new advanced
industrial methods in construction and primarily the introduction of prefabricated
construction; describing the introduction of new equipment, efficient materials and
advanced technological methods in construction work; studying the mechanization and
full mechanization of the most labor-intensive and widespread construction and in-
stallation jobs; studying specialization, cooperation, integration and concentra-
tion in construction; determining economic effectiveness from introducing new
equipment, advanced production methods and technology in construction.

52. Indicators for the Elaboration and Application of Standardized Designing
An important prerequisite for introducing industrial methods in construction is the
development and wide use of standard designs. By a standard design one understands

a design planned for repeated use in building the same type of projects. A statis-
tical study of standard designing has two basic areas: 1) a description of the

175

FOR OFIWCJAI.IﬂSEZ(HVLY
I‘UK U'I'ILIAI. 08E. UNLY

standard designing as n result of the design and research activities carried out by

the corresponding organization; 2) determining the scale and pace of introducing the
standard designs into construction.

A notion of the scope of standard designing in the sectors, ministries or construc-
tion as a whole is provided by the number of standard designs created over a certain

the USSR Gosstroy has worked out new ones which are based not on the standard plans
for the projects as a whole but rather plans for standard sections. spans and other
parts of the projects. From these sections, spans and so forth, standardized build-
ings and structures of varying size are built. The spread of this progressive trend
in designing can be described by the number of created standard designs for sections,
nodular sections, spans of buildings and installations for the national economic
sectors. for types of production and so forth.

For studying the process of introducing standard designing in construction of fixed
capital projects, statistics has elaborated a series of indicators which differ in
the purpose and method of their calculation. The simplest indicator is the number
of fixed capital projects being built under standard designs as well as the propor-
tional amount of the number of these projects in the total quantity of erected
projects. A fuller description of the use of standard designing in construction

is provided by the indicators for the estimated cost of the projects being erected

under standard designs as well as by its proportional amount in the total estimated
cost of the projects being built by individual and standard plans.

Standard designing does not always encompass projects and sites as a whole. Some-
times this applies to their component elements. particularly in the construction of
production projects. For this reason, in calculating the indicators, it is desir-
able to proceed from the estimated cost of the construction-installation work on

the projects and those parts which are being erected under standard plans. The

relative amount of the coverage of construction by standard designing is the ratio
of the estimated cost of the construction-installation work carried out under the
standard plans and designs to the estimated cost of the work on all the construc-
tion projects or those projects which can be covered by standard plans. In Soviet

construction, the proportional amount of the work carried out under standard plans
in the total volume of work was 81 percent in 1973.

The frequency of employing standard designs in construction can be described by

the number of projects built using the given standard design. For a general de-
srription it is possible to calculate the number of projects built as an average per
standard design over a certain period, that is:

where m-- the number of projects built using standard designs and plans in the given
period;
n--thc number of standard designs used in the given period.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can disclose the sectorial and other features in the development of standard de-
signing as well as the scale and direction of its spread. The state statistical
bodies systematically observe the state of standard designing and its introduction.
This information is collected under Form No (Hts "Report on the Use of Standard
Designs in Construction Carried Out from Capital Investments Envisaged in the State
Plan." '

53. The Statistical Study of Introducing Advanced Industrial Methods

The main area of industrialization and progress in construction equipment and meth-
ods in construction at the present stage of national economic development is the
use of prefabricated pieces and assemblies for erecting fixed capital projects.
Conscruction statistics has worked out and employed a system of indicators which
from various aspects describe the scope of prefabricated construction, the level of
its prefabrication and other particular features. The prefabricated elements in
practice include the parts and elements of buildings and installations made from
concrete and reinforced concrete as well as metal and wooden structural elements
which are industrially manufactured. For example, these are the concrete, rein-
forced concrete, haydite and other modules and panels, bathroom assemblies, beams
and columns.

The prefabrication coefficient is a widespread indicator describing the degree of
employing prefabricated elements in construction. Construction statistics recom-
mends several methods for calculating the given indicator with a varying economic
content. Most often the prefabrication coefficient ( f) is defined as the ratio
of the estimated cost of construction-installation wor using prefabricated elements
and parts, including the cost of the prefabricated elements (qufp) to the estimated
cost of the construction and installation work on the project, site or aggregate of

projects and sites (qu), that is, Kpf - Eqpfpdlqp.

The prefabrication coefficient can be obtained by finding the proportional amount
of the cost of prefabricated elements and assemblies (mpr) in the total value of
all the materials employed in constructing the given project (Dip), that is, Kpf I
Dipfpﬁlip. This indicator only approximately shows the degree of prefabrication,
as it involves only the structure of material expenditures on erecting the project.
Moreover, it depends upon the price level for the materials and this will tell on
its dynamics. Let us give an example. Let us assume that the following data are
known (1,000 rubles of estimated cost) for a trust during a 2-year period (Table
1X.l). The construction prefabrication coefficient according to the data on the
work performed is: in the previous year 4—133 - 0.64; in the report year #181,153; -
0.70. The construction prefabrication coefficient according to the data on con-
sumed materials was: last year 4—2333 - 0.72; in the report year 4%ng - 0.78. The
divergence in the change of the coefficients is caused by the different sense of
the indicators and by the methods of determining them. While the former indicator
reflects changes in the composition of the work carried out as well as in the cost
of the employed materials and other production resources, the latter considers
changes only in the realm of material expenditures.

177

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1x.1

  
  

Ind ica tors

   

Volume of construction-installation work carried out 11,600
Including for projects erected from prefabricated
elements 8,120
Value of expended materials 9,048
Including prefabricated pieces and structures 7,030

Finally, the degree to which the prefabricatioc method has spread in construction
can be judged from the number of projects built from prefabricated pieces and struc-
tures and their proportional amount in the total number of projects. In housing
construction, analogous indicators can be calculated using data on the number of

m2, respectively, of the effective or dwelling area of the buildings put into oper-
ation. The statistical Form No l-ks gives information in the area of buildings put
into Operation with the isolating of buildings from factory-manufactured large-
sized elements and assemblies. This information is given separately for industrial,
housing, civil and rural construction and this makes it possible to consider the
sectorial differences of prefabricated construction.

For studying the prefabrication level in construction, indicators are also calcu-
lated for the proportional amount of prefabricated asselblies and units in physical
terms. The proportional consumption of prefabricated elements is determined per
unit of capacity or power of the fixed capital project as well as per 100, 1,000
and so forth rubles of the estimated cost of construction and installation work.
Information on the consumption of prefabricated elements in physical terms can be
found in Form No 2-5)! and No l—ks.

Let us give an example. Z,Let us assume that during the report year a construction
trust completed 21,000 m2 of housing, including 114, 200 n2 of housing from prefabri-
cated elements. For constructing the buildings from prefabricated elements,

4,800 In3 of prefabricated reinforced concrete elements were used along with 5, 200m3
of large wall modules and 1,800 m2 of large wall panels. Let us determine the pro-

portional expenditure of prefabricated elements per m2 of housing. As a whole for
housing (onstructiun - 91%;;8-33 - 0.831 m ; including for the prefabri-
cated reinforced concrete units 144282 - 0.338 m ; for wall modules 154222 - 0.366 m .
for wall panels 1-15'82- -.O 127 m . The prefabrication coefficient for housing con-

16.2
21.0 - 0.676, or 67.6 percent.

 

 

 

 

construction at the given trust was:

The statistical methodology for studying other industrial construction methods is
analogous to the above-examined one for prefabricated construction.

54. A Study of the int roduction of New Technology, Progressive Production Methods
and Efficient Materials

Technical progress in construction is characterized not only by an increase in the
fleet of construction machines but chiefly by the ongoing improvement in the means

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of production. This is aided by the creation of highly productive. more powerful
and economic machines, by the introduction of new progressive technology and by

the use of new types of efficient materials. Technical progress statistics should
provide answers to the questions of how the plans for the introduction of new tech-
n010gy are being carried out and what is the actual scale of the spread of new

technology, improved production methods and new efficient materials in construc-
tion.

New equipment is studied by statistics primarily using data on the composition, num-
ber and power of the new, advanced types of machines. From these same indicators
the fulfillment of the plan for the technical development of the construction or-
ganizations and sites is monitored. On the basis of data concerning the number and
power of new machines at contracting organizations, it is possible to determine
relative indicators for their introduction into construction, for example, the pro-
portional amount (by number and cost) of new advanced machines in the total fleet
of the given type of construction equipment. The absolute and relative indicators
for new equipment must be compared with the analogous indicators of the worn out
and obsolete machines to be replaced. Among the new types of construction machines
in practice are those which differ substantially from the previously produced and
employed analogous models of Soviet and foreign equipment in terms of the most im-
portant technical an' economic specifications, for example, in terms of improved

design, increased po\ er and other features which asks the new machine more produc--
tive and economic.

In describing new construction equipment it is important to have the average unit
values for the operating parameters of the machines, for example, the average shovel
capacity of an excavator (clamshell) and scraper, the average hoisting capacity of
a given type of crane and so forth (see Chapter VII, 5b). Such average indicators

are employed in studying the dynamics of new equipment and the prospects for its
development.

The coefficient for the renewal of the fleet of construction machines can be a gen-
eral surnary indicator for the introduction of new equipment in construction. This
is figured as the ratio of the value of new construction equipment put into produc-
tion over the period (ordinarily a year) to the total value of the fleet of exist-
ing construction machines at the end of the period (year). In employing this co-
efficient in a study of technical progress, it is essential to consider that with
an increase in the period for which it is calculated the machines considered new at
the start of the period can be obsolete at the end of it. For this reason it is
essential to systematically adjust the list of construction machines which in the
national economic plan are considered among new equipment.

An important manifestation of technical progress is the use of new, efficient (pro-
gressive) materials in construction as they male it possible to improve the quality,
reliability and economy of the fixed capital construction projects. For example,
an increase in the output volume and the use of synthetic materials (epoxy resins,
plastics and so forth) on the basis of introducing chemistry in industrial produc-
tion makes it possible to substantially reduce the weight of buildings and installs-
tions, to obtain high thermoncoustic and waterproof properties in the projects and
obtain an economic effect in reducing expenditures on materials and as a whole for
the construction product. The introduction of new efficient materials can be jud-
ged from the very list and number of types and grades of these materials employed

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in construction. But a more certain notion of the improvement in the subjects of
labor is provided by the quantity of the individual types of efficient materials
employed in construction over this period. By comparing the absolute actual and
planned indicators for the use of efficient materials, it is possible to gain a
notion of the degree of fulfilling an important part of the technical development
plan for the contracting organizations.

Technical progress is also manifested in the improving of production methods. The
introduction of new, more advanced technology provides the same economic effect as
the use of new equipment. Statistics, in studying this area of technical progress,
monitors the fulfillment of the plan for introducing new technology into construc-
tion and describe: the dynamics of this process. The indicator most often used

for judging the amount of the introduction of new progressive technology is the
volume of construction-installation work carried out over the report period under
conditions of new technology. An analogous relative indicator is the proportional
amount of the volume of construction-installation work carried out under the condi-
tiona of employing new technology in the total volume of all the estimated cost of
the work carried out during the given period.

55. A Statistical Study of Construction Hechanization

The mechanization of construction is an important factor in raising labor produc-
tivity of the workers. In the lorg-range national economic plans primary measures
are envisaged to mechanize the labor intensive and most widespread jobs in con-
struction. These include earthmoving and loading, the installation of metal struc-
tural elements, finishing work and many others. Construction statistics studies
plan fulfillment and the dynamics of work mechanization in terms of their individu-
al types and as a whole, it determines the effectiveness of mechanizing the work
and brings out the influence of factors on changing the degree of work mechaniza-
tion in construction.

In carrying out these tasks, it is essential to delimit and determine the basic con-
cepts related to construction mechanization. In construction, all work performed
from the viewpoint of its mechanization can be divided into unmechanized and mech-
anized. The unmechunized includes work which is performed by man using simple im-
plements of labor powered by human muscles, that is, manual jobs, for example the
laying uf walls from brick, digging a pit or ditch with a pick and shovel. Work is
considered mechanized when one or several of the basic operations is performed us-
ing machines or mechanisms driven by any type of engine but not by human muscle
power. Jobs where all the basic and auxiliary labor-intensive operations of the
production process are performed by machines or mechanisms are considered to be
fully mechanized or integrally mechanized. For example, full mechanization of
curthmoving occurs if the digging of the dirt, its transporting, unloading, level-
ing out and compacting are done by machine.

A notion or the level (degree) of mechanizing construction and installation work
is provided by the following statistical indicators: coefficients of mechaniza-
tion and full mechanization of individual types of construction and installation
work; a summary coefficient for the mechanization of construction and installation
work; a coefficient of labor mechanization.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coefficient for the mechanization of individual types of construction and in-
stallation work is calculated by comparing the amount of work performed by any

mechanized method with the total volume of work performed in physical units, that
is, according to the formula

qm
qm+qn’

 

“C-

where qn--the amount of work performed mechanically in physical units;
qn-the amount of work performed manually in physical units.

This indicator expressed in percent is termed the mechanization level. It charac-
terizes the overall mechanization level of the given type of construction or instal-
lation work in the broad sense, since the numerator of its formula includes the
amount of work done by a mechanized method and, in particular, a fully mechanized
one. In 1978, the level of full mechanization for the installation of concrete and
reinforced concrete elements in the USSR reached 97.1 percent and for earthmoving,
98.0 percent.

The coefficients for the full mechanization of work are calculated by dividing the
amount of work performed by the fully mechanized method by the total volume of the
given type of performed work. In calculating this indicator it is possible to use
data from the quarterly reporting of Form No l-NT “Report on the Hechanization of

Construction and the Use of Construction Machines." Along with the mechanization

coefficients, in construction indicators are calculated for the fulfillment of the
mechanized work plan such as In - qnfzqnpz.

The degree of mechanization for several types of construction and installation
work can be described by a summary mechanization coefficient in which the volumes

of various types of work are compared in their labor intensiveness, that is, by
the formula:

ant
K8. I tqmt+£qnt ,

where t--working time expenditures per unit of work (labor intensiveness).

In calculating the summary coefficient using this formula, as the comeasurements,

it is possible to use the actual and normed labor intensiveness levels in mechanized
and unmechanized jobs as well as the average actual levels of labor intensiveness

in mechanized and manual Jobs taken together. The choice of the comeasurement is
determined by the availability of initial data for calculating the coefficient.

In practical terms an always possible but not unconditional variation for deter-
mining the summary work mechanization coefficient can be considered the one in which
the average labor intensiveness of the work performed by the mechanized and unmech-
anized method is adopted as the comeasurement. The summary work mechanization co-
efficient can be employed for an aggregate of jobs united in a single production
process in building a project. for example, for painting and stuccoing and so forth.
Let us give an example. Let us assume that the following data are available on
finishing work and the time expensitures for them in a construction trust in Septem-
ber of the report year (Table IX.2).

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

 
   
 
   

Indicators

1. Volume of work performed, total, 1::2 a,
2. Including mechanized 3,000
3. Man-hours spent, total 2,160
b. Including in mechanized jobs 1,560
5. Level of work mechanization, 1
[line 2.100] 75
line 1
6. Level of labor mechanization, 1
[line a-ioo] 72
line 3

Key: a--Painting; b--Plastering

In the table, line 5 shows the mechanization levels of the individual types of fin-
ishing work. In particular, in comparison with the plan the painting mechanization
level has dropped while that for plastering has risen. Here the mechanized paint-

ing plan was fulfilled by 1062 lJQQQ-IOO and for plastering by 98.42 24999-100 .
1,510 3.050

The summary work mechanization coefficient can be calculated by the last method.
The actual overall labor intensiveness for mechanized and manual painting for l m2
of surface equals 0.32 man-hour (640:2,000) and for plastering 0.56 man-hour .
(2,160:4,000). Hence the actual summary coefficient for painting and plastering
mechanization during the report month will be:

1 600.0.32-f3 000.0.56 2 132
.J—_——l__— . _2__ .

2,000.0.32+a,ooo~o.sa 2,800 °'7°1' °' 76'11'

The labor mechanization coefficient is calculated by comparing labor expenditures
in mechanized jobs (Tm) with the overall labor expenditures for the given type of
jobs (T), namely Kmt . Tsz. Expressed in percent, this indicator is called the
labor mechanization level. The table gives the initial data and the calculation of

the labor mechanization level for the report month (line 6). The summary labor
mechanization coefficient in finishing work for September equals: 229:;l*§22 -
600 + 2 , 160
.1_._880 .
2,800 0.671, or 67.12.
In determining the labor mechanization level it is possible to proceed from the
number of workers employed in mechanized jobs and the total number of workers em-
ployed in the given Jobs as of a separate date. Here, however, it is essential to
:learly define the professions of the workers involved in mechanized jobs. Basi-
cally these are workers who are employed in controlling or servicing construction
machines and mechanisms. for example, bulldozer, crane or excavator operators and
others. The indicator calculated by this methodology describes the labor mechaniza-

tion level on an individual date.

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The labor mechanization coefficient is always less or equal to the corresponding
work mechanization coefficient. The reason is that the labor mechanization coeffi-
cient reflects only the ratio of the volumes of labor expenditures on mechanized
and manual jobs and gives no consideration to the differences in labor productivity
in this work. One hour of work by an excavator operator in terms of its productive
ity cannot be equated to an hour of work by a ditchdigger supplied with a shovel,
although in the denominator of the labor mechanization coefficient the work time of
both workers is added together. For this reason, in the mechanization of manual
labor, the labor and work mechanization coefficients will rise. With further mech-
anization of labor already equipped with machines, with other conditions being
equal, the labor mechanization coefficient will decline since the quantity of man-
ual labor or the equal volume of work remains unchanged while the quantity of mech~
anized more productive labor declines.

The above-examined dependence of economic characteristics can be expressed in a
system of interrelated indicators:

T Qm
me'Kmt'Kpr'T?” ﬁ‘S-ll-I ’

where Raw-work mechanization coefficient;
Kat—labor mechanization coefficient;
Kprurelative amount indicating by how many times the productivity of mech-
anized labor is greater than labor productivity in the given type of
work as a whole.

This system of indicators can underlie factor index analysis for the mechanization
of construction-installation work and from its methodology it is possible to deter-
mine by how many percent the labor mechanization level has changed depending upon

a change in the degree of labor mechanization (the labor mechanization coefficient)
and the change in mechanized labor productivity in comparison with all labor produc-
tivity. Let us show the influence of these factors from the example of plastering
(see Table IX.2). The excess of mechanized labor productivity over the productivi-
ty of all labor in Septeuber equaled:

3,000 . l0.000

“”1 1.560 ' 2,160

I 1.92:1.85 - 1.038.

plan %%:%I% - 2.21:2.03 - 1.089.
' '

Hence the change in the work mechanization level as a consequence of the change in
the labor mechanization level Akmw - Kprﬂl‘gn-Knto) . 1.038(0.72-0.6lo) I 0.083.
or 8.32. The change in the work mechanization level as a consequence of a change
in the ratio of the productivity of mechanized and all labor of the workers is:

Am - Kata-(upﬂ-xpro) - neurons-1.089) - -o.033, or -3.3z.

The total deviation in the mechanization levels of plastering in percent equals the

total of the changes for the factors: 8.3+ (-3.3) - 52. Consequently. the plaster-
ing mechanization level increased in comparison with the plan due to a rise in the

183

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

labor mechanization level in pastering and mainly because of the mechanizing of
manual labor (according to the plan 770 man-hours should have been worked in manual
plastering but in fact 600 man-hours were worked).

56. A Statistical Study of Specialization, Concentration, Cooperation and
integration

Specialization, cooperation [subcontracting] and other forms of managing construc-
tion are an important condition for accelerating industrialization and technical
progress in construction. These contribute to the successful carrying out of the
long-range capital construction plans in our nation. Two types of specialization
among contracting organizations are distinguished: sectorial (product) and tech-
nological (by types of work). Sectorial specialization occurs when the construc-
tion organizations focus their basic operations on the performing of work to erect
the projects of a single sector, for example, power plants, metallurgical plants,
railroads, housing and so forth. Technological specialization consists in the
focusing of a construction organization's basic operations on the performing of in-
dividual types of construction and installation work or on erecting individual
parts of buildings and installations.

The designated types of specialization lie at the basis of the statistical study of
construction organziations in this area. An idea of sectorial specialization can
be gained from the grouping of construction organizations by the sectors of indus-
try, transportation, agriculture and so forth as well as in terms of the nonproduc-
tion sphere of the national economy, for example, the housing and utility systems,
public health and so forth. The distribution of the aggregate of contracting or-
ganizations by sectorial groups can also be carried out using the data of the con-
tracting organization censuses (one-shot counts) conducted annually by the statisti-
cal bodies. Current reporting does not contain sufficiently complete materials for
this purpose. A structural description of sectorial specialization can be gained
from the group absolute and relative data on the number of construction organiza-
tions and the volume of construetion-installation work performed by their own
forces.

The sectorial specialization level of an individual construction organization is
deSeribed by the proportional amount of the volume of construction-installation
work done by its own forces in accord with the sectorial specialization of this
organization in the total volume of work carried out during the period. This indi-
cator is calculated in an analogous manner for the aggregate of contracting organ-
izntlons. But from the statistical reporting it is not always possible to obtain
information on the amount of work carried out along sectorial lines. For this rea-
son. for determining the overall sectorial specialization level for the aggregate
nr construction organizations in a republic or administrative rayon, for the sector
and department it is possible to calculate the proportional amount of the volume of
work performed by the organizations having sectorial specialization in the volume
of work carried out by all the organizations of the studied aggregate.

A study of the development of technological specialization in construction is also
based upon the method of grouping the contracting organizations. In practice all
ronstruction organizations are divided into two large groups: general construction
and specialized. The specialized construction and installation organizations per-
form only individual types of work or erect the parts of buildings and installations.

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIDFFKJAL.USIZONIJ

Such organizations are considered specialized by the technological feature, for
example, organizations performing earthmoving or finishing work and others. A

structural description of these two groups of organizations by absolute and rela-
tive (proportional) indicators for the number of organizations and the volume of
work performed by then provides an overall notion of the level of technological
specialization in the aggregate of construction organizations. A more detailed
description of the areas and the level of technological specialization can be gained
by grouping the aggregate of specialized organizations according to the actually de—
veloped types of technological specialization (Table IX.3).

Table IX.3

1965 1978

Total primary contracting organizt .ons 11,890 100 22,932 100
Including:
General construction 5,482 46 9,800 37
Specialized 6.408 56 13,032 63
Including by types of work:
Earthmoving 663 4.0 1,021 6.5
Laying exterior utilities 386 3.5 591 2.6
Installation of large-sized building and

structural elements 155 2.5 286 2.9

Finishing work 318 2.9 621 2.7
Hydraulic engineering work 124 1.6 108 1.3
Sanitary-technical work 631 5.1 1,013 4.0
Electrical installation 594 5.9 796 5.1
Work on low—voltage equipment 251 1.7 316 1.1
Installation of production and other equipment 562 7.0 966 6.7

_—

Key: a-Number of organizations; b-Proportiona1 amount of work performed by
these organizations in total volume of work, percent

The technological specialization level of an individual construction organization
is characterized by the proportional amount of the volume of work performed by the
organization's own forces in accord with its production specialty in the tctal vol-
ume of work performed by it during the period. In an analogous manner this indica-
tor is calculated for the aggregate of organizations specialized in the given type
of work. However, the information needed for the calculation is found only in the
organization's accounting documents. From the data of statistical reporting (Form
No l-ks), the level of an individual type of technological specialization can be de-
termined as the proportional amount of the volume of work carried out by the own
forces of the organizations having the given specialty in the total volume of the
work carried out by all the specialized organizations in the given aggregate. Pre-
quently in statistical practices as the basis they employ the amount of work carried
out by all the construction organizations (specialized and general construction).

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run vrrnun. var. UnIJ

Table IX.3 gives the indicators for the technological specialization of primary con-
struction and installation organizations according to the individual types.I From
this it follows that the highest specialization level has been achieved for equip-
ment installation while the greatest growth in the technological specialization
level has been achieved in earthnoving.

Specialization in construction requires the establishing of production ties between
the construction organizations and the enterprises involved in the joint erection

of fixed capital projects. The planned organization of these ties is termed coopera-
tion. The forms of cooperation in construction are rather diverse. In terms of the
affiliation of the organizations, a distinction is drawn between intradepartmental
cooperation and interdepartmental cooperation. From the viewpoint of the territor-
ial location of the organizations. there is also intraregional and interregional
cooperation.

Cooperation in construction can be described by different indicators. An approxi-
mate notion of the cooperation level can be gained from the number of specialized
organizations participating in the given construction or the aggregate of sites as
well as from the number of specialized organizations acting as subcontractors for
the general contracting organization. A general indicator for the cooperation level
is the average number of subcontracting organizations per general organization for
the aggregate as of a certain date. This can be calculated from the formula:

0
Kop ‘ £_£

0% ’

where 05--the number of subcontracting organizations :or the given general organiza-
tion;
0g--the number of general organizations in the given aggregate of contracting
organizations.

Since cooperation is cloaked in the appropriate contractual form, the fullest notion
of its level is provided by an indicator calculated using data on the amount of work

carried out by the organizations under different contracts. The cooperation level
using these data is expressed by the proportional amount rf work carried out by

the organizations under subcontracts in the total amount of work done under general
contracts. According to the data of statistical reporting in Form No l-ks, it is
possible to determine the cooperation level achieved by a construction organiza-
tion as a whole as well as separately for the existing forms of cooperation.

Let us examine an example. Let us assume that there is information on the fulfill-
mcnt of the contracting program by the construction organizations for one of the
RSFSR oblasts (Table IX.6; 1.000 rubles of estimated cost).

The cooperation level of construction organizations on the oblast scale is charac-
terized in the following manner:

'Sue: "Narudnoye khozyuystvo SSSR v 1978 g." [The USSR National Economy in 1978].
Statistical Annual. Moscow. Statistika, p 356.

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table IX.4

  
  

Indicators

  

Contracting work under general contracts with builders 38.360
Including:
By own forces of reporting organization 16.460
By outside organizations, total 21.920
Including:
Other trusts of one's glavk 21,498
Other ministries of given Union republic 422
As . 11 835 .
a whole in the previous year. 46.52 23:335. 100 , and in the report year.

57.12 %%‘%%%'100], that is. the production ties between the contracting organiza-
O

tions in the oblast increased;

With the trusts of their own glavk in the previous year: 00.12 {%g*%%%. 100], and
9

21 £98
.__L___ , .
in the report year 56.0% 38,360 100],

With trusts of other ministries in the given Union republic in the previous year:

 

l 620 422
_l._ . z . . .
6.42 25.440 100], and in the report year 1 11 [38,360 100]

The overall cooperation level in each year can be represented as the total of the
particular cooperation levels with the organizations of the various systems: in
the previous year 46.5 - 60.1-t6.h; in the report year 57.1 I 56.04-l.1.

By a parallel comparison of cooperation levels it is possible to describe not only
their overall change but also the role of the specific production ties which have
developed in the given period among the construction organizations from different
systems as well as the direction and amount of their changes over the period. In
the example, along with an overall rise in production ties, there has been signifi-
cant development of cooperation among the construction organizations within their
own glavk and a decline in the cooperation level with the organizations of differ-
ent ministries.

Along with specialization and cooperation, integration is an effective form for
organizing construction in a number of instances. This form is characterized by
the organizational unification of the construction enterprises with different spe-
cialties as well as by combining them with industrial enterprises. The latter type
of integration has been expressed in the creation of the housing construction com-
bines (DSK), plant construction combines (28K) and other combines, associations and
firms. The scale of integration in construction can be judged from the number of
the DSK. ZSK and other associations as well as from the volume of product produced
by them. The integration level in construction can be expressed by the proportion-
ai amount of the volume of construetion—installation work carried out by the

187

FOR 0FTWC]A1.USE(MVLY
a VA vs I avian. mar. URL!

integrated usaoeiutions in the total volume of the work carried out by all the con-
struction organizations of the sector, ministry. republic and so forth.

Significant reserves for increasing construction efficiency by specialization and
integration can be activated by increasing the level of its concentration. The
advantage of large construction enterprises over small- and medium-sized ones is
great and they operate more successfully and profitably. For studying this process,
statistics works out indicators which describe the concentration level and its dy-
namics and determines the influence of production concentration on its effective-
ness.

A notion of the level and dynamics of concentration can be gained on the basis of
average indicators expressing the amount of the production volume, the fixed capi-
tal or the number of employees per organization. Let us assume that a main admin-
istration has 30 construction trusts of which four trusts have an annual work vol-
ume of 3 million rubles; six trusts have 4 million rubles, eight trusts have 5 mil-
lion rubles. ten trusts have 6 million rubles and two trusts have 10 million rubles.
The average annual volume of work for one trust of the glavk equals:

3 . W . 1—356“. . 5.2 311110;: rubles.

If in the base year the average annual volume of one trust in the glavk was 5 mil-
lion rubles, then production concentration occurred in the given glavk and its
growth rate was 104 percent (S.2:S.0)'100. As an additional description for this
indicator, the coefficient of variation is determined making it possible to differ-
entiate the aggregates of organizations having the same average but a varying range
of fluctuation in the concentration feature.

Attention should be given to the theoretical recommendation for measuring the pro-
duction concentration level by an antiharmonic average using the formula:

where q1--thc volume of work carried out by the given organization over the period
(or other variations of the feature to be averaged).

According to the data of the previous example. the average annual volume of work
for one trust is:

— 32-a+42-6+52oe+62o10+102-2 892 _
«ah ' W ' 1—53 5" “111°“ “mi

The average calculated using the formula of the antiharmonic is much greater than
the arithmetic average. This is caused by the fact that the given indicator, in
contrast to the one examined above. also considers the characteristics of the aver-
age arithmetic value of the concentration feature as well as the variation of organ-
ization sizes. This is confirmed by the following equality:

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

38h I t:—1(1+V2),

where n-number of organizations;
v-coefficient of variation for feature.

In analyzing concentration it is advisable to calculate the average indicators not
for one but rather for several concentration features simultaneously and a multi-
dimensional average should be employed as the general indicator.’ These indicators
make it possible to judge not only the level but also the qualitative features of
concentration. Table Ix.5 as an example gives the average sizes of construction
organizations according to a series of features and their growth rates in Soviet
construction.’ The increased concentration level of the construction volume has
occurred as a result of a concentration of the means of labor and a reduced level
of manpower concentration. This has been caused by the growth of worker labor pro-

ductivity as a consequence of increasing the amount of equipment available per
worker.

Table IX.5

  
   

 
  
    

Average per construction
organization

1965 1975

Growth rate,
2

   

  

Volume of construction-installation work

over year in 1,000 rubles of estimated cost 101.7
Average listed number of employees 76.7
Value of fixed productive capital at year's

end, 1,000 rubles 151.2

It is also possible to describe the concentration level by a graphic method (by a
Lorenz curve). Its essence consists in constructing a curve on the basis of the
two-dimensional distribution of variants for the ranked, cumulative series of indi-
cators, that is: the share of the number of organizations and the proportional
amount of the volume of their work. Here along the abscissa axis the first indi-
cator is plotted off while the second indicator is plotted on the ordinate axis.

In the event that the acrumulated share of the number of organizations and their
proportional amount by the volume or work are equal, that is. there is 10 percent
of the volume of work for 10 percent of the number of organizations, 20 percent of
the volume of work, respectively, for 20 percent of the organizations and so forth.
then the curve on the graph coincides with the diagonal of the square. The higher
the level of concentration the more convex the curve will be.

2See: 0. S. Kil'dishev and Yu. I. Abolentaev. "Hnogomernyye gruppirovki" [Multi-
dimensional Groupings], Moscow, Statistika, 1978.

aCalculated from the data of the statistical annual "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR”
[The USSR National Economy in 1975].

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
o v“ we a as una- L-va. v: 1a..

Increased concentration of construction is a factor for increasing its efficiency.
In a statistical study of this process, an important place is held by the grouping
method which is of independent importance also as a basis for employing the methods
of regression correlation analysis. It is advisable to use the size of the con-
struction organisations in terms of the production volume as well as in terms of
the amount of the resources of the means of production and labor as the grouping
features.

57. A Statistical Study of the Economic Effectiveness of Technical Progress

In the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress. great attention was given to scientific
and technical progress and to its role in raising production efficiency. For pre-
cisely this reason a study of the economic advisability of measures to be carried
out in construction practices in the area of new equipment is an important task of
technical progress statistics.

The effect from employing new equipment is a diverse one. In construction this is
expressed by indicators describing the increased amount of work carried out (pro-
duction tapacity), the savings of live labor and materials, a reduction in operat-
ing expenditures and generally the expenditures on the work to be performed, an
improvement in the quality of work, working conditions and so forth. The economic
effect from technical progress is established from one or several of the listed in-
dicators as well as from the general indicator. Uniform methodological principles
for .alculating these indicators have been established in the "Procedure for De-
termining the Economic Effectiveness of Employing New Equipment, Inventions and
Rationalization Proposals in the National Economy" (1977).

In this procedure the advisability of employing new equipment is established on the
basis of an economic effect calculated per annual production volume. The first year
after completing the planned time for starting up the new equipment is used as the
calculation base. The economic effect is established by comparing production re-

sults before and after the introduction of the new equipment. Let us examine the
indicators which characterize the individual aspects of the economic effect.

In studying the effect from the introduction of new equipment, it is frequently
necessary to establish the degree of the increased productivity of the new equip-
ment in comparison with the old operating equipment and determine the influence of
the growth of the new equipment's productivity on the increased amount of work car-
ried out by it. In the first instance an index for the productivity of new equip-
ment is calculated, that is, for several types of construction machines performing
the same job, using the formula

[=1—

29:,-
2500’].

and for one machine:
(=‘UIE‘UQ.

where rl--the average listed number of the given type of new machines;
v0 and vl--the productivity of one average listed old and new machine over the
period.

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the second instance the influence of the increased productivity of new equipment
in comparison with the old on increasing the amount of work carried out is defined
as the difference between the numerator and denominator of the corresponding index,

that is, by the formulas: for several types of machines Av - £v1r1- var], and for
one type of machine Avi - r;(v1-vo).

Table IX.6

Indicators

 

Capital investments for the purchase of machines, rubles 36,600
Annual output of machines (calculated for effective area), m2 16,200
Average listed number of machines over year 18
Average listed number of workers operating machines over year 90
Expenditures on materials handling work per m2 of effective area,

rubles 6.1

From the data of the example given in Table Ix.6, the annual productivity of a new

crane in comparison with the old one was: iéi%99-:l£3%29 I 900:620 - 1.652, or

145.22, that is, it increased by 45.22. As a consequence of this the new cranes
carried out an additional work volume of 5,040 m2 of effective area, l8(900-—620).

In utilizing the data on the change in machinery productivity, it is possible to de-

termine the influence of this factor on the savings of capital investments using the

formula are - (KOI-Knmn,

where K0, Kn--proportional capital investments per unit of annual work volume before
and after introduction of new equipment;

Qn-the amount of work in calculated year of introducing new equipment.

In the example the savings of capital investments calculated per tower crane will be:

26 800. _36 600 . _
axe [sz536 1,452 Iifiﬁﬁ] 16,200 5,965.6 rubles.

The increased productivity of live labor or its savings as a consequence of employ-
ing the new equipment is also determined by the index method. Here in the calcula-
tions it is advisable to proceed from a formula of the labor productivity index cal-
culated in terms of the actual labor intensiveness levels, that is,

_ Vl‘v
,_ VI’I '

where to and t1--actual levels of labor intensiveness for a unit of the given type

of performed work, respectively, before and after the use of new
equipment.

191

FOR(MﬂﬂC1AL.USl20NLY
I'UK Ufl‘lt IAL USE ONLY

The savings of live labor is obtained as the difference in the numerator and denomin-
ator of this index, that is, At - quto-qut1. If the new equipment is employed
only in one type of work, then the index is i - to:t1, while the absolute amount is
found using the formula Ac, - q1(to- t1). In finding the number of workers released
as a result of employing the new equipment, one proceeds from the labor intensive-
ness of the work expressed in “average annual employees." From the data of the pre-
vious example, the labor productivity index for the new tower cranes in comparison

with the old ones was: c0:c1 - 120280 : 169300 - o.oo71:o.ooss - 1.290, or 129.02.
’ ’

 

 

Consequently, as a consequence of introducing the new cranes worker labor productiv-
ity rose by 29.0 percent and 26 workers were let go, that is, 16,200(0;007l-0.0055L

In practice the number of released workers is determined by comparing the average
number of workers in maintaining basic output (wo) with the average number of workers
ers during the period of employing the new equipment (0), that is, according to the
formula

A ql _
c Iw—o- CI.
or frcm the data of the example:
A ﬂ—-90 - 26 workers.

C ' (14,880:106)

The relative savings from reducing expenditures on construction product as a result

of introducing new equipment can be determined proceeding from the following cost
index:

l= Egl’l
201:0.

where q‘--the volume of work during the period of employing the new equipment;
20, zl--expenditures (depending upon the use of new equipment) in cost terms per
unit of work before and after the application of new equipment.

The total savings of expenditures is determined as the difference between the numer-
ator and denominator of the index, that is, according to the formula A; - quzl-
ﬁqlzo. If the new equipment is employed for one type of work, then all the calcula-
tions are simplified and the index is determined as i - 21:20, and the savings ac-
cording to the formula A; - ql(zl-zo). From the data in the example. as a result
of employing the new tower cranes. the cost of materials handling work calculated

per m2 of effective area was reduced by 6.81 [lOO'-&¢lo 100] and this is 6,680

4.6
rubles of savings a year, 16,200(é.5-b.l).

The economic effectiveness of new equipment, in contrast to its effect, is charac-
terized by indicators which express the ratio of the basic result (effect) achieved
with the aid of the new equipment to the expenditures used to acquire the new equip-
ment. The basic indicators here are the capital investment repayment time (for the

full and additional investments) and the proportional capital investments (see 52 of
Chapter IV).

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The repayment time of the additional capital investments into the new equipment is
determined by the formula:

where Rad--additional capital investments for the introduction of new equipment;
Ap--the increase in profit as a consequence of introducing the new equipment.

This describes the time (number of years) over which the additional capital expendi-
tures on new equipment are fully repaid. In instances when the profit data cannot

be obtained, one proceeds from the cost of the work and the total operating expendi-
tures related to the use of the new and old equipment.

The indicator which describes the proportional capital expenditures (the capital in
tensiveness of the new equipment) is defined as the quotient from the dividing of
capital expenditures on the new equipment by its power or by the annual volume of
work carried out with its aid. In the example the capital invensiveness of a unit
of annual work volume, respectively, equals 26,800:l4,800 - 1.8 ruble for the old

crane and 36.400:16,200 - 2.25 rubles for the new one, that is, it increased by
1.2-fold.

The annual economic effect of new equipment is a general indicator and describes the
total savings of all production resources (live labor. materials and capital invest-
ments) which the national economy obtains. This is determined by comparing the

adjusted expenditures (see 52 of Chapter IV) for the base and new equipment, that
is. according to the formula:

2 ' [(co+EnKO)'(cn+EnKn)]Qn o

where En-the normed coefficient for capital investment effectiveness equal to 0.15;
Co, Cn--the cost of a unit of work before and after the use of the new equipment.

The annual economic effect from the use of one new tower crane in housing con-
struction equals: 2 - (4.4-+1.80-0.15)- (4.1+-2.25-0.lS)-16,200 - 3,766 rubles.

The initial data for calculating the indicators for the effectiveness of capital

expenditures on new equipment can be obtained only as a result of a special statis-

tical survey or directly from the accounting documents of a contracting organiza-
tion.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR Ul’l‘l‘JﬂL U§L UNI-l

CHAPTER X: STATISTICS 0? CONSTRUCTION PRODUCT COSTS

51. The Task: of a Statistical Study of Construction Product Costs

work. For this rea.on the cost level is validly considered to be a synthetic indi-

construction organization. A reduction in costs as a result of saving expenditures
on production is the main source of socialist accumulation. This ensures a reduc-
tion in the ex-factory prices for the products of all the national econosic sectors
and thereby helps to raise the material and cultural level of the workers.

penditures of previous labor which has been transferred to the product and a portion
of the expenditures of live labor operating in the form of wages. In construction
these are the expenditures on a certain volume and composition of construction-

At present the quota to reduce the costs of construction and installation work is
not set for all the contracting organizations as an evaluation indicator. However,

this circumstance does not reduce the importance of the indicator for lowering work
costs. The cost indicators are of great significance in working out the profit

The calculating of expenditures and the coating of construction product are a func-
tion for bookkeeping of construction organizations. Among the tasks of cost statia~
ties are: a description of the fulfillment of the plan to reduce costs; a study of

cost dynamics; a study of the cost structure of construction product; an analysis

of the influence of factors and individual types of expenditures on the dynamics of
actual costs and their deviation from planned costs.

194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

52. Types of Construction Product Costs

In accord with the aims and tasks of planning and construction, in the actual work
of the construction organizations a distinction is made between the following
types of costs: estimated, planned and actual. The obtaining of a numerical de-
scription for each of these cost types involves the estimated cost of construc-
tion product and for the establishing of profit,also its planned cost.

The estimated cost of construction and installation work is the normed value of the
work determined by the total expenditures on the work and planned accumulation (see
Chapter V, 56). In studying costs. this category usually is used as the basis of
comparison. Planned or otherwise-called contractual cost of construction and in-
staiiation work is expressed by a monetary amount (price) paid by the client for the
performed work. This is based on the estimated cost of the work and it differs from
the latter by the amount of expenditures, compensation and benefits to recover the
expenditures paid above the estimated cost of the performed work, for example, addi-
tional payments for work in remote areas, the use of the piece-bonus wage system,
surpayments for the mobile nature of work and others. The term "planned cost“ for
this reason does not correspond completely accurately to its content and it would

be more accurate to speak about contractual costs. The financial payments by the
contracting organizations with the clients are carried out according to the contrac—
tual cost and the profit of construction organizations is also determined by this.

Estimated costs characterize the total normed expenditures on construction and in-
stallation work. Its amount can be obtained either by adding up the direct expendi-
tures and overhead or by subtracting the total planned accumulation from the esti-
mated cost of the work. This is 6 percent of the estimated cost or 5.66 percent of
the estimated value of the work.

Planned costs characterize the expenditures on producing a construction product
considering the quotas to reduce their cost. In contrast to industry, planned
product costs in construction are determined indirectly, that is, proceeding from
the estimated or planned value of the work. In the first instance the planned costs
of the work are obtained by subtracting planned accumulation and the total savings
planned for the reduction in production outlays from the estimated cost and by add-
ing the total compensation above the estimated cost. In the second instance, only
the planned accumulation and the planned savings of expenditures are subtracted from
the planned cost of the work. The planned saving is determined on the basis of
quotas for reducing work costs as set in percent in relation to the estimated cost
of the work. Planned costs are important as a major criterion for evaluating the
work of a contracting organization in checking plan fulfillment for reducing product
costs.

The actual costs of construction and installation work are the total outlays made
by the construction organization to carry out the work under the existing produc-
tion conditions. These are determined from the bookkeeping data. Let us give an
example for calculating the value and costs of work related to erecting a cowbarn
building by a trust during a quarter:

195

FOI.0531CIALIJSE(NVLV
a-vn vs'rst-ana. Us," 0"...

Dlrccl expenditures on construction work according to the YeRYeR,

thousand rubles 485
Overhead in percent of the total direct expenditures 12
Planned accumulation in percent of estimated costs 6.0
Quota for reducing costs in percent of estimat 1 cost 3.0
Compensation above estimated cost, thousand rubles 6.2

The estimated costs of constraction-installation work during the report quarter for
the building of a water tower is:

485-+48S-0.12 = 485-t58.2 - 543,200 rubles;

estimated cost of construction-installation work:

543.2‘+543.2-0.06 - 543.24-32.6 - 575,800 rubles;

planned cost of construction-installation work:

57S.8-+4.2 - 580,000 rubles;

planned costs of construetion-installation work proceeding from their estimated
cost:

575.8- 32.6- 575.8-0.03-+4.2 - 530,130 rubles;

the same, proceeding from the planned coat of the work:

580-32.6-S75.8-0.03 - 530.130 rubles.

In accord with the costing objects used in the accounting, that is, those product
types the costs of which are calculated, in planning and statistics the estimated.
planned and actual coats are determined for the produced and commodity construction
product, for the completed construction project. work stage or other stages of com—
pleteness for the construction product. However, in Construction as a consequence'
of the existing accounting of expenditures, the costs of a unit (capacity or power)
of a completed project are extremely rarely figured.

Under the new conditions of construction economic incentives, expenditure planning
and accounting have been maintained for the entire volume of the work performed in

a report period, chiefly for the purposes of ensuring operational control over the
cost level during the current period. This is understandable since. as a conse-
quence of the great length of the production cycle in construction, a contracting
organization cannot, for example. during a month begin and end a work stage, all the
more build the project as a whole. The costs of the work carried out in the report
period are obtained as the total of the fixed expenditures during this period in

the accounting documents. This indicator is given in the "Report on the Costs of
Construction and Installation Work" in Form No 2-s.

In the statistical reporting there is no direct information on the cost of commodity
construction product, but this indicator can be obtained by calculation. The ini-
tial data for calculating the costs of commodity construction product (Ccp) is the
total expenditures on the volume of work carried out in the report period (Ccnp),
the expenditures on incomplete construction at the beginning (Cup) and the end of
the report period (Cﬁp) as given in the reporting in Form No Z-ks. The costs of
commodity construction product are determined by the balance method using the scheme:
C8p+cmp - Cng-D-Cf1 . Hence the cost of the comodity product: Cap - Cc. 44:3“-
Cﬁp - ccmp- (Cnp-cnp) - Camp-U”. In other words. the cost of the com ity con-
struction product over the report period equals the difference in the costs of the
work performed over the given period and the change in the balance of expenditures
for incomplete construction (Unp). Let us examine an examplc.

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table X.1

  
 

Actual Costs, thousand rubles

   

Indicators

     
 

Incomplete construction at start of month

Volume of construetion-installation work carried out
over month

Incomplete construction at end of month

320
153

Let us assume that the following data have been given on actual expenditures for
construction-installs:ion work at a construction administration for 2 months of the
third quarter (Table x.1). The costs of the commodity construction product (work
turned over to the clients) will be in July: 312->(134-148) - 312-(-14) - 326,000
rubles, and in August 320-—(lS3-135) - 320-l9 - 301,000 rubles.

53. A Statistical Study of the Fulfillment of Quotas for Reducing Costs

Using the methodology adopted in the plans of construction organizations. the prod-
uct cost level is set in relation to the estimated cost in the form of expenditures
per ruble of estimated cost of construction-installation work, that is:

fipgfpg _ egpenditures under plan for amount of work in given period1 ,
tqup estimated cost of amount of work for given period according to plan

where ng-the volume of construction-installation work according to the plan in the
report period;
sz--p1anned cost of a unit of work;
p--estimated prices.

Since planned costs are determined in current prices and production conditions, the
planned expenditure level per ruble bf estimated cost of the work includes the com-
pensation above the estimated cost. If the compensation above the estimated cost

(K) is subtracted from the planned costs. than we will obtain the planned level of

expenditures which depend solely upon the activities of the given organization,
that is,

£2 E: !-K
T-qptp .

The quota set in the plan of reducing costs is denigrated in percent of the esti-
mated cost of the volume of work. but can also be expressed for the given product

1The designating of the costs of the work by zqz and their value by tqp does not

correspond to the methodology for calculating these indicators in practice (see
52 of this Chapter) but this brings out the economic sense of these indicators.

197

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USB(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

volume of work. but can also be expressed for the given product volume by an abso-
lute amount. that is. in rubles. This quota is set by the contracting organization
in the plan for organizational-technical measures aimed at saving production out-
lays by raising labor productivity, by improving fixed capital utilization, by the
more rational expenditure of materials and so forth. In the statistical reporting,
the quota to reduce costs is not given but on its basis the planned work costs are
calculated and these are used for evaluating plan fulfillment to reduce costs. "hen
it is necessary to know the amount of the quota to reduce costs, it is possible to
use the data given in the reporting in Form No 2-s on the planned costs of the work
carried out and the compensation above the estimated cost. The setting of the quota
is based upon the method of calculating planned costs for the work performed (see
52 of this Chapter), according to which the latter is zqf'ipz . qup-Ae- Art-K,
where Ae--the savings in expenditures set by the quota to reduce costs;

Aa--planned accumulation.

Since the relative amount of the quota for reducing costs (Y) is ordinarily set in

percent of the estimated cost. we will divide all the components of the expression
by the estimated cost of the work and we will determine the sought indicator:

2q 2 100 sq p A A x
_flr_. _f_..__2___J_.+_ mo. hem
EQfP zqu tarp ZQfP tarp

 

A 100 Eq 2 -K A 100
. . 100- [—f'LIXOO-L .
qup tqrp 2st?

Thus, the percent of reducing costs according to the plan equals the difference of
100 percent (the estimated cost level) and the planned level of expenditures which
depend upon the operations of the contracting organization and the planned accumula-
tion rate from the estimated cost which equals 5.66 percent. Let us give an exam-
ple. Let us assume that from Form No 2-3 we know the following data on the con-
struction work carried out by a trust in June and the expenditures for the work
(thousand rubies):

Estimated cost of performed work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82$
Planned cost of performed work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 792
Actual cost of performed work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 776
Compensation and benefits above estimated cost . . . . . . . . 50

According to the plan, the expenditure level per ruble of estimated cost of construc-

tion work over the report period will be: considering compensation above the esti-

mated cost (the full level) ggé ' 0.96 rubles. that is there are 96 kopecks of ex-

penditures according to the plan per ruble of estimated cost of the work; without

lggééég - 0.9 rubles,

that is, 90 rubles of expenditures per ruble of estimated cost of the work. The
quota to reduce the cost of the work in the trust will be:

compensation above the estimated cost (the incomplete level)

 

.. - .793. - -Eﬂ . - _ 792'50. . - .
v 100 e 100 5.66 825 100 5.66 825 100 100 5.66-90 4.34:.

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIH!(”W1(1AL USE1NVLY

By analogy with the planned indicator for a general relative description of expendi-
tures for construction product. the actual expenditure level psr rubls of the esti-
mated cost of the work carried out over the report period is calculated, that is:

Iquf _actual cost of work carried out in report period
qup estimated cost of work carried out in report period

 

According to the data of our example, the full actual costs per ruble of estimated

cost (the cost level) of construction work (considering compensation) are

%%% - 0.9a ruble. and not counting compensation the cost level (incomplete) reflect-

ing the influenze of just the factors depending upon the contracting organization

equals 0.88 ruble Zlgiéég .

The actual and planned expenditure levels per ruble of estimated cost of the work
are intercomparable and their ratio characterizes the degree of fulfilling the plan
to reduce costs. In statistical practice another method of calculating the indi-
cator is also employed and this is the index for the deviation of actual costs from
raft f
XQprl
of the construction-instsllation work carried out in the report period to its plan-

 

the planned, using the formula I - . This is the ratio of the actual costs

ned cost. In our example, the index for the deviation of actual costs from the plan

equals: %%%° 100- 981, that is. the actual cost declined by 2 percent in compari-

son with the plsn and this produced a savings of 16,000 rubles.

1n the designated index, the planned costs of the actually performed work, as a con-
sequence of the methodology adopted to determine them, reflects the influence of the
planned composition of construction-installation work. and, consequently, the index
for the deviation of actual work costs from the planned will also consider the in-
fluence of changes in the composition of the work which distorts its actual amount.

is. Studying the Dynamics of Construction Product Costs

One of the tasks in a statistical study of the results of construction is to describe
the change in the product cost level over a year and over a number of years, that is,
its dynamics. This problem can be solved relatively simply in instances when it is
a question of the cost dynamics of fixed capital projects which are complete and

have the same purpose and when their size or capacity can be measured by the sane
physical units. For example, in housing construction it is possible to compare the

cost of a n2 of housing or effective area. in the construction of power plants the
actual expenditures can be compared over time for the various types of plants per
1. 100, 1,000 and so forth kilowatts of turbine capacity. The product cost index
for these instances can be calculated by the formula:

“ﬁg:-

199

FIN!(NHW(1AL.USE!MNLY
run Urn-nuns. use URL!

where q.--the power. ares. length or capacity of the completed project in the re-
port period;
20, zl--the costs of a unit of power, area. length or capacity for a completed
project, respectively, in the base and report periods.

The cost index for construction-installation work can be calculated relatively
easily using the above-given formula if the conditions for the comparability of
construction product are not violated. For example. it is not always possible to
establish the base costs of work carried out in the report period, for precisely
such work may not have existed from the viewpoint of its composition in the base
period and this more often happens in practice.

The necessity of calculating the cost dynamics indicator, on the one hand, and the
limited use of the aggregate formula for the index. on the other. have led to a
measuring of product cost dynamics in construction on a basis of the expenditure

level per ruble of the estimated cost of the completed work. The formula for the
so-called index of expenditures per ruble of estimated cost of the work has the

following form:
_ 21-?l—KI . 2: urn-Kn
I on.» ' ’21»! '

where q1 and qo--the volume of construction-installstion work, respectively, in the
report and base period;
2, and z°--the costs of a unit of work, respectively, in the report and base
period;
p--the estimated prices adopted in the report period.

In this index, the volume of construction-installation work for the report and base
periods should be set in uniform estimated prices. Otherwise the comparability of
the cost level will be disrupted and the index will be influenced by changes in the
estimated prices in addition to all the other factors.

In order to gain a notion of the cost dynamics of work as a consequence of the influ-
ence of only those factors which depend upon the production activities of a con-
struction organization, in calculating the index it is essential first to exclude
from the actual costs of the report and base periods those expenditures covered
through compensation and benefits above the estimated cost (K). Let us give an
example. Let us assume that from Form No 2-3 the following data are known on the
work carried out by the trust and the expenditures made on it (thousand rubles).

Previous Report

Year Year

Cost of executed construction-installation work in
comparable estimated prices 7.560 9,072
Actual cost of performed construetion-installation work 6,955 8,256
Compensation and benefits above estimated cost 152 252

The index for the expenditures per ruble of estimated cost considering all the fac-
tors is:

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8 256 6 955
o - ' I

§f575 . 7f335 0.91.0.92 0.989, or 98.92.

The index for expenditures per ruble of estimated cost as a consequence of the in-

fluence of factors depending upon the organization is:

8 256-252 6 955-152
-‘§:57§- : -‘7T§§6- - 0.88:0.90 - 0.98, or 981.

The algebraic difference in the levels of the compared periods describes in abso-
lute terms the change in the actual expenditures per corresponding unit of the esti—
mated work cost. In our example, this amount for the first instance is l kopeck of
savings in expenditures per ruble of the estimated cost of the work, and for the
second, respectively. two kopecks. The total savings (overexpenditure) for the en-
tire volume of the work performed is determined by the product of the amount of the
savings (overexpenditure) in expenditures per ruble of the estimated cost of the
work and the amount of work carried out in the report period. In the example, the
overall savings of expenditures, as a consequence of the influence of just the fac-
tors which depend upon the contracting organization. will be 0.02'9.072,000 -
181,440 rubles. The designated method for calculating the expenditure index per
ruble of estimated cost can also be employed for establishing quotes to reduce costs
in the annual and long-range plans. Here. instead of the actual expenditure level
in the report period, one must take the planned expenditure level per ruble of esti-
mated cost of the planned volume of work.

The expenditure index per ruble of estimated cost of the work is among the so-called
indexes of variable composition and describes not only the change in costs but also
the influence of a change in the proportional amount of different types of
construction-installation work having a differing expenditure level. One can be
convinced of this from the following example. Let us assume that for a construc-
tion administration data are known on expenditures for construction and installation
work during 2 years (Table X.2). In the example the expenditures per ruble of the
estimated cost of the individual types of work in the report year remained on the
level of the previous one while for all work as a whole the index showed a decline in
in expenditures (98.9 percent). This happened as a consequence of the increased

share of work for major overhauls which had a lower expenditure level per ruble of
estimated cost. -

It is possible to eliminate the influence from a change in the composition of the
work on the expenditure index per ruble of estimated cost if one calculates a fixed
' ‘10P ]

QoP
of the base period according to the estimated cost in their total volume serve as

the weights for the average expenditure levels, that is:

 

composition index in which the shares of the individual types of work dqo -

_ 23.. . EMop__}s.do.
If/C w ' 2M " xm. '

 

where 31-3: --expenditures per ruble of the estimated cost of each type of work.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table x.2

 
   
 
 

nun pat-m

thtpouvs'nuuc pn-
60m

1 yonumuasuh pc-
Ion

     
         

2640 2376
”Btu-o

Key: a--Types of work; b--Volume of work in 1977 in thousand rubles
according to; c-Estimated cost; d--Actual cost; e--Expendi-
tures per ruble of estimated cost of work, rubles; f-Volume
of work in 1978, thousand rubles, according to; g-Expenditure
index per ruble of estimated cost, 1; h-Construction work;
i-—Hajor overhauls; j-Total

Since in the example the expenditures per ruble of estimated cost have not changed
for the type of work, the fixed-composition expenditure index per ruble of estimated
cost will equal one. The index for the influence of structural shifts in accord
with the adopted weighting system can be determined by the formula:

0 9'» % + o 9 ’6”
v . .. . '6'—
Istlt‘ ' $34. that is. Is“. - mgr-0-0.989. or 98.92.
" 3575 ’ 53'.“

Consequently. the change in expenditures per ruble of estimated cost has been con-
pietely caused by structural shifts in the composition of the cost of the work per-
formed. including the influence of covariation. that is, the joint interrelated in-
fluence of both factors.

55. A Study of the Composition of Expenditures on Construction Products

A study of the composition of expenditures is of importance in describing costs and
elucidating reserves for further reducing them. In construction statistics, expend-
iture groupings are primarily employed for two areas: for economic elements and for
the costing items of the expenditures. The essence of studying product costs in
terms of economic elements consists in determining the expenditures of live and pre-
vious labor and the ratios between them. This is essential for calculating the sec-
tor's net product and national income for the country as a whole as well as for es-
tablishing the amounts of current expenditures, for example, the wage fund and so
forth.

The composition of expenditures on construction products includes the following eco—
nomic elements: Basic materials. auxiliary materials, fuel and electric power,

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

amortization, wages and deductions for social security and other monetary expendi-
tures. However, in the bookkeeping offices of construction organizations, expendi-
tures are not accounted for by the economic elements and this information is not
given in the reporting. Data on the structure of expenditures of live and embodied
labor in construction are obtained by statistics only from materials of one-shot sam—
pling surveys. The last sampling survey for expenditures on production in construc~
tion was conducted in 1959. Starting in 1967, the statistical reporting (Form No
2-a) has given information on wages with deductions for social security and this is
essential for determining construction net product.

The grouping of expenditures by coating items is aimed at establishing the place of
making the expenditures, their purpose and type. For this reason a majority of
costing items has a comprehensive nature, bringing together expenditures related to
the consumption of live and previous labor. For example, the item "Materials,
Structural Elements and Pieces" includes the expenditures on the wages of store-
keepers, loaders and so forth. amortization deductions and other expenditures. The
grouping of the expenditures by costing items is reflected in the accounting of con-
struction organizations and in the statistical reporting in Form No 2-e. All ex-
penditures in compiling the estimates and in accounting are divided into two major
groups: direct expenditures and overhead.2 The direct expenditures include those
directly related to carrying out the work and provided for in the uniform rates for
each type of work. These include the following costing items: 1) expenditures on
materials, pieces and structural elements including expenditures f.o.b. the site
warehouse for basic and auxiliary materials as well as fuel, electric power, steam,
water and so forth expended on construction-installstion work; 2) basic wages of
workers which include all types of wages to workers engaged in building the projects
and additional payments related to time worked; 3) expenditures on the operation of
construction machines and mechanisms including expenditures on the upkeep, opera-
tion and maintenance of the machines; 4) other direct expenditures.

into the following integrated items: 1) administrative and managerial expenses
consisting of the expenditures for the support of personnel employed in managing
and servicing production; 2) expenditures on organizing and carrying out work re-
lated to the recruitment of workers, the support of line personnel and other expend-
itures not accounted for in the uniform estimate rates; 3) expenditures on serving
workers related to labor safety and safety equipment, cultural and domestic serv-
ices for the employees of the organizations and so forth; 4) unproductive expendi-
tures caused by violations of normal production conditions by the construction or-
ganizations, for exasple, stoppages of workers and equipment and other violations

“—

2The division adopted in construction for expenditures on direct expenses and over-
head contradicts the concepts of the same name adopted in accounting practices in
enterprises of other national economic sectors and in use there. Generally -c-
cepted is the dividing of expenditures by their role in production into basic ex-
penditures and overhead and in terms of the method of their distribution into
direct and indirect expenditures. But in construction accounting one mixed group-
ing has been made up from the two expenditure groupings.

203

FilliﬂﬂﬂClAl.lﬁﬂi(HVLY
I'UK UPHLIAL USE ONLY

causing additional expenditures, fines, penalties, forfeits and so forth. This
item is not provided for in the estimate and plan but, as a rule, is employed in
the actual expenditures. A detailed study of this item is of importance for eluci-
dating individual shortcomings in the work of the organization.

In analyzing the results of operations by a construction organization, it becomes
important to compare the actual structure in the report period with the planned
(estimated) or actual cost structure of work in previous years. Thus, the expendi-
ture structure over the period from 191.0 through 1978 has undergone substantial
changes. The proportional amount of expenditures on materials has risen from 108.9
to 53.8 percent. while for basic wages it has declined from 20.9 to 16.1 percent

and this indicator has increased by more than 4-fold for expenditures on operating
machines.

$6. Studying the Dynamics and Fulfillment of the Work Costs Plan by Expenditure
Items

A study of the costs of construction work is not limited to an overall estimate of
fulfilling the quota for reducing costs or for their change over time. An eluci-
dation of the influence of factors on the cost level and its deviation from the
corresponding base level comprise a task for statistical economics analysis of con-
struction product costs. This problem is solved by various ways. in particular, on
the basis of calculating the absolute and relative amounts (subindexes) in the de-
viations of the actual expenditures from the planned or the estimated in terms of
the expenditure items, that is:

Az - tqiz‘l 43:12“ or i - “1‘“qusz

where )2 z' and liq 2' «correspondingly, the actual and planned expenditures for
qI l 1 pl

the individual items on the actually performed amount of
work.

The relative indicator showing the influence of changes for the individual expendi-
ture items on the overall cost deviation is calculated as the ratio of the savings
(m't'rCchndlturc) for each item to the planned costs of the work (or to the corres-
ponding level of estimated costs), that is:

l I
iqm hnznz_ AZ.

2:4.sz rqnpz

 

L5:

uhcl'u 'Ilq‘zpl'uplnnncd (estimated) costs of work actually carried out in report
period.

The algebraic total of these relative indicators in percent for all the coating
items equals the total percentage of the deviation in costs from the adopted base
(the planned or estimated costs of the work), that is:

 

 

 

Tl Az . 100 Azn100 Ebzn
. _ = + + - 100.
7 7-‘1 lzpl 5‘1 lzpl 3‘1 xzpl

2010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The expressipn tAzn describes tut total savings (overexpenditure) in expenditures
for all the costing items in comparison with the planned costs while its ratio

(EAzn:2q1z g)100 shows the above-planned reduction (rise) in the cost of the work
performed n percent. '

The above-examined subiudexes mathematically can be linked with the overall cost in-
dex in defining this as the arithmetic average of the subindexes weighted by the
fractions of the expenditures for the items, that is:

I - Zidz.

tqzaz

 

where dz - --the portion of expenditures for the individual items in the

tqlng total expenditures according to the plan.

Table X.3

 
 
     
   

     

  

Percent of
deviation
of actual

Savings
over-
expenditure

   
  
  
       
  

  
 
  
 

Costs of

   

  
 

       

performed work,Subindex "+" cost from
1.000 rubles (col.2:col.l) (col.2-col.l),planned
E""°“"““’° m” 1.000 rubles co1.l.x1oo
total of
-m

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Materials

Basic wages of workers -0.2
Expenditures on operating

of machines +0.6
Other direct expenditures -0.6

Overhead

The breaking down of the overall change in costs into its components makes it pos-
sible not only to disclose the reasons for deviations but also to bring out their
importance for the given organization and to seek the main area for reducing work
costs. The statistical reporting of Form No 2-s contains the initial data for such
an analysis in terms of the volume of contracting work. In Table X.3, from the
example of reporting data of Form No 2-9 on expenditures for the work carried out by

a trust during the year. the above-examined indicators have been calculated (see
cols. 3, 4 and 5).

From a comparison of the subindexes it is possible to conclude that in the trust the
greatest reduction rate in expenditures in comparison with the plan has been achieved
for other expenditures (92 percent): although the absolute savings for this expendi-
ture item is less than for the others. However, from the viewpoint of the absolute
Hm (DH-K IAI. USE ONLY

amount of savings (over-expenditure) for the individual items, expenditures on ma-
terials have had the greatest influence on the overall percentage of cost reduction
in comparison with the plan.

The total amount of the deviation of actual costs from the planned is caused not only
by the rate of decline in expenditures for the items but also by their proportional
amount in the total expenditures. The role of these factors for each item can be
seen from a calculation of the components in the overall arithmetic cost index,

 

 

6 2:30 2 520 600 600 2 040
. _:.__. _n_ .2...— .
Zidz 97.7 12,000+99'112.000+ 112.0 12,000+92 12,000+95'312.000 50.8+20.8+

+ S.6+4.6+16.2 - 98.0. Each component of the overall index describes in a way the

contribution of the corresponding factor to the overall percentage of deviation in
actual costs from the planned.

The above-examined methodology for studying the influence of a saving (overexpendi-
ture) for the expenditure iteas on the overall indicator for the change in costs is
also applicable for a comparison with planned or estimated costs but not over time.
In the latter instance the actual expenditures on the work carried out in the re-
port period cannot be directly compared with an analogous indicator in the base
period, since they have been established for a varying volume of construction prod-
uct. In order to eliminate the influence of the amount of work on the change in ex-
penditures over time, it is essential to calculate the deviations of actual costs
on a basis of comparing the expenditure levels per ruble of estimated work cost.
Here the absolute changes in expenditures over time for the costing items will de-
scribe the expenditures nor for all the produced construction product but rather as
an average per ruble of its estimated cost. It is possible to determine the change
in expenditures for the entire amount of work carried out due to the influence of
changes in each item of expenditures per ruble of the estimated cost of the work by
employing the formula which derives from the corresponding cost index, namely
Qp1(8') ‘35).

where Qpiluthe estimated cost of the work carried out in the report period,

s‘l. so--expenditures for the given item per ruble of the estimated cost of the
work carried out in the report and base periods.

The total deviations for all the items equal the total change in expenditures due to
a change in the expenditure level per ruble of estimated cost of the work, that is,
(‘7. - liQN(s'l-s'o).

57. Methods of Analyzing the Influence of Individual Factors on Construction
Product Costs

Ilnder construction conditions not all the expenditure items and, consequently, the
factors influencing them play the same role in reducing costs. From the viewpoint
of the scale of expenditures of the greatest importance in their saving are basi-
cally three expenditure items: materials, wages and overhead. A study of the in-
flucnre nf the factors on the change in expenditures is most often made by the index
method, by the grouping of expenditures for various features as well as by the
methods of regression correlation analysis.

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A change in expenditures for the material elements of working capital is caused not
only by a change in the amount of work but also by the influence of numerous fac-

tors related to the purchasing and procurement conditions for building materials,
their storage, transporting, utilization as well as to a change in the prices and
rates for transporting them. The influence of all these factors for analysis pur-
poses can be viewed in a grouped form and namely as the change in the amount of work
and expenditures on materials as a consequence of a change in the quantity of materi-
als per unit of construction product, that is, the proportional consumption of ma-
terials (m) and the change in expenditures per unit of each type of material (pi).
Then a numerical description of the influence of these consolidated factors in terms
of the entire volume of work (q) can be represented by the following system of in-
dexes:

2 VIWIP; )3 inﬂoP’ 2 “MP3. 2 WWW;

2‘. «won; 2‘. mm}, ' 2 qua-op, ' 2: mm. ’

 

In this system the overall index of expenditures for materials reflects the joint
influence of the three above-listed factors. The first factor index characterizes
the change in expenditures under the impact of a change in the amount of work, the
second under the influence of changes in proportional material expenditures and the
third under the influence of changes in expenditures per unit of each type of
material.

If in the analysis a comparison is made between the actual cost and the planned in
terms of the actual amount of work, then the first factor index will equal one while
the overall expenditure index for materials will reflect the influence of only two
factors: a change in the proportional material expenditures and the expenditures
per unit of each type of material. The result of the influence of each of the fac-
tors on the change in expenditures in absolute terms is obtained by subtracting the
denominator of the corresponding factor index from its numerator. The initial data
for calculating the above-examined indicators are to be found in the accounting doc-
uments of construction organizations.

Table X.‘

  
    
  
  
   

 

Proportional Planned-calculated tual cost
Name of material expenditure of price per unit of of a unit
and unit of material per material, rubles of material,

measurement unit of work rubles
volume

Types and volume of
work performed

    

    
 

     
     
      

   
       
     
 

Laying foundation, Concrete, m3 10.5
2.680 m3 Brick, thousand
pieces 30.0

 
  

Laying flooring
1.860 m2

   

Asphalt, kg
Linoleum, m2

    
 

Let us give an example. We will:assune that the following information is known on
the consumption of building materials in a trust for June (Table X.b). In this

207

FOR¢0FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
rUK UONLIAL UDI'. UNI—Y

example, as is accepted in practice, the planned-estimated prices have been adopted
as the expenditures per unit of each type of materials according to the plan. The
actual cost of a unit of material is obtained by dividing the actual expenditures

on acquiring and delivering the materials f.o.b. the construction site by the amount
of the given type of material consumped in the report period. Since in the example
the actual costs are compared with the planned for the amount of work carried out in
the report period, it is essential to determine the influence of only two factors:
the change in the proportional expenditurew of mat:rials and the change in material
coats. Thus, the overall expenditure index for materials is:

QGHHOJSJOJaoOJme)I-Inm(L0t3Ji+0.m-Ln)__32mu__
—'—2m1(0.8-II_+(MW-3‘2) + lawn—.075” 9-0.2-l'._2')_". .n‘l! “0'942- 0' “~21-

The total savings of actual expenditures on materials in comparison with the plan
were 2,005 rubles (32,526—34,529). The index for the influence of the change in pro-
portional expenditures (the "norm index") is:

MWNQMJIpmMnﬂ+lMHLm3ﬁ+0J8LH_3Hm_
“llitﬂHOJ-ll+0.m-32)+IMK)(I.0-;I.N+0.'-l.') ”3432(3‘0'989' °" 98°91!

     

that is, as a consequence of reducing proportional material expenditures in compari-
son with the standards, the savings equaled 379 rubles (34,150—34,529). The index
for the influence of the change in the costs of the consumed materials (the "price
index") is:

 
     

2fm(0.7ﬁ-m.5 + 0.m-m)+m'ml,04-.1.6 +o.ls.l_:n _::2524_
2mm, .- l-l-O. --)+ ( .04- .s+o. . .-) "WM—"'QSQ' °' 95'2“

 

that is, the savings of actual expenditures as a consequence of reducing the cost of
the consumed materials in comparison with that adopted in the plan were 1,626 rubles
(32,524-34,150). The combined influence of the factors equals: (-379)-f(-l,626) -
-2,005.

A further analysis of expenditures on materials should be carried out separately for
the factors relating to the formation of the proportional materials expenditures and
the cost of a unit of materials. Thus, in studying expenditures per unit of materi-
als one should establish the influence of changes in the wholesale prices of trans-
port expenditures for the delivery, loading and unloading of materials and the pro-
curement and warehousing expenses. The listed type of expenditures are shown in the
bookkeeping and the corresponding planning data are taken from the costings of the
planned-calculated prices which in terms of sense can be equated to the planned cost
of n unit of materials. Table X.5 gives an example of calculating the deviations in
actual expenditures from the planned outlays per ton of cement in rubles.

In knowing the total consumption of cement for the amount of work carried out, it is
easy to figure the amount of deviations for each type of expenditures and as a
whole. if, for example, during the report month 2,860 tons of cement were spent on
construction work, then the total overexpenditure of 6,290 rubles (2,860.1.5) con-
sists of the overexpenditure on the transporting of materials of 4,576 rubles
(2.860-l.6), on procurement-warehousing expenditures of 286 rubles (2,860-0.1) and

a saving of expenditures on loading and unloading work totaling 572 rubles (2,860 X
0.2).

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table XLS

      
  
 

Indicator

  
    
 

Procurement-
warehousing
expenses

Expenses on
loading and
unloading

     
 

      
 

 
    
    

wholesale
price

Transport
expenses

Planned-calculated

price (planned cost) 21.0 0.3
Actual costs 0.1
Deviation of actual

costs from planned -0.2

The change in expenditures for the wages of workers is influenced by diverse factors
among which an important place is held by the labor productivity of the workers, the
use of working tine, worker skills and so forth. These factors can be unified and
represented in the form of two consolidated ones: average output of employees and
their average wages. The theoretical basis for studying the influence of these fac-
tors using the index method is the relstionship of the wage expenditure level per
unit of the estimated cost of the work (u) and the proportional labor intensiveness
characterized by the amount inverse to the labor productivity level (t) and average
wages (I) per unit of expended labor, that is, u - tf. As a calculation unit for
the value of construction product it is possible to use 100,1.000 rubles and so

forth of estimated work cost. Let us give an exanple of calculating the indicators
for a trust (Table X.6).

Table X.6

  
   

 

Indicator Previous year

 

  

Expenditures on wages per 1,000 rubles of

estimated work cost. rubles 91.7
Proportional labor intensivenesa of 1.000

rubles of estimated cost of work (average

annual number of employees per 1,000

rubles of work 90.0
Average annual wages of one employee. rubles 101.9
Total expenditures per 1,000 rubles of esti-

nated cost of work, rubles 99.6

The total savings from reducing wage expenditures per 1,000 rubles of work cost is

set as an - ul-uo. In the exanple the trust has achieved a savings of 34.8 rubles

(385.2-—420). As a consequence of the 10 percent reduction in the labor intensive—
l

ness of the work or a 11.1 percent rise in labor productivity 100-6-§~100 , the

following savings has been obtained: A: - fo(t1-to) - 2.100-(0.18—0.2) - ~42
rubles. As a consequence of the change in average wages, the corresponding savings
(overexpenditure, is deternined as: Ag - (fl'fo)tl° In the example the trust has

209

HOR(MHWC1AI.USE(HQLY
I-‘OR Ul-‘HCIAL USE ONLY

permitted an overexpenditure of 7.2 rubles (2,140-2,lOO)-0.l8. The combined in-
fluence of the factors is: (-42)-+7.2 - -34.8 rubles.

From the calculated data it is possible to establish the influence of a change for
each factor on the total percentage in the deviation of expenditures per unit of work
cost. For this the total savings (overexpenditure) for each factor must be divided
by the base level of expenditures, in our example, by 962 rubles. The increase in
labor productivity led to a decline in the expenditure level per 1,000 rubles of

work cost by 6.62 g%§.1oo], the rise in average wages led to an increase in the

 

level by 0.82 (%%%'1°°J’ and as a whole to its reduction by 3.62 [-3258-100]. or

(-6.4)4-0.8 - -3.61. The total savings of wage expenditures for the entire amount
of work carried out in the report period can be determined as Z - AuQPl. If in the
example the amount of work carried out by the trust in the report year was 1.68 mil-
lion rubles, then the savings will be 58,500 rubles (l,680°3é.8).

In studying overhead the most effective grOuping method is the one employed together
with the absolute and relative indicators for the change in expenditures in the giv-
en item. Here it is advisable to differentiate the expenditures which depend upon
the volume of construetion—installation work and are therefore called variable and
those which do not depend upon the amount of work performed and termed conditionally
fixed expenditures. The variable overhead is in a direct dependence and not a pro-
portional one upon the amount of work to be carried out. In these expenditures are
the additional wages, deductions for social security. wear on production tools and
supplies and so forth. Among the conditionally fixed expenditures are the adminis-
trative and managerial expenses, the housing and utility costs. the wear on tempo-
rary nontitle structures, the support of guard and fire security and so forth.

As a rule, the greatest savings is achieved for this portion of overhead as its
amount remains almost constant over a certain time.

In checking the fulfillment of an overhead estimate it is essential to take into
account the level of plan fulfillment for the produced construction product (the
fulfilled amount of work) and correct the amouM of variable overhead for it. The
conditionally fixed portion of overhead remains unchanged. In an analysis of over-
head attention should be given to studying the aboslute and relative amounts of pro-
ductive expenditures and their composition.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER XI: A STATISTICAL STUDY OF FINANCIAL ACTIVITIES AT CONSTRUCTION
ORGANIZATIONS

51. The Tasks of Financial Activity Statistics

All production and economic activities in a construction organization are reflected
in its financial indicators. The financial status of any socialist enterprise is
characterized by the state of its assets in monetary terms, by the duration of their
circulation and by the financial result, that is, by the amount of obtained profit
or loss.

Each self-financing construction organization has been granted fixed and working
capital by the state. These assets must be efficiently used for carrying out the
production program. As a result of carrying out the production program and selling
the product, a construction organization should recover the expenditures made in
this and receive a profit above this. The conversion of the construction organiza-
tions to the new system of planning and economic incentive has increased the impor-
tance of the indicators for their financial results and the role of the efficient
use of fixed and working capital in construction.

In studying the financial activities of contracting organizations, along with book-
keeping, an important role has been assigned to statistics. In relying on the book-
keeping data, statistics carries out the following tasks: 1) it studies the volume
and structure of working capital in the construction organizations; 2) it describes
the efficient use of working capital; 3) it studies profit and profitability of con-
struction organizations; A) it analyzes the factors which determine the organiza-
tion's financial results.

52. A Study of the Volume and Composition of Working Capital

The working capital of construction organizations is a monetary expression of the
productive working capital and cash and disposable stocks needed to carry out the
production program. The amount of working capital for each construction organiza-
tion depends upon the production conditions existing at it and its economic activi-
ties. in particular, upon the volume and composition of the construction-
installation work carried out, the organization of supply, payment principles for
the products and so forth. The total amount of working capital in construction at
the end of 1978 was 72.838.000.000 rubles and this exceeds its amount at the begin-
ning of the Ninth Five-Year Plan by 3.8-fold.

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a van vs s axons. vos'. Vl‘h.

The total working capital of a construction organization is calculated as of a cer-
tain date, usually at the end of a report period. Under the actual conditions of
the organization's operation the amount of its working capital varies from one date
to another. For this reason, in determining its amount over a period. the average
balance of working capital is calculated (using the formula for the chronological
average or as the half-total of the balances at the start and end of the period).
Information on the amount of working capital at the end of a report period can be
found in the assets of the balance sheet for basic operations of a constructic or-
ganization and this is compiled monthly and for the report year as a whole (Po-4
No 1-Contractor).

As a consequence of the substantial differences in the working capital elements,
statistics studies not only its volume but also structure. For this purpose a num-
ber of groupings are employed and these describe the structural features of working
capital from different aspects. In terms of functional role, working capital in
the reproduction process is divided into working capital in the production sphere
(as a monetary expression of productive working capital) and working capital in the
circulation sphere (cash and disposable stocks). Working capital in the production
sphere participates directly in such production stages as the purchasing of materi-
als, structural elements and so forth and the formation of their inventories, pro-
duction consumption of materials and the creation of the construction product.

Table XI.1

    
   
  
    

Working Capital Groups

Working capita1--total (I)

  

Working capital in production sphere 67.1
Production inventories 19.9
Basic materials. structural elements and pieces 29.5 14.8
Auxiliary materials 4.7 2.4
Inexpensive and rapidly used-up articles 5.8 2.7
Assets in production ' 15.4 47.2
Incomplete production 15.2 47.1
Expenditures of future periods 0.2 0.1
Working capital in circulation sphere 44.6 32.9
Cash 13.2 6.7
Assets in accounts 31.4 26.2

According to the form assumed by working capital several subgroups are formed the
names of which are given in Table XI.1 for the USSR. Prom the data of this table

it follows that for example. the proportional amount of production inventories has
declined noticeably and, at the same time, the proportional amount of incomplete
production has risen. The varying dynamics of the working capital elements reflects
the changes occurring in construction as a consequence of carrying out the economic
reform.

Among the working capital of contracting organizations in terms of the limit feature
a distinction is drawn between the normed and unnormed working capital. The normed
working capital in construction includes the predominant share of working capital in

212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the production and circulation sphere and the amount of this is determined for each
organization within the limits set by the norms. The unnormed working capital in-
cludes debts, money in the payment account and the cash of the contraczing organiza-
tion and so forth. Information on the normed and unnormed assets is to be found in
the balance sheet for the organization's basic operations, respectively, in sections
"B" and "c".

In terms of formation sources, the working capital of construction organizations is
divided into four groups. There is the own and equivalent capital which a self-
financing construction organization receives at the moment of its formation. These
assets are earmarked for forming the normed production stocks and partially for in-
complete production not covered by borrowed and other assets. Secondly there are
bank credits which comprise a portion of borrowed working capital for contracting
organizations and used to form seasonal inventories of materials and in part incom-
plete construction work. Debts are characterized by the total assets formed as a
result of payments between contracting organizations when the client's assets tempo-
rarily are in use by the given organization. Under the new management conditions,
the contracting organizations are granted client advances to cover large amounts of
incomplete production of construction and installation work and these advances also
form working capital. Lastly there are other sources. for example, the obtaining
of working capital from ministries for temporary use and so forth.

53. A Study of the Efficient Use of working Capital

For ensuring the ongoing production process. construction organizations should not
only have the necessary amount and composition of working capital but also utilize
this capital effectively. A notion of the efficient use of working capital is pro-
vided by indicators describing the actual amount or need of working capital for a
cost unit of product. the rate of circulation and the length of circulation for the
working capital.

An indicator expressing the amount of working capital calculated per cost unit of
product called the coefficient for the retention of working capital is determined by
the ragio Kr - 0:R,
where 0--the average balance of working capital over the report period;
P--receipts from the sale of the product (the ao-called turnover of capital)
for the report period.

In calculating the average working capital balance, consideration is given to both
the normed and unnormed assets which are in the production and circulation sphere,
with the exception of the assets in circulation outside the construction organiza-
tion. The turnover of the assets considers, correspondingly, the receipts from the
turning over of the construction-installation work to the clients, including compen-
sation and benefits above the estimated cost, the receipts free the outside sale of
services and products from subsidiary and service production entered on the contract-
ing organization's balance sheet.

The working capital retention coefficient describes the level of its effective use

by expressing the resource intensiveness of the product in terms of working capital
over the given segment of time. The smaller this coefficient the higher the effi-
cient use of working capital at a construction organization. Let us give an example.
We will assume that in the report year the total receipts from the sale of product

213

FORiOFFKJAI.US£40NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the construction trust was 8.45 million rubies, and the average working capital
balance over the year was 4,056,000 rubles. Hence the working capital retention

coefficient for the trust equals: fang—:3 - 0.108. This leans that as an average over
0

the year the construction trust needed 840 rubles of working capital for the manu-
facturing and sale of each thousand rubles of product.

An indicator measuring the rate of working capital circulation, that is, the turn-

over coefficient. is an amount calculated by the foraula Km - Rza - K_1r' The turn-
over rate coefficient shows the number of turnovers carried out by the working cap-

ital of the construction organization over the given period. In our example Kt“ -

%’%g-g - 2.08. In other words, the trust's working capital turned over 2.08 times

during the year. This indicator can be interpreted as the return from the working
capital advanced for production. In the exanple each ruble of advanced assets

makes it possible for the construCtion trust to receive 2.08 rubles of receipts from
product sales over the year.

The amount of the turnover rate coefficient, like the working capital retention co-
efficient, depends upon the length of the period. In order to eliminate this in-
convenience in studying the efficient use of working capital over different-lengthed
periods, statistics calculates the average lengths of one working capital turnover
(Ttu) by dividing the calendar length of the report period in days (Tc) by the work-
ing capital turnover rate coefficient, that is, Ttu'Tc:Ktuv or as the product of
the calendar length of the period by the working capital retention coefficient, that
is. Tm - Tc-Kr. In the example, the average length of one capital turnover at the
trust was: Tc“ - 360:2.08 - 173 days, or Tn, - 360.0.48 - 173 days.‘

Another method for calculating this indicator is based upon comparing the average
working capital balance ovgr_the period with the average daily receipts from product
sales (5'), that is, Ttu - Ozp. The average daily turnover is detereined by dividing
the total receipts from the construction organization's product sales over the re-
port period by the calendar length of this period in days. In the example the aver-

age daily turnover 0] the trust equals: 3 - m - 23,670 rubles, and hence the

360
average length of one turnover at the trust is Tm - %§% - 173 days.

Along with the overall average length of capital turnover at a contracting organiza-
Lion it is possible to determine this indicator for various stages of capital circu-
lation, that is, individually for the production sphere and the circulation sphere,
fur normed and unnormed working capital and so forth. The general nethodological
principle for calculating the indicators here is not changed, but one must proceed
not run the overall total of the working capital at a construction organization but
tntler from its component parts. In the Appendix No l to the balance sheet for the

 

Iin calculating this indicator, the length of the year is considered equal to 360
days, .- quarter is 90 days and a month 30 days.

2110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basic operations of contracting organizations, initial data are given for separately
calculating the turnover rate of the normed and unnormed working capital as well as
the indicators themselves for the turnover rate in days. The total of the capital
turnovers in all cases remains the same.

The amount of working capital required for normal continuous production depends
directly upon the level of the efficient use af this capital by the contracting or-
ganization. For this reason in the analysis it is important to bring out to what de-
gree a change in the effective use of the working capital influenced its overall
aaount. For this, using the index method, the total working capital released from
turnover or additionally involved in turnover is determined using the index lethod.
At the basis of constructing the system of factor indexes lies the proportional
dependence of the average balance of working assets upon the retention coefficient
and the volume of sold product, that is, 0 - [993. In using this relationship it

is possible to establish the total of the capital released from turnover or addi-
tionally involved in it under the influence of these two factors.

Let us assume that in the example (see page 213) in the previous year the retention
coefficient equaled 0.5 while the receipts from product sales were 8 million

rubles. Then the influence of the change in the effective use of working capital
will be: AK, - “(Kr-Kr) - 8.650(0.108-0.5) - 169.000 rubles, while the influence
of the change in the volume of sold product A& - “(pl-pa) - 0.5(8,450-8.000) -
225.000 rubles. The overall increase in work ng capital is 50,000 rubles (-169)+225.
In both instances, if the amount was obtained with a minus sign, then working capi-
tal was freed. A plus sign means that the obtained amount was additionally put into
the turnover of the construction organization.

The total of the freed or additionally used capital can be determined not only for
the working capital of a contracting organization as a whole but also separately for
each component part of the working capital using the ease methodology.

56. The Study of Profit and Profitability of Construction Organizations

The profit and profitability indicators describe the financial results from the pro-
duction activities of construction organizations. Under the conditions of carrying
out the economic reform, the amount of profit becomes one of the planning indicators
set by the superior organizations and employed for assessing the operating results
of the organizations. Profit serves as the main source of the payment for produc-
tive capital and the formation of the material incentive fund for the construction
employees. the production development fund and the fund for sociocultural measures
and housing construction. In order to obtain the planned profit under the new eco-
nomic incentive conditions, a contracting organization should complete all the con-
struction and installation work at the starting-up projects. work stages and com-
plexes to be turned over to the client and achieve the planned work cost level.

The profit of a contracting organization is formed chiefly from the sale of con-
struction product as well as from the financial results in the nonbasic activities
of the organization (ancillary production and the service systems) and, finally,
from extrasale operations. In this regard a distinction is made between the over-
all (balance sheet) profit obtained from all the activities of the organization and
profit from product sales in basic, that is, construction, work. The latter indi-
cator is determined by subtracting the actual cost of the construction and installa-
tion work turned over to the client from the contractual (planned) cost.

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Vﬂ \Il'l‘lkll‘ll ‘h’l‘. Ul‘la'

Let us assume that we possess the following data on the completed amount of work
which has been turned over to the client by the trust for the report year (thousand
rubles):

Estimated cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6,100
Planned cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5,800
Actual cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5.700
Compensation above estimated cost . . . . . 275

The planned profit for the amount of construction and installation work completed
and turned over to the client in the report year equals: (6,1004-275)-5,800 -
575,000 rubles. Actual profit for the report year is: (6,100+-275)-5,700 -
675,000 rubles. Thus, in the report year, due to the reduction in work costs in
comparison with the plan, an additional (above-planned) profit was obtained totaling
100,000 rubles (675-S75).

The profit from the product of the subsidiary types of production and service sys-
tems is determined as the difference in the value of the sold product from these sub-
divisions of the contracting organization according to the planned-estimate prices
(or wholesale prices) and actual product costs.

At present, along with balance sheet profit, construction organizations also deter-
mine calculated profit. Calculated profit equals the balance sheet profit minus the
payment for productive capital and the total interest on bank credit. Information
on the financial results of the organization is found in Form No 20 "Report on
Profit and Losses," and in addition. Form No Z-s contains initial data for calculat-

ing the profit from basic production.

For describing the financial state of organizations. along with absolute indicators.
statistics also employs relative indicators, namely the level of construction prod-
uct profitability and the profitability level of the construction organization. The
first indicator in construction practices is usually expressed by a percentage ratio
of profit to the estimated cost of the costs of the sold construction product. In
economic theory this indicator is also determined by the ratio of profit to product
costs. The profitability level of the construction product can be established for
all the economic activities of an organization (for the balance sheet profit) or
only for its basic activities (for the profit from completed contracting work). The
second indicator, the profitability level of a construction organization, is de-
termined by the ratio of profit to the average annual value of the fixed productive
capital and normed working capital. This can be calculated for the overall (balance
sheet) profit and for calculated profit. In the latter instance from the total val-
uu of the fixed capital one must exclude that portion for which the capital payment
is not charged. In construction, in contrast to industry, profitability levels are
not planned but are used as calculation and analytical indicators.

For an illustration of the calculating of profitability indicators, let us use the
following example (Table Xl.2; thousand rubles).

The overall profitability for construction product in the previous year was
130
1,600
ability rose by 3.31.

 

 

.100 - 8.12, in the report year 11228-100 - 11.42, that is, product profit-
D

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nun-u In- I -

Previous
year

 
 
 
 

Indicators

  

Sold construction product (estimated cost) 1,668

Balance sheet profit 188
Payment for productive capital, interest on credit -95
Annual value of:
Normed working capital 610
Fixed productive capital 2,880
Including for which payment is not collected 190

The calculated profitability of the construction organization was in the previous

, 130-86 . _ . 188-95 _
year. 5:856:565:§§6 100 1.522 and in the report year. it§§6$ZI§Zi§6'1°° 3.061.

Consequently, calculated profitability rose by 1.54 percent for the organization.
The designated method for calculating a construction organization' s profitability
is applicable to those organizations which have fully been given their own
construction-end fixed productive capital. A majority of the construction adminis-
trations does not possess their own construction machines but rather use other ma-
chines by rental and lease arrangement. For this reason, the given indicator is
better applied as a whole for the combines, trusts, associations, glavks and minis-
tries.

55. Analysis of Factors Influencing the Financial Results of Construction
Organizations

Of great importance in studying the fulfillment of the profit plan, particularly
for basic production and the change in its dynamics, is an analysis of the factors
which influence these changes. In factor analysis of profit it is advisable to em-
ploy the index method. as it best meets the conditions of the set task. For this
it is essential to represent profit as a function of indicator factors. The simpl-
est analytical form for the dependence of profit (P) can be represented by the fol-
lowing expression: P - Q r, where Qp --the volume of sold construction product; r--
the profitability level of this product. Hence, the influence of the change in the
volune of product on the profit deviations is determined as - ro(QP -on), while
the influence of the change in the product profitability levels is A r-trl-ro)Qpl.
The combined influence of the two factors is: Ap - AQ-PQr.

The thoroughast analysis of the change in profits can be made under the influence
of the following factors: Changes in prices, changes in the cost of the sold con-
struction product, changes in the composition of the sold product and changes in
the volume of this product. In the statistical literature, for solving such prob-
lems a methodology for calculating the influence of these factors has been recom—
mended based on mixed (additive-multiplicstive) index models.

2
V. Ye. Adamov, "Faktornyy indeksnyy analiz" [Factor Index Analysis], Moscow,
Statistika, 1277, p 169.

217

roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
u we. veinso-OO- yup.- v.nun

In the given instance, the following system of factor indexes has been adopted as
the basis of analysis:3

PI__ E!|(£I—’IZ __ "VIU’I‘ﬁ’ . E u( —?I)
T7." mum—to) " Linus—2.) szo—a‘n) x
2'.( -—:.o EMA—’0’ 2 '

x__LL:ZC. Mb
‘ W‘
Scum—I») 2": q' A ')

The difference in the numerator and denominator of each index describes the influ-
ence of the change in each of the above-listed factors on the change in profits.

The influence of the change in prices in analyzing the dynamics and fulfillment of
the profit r-lsn can be viewed as a change in the estimated prices for construction
product and as a change in wholesale prices for materials and the rates for trans-
porting thun not accounted for in the estimated prices. A change in estimated
prices under the conditions of a value accounting for construction product in a

majority of instances has no impact on the deviation in profit as the estimated
prices operate without substantial changes for several years. But in instances
when the changes in the estimated prices or norms do occur (partial or complete),
then the deviation in profit as a consequence of this factor is determined as the
difference between the estimated cost of the sold construction product in the new
and old estimated prices. The influence of a change in wholesale prices for materi-
als also rarely occurs within 2 years. Ordinarily this is taken into account in the

total compensation and partially in determining the influence of a change in costs
themselves.

The analysis nethod which can be recomended for practice can be employed only when
comparing actual profit with planned profit. This cannot be done over time as not

all the elements of the factor model are available in the accounting of the con-
tracting organizations.

COPYRIGHT: "Izd-vo "Statistika", 1980

[0272
C50: 8144/1954

-END-

"the form of notation for the indexes reflects only the conditions of this calcula-
tion, where Q--the volume of work, p--estimated prices, z--cost of a unit of work.

218

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY