FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/10411

:5 March 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE
(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmiss!ans and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given L; source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE

(2000 5/82)

CONTENTS

LIVESTOCK

Poultry Raising Goals, Potential
(1. Wtiﬂ; anavomm' Jm 82)....ooocoeococoa-noon... 1

Role of Accomclng Prices, (butt-acts 1n Inter-Pam Emnonic
Relations
(A. P. rutv1yenko;xommzvomm, Jan 82).............. 8
AGED-ECONOMICS AND ORGANIZATION

Handbook on Sovlec, CBHA Agriculture
(MIR SO‘BIALIDIA V 151m I FARM, 1980)............... 13

Accounting System mm in Sovkhoz, Enterprise Interrelation:
(V. N. Bauer; PLANIRDVANIYA I UGET V SEL'SKGOIOZYAY-
Sm“ memAnYm' me 81)....OOOOIOOOOIOOIOIOIt... 32

-a- [III-USSR-‘lFOl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POULTRY RAISING GOALS, POTENTIAL

MoscOw PIITS£VODSIVO in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 2-5

[Krticle by l. Bakhgin, chief of USSR Ptitseprmn: 'u11 Reserves -- In Behalf of
the Five-Year Plan:/

[Iexg/ All Soviet people live and work under the beneficial influence of the
immortal ideals of Msrxism-Leninism, measuring their deeds against the decisions
handed down during the 26th congress of the Cummnust Party of the Soviet Union.
The majestic nature of the party‘s plans is arousing among our country's workers
legitimate pride and an ardent desire to ensure that they are implemented. For
further improving the welfare of our people, tremendous importance is being
attached to implementing the all-round food program developed by the party.

In his speech delivered before the November (1981) Plenum of the cc CPSU, Comrade
Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev emphasized: “The food problem -- from both an economic and
political standpoint -- is the central problem of the entire five-year plan. The
foundation for solving it -- high rates for agricultural production."

The workers engaged in poultry raising, similar to all agricultural workers, are
confronted by important and complicated tasks concerned with ensuring that the
population of our cauntry is continuously supplied with high quality food products.

Public poultry raising is developing at a rapid pace. During the years of the past
five-year plan, the capital investments in the branch amounted to many billions of
rubles. Many new enterprises were placed in operation and extensive work was
carried out in connection with the modernization of existigg farms. Within the USSR
Ptitseprom [Administration of the Poultry Raising Industry] system alone,
capabilities for 60 million laying hens and 345 million head of meat poult y were

placed in operation. Fixed productrve capital increased from 6 billion rubles in
1975 to 11 billion in 1980 and the capital-labor ratio -- by a factor of 1.8.

The strengthening of the branch's logistical base was expressed in deliveries of
highly productive technological equipment, which made it possible to lower labor
expenditures considerably per unit of output. New and more promising crosses of
egg and meat paultry were introduced into production operations and improvements
were achieved in the technological processes and in the forms and methods for
administering the branch. All of this made it possible to achieve new goals in
raising labor productivity. During the past five-year plan, output production per
worker increased by 5,000 rubles. ‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

During the final year of the five-year plan, the gross yield of eggs in our country
was 67.8 billion and the production of poultry meat -- more than 2.1 million tons.
The lion's share of this output was produced by farms in the Ptitaeprom system --
almost 60 billion eggs and approximately 1.6 million tons of poultry meat. The 1975
level was exceeded by 13.8 billion eggs and 680,000 tons of meat.

A great event in the life of all public poultry raising workers was the publication
in 1977 of the decree of the cc CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers entitled'
"Measures for Increasing the Production of Poultry Heat,“ which defined the program
for the priority development of meat poultry raising. In conformity with this
decree, 88 poultry factories and reproduction farms were placed in operation during
the years of the past five-year plan. Their overall capability amounted to 306
million head of meat poultry annually. The broiler industry developed at especially
rapid rates. The production of meat chicks increased from 170,000 tons in 1975 to
560,000 tons in 1980, that is, a threefold increase.

The above-mentioned successes and achievements of the branch are creating a fine
foundation for realizing further progress and for solving new and great tasks
during the Eleventh Five-Year Plan. However, in critically evaluating the path
already traveled, one must not overlook the fact that the opportunities embodied in
intensification of the branch are still not being utilized to the degree desired.
This is borne out mainly by the fact that many farms and associations did not cope
with fulfillment of their state plans and the level of their operations are still
not in keeping with the established requirements.

The specialized farms operate under identical conditions, that is, they are supplied
with prepared feed mixtures, they use the same equipment and roughly the same
technology and normstives and they maintain highly productive poultry of the

best crosses. All of these factors should ensure adequately stable indicators.
Nevertheless, there is still a large group of farms, the indicators of which -- for
the productivity and conservation of the poultry, feed expenditures per unit of
output, output production costs and labor productivity -- are at an extremely low
level. Thus an important task requiring priority attention at the present time is
that of achieving a sharp improvement in the production indicators of backward

enterprises, by making use of those rich reserves which as yet have still not been
placed in operation.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, the average annual production of eggs must be
raised to 72 billion. This implies that the goal of 75 billion eggs must be
achieved for all categories of farms by 1985, with 45 billion being procured from
enterprises of the USSR Ptitseprom system. All of the required conditions are
available for achieving this goal. Adequate capabilities have been placed in
operation at breeding farms and the required technological equipment and experienced
personnel are available at the commodity farms. Obviously, it will be necessary to
raise still further the productivity of laying hens, expand the capabilities of
existing enterprises and build new factories in those regions where they are few in
number, that is, all well developed types of work must be continued. Indeed, at
the present time a regular egg trade has been organized in almost all areas of our
country. Per capita egg production has reached 256.

More complicated tasks remain to be solved in meat poultry raising. Computations
reveal that meat poultry production may reach 3.5 million tone by 1985, including

)FFICIAL USE ONLY
2 million tons at Ptitseprom farms. This obviously requires the energetic
introduction of progressive work methods and the decisive elimination of
shortcomings in the organization of poultry meat production.

Heat poultry raising, which is being carried out on an industrial basis, represents
a new trend in the branch and it is marked by a number of specific peculiarities.
Compared to egg production, which has been developed to a considerably greater
degree, poultry meat production is more complicated and requires unconditional
fulfillment of the zootechnical and veterinary-sanitary rules. The slightest
deviations from the technological process can produce very serious consequences.

A chief reserve for increasing the production of poultry meat is that of developing
the broiler industry. For it is here, as is well known, that use is made of
specialized crosses for obtaining hybrids possessing high growth energy. The
technique for crossing combination lines of these crosses has been studied well,
mastered and does not present special difficulties. The highly productive
Broyler-6 cross, which won first place during international competitive tests held
in Czechoslovakia, was created by domestic pantry breeders. The meat young stock of
the cross possess the ability to increase their live weight by 35 grams daily, with
feed expenditures of 2.3 kilograms per kilogram of weight increase. The leading
farms -- as a rule, these are the large poultry factories -- achieve average daily
weight increases of 30 grams or more. However, the average indicator for farms in
the USSR Ptitseprom system does not exceed 18 grams. Thus only 50 percent of the
genetic potential of the poultry is utilized. A legitimate question arises: what
factors inhibit the full use of the natural instincts of neat poultry? Why is it
that one farm achieves an average daily weight increase in broilers of 25-30 grams,
whereas on other farms this indicator equals 12-14 grams, the hatchability of eggs
at some enterprises is 78-85 percent and at others -- 55-60 percent and the
preservation of broilers at the better farms is 95-96 percent and at backward

farms -- 72-80 percent or less. In addition to establishing the causes of such
situations, urgent measures must also be undertaken aimed at eliminating the
differences in these indicators.

Recently, the unsatisfactory quality of mixed feed has been cited as the reason for
the low weight increases and great reduction in the number of meat young stock. In
the process, they ignore as a rule the technological violations and from year to
year they tolerate low production indicators. Such reasoning produces a great amount
of harm, since it encourages inactivity and en irresponsible attitude towards the
task at hand.

Certainly, it would be wrong to negate the importance of the feed factor and
particularly the fact that the quality of the mixed feed is not always at the proper
level in all areas. But leading experience proves rather convincingly that it is
possible to obtain considerably better results if the poultry are protected against
diseases, complete four-strain hybrids of the Broyler-6 cross are raised rather than
the two-strain type and the technological regimes and parameters are observed in a
strict manner against the same feed background. Thus, for example, all four

broiler enterprises in Moscow Oblast are being supplied with feed from the same
mixed feed plant, but the average daily increases in weight in the meat chicks
differ. At the broiler factory of the Zagorak Experimental Farm of VNITIP _
[all-union Scientific-Research and Technological Institute of Poultry Raisingl,

they amounted to 23.7 grams in 1980, at Petelinskaya -- 21.9, istro-Seneshsksya --

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

19.1 and at Bronnitskaya -- 18.6 grams. Thus the figure for the Petelinskaya
Poultry Factory was 1.8 grams daily less than that for the factory of the Zagorsk
farm and during the raising period it obtained 110 grams less per broiler, Iatro-
Senezhskaya -- “.6 and 280 grams respectively and Bronnitakaya -- 5.1 and 310 grams.
And if this shortfall is computed for the number of broilers raised during a year's
time, then extremely impressive figures are obtained: Petelinskaya Poultry Factory
sustained a shortfall of 460 tons, Iatro-Seneshsakay -- 845 and Bronnitskaya --
1,106 tons and the total for the three factories -- 2,611 tons of poultry meat. And
indeed these three enterprises cannot be referred to as backward. If such an
analysis was carried out for all of the broiler factories, then colossal reserves and
opportunities would be revealed, the use of which would require indefatigable work.

One of the more important problems in poultry raising today is that of protecting
the farms against various poultry diseases, particularly pullorosis, mycoplazmosis
and laringo-tracheitis. For it is these diseases which cause the greatest harm to
the branch. It is hopeless to combat these diseases using only medicinal means.
Existing diagnostic methods make it possible to isolate very sick specimens, while
those in which the disease is in the incubation stage remain in the flock. Hence,
if the source of the infection is not eliminated, it will be impossible to avoid the
danger of it breaking out once again. Thus, at enterprises considered to be
unfavorable from the standpoint of these diseases, the parental stock should be
replaced completely by healthy poultry obtained from pedigree farms. This method
for sanitizing poultry is well known and our country has adequate pedigree resources.
The work must be carried out as rapidly as possible and in an efficient manner.
Poultry infected by pullorosis remain lifelong carriers of the disease, which is
transmitted to offspring through the eggs. At times, tremendous quantities of
disinfectants, antibiotics and veterinary preparations are expended for the purpose
of containing the mass spread of infection. Thus the campaign is waged not against
the infection itself, but rather against its spread. Only by radically changing the
tactics of this campaign will it be possible to achieve definite results. Effort
must be concentrated on eliminating the sources of the infection. This is why such
importance is being attached to the 100 percent sanitation of the parental flocks
and older generations at poultry raising enterprises.

Mention must be made of the fact that each farm renews its parental stock annually,
the poultry change and still the diseases remain. Consequently, this work is being
carried out in an unskilled and uncontrolled manner. Numerous facts cauld be cited
shaving how valuable pedigree eggs are using placed in the same incubator with eggs
from sick poultry or healthy young stock are being accommodated in a zone containing
infected poultry. quite often the sanitation of facilities is carried out in a
haphazard and incomplete manner, with no quality checks being carried out on the
status of the disinfection work. How is it possible to achieve the desired results?
The time is at hand for sanitizing the farms in the most decisive manner possible
and eliminating forever the mentioned diseases. This work must be directed by the
leaders of enterprises, associations and the local organs of Ptitseprom.

A detailed plan of organizational measures should be developed at each enterprise
requiring sanitation work. This plan shOuld indicate the source for obtaining
incubative eggs, the place and time for their incubation and the schedules for
preparing the facilities for the raising of young stock and the maintenance of an
adult flock. Contact between the incubative eggs or poultry obtained from a
healthy flock and the possible sources of infection must be eliminated entirely.
It is obvious that rigid control is required over the execution of all measures

a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
planned. when the work is organized in this manner, many poultry diseases can be
eliminated entirely in just 1.5-2 years. This constitutes one of the chief reserves
for increasing production and raising the quality of output.

In broiler production, extreme importance is attached to the general conversion over
to the raising of four-strain hybrids. It is known that their growth energy and
disease resistance are substantially higher than that of two-strain hybrids.
However, this conversion is being delayed by a shortage of reproductors of the first
order. Broiler production at the present time has reached a stage wherein the
existing zonal reproductors are unable to satisfy the requirements for incubative
eggs. In order to solve this problem, reproductors of the first order must be
organized in each oblast, kray or republic. At the present time, a large number of
such farms are being created and yet even their introduction into operations will
not make it possible, within a brief interval of time, to cover the deficit in eggs
required for completing the parental flocks of broiler poultry factories. Thus, in
a number of rayons on the whole, reproductors of the first order should ideally be
created at existing farms. At one time, this was precisely the action taken by the
leaders of the Leningrad Trust of Ptitseprom. In additioa to satisfying their own

requirements for intubative eggs, this also enabled them to furnish assistance to
other regions.

In recent years, broiler production has experienced a more acute shortage of
incubative eggs required for obtaining day-old broilers. This is disrupting the
rhythmic operations of poultry factories and it is preventing the full utilization
of their productive capabilities. Moreover, whereas earlier this was noted mainly
on farms in Central Asia and the Trans-Caucasus, today it is being observed at
enterprises in certain oblasts of the RSPSR. Here the problem reduces to an
insufficient number of parental flocks of meat chickens, their low productivity,
irrational use of incubative eggs and their low hatchability. The elimination of all
these shortcomings does not require any additional material expenditures. Rather,
it is necessary only to observe very carefully the technological requirements and to
raise the responsibility of leading workers at the broiler enterprises in this .
regard. These enterprises were all built according to standard plans and they have
suitable capabilities at their disposal for raising replacement young stock and
maintaining a parental flock. These capabilities were computed so as to provide a
large reserve and it follows that, if judiciously used, no problem will arise in
connection with obtaining incubative eggs. This is borne out by the operational
practice of many broiler poultry factories in Belorussia, Kazakhstan, the Baltic
republics, a number of oblasts in the RSPSR and in the Ukraine. At these
enterprises the replacement young stock are separated according to sex when 1 day
old, a system of limited feeding is employed, a light regime is observed and the
parental flock is maintained at a density of 5 head per square meter of floor space
and not 2-3 head as is often the case.

The separate raising of young stock according to sex, from the time they are 1 day
old, is an important condition for obtaining a highly productive parental flock,

since it makes it possible to create the best conditions for pullets and to observe
in an accurate manner the ratio for hens and roosters, which is of great importance
in meat poultry raising. '

The incorrect use of eggs obtained from meat hens of a parental flock or an older
generation arouses special concern. Such eggs are considered to be expensive
output and they should be used for one purpose only «- for incubation purposes.

5 ,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

If certain breeding plants and reproductors have plans for supplying eggs for food
purposes, then methods must be found for releasing them from having to carry Out
such deliveries. This will make it possible to make full use of the breeding
resources and at the same time it will eliminate excessive shipments of incubative
eggs. Each specialized enterprise must be assigned the task of obtaining a minimum
of 90 day-old broilers for every adult laying hen of the parent flock. This task is
completely realistic and must be carried out.

A great amount of work must be carried out during the current five-year plan aimed
at improving the quality of dressed poultry. The carcasses still do not have a
proper marketable appearance and they are being issued in a semi-drawn or not
completely drawn form. As is known, the conversion over to a progressive technology
for poultry processing is of great importance from the standpoint of supplementing
the resources of a valuable protein feed. The poultry breeders of Belorussia are
accomplishing a gieat deal in this regard. They have outlined measures which will
make it possible in 1983 to produce all of the republic's dressed poultry only in
the completely drawn form. This experience should ideally be studied by those
workers who openly criticize the mixed feed plants for the low protein content in
the feed, but who fail to undertake effective measures aimed at increasing the
protein feed resources. Such a position can only be described as parasitical. The
slaughtering departments of poultry factories must be tasked with producing
completely drawn dressed paultry and of ensuring the processing of all non-food raw
materials, including dead poultry and the waste products obtained from incubation,
into meat and bone meal.

The problem of increasing the production of poultry meat obviously does not end with
the development of the broiler industry. Maximum use must be made of the reserves
available to all branches of meat poultry raising without exception. In increasing
the production of the branch's products, a considerable role will be played by the
private plots of the population.

Last year, approximately 650 million head of young stock, or 80 million more head
than during 1980, were sold to satisfy the requirements of the private plots.
Although this is a good amo nt, it must nevertheless be recognized that the
potential of private poultry raising is such that its requirements for young stock
are considerably greater. Thus, a sharp increase must take place in the near
future in the number of young stock withdrawn for delivery to the population. In
addition to an expansion of the incubator pool, this also requires a considerable
increase in the number of meat types of poultry. The same applies to meat and egg
types of poultry, the young stock of which are in great demand by the population.
New Hampshires, Rhode Islands, Avstralorps and other strains having colorful
plumage are distinguished by good growth energy and relatively high hatchability.
This poultry can be bred without difficulty st breeding sovkhozes, which at the
present time are for all practical purposes performing the functions of commodity
farms. Individual lines of the Khayseks Korichnevyy cross and also meat and egg
chickens which are available at breeding plants in our country can be used as the
breeding material.

Special attention should be given to the breeding of geese, since this can involve
the use of a large quantity of green feed. Reproductor geese raising farms for
10,000-20,000 head of adult poultry should be organized in the proper manner at
existing poultry factories for the sale of 1-day old goslings to the population.
Since the owners of private plots acquire their young stock mainly during 3-4 of the

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
spring and summer months, more extensive use should be made of light-Height
structures and sheds for the seasonal maintenance of the parental flocks of ducks.
This will make it possible to increase the collection of incubative eggs
considerably and, it folIOHs, the sale of ducklings to the population.

The Specialized enterprises have at their disposal a powerful production base and
diverse breeding material and thus they can and must furnish a tremendous amount of
assistance to private poultry raising. Each enterprise must outline measures for
increasing the size of its adult flock of meat types of poultry and in 1982 sell a
greater number of young stock to the population. By the and of the five-year plan.
the sale of such young stock must be increased to 1 billion head, that is an
increase of 1.5 times. This will constitute a canaiderable contribution towards
the implementation of the food program planned by the 26th party congress.

The first year of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan has ended. The poultry raising
workers accomplished a great deal towards the further development of the branch.

And although there are still many unsolved problems in the branch, nevertheless we
can count upon achieving more complete use of existing reserves and realizing radical
improvements in the economic activities of the poultry raising enterprises. The

high skills possessed by the leading workers and specialists and also the increasing
expertise of workers in the mass professions serve as a guarantee that these
achievements and improvements will be realized. There can be no doubt but that by
implementing the historic decisions handed down during the 26th CPSU Congress, these
workers and specialists will spare no effort or energy as they strive to fulfill and
overfulfill the planned tasks for 1982 and for the Bleventh Five-Year Plan as a whole.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Kolos", "Ptitsevodatvo", 1982

7026
C50: 1824/178

7 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LIV ESTOCK

ROLE OF accommuc PRICES, comers 1N “HEB-PAM 300101110 RMTIOIIS
Hoacow DMPBOIZVODSTVO in Russian No 1, Jan 82 pp 18-20

LXrticle by A.P. Hatviyenko, chief economist at the Helitopol' Inter-Perm Enterprise
for the Production of Animal Husbandry Products: "Role of Accounting Prices and
Contractual Obligations in Econonic Relationsﬂ/

Luxy The conversion of animal husbandry over to an industrial basis and growth in
the number of animals being fattened at inter-farm enterprises require a basically
new approach for the organisation of feed production operations. Towards this end,
specialized feed production farms are being created and also enterprises for the
production of feed based upon the principles of inter-farm cooperation.

In Helitopol'skiy Rayon in Zaporozhskaya Oblast, an inter-farm enterprise for the
production of pork and eggs is being supplied with all types of feed by two
specialized farms -- the imeni Lenina and Put' Lenina Kolkhoses.

This guaranteed support in the form of feed for the inter-farm enterprise has
promoted improvements in its economic and production indicators. Thus. during the
1977-1980 period, the production cost for l quintal of weight increase in swine at
kolkhozes in Helitopol'skiy Rayon was 141.3 rubles and at the inter-farm enterprise
-- 102.9 rubles and for 1,000 eggs -- 70.6 and 60 rubles respectively. And this
occurred despite the fact that the production cost for 1 quintal of feed units at
the kolkhoses during this period amounted to an average of 6.8 rubles, whereas at
the inter-farm enterprise -- 10.2 rubles. The difference lies in the fact that the
accounting price for the feed provides for profit to be realized by the participating
kolkhoses. however, feed consunption per quintal of weight increase in the swine
at the kolkhozes, over a period of 4 years, amounted to 8.6 quintals of feed units
and at the enterprise -- 6.8 quintala of feed units and for 1,000 eggs -- 4.5
quintals and 2.4 quintels of feed units respectively. Labor expenditures per
quintal of weight increase in the swine at kolkhoses throughout the rayon amounted
to 43.4 man-hours and at the enterprise -- 8.4 man-hours and for 1,000 eggs -- 27.8
and 7.1 man-hours respectively.

It should also be noted that labor eXpenditures per quintal of weight increase in
the swine, over a period of 4 years in the departments of the inter-farm enterprise
and compared to the level observed at the kolkho: farms prior to their transfer over
to the enterprise, decreased by a factor of 1.4, for 1,000 eggs -- by twofold and
for 1 quintsl of weight increase in poultry -- by a factor of 1.5. Over a period
of 4 years at the Helitopol' Inter-farm Enterprise, the average gross output per
average annual worker engaged in agricultural production was 13,320 rubles and at
kolkhozes throughout the rayon -- 4,670 rubles, or almost three times less. During
the period under review, the average gross animal husbandry output produced at the
enterprise per man-hour was valued at 6.90 rubles and at kolkhozes in the rayon --
only 1.87 rubles.

One peculiarity of the inter-farm enterprise lies in the fact that it was created
not through the construction of new production facilities but rather on the basis

of farms made available by the kolkhoses. As a result of high animal husbandry
productivity and more improved economic relations in connection with feed deliveries
to the inter-farm enterprise, the production of pork at these farms increased by

25 percent and eggs -- by almost twofold. Today the inter-farm enterprise is
producing 50 percent of the pork and 70 percent of the eggs being obtained in the
kolkhoz sector in Helitopol'skiy Rayon.

The operational experience of the Melitopol' Inter-farm Enterprise reveals that for
it to operate successfully a strong feed base with an annual carry-over feed supply
is required. This alone will make it possible to achieve a high and stable
productivity for public animal husbandry and to eliminate the dependence of
production upon the weather conditions. Here the principal factor must be that of
a high economic effectiveness for feed production, which will be determined not
only by the enterprise’s total amount of profit, distributed according to the value
of the feed delivered, but also by the existing accounting prices for the feed.
Thus, for coarse, succulent and green feed at the Helitopol' Inter-farm Enterprise,
accounting prices have been developed which provide the specialized farms with a

30 percent profitability for producing then. When establishing the accounting
prices for concentrated feed, which occupies 95 percent of the enterprise's feed
balance, consideration was given to one particular condition, namely: their
profitability during sales to the inter-far- enterprise must be no lower than
during sales to the state.

When determining the accounting prices for concentrated feed for the inter-farm
enterprise, we selected as a basis the average sales prices for selling grain to the
state at the kolkhozes Put' Lenina and imeni Lenin during the 1973-1978 period.
During this period of time, the sales price for a quintal of grain at the Put'
Lenina Kolkhoz was 10.65 rubles and at the Kolkhoz imeni Lenin -- 9.92 rubles and
the profitability levels -- 188.6 and 146.1 percent respectively.

importance is also attached to taking into account certain local peculiarities.

For example, it would be wrong, when determining the accounting prices for
concentrated feed, to proceed on the basis of branch profitability for the farm as a
whole. This would distort somewhat the true status of affairs, since the sale of
grain at the kolkhozes, within a farm (to kolkhos members, pensioners and office
workers), could be carried out at state prices or in accordance with the production

costs.

when establishing the accounting prices for grain forage, we took into account the
existing structure of the areas designated for grain crops. Thus, winter wheat
grown for sale to the state occupied an average of 54.3 percent of the areas at

the Put' Lenins and imeni Lenin Kblkhoses during the 1973-1978 period. The
kolkhozes received a considerable bonus added on to their procurement prices for

the sale of strong and durum wheat and also valuable grain crop varieties. And this
must also be reflected in the accounting prices.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFLCLAL use URL!

There is still one other peculiarity. Under our conditions, the cropping power of
winter wheat surpasses that of other grain crops. The principal task of the
specialized feed production kolkhozes is that of supplying the enterprise not simply
with grain. but rather with forage grain that can be employed for preparing full
value mixed feed.

It is clear that the rut' Lenina and imeni Lenin Rolkhozes cannot change to any
significant degree the structure of the grain plantings and yet either farm is
capable of increasing the area used for forage crops by 10 percent. He considered
this fact when establishing the accounting prices. The profit realized from the
sale of grain to the state at these kolkhozes, on the average for the 1973-1978
period and per hectare of sowing area devoted to all grain crops, amounted to 66
rubles. If the sales price for l quintal of grain crops was at the procurement
price level for winter wheat (8.20 rubles per quintal). then it would equal 54
rubles, for an increase in the sowing area for forage crops of 10 percent -- 52
rubles and taking into accOunt a lower gross grain yield from the forage crops (as
less productive) and their higher production cost, it would amount to only 48 rubles
per hectare of grain crop sowing. In the latter case, the sales price for a quintal
of grain would be 7.27 rubles.

Thus, having established the accounting prices at the state procurement price level
and having deprived the farms of the opportunity of obtaining additional income

from bonuses for the sale of grain to the state, we thus decreased their profit by
27.3 percent. If the accounting prices were lower, then the difference in the
incomes would have been greater. The inter-farm enterprise makes compensation to
the Put' Lenina and imeni Lenin Kolkhores for the missing portion of the profit by
means of deductions in the amount of 50 percent of the internal income. As a result,
the profitability of grain production at the kolkhozes did not decrease but rather
it remained at the former level. This is very important from the standpoint of
further improvements in economic relations.

The material interest of the specialized feed production kolkhozes is apparent in
their desire to increase the sale of grain to the inter-farm enterprise. The
principle of a firm plan and volume for selling forage grain to the enterprise was
retained for the Put' Lenina and imani Lenin Kolkhozes: the annual firm plan used
by kolkhozes which sell grain to the state was also employed by the specialized
feed production farms (for 1980, the firm plan was 85.3 percent of the overall
volume of grain sales). Grain forage sold to the enterprise over and above the
established firm plan was paid for with a 50 percent bonus.

During the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, the 50 percent bonus will be paid to farms for
grain which they sell to the state over and above the average annual grain sales
level for the Tenth Five-Year Plan. In this regard, the council of the inter-farm
enterprise introduced changes in connection with the payment of the 50 percent
bonus. The bonus will be given to the feed production farms only for grain which
was delivered to the enterprise over and above the average annual sales level for
these farms during the 1977-1980 period. However, this bonus will be paid upon the
condition that the farms fulfill their plan for selling grain forage to the
enterprise and in the assortment established in the agreement for feed deliveries.
This addition to the agreement is of importance to the enterprise, since a proper
balance in the feed ration is dependent upon it to a certain degree.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The use of state procurement prices underscores still another requirement. This
is associated mainly with the fact that the state procurement organizations are
authorized on an annual basis to accept strong wheat grain from inter-farm
enterprises in a trade for mixed feed (within the limits of 20-30 percent of the
annual requirement). However, if grain is procured at the kolkhezes at one price
and sold to the state in exchange for mixed feed according to another price, than
the principle of fairness in economic relations between an enterprise and the
participating farms will be violated to a certain degree.

when such a method is employed for establishing the accOunting prices for feed,
some growth is possible in the production costs for animal husbandry products. But
if we take production as a whole, then the advantages will be mutual if support in
the form of feed is organized in a fine manner: both for the kolkhozes which
taking into account the additional distribution of profit will obtain a high
profitability for feed production and for the inter-farm enterprise which will be
ensured a guaranteed production of animal husbandry products.

Based upon the example of our own inter-farm enterprise, we are becoming more
convinced with each passing year that the mixed feed problem is becoming one of the
most important problems in the intensification of animal husbandry. Having carried
out a very complicated task in this work —- the conversion.of animal husbandry over
to an industrial basis -- we encountered a clear lack of readiness for this process
on the part of the inter-farm mixed feed plant responsible for supplying the
enterprise with mixed feed. The industrial method for producing animal husbandry
products requires first of all high quality mixed feed. The inter-kolkhos mixed
feed plant is presently unable to balance the mixed feed conpletely in terms of
nutritional and biologically active substances. The principal reason for this
situation lies in the fact that the oblast administration of the mixed feed industry
issues protein-vitamin and mineral additives, feed of animal origin and other
deficit components mainly to the state mixed feed plants. Thus the question of
raising the quality of mixed feed produced at inter-farm mixed feed plants

requires solutions for problems which go far beyond the limits of inter-farm
cooperation.

Contractual discipline plays a special role in the econOmic relations between
farms which supply feed and inter-farm enterprises. A judgment can be made
regarding the durability of the entire chain of inter-farm links based upon the
degree of fulfillment of contracts.

At the present time, the overall amount of feed being delivered to the inter-farm
enterprise is as a rule being expressed in the production-financial plans of the
kolkhozes. Under such a system, full consideration is not being given to the
daily, 10-day, monthly or quarterly feed requirements of the inter-farm enterprise.
In addition, the responsibility of the feed production farms for carrying out their
established plan indicators is not being enforced. under these conditions, a
special role must be played by those contracts which the inter-farm enterprise
concludes annually with the specialised feed production farms..

One of the chief problems in contractual discipline, as revealed by the experience
of the Helitopol' Inter-farm Enterprise, concerns the times at which the contracts
are concluded. They must be concluded with the feed production farms prior to the
latter composing their production-financial plans, so as to ensure the greatest
degree of coordination in these plans of both the feed delivery volumes and the
feed assortment. The use of such an approach in the preparation of these
contracts will make it possible to take into account the requirements of the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inter-farm enterprise and the true potential of the kolkhozes with regard to feed
production.

The practical operational experience of the Helitopol' Inter-Farm Enterprise for the
production of animal husbandry products has revealed that the beat period for
concluding contracts for feed deliveries during the year being planned is during
August and September of the current year. For it is during this period that the
structure of the area under crops on the farms is being determined for the coming
year. when necessary, definite corrections can be introduced at this time into the

planting structure of those kolkhozea engaged in producing feed for the inter-farm
enterprise.

In contracts prepared at our enterprise, the responsibilities of the parties
involved for non-fulfillment of a particular item of the contract is also reflected
and this makes it possible to increase the role and importance of such contracts in
economic relations. Thus, when the inter-farm enterprise receives less animal
husbandry products than originally planned, as a result of untimely feed deliveries,
the loss is applied to the feed production farm.

when an all-round approach is employed in connection with these contracts, cyclical
operations are manifested to a greater degree in the work of the inter-farm
enterprise and more favorable conditions are created for utilizing its productive
capabilities. In addition, a high productivity for public animal husbandry and
growth in the production volume for animal husbandry products are ensured. The
substitution of directive instructions in place of a contract tends to distort the
economic relations in inter-farm cooperation between the feed production farms and
the inter-farm enterprise. When such an approach is employed in connection with
these contracts, the successes achieved will be temporary in nature and not
expected to endure for long.

The same amount of attention must be given to the contracts for delivering feed to
an inter-farm enterprise as is given to share payments, distribution of the
enterprise'a profits, formation of its funds and so forth, since the economic and
production operational indicators of each inter-farm enterprise are dependent upon
the fulfillment of these contracts.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Kolos", Kormoproizvodstvo", 1982

7026
C50: 1824/175

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRO-EOGIOHICS AND ORGANIZATION

HANDBOOK 0N SOVIET, CEMA AGRICULTURE

Moscow MIR SOTSIALIZHA V TSIFRAKB I PAKIAXH in Russian 1980 (signed to press
25 Sep 81) Pp 2, 63-68, 128

(Annotation, table of contents and chapter entitled 'Asriculture' in book "Mir
Sotaializna v Tsifrakh 1 Faktskh" [The World of Socialism in Figures and Pactell

[Excerpts] Under the general editorship of R. N. Pedorov

Authors:
I. A. Ksprsnov, V. I. Kartsev, N. N. Pusenkov, R. R. Ultanbeyev, and R. P. Fedorov
Compiler: V. S. Glagolev

The World of Socialism in Figures and Facts. 1980: Reference Book. I. A. Kaprsnov,
v. I. Kartsev, N. N. Pusenkuv, and others. Moscow: Politisdst, I981.

Annual reference publication. In it are reflected the achievements of the socialist
countries in.l980 in the most important spheres of political and economic coopera-
tion. The extensive statistical and factual material shove the development of the
basic sectors of the nstionsl scone-y. the growth of the material welfare and cul-
tural level of the workers, the intensification and development of multilateral
foreign economic relations .

The reference work is prepared on the basis of official statistical data and
materials of the the periodical press of the socialist countries.

CONTENTS
Socialist c00p¢rat1oﬂ.-Th. “.1“ Sﬁpport of World Peace.......o.................. 3

Industry. Capltﬂl COOOCNCC‘DII .nd Trmsportasoeeeeeeesseesoeeoaaeeoeooaeaeeeaae 12

“ricultureeeaseassesaseeeaaeoeaea000000000000a...Date...OOOOOOOOOOUIoeeOeeeeaaO ‘3

Increased Material Hell-Being and Cultural Level of the workers................. 69

EXCCIRBI EconOC1c TieaasaeeeaeesaeaaaaaeaeeeaasaaadaeeeceaodO-OOIOOOOOOOIOOOOOOO 9‘

l3

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRICULTURE

The develop-eat of agriculture, the increase of its efficiency and the consistent
intensification of agriculture and livestock production are constantly at the center
of attention of the connunist and working-class parties of the socialist countries.
During the past five-year-plen (1976-1980). a broad complex of nessures hes been
inplenented in the states of the socialist con-onwealth with regard to the further
steady raising of the production of the basic types of agricultural production, the
growth in the yield of agricultural crops, and the increase in the productivity of
livestock~raising. A great deal of attention was devoted to the organizational
strengthening of agricultural production cooperatives and state ferns, the expan-
sion and intensification of the specialization and concentration of production on

the basis of inter-fern cooperation and agro-industrial integration.

The unfavorable weather conditons that developed for the agriculture of the major-
ity of the socialist countries in 1980 were responsible for a certain reduction in
the volume of gross agricultural production as a whole in the countries of the
socialist connonwealth. This affected above all the volume of the gross harvest
of potatoes, which declined in all European CBHA nenber countries, as well as
sugar beets and vegetables. The harvest of bread grains and leguninous plants,
first of all wheat and rye, collected in 1980 was greater than in the preceding
year. For example, in 1980 127.3 nillion tons of wheat were harvested in the
European CEMA nenber countries (12.4 percent more than 1979) and 19.6 million tons
of rye (22.8 percent more). The livestock production of the socialist countries
continued to become stronger: 1n the majority of countries there was an increase
in large cattle livestock and especially in poultry.

In the agriculture of the Soviet union inportant changes took place during the
years following the March (1965) Plenun of the CPSU Central Committee. which set
forth the basic directions of agricultural policy of the CPSU. As a result of
enormous efforts by the party and the people, the productive forces of the country
increased to a new level. there was an increase in the production scales of kol-
khozes and sovkhozes, there was further intensification of its specialization and
concentration on the basis of inter-fern cooperation, and the economic links within
the framework of the agro-industrial conplex expanded and became more complicated.
As was noted in the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress, the naterial-technical
base of agriculture, which is acquiring an increasingly industrial appearance, was
significantly strengthened. There was an increase in the power availability per
worker and large~scale work was carried out in the area of irrigation and reclama-
tion construction. The realization of these neasures required a significant in-
crease in capital investments in agriculture. The increase in the production
efficiency of agriculture in the USSR was acconplished primarily on the basis of
the acceleration of scientific-technical progress and the amplification of the
role of intensive factors of development. The intensification of agriculture

made it possible to steadily increase the output volule of production while re-
ducing the number of workers in this sector of the national econony. The volume
of production output calculated per hectare rose in 1976-1980 by a factor of 1.3
compared to 1971r1975.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In 1980 unfavorable weather conditions for agriculture developed in many regions
of the Soviet Union. However, the strenuous labor of the workers in agriculture
and measures adopted by state and party organs made it po'sible to weaken their
negative influence on the results of the agricultural year. The gross production
of agriculture in 1980 amounted to 121.2 billion rubles (in comparable 1973 prices)
--which is 6.6 percent higher than the average annual production in the 9th Five-
Year-Plan. The average annual volume of gross agricultural production for 1976-
1980 reached 123.7 billion rubles (compared to 113.7 billion rubles of average
annual volume in 1971-1975). Compared to 1965 the gross production of agricul-
ture increased by 35 percent, including the production oﬁvplgnt“growing by

32 percent, and the production of livestock production-by 39 percent.

As a result of the continuing process of specialization and concentration in agri-
culture, the number of inter-farm enterprises and organizations increased to 9,661
by the end of 1980 (in 1965--3,356; in 1975--6,330); 154,400 (in 1965--68,500, in
1975--9b,100) kolkhozes, sovkhoaes and other enterprises and organisations took
part in them. At the end of 1980 there were more than $00 agro-industrial productic
and agricultural organizations.

The number of sovkhoaes increased to 21,000 by the end of 1980 (compared to 11,700
in 1965 and 18,100 in 1975). The average annual number of workers employed in
sovkhozes amounted to 11.500.000 people. The total sowing area of the sovkhozes
reached 111.8 million hectares (l965--89.l million hectares). A sovkhoz in 1980
averaged 17,300 hectares of agricultural lands, including 5,600'Lhectares .

of arable land, 1,906 head of large cattle, 1,125 hogs, and 59 tractors. By the
end of 1980 equipment in all the aovkhozes numbered 1,228,000 tractors, 380,000
grain combines, and 592,000 heavy trucks.

The number of kolkhoaes declined from 26,500 at the and of 1979 to 25,800 at the
end of 1980 as the result of their enlargement and the transformation of a certain
part of the kolkhozea into sovkhozes (by the decision of the general meetings of
the kolkhoz workers. The average annual number of kolkhoa workers working in the
public economy of the kolkhozes came to 13,300,000 (l965--l8,600,000; 1975--
15,200,000). Thetotalof all public areas under grain crops of the kolkhozea in
1980 came to 95.2 million hectares and 56.8 million hectares of grain crops per
1,000 people (in 1975--98.2 million hectares and 56.6 million hectares respective-
ly). The livestock of public productive cattle in the kolkhozes by the end of
1980 increased to 67.9 million head (1965--38.3 million; 1975--67.6 million

head ). At the end of 1980 the kolkhores had 1,110,000 tractors, 306,000 grain
combines, and 537,000 heavy trucks. The gross income of the kolkhoses in 1980
amounted to 19.6 billion rubles (in l975--21.5 billion rubles for a comparable
range of kolkhozes). Calculated per completed man-day, kolkhor workers in 1980
were paid 5.51 rubles in cash and products (in l965--2.68 rubles; in l975-h.54
rubles). At the end of 1980, one kolkhoz averaged #94 kolkhos households, 6,600
hectares of agricultural land (including 3,800 hectares of arable land), 1,845
head of large cattle (in 1965--l.056; in 1975-1,664), and 43 tractors.

As the result of unfavorable weather conditions in BULGARIA, the gross production
of agriculture in 1980 diminished by 6.8 percent compared to the preceding year.

There was a reduction in the yield of such crops as rye, corn, leguminous plants,
sugar beets. potatoes, and fodder root-crops.

15
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
F1)R‘0FF1C]A[.I£SEZ(M§LY

The agriculture of HUNGARY, whose average annual growth rate during the past few
years has amounted to 2.9 percent, is developing at a stable rate. The level of
development attained by this sector of the national economy is evidenced by the

fact that in 1980 1,300 kilograms of grain and 140 kilograms of meat were produced
per capita in the country. At the present time, the population is continuously sup.
plied with agricultural products and the necessary commodity funds are being created
for their growing export.

The production of agricultural output in hungary increased during 1976-1980 by 15
percent compared to the level of the preceding five-year-plan, including in state
farms and agricultural production cooperativea-by 20 percent and in private plots
and subsidiary farms--by 8 percent. The production volume of plant-growing for

the five years increased by ll percent and the production of livestock-by 20 per-
cent. The increase in agricultural production volume was secured in conditions of
a general reduction in area under agricultural crops (the allotting of land for in-
dustrial and transport construction).

During the past 5 years the area of arable land has diminished by 241,000 hectares
and there has also been a reduction in area set aside for fruit orchards and vine-
yards. At the same time there has been an increase in areas allotted to vegetable
crops, meadows and pastures. The reduction in the number of people employed in
agriculture, being noticed in Hungary as well as in practically all of the CEMA
member countries, was more moderate during the years of the past five-year-plan
than during the preceding years, but the number of people employed in the large
agricultural enterprises during the past two years has grown somewhat.

In VIETNAM the growth production of agriculture increased by 16.6 percent during
1976-1980. Moreover, the production of plant-growing, which accounts for more

than 80 percent of the gross production of total agricultural production, increased
by 20.6 percent, the production of livestock-by 2.5 percent.

In the agriculture of the GDR [German Democratic Republic] the highest production
indicators attained during any of the preceding five-year-plans were noted in
1976-1980. In spite of unfavorable weather conditions, a good harfest of grain

and other crops was gathered and the state plan targets were overfulfilled by 2
percent. The plan of state purchases was overfulfilled for all products of
livestock-raising. The existing cattle livestock corresponds to the plan targets
for 1980 and guarantees the prerequisites for the plan fulfillment of the following
year.

Successful development took place in regard to the concentration and specialization
of production. Modern plant-growing and livestock-producing agricultural produc-
tion cooperatives and national estates have developed. The agricultural production
cooperativescultivate87.6percentof the agricultural land and the national
estates--6.9 percent. In the interest of the further expansion of agricultural
production, special attention is being given not only to agricultural production
cooperatives and national estates, but also to the private subsidiary farms.
Private farms and the union of gardeners and amateur cattle-raisers account for a

large quantity of marketed vegetables, fruit, honey, meat from large cattle, hogs,
chicken and other products-which significantly helps improve the supply of the

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

population with food products. The number of members of the union of gardeners and
amateur livestock-producers increased from 800,000 in 1970 to 1 million in 1980.

The average annual growth of agricultural production in CUBA during 1976-1980
amounted to 3.5 percent. During the past five-year-plsn, the development of agri-
cultural production was adversely affected by unfavorable weather conditions, as
well as by the spread of dangerous diseases of the basic agricultural crop--sugar-
cane, and also tobacco. For the purpose of stimulating the growth of agricultural

production, a new and more progressive system of procurement prices has been intro-
duced effective 1 January 1981.

The first successes on the road of the comprehensive development of agricultural
production have been noted in the [A0 PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC RSPUBLIC. In spite of the
difficulties caused by a destructive war, the difficulties inherited from the old
regime, the natural calamities which have struck the Lao People’s Democratic Repub-
lic in the course of a number of years, as well as the subversive operations of the
enemies of the Lao people, the sown areas of the country have been restored and
expanded by 24 percent and the areas under non-grain and technical crops have
doubled.

The development of agriculture in POLAND in 1980 took place under exceedingly un~
favorable weather conditions. Excessive precipitation rendered the performance of
agricultural operations very diffiCult and were the reason for the flooding and in-
undation of approximately 1.7 million hectares of agricultural land. This caused

a significant decrease in the harvest, especially of cultivated crops and hay--
which to a decisive extent affected the results of the agricultural year. The
value of gross production of agriculture in 1980 decreased by 9.6 percent in com-
parison with 1979, including in the production of plant-growing--by 15.2 percent,
and livestock production--by 3.3 percent.

In RUMANIA the average annual volume of gross production in agriculture during
1976-1980 increased by 26.4 percent compared to the average annual volume of the
preceding five-year-plan. The average annual growth rates of agricultural produc-
tion during l916-l980 came to 4.8 percent. In the state farms the realization of
measures to expand and modernize their material-technical base continued. The
production output in state farms during 1976-1980 increased by 27 percent compared
to the preceding five-year-plan. In 1980 state farms accounted for 22.5 percent
of wheat production, b0 percent of fruit, 58.3 percent of pork, 68.7 percent of
poultry meat, 30.2 percent of cow milk, and 63.5 percent of eggs. The realization
of measures regarding the economic and organisational strengthening of agricul-
tural production cooperatives continued. Agricultural production cooperatives and
inter-cooperative economic associations received credits from the itate and
allotted significant capital investments from their own resources for the expansion
and modernization of the material-technical base. Advanced technology was intro-
duced in plantrgrowing and livestock production. An important role in increasing
the efficiency of agricultural production was played by the united state and agro-
industrial councils,which guaranteed a more rational distribution of agricultural
crops, a more efficient use of land resources and the material-technical base, and
the broad application of progressive agro-technical measures.

17
FOR 0FF1C1AI.USE‘0NIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In spite of two unfavorable years with respect to weather conditions, the agricul-
ture of CZECHOSLDVAKIA achieved certain successes during 1976-1980. The volume of
agricultural production for the five years grew by 9 percent, including the produc-
tion of plant-growing--by 6.7 percent, and livestock production-by 11 percent.

The last year of the five-year-plan-1980--was one of the unfavorable ones for the
agriculture of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. Regardless of this fact, the
volume of gross agricultural production increased by 6 percent compared to 1979.

In 1980 the country had 1,767 agricultural production cooperatives, the average
size of agricultural land of which amounted to 2,476 hectares. The state farms
(including subsidiary enterprises of industrial enterprises) numbered 203. and the
average size of their agricultural land reached 6,784 hectares. In agriculture
there were 352 joint agricultural enterprises and 591 cooperative interfarm associ-
stions.

The Strengthening of the Material-Technical Base of Agriculture

The progressive development of agricultural production in the socialist countries
is secured primarily by virtue of the further strengthening of the material-
technical base of this important sector of the national economy. its technical re-
equipment, and the systematic growth of the level of Imechanization/ of all types
of agricultural operations.

In the SOVIET UNION capital investments in the development of agriculture for the
entire complex of operations increased (in comparable prices): In the 7th Five-
Yesr-Plan they amounted to 68.2 billion rubles. in the 8th--81.5 billion, in the
9th--130.5 billion, and in the lOth--l7l.1 billion rubles. In 1980 alone, 36
billion rubles were spent for the development of agriculture--l6.9 percent more
than in 1975 and 2.6 percent more than in 1979. A total of 30.7 billion rubles
was directed towards the construction of production projects. 0f the total sum
of capital investments in the development of agriculture during l976-l980, ll3.9
billion rubles represented state capital investments, 57.7 billion rubles--capits1
investments of kolkhozes. The increase of the volume of capital investments ear-
marked for agriculture is accompanied by the growth of their relative weight in
the total volume of capital investments in the entire national economy: In the
7th Five-Year-Plan their relative weight amounted to 20 percent. in the 8th Five-
Year-Plan--23 percent, in the 9th Five-Year-Plan--26 percent, and in the 10th
Five-Year—Plan--more than 27 percent. For all the years of Soviet power capital
investments in the development of agriculture for the whole complex of operations
came to 491 billion rubles.

By virtue of the construction of new and also the expansion of existing enter-
prises, the years of the 10th Pive-Year-Plan saw the introduction of elevators
for 18.6 million tons (including in l980--3 million tons). grain depots and
storage facilities for 31.7 million tons (6 million tons). 3.8 million hectares
(0.7 million hectares) of irrigated land.3.6 million hectares (0.6 million hec-
tares) of drained land, and 36 million hectares (in 3980--4.7 million hectares)
of irrigated pastures. During 1976-1980 the following were constructed:

Poultry plantsfor egg production with a capacity of bl.b million laying hens (in-
cluding in l980-~for 7.4 million); poultry plants for meat production with a

capacity of 362.2 million units of poultry per year (100.5 million units); live-
stock housing, including mechanized farms and complexes for 21.3 million cattle

18
FOR‘OFEKJAI.USE‘ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

places for large horned cattle (3.9 million); 13.6 million for hogs (3 million) and
23.3 million for sheep (in l980-3.7 million).

In BULGARIA measures were taken in 1980 to prevent soil erosion in an area of ap-
proximately 150,000 hectares. AbOut 1,200 hectares of damaged areas were restored
to production and approximately 2,100 hectares were drained. Chemical land impene-
ment was undertaken and fertility was restored in 98,000 hectares of salty soils
and soils with increased acidity. Plant protection by biological means and inte-
grated methods was carried out on more than 290,000 hectares.

During 1976-1980 126 billion forints were allotted to the development of agricul-
tural production in HUNGARY, more than 50 billion torints to the food industry,
and 9 billion forints to forestry and the timber-processing industry. Livestock
production farms were created for several hundred thousand cattle places, the
traction force of the machinery park increased by 30 percent and its capacities
exceeded 7 million kilowatts. Grain storage facilities with a total capacity of
2 million tons were built.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 25.5 billion marks were spent in 1976-1980 for
strengthening of the production base of agriculture-which amounted to one tenth
of all means allotted to the national economy of the CDR. The fixed capital of
agriculture during this period increased by 29 percent.

In LAOS more than 100,000 hectares were irrigated during the past five-year-plan,
and there was an increase in the number of mechanical devices and machines used in

agriculture.

The volume of capital investments in the agriculture of MONGOLIA in 1980 increased
by 14 percent. A number of complex farms were constructed and 3,387 livestock
housing units were put into operation for 1.7 million head of cattle. The plan for
putting them into operation was overfulfilled by 20.9 percent, for watering points
--by 4.7 percent.

In ROMANIA land improvement work during 1976-1980 was carried out in an area totaﬁng
891,000 hectares-~which is almost 12 percent more than during 1971-1975. The total
area of irrigated land reached 2,300,000 hectares.

During 1976-1980 capital investments in agriculture in CZECHOSLOVAKIA came to 76
billion crowns, including 36 billion crowns spent for the expansion of the machinery
park and the acquisition of different types of harvesting equipment. In 1980 57,000
hectares of crop land were drained, and 16,000 hectares were irrigated.

The growth of state appropriations for the expansion and strengthening of the
material-technical base of agriculture in the socialist countries makes it possible
to increase the security of this sector with modern and highly-productive machines.

During 1976-1980 agriculture in the SOVIET UNION was supplied with 1,805,300 trac-
tors with a total engine capacity of 104.1 million horse power; 1,343,800 heavy

trucks (including specialized trucks and chassis); 973,600 tractor ploughs; 1,167,100
tractor drills; 539,000 grain combines; 62,400 best combines; 57,200 potato com-
bines; 075,600 mowing machines for tractors; and 120,500 irrigation machines and

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

installations. In 1980 agriculture received 346,700 tractors with a total engine
capacity of 28.9 million horse power; 270,000 heavy trucks; 196,600 tractor
ploughs; 226,700 tractor drills; 200,100 tractor cultivators; 117,500 grain com-
bines; 10,500 potato combines; 46,400 silage combines; 8,900 cotton pickers;
85,500 tractor mowers; 48,600 spreaders for mineral fertilisers and lime; 32,000
balers; 58,400 milking installations; 18,800 irrigation machines and installations;
and a significant number of other machines and installations. The tractor park in
agriculture grew from 1,613,000 in 1965 and 2,334,000 in 1975 to 2,562,000 in 1980;
the combined capacity of their engines came to 78 million horse power in 1965, 152
million horse power in 1975, and 191 million horse power in 1980. The grain com-
bines in the agriculture of the country numbered: 520,000 in 1965; 680,000 in 1975;
and 713,000 at the end of 1980. The truck park in agriculture grew from 945,000 in
1965 and 1,396,000 in 1975 to 1,607,000 in 1980; their combined carrying capacity
amounted to 2,580,000 tons in 1965, 4,446,000 tons in 1975, and 5,895,000 tons in
1980.

The power availability per worker is consistently growing in agriculture. Power
capacities in the agriculture of the USSR increased from 231,7 million horse power

in 1965 and 457.2 million horse power in 1975 to 605 million horse power in 1980.
Power capacities per worker in kolkhores, inter-farm agricultural enterprises and
sovkhozes increased from 7.7 horse power in 1965 and 16.8 horse power in1975 to 24.2
horse power in 1980. For every 100 hectares of sown area in 1980 there were 260
horse power of power capacities (in l965--100 horse power; in 1975--l90 horse power).
The total consumption of electric power in agriculture (including that received from
state power stations) increased from 21.1 billion kilowatt hours in 1965 and 73.8
billion kilowatt hours in 1975 to 109 billion kilowatt hours in 1980.

The agriculture of BULGARIA in 1980 was supplied with 4,352 tractors (21 percent
more than in 1979), 1,383 heavy trucks (12 percent), 3,213 tractor ploughs (8 per-
cent), and 2,035 tractor drills (11 percent more).

The technical equipment of the agriculture of HUNGARY increased. In 1980 4,524
tractors, 2,066 tractor drills, and 1,105 grain combines were sent here. The capac-
ity of machines and power units available to the agriculture of the country in-
creased by approximately 30 percent during 1975-1980.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC machine and equipment deliveries to agriculture
were realized according to plan; in 1980 5,692 tractors and 400 grain combines were
delivered. A total of 147,900 tractors, 54,600 heavy trucks, and 13,600 grain com-
bines were working in agricultural enterprises.

Deliveries of machines and mechanical devices are increasing in LAOS-which, along
with the growth of the use of mineral fertilizer, makes it possible to make wide
use of intensive methods of conducting agricultural production.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INDR‘OFTHCJAI.IEHE(NVLY

Table l. Tractor Park in Agriculture
(In Physical Units, at the End of the Year, in thousands)

 

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979* lgggf
USSR 595 1,122 1,977 2,336 2,560 2,562
Bulgaria 6.6 25.8 53.6 66.7 66.6 63.6
Hungary 13.6 61.0 68.6 62.1 58 57.1
COR 36.6 71 169 160 160 163
Cuba ... ... 51.6 56.8 66.3 70.6
Mongolia 0.1 1.7 5.5 8.1 9.6 9.6
Poland 28.6** 62.8** 231 611 525 599
Rumania 13.7 66.2 107 120 139 160
Czechoslovakia 25.8*** 76.9 136 162 160 138
Yugoslavia ... 30.7 68.2 226 . . . . . .

*)At the beginning of the year, except USSR.
**)Not including gardening and truck-farming tractors.
***)1951.

The agriculture of MONGOLIA was supplied with more than 700 tractors, 170 grain
combines and a significant quantity of other technical equipment in 1980.

Difficulties arose in POLAND in 1980 in the supply of agriculture with the means of
production. The cost of deliveries of tractors, trailers, engines and agricultural
machines amounted to 32.7 billion zlotys, which is 2.6 percent less than in 1979.
Deliveries included 60,000 tractors, 37,000 tractor ploughs, 12,000 tractor drills,
6,100 grain combines. 0f the total number of tractors--618,000 units--at the dis-
posal of the agriculture of the country at the end of 1980, approximately 115,000
were found in agricultural groups and cooperatives (a reduction of 5.8 percent for
the year) and approximately 378,000 tractors (an increase of 16.5 percent for the
year) in the non-socialized sector of agriculture. The total cost of credits
granted to the rural population in 1980 amounted to 66.7 billion zlotys--which is
13.6 percent less than in 1979.

During the past five-year-plan (1976-1980) the number of tractors in the agricul-
ture of RUHANIA increased by 27,000. The number of self-propelled combines grew
by 17,900 to 39,100. By 1980 the ploughing, sowing and harvesting of cereals,
sunflowers and soy-bean were almost completely mechanized. An important direction
of the intensification of agricultural production in the socialist countries is its
/chemica1ization/. The quantity of mineral fertilizers and chemical plant protec-
tion agents being supplied to this sector is growing.

In the SOVIET UNION the production of mineral fertilizers grew (in conventional
units) from 31.3 million tons in 1965 and 90.2 million tons in 1975 to 106 million
tons in 1980 (recalculated per 100 percent of nutritious substancea--to 26.8
million tons). In the 100 percent calculation according to operating principle,
103,000 tons of chemical plant protection agents were produced in 1965, 266,000
tons in 1975, and 283,000 tons in 1980. In the production of mineral fertilizers
the Soviet Union occupies first place in the world. By virtue of the construction
of new. as well as the expansion and reconstruction of operating enterprises, the

21
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following capacities for the production of mineral fertilizers were put into opera-
tion (average per year): During 1966-1970-6.6 million tons; during 1971-1975--7.6
million tons; during l976-1980--7.9 million tons, including in 1980-~9.9 million
tons. In 1980 agriculture received 81.8 million tons of mineral fertilizers in
Conventional unite (recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient substances-18.8
million tons) and 2.7 million tons of chemical feed additives (recalculated per

100 percent of nutrient eubetances--0.5 million tons). During the years of the
10th Five-Year-Plan a total of approximately 390 million tons of mineral fertili-
zers were supplied to agriculture.

In BULGARIA the production of mineral fertilizers in 1980 amounted to 3.3 million
tons and, recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient eubetances--0.6 million tons.

The production of mineral fertilizers in HUNGARY in 1980 reached 4.9 million tons
(recalculated per 100 percent nutrient substancee-l million tone). The consump-
tion of mineral fertilizers in the agriculture of the Hungarian People’s Republic
in 1980 (1.6 million tons), although somewhat lower than in 1975, increased in
effectiveness of their use-~vhich is evidenced by the improvement in the indicators
achieved in plant-growing.

In the agriculture of the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC [we find] one of the highest
levels of consumptiou of mineral fertilizers per hectare of arable land and peren-
nial plantations. In 1980 a total of 15.1 million tons of mineral fertilizers was
produced and, recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient substances, 4.8 million
tons.

Table 2. Deliveries of Mineral Fertilizers to Agriculture
(In Thousands of Tons of Nutrient Substances)

Countries 1950 1960 1970 197 1979 1980*
USSR 1,261 2,626 10,317 17,251 17,365 18,763
Bulgaria 6.2 157 639 679 820 830
Hungary 35.2 168 837 1,535 1,502 1,400
GDR 678 951 1,535 1,826 1,713 1,637
Cuba ... ... 396 331 ... ...
Mongolia ... ... 1.9 25.6 52.3 66
Poland 363 765 2,416 3,660 3,567 3,635
Rumania 6 82 702 1,197 1,631 1,185
Czechoslovakia 262 510 1,227 1,60ﬁ 1,765 1,730
Yugoslavia ... 286 632 720 ... ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR.

The deliveries of mineral fertilizers to the agriculture ofllnmoblA in 1980
amounted to 64,000 tons.

In RUHANIA the production of mineral fertilizers in 1980 reached 12.1 million tons
(recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient eubatances-2.5 million tons). During

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1976-1980 agriculture was supplied with 6.4 million tons of mineral fertilizers (re-
calculated per nutrient substances)--which is 1.9 million tons more than during

1971-1975. The average annual consumption of mineral fertilizers per hectare of
arable land during 1976-1980 amounted to 112 kilograms compared to 77 kilograms
during the preceding five-year-plan.

In CZECHOSLOVAKIA 5.7 million tons of fertilizers were produced in 1980 (1.2 million
tons recalculated per nutrient substances). The deliveries of mineral fertilizers
to agriculture reached 1,730,000 tons in 1980 (in nutrient substance)--which made it
possible to increase the consupmtion of mineral fertilizers per hectare of agricul-
tural lands.

Table 3. Application of Mineral Fertilizer per Rectsre of Arable Land and Perennial
Plantations (In Kilogram of Nutrient Substance)

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1978 1979
USSR 7.3 12.2 46.8 77.5 82.5 77.7
Bulgaria 1.5 36.1 159 166 180 201
Hungary 6 29.4 150 276 286 280
GDR 129 188 319 370 331 340
Cuba ... ... 125 96.4 ... ...
Mongolia ... ... 2.3 34.2 35.7 41.7
Poland 24.1 48.6 162 236 241 239
Rumania 0.6 7.9 66.7 114 141 137
Czechoslovakia 49.7 94.6 230 305 334 335
Yugoslavia ... 34 77 90 107 ..

The Production of the Output of Agriculture

Unfavorable weather conditions that developed in 1980 for a number of socialist
countries were reflected in the results achieved in agriculture. For the agricul-
ture of the SOVIET URION the year 1980 was one of the unfavorable ones in terms of
weather conditions. Regardless of this fact. the average annual harvest of grain
during the years of the 10th Pive-Year-Plan exceeded 200 million tons for the first
time. If during 1961-1965 it amounted to 130.3 million tons, during 1966-1970 to
167.6 million tons, during 1971-1975 to 181.6 million tons, it reached 205 million
tons during 1976-1980. In 1980 189.1 million tons of grain were produced--10 mil-
lion tons more than in 1979; 98.2 million tons of wheat were harvested; 10.2 million
tons of rye; 9.5 million tons of corn; 6.4 million tons of leguminous plant crops;
and 2.8 million tons of rice.

The largest harvest of raw cotton was brought in--9.96 million tons. The plan for
selling it to the state was overfulfilled by all cotton-growing republics. The
procurement points received 6.24 million tons from the farms of the Uzbek 888, 1.26

million tons from the Turkmen 88R, 1.01 million tons from the Tajik 888. The har-
vest of sugar beets (for factories) amounted to 79.6 million tons; sunflower--4.65
million tons; potatoes--67 million tons; and vegetables--25.9 million tons.

23
FOR OFFHJAI.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These results were achieved in the presence of a certain decrease of the sowing
area under bread grains and potatoes during the years of the 10th Five-Year-Plan,

as well as the partial expansion of sowing areas under industrial crops and fodder
crops.

The average annual state procurements of grain during 1976-1980 came to 77.7 million
tons (in 1980--69.4 million tons) by comparison with 67.6 million tons during the
years of the 9th Five-Year-Plan. State purchases of cotton grew from 7.67 million
tons on the average during 1971-1975 to 8.93 million tons during 1976-1980 (in
l980--9.96 million tons). In 1980 64.4 million tons of sugar beets were procured;

3.36 million tons of sunflower; 11.1 million tons of potatoes; and 17.7 million tons
of vegetables.

Table 4. Output of the Products of Agriculture in All Categories of Farms of the
USSR (Millions of Tons)

Average per Year

 

Products 1971—1975 1976-1980 197 Egg
Grain 181.6 205.0 179.2 189.1
Raw cotton 7.67 8.93 9.16 9.96
Sugar beets (for

factories) 76.0 88.4 76.2 79.6
Sunflower 5.97 5.32 5.41 4.65
Potatoes 89.8 82.6 91.0 67.0
Vegetables 23.0 26.0 27.2 25.9

The average annual production of grain in HUNGARY during 1976-1980 was 11 percent
more than the average annual production during 1971-1975. The average annual
harvest of wheat during the past five-year-plan came to 5.2 million tons, that of
corn--6.3 million tons--which signifies a growth of 20 percent and 7 percent re-
spectively by comparison with the preceding five-yesr-plan. The increased harvests
of cereals were attained thanks to an increase in their yield (in the presence of
a reduction of sown areas). Sown area under sugar beet cultivation increased by
26 percent during the five-year-plan, but the harvest of sugar beets increased by
28 percent. The production of sunflower seeds was increased at accelerated rates.
In 1980 the sown areas under sunflower cultivation almost doubled by comparison
with 1975, and the harvest tripled. While there were significant annual fluctua-
tions, on the whole the harvest of fruits and grapes increased during the five-
year-plan.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC a good harvest of grain and several other agri-
cultural crops was brought in. In 1980 the harvest of cereals was the third
highest for all the years of the existence of the GDR. Plan targets for some
other crops were also fulfilled or overfulfilled. However, there was a decrease
in the harvest of potatoes, sugar beets, oil-producing. crops, and a number of

vegetables and fruits. The plan for the state procurements of plant-growing
production was fulfilled with respect to cereals, edible leguminous plants,

24
FOR 0FF1C1AL.USE1DNLY
Average per Year

Countries 1951-1955 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1979 1980*
USSR' 88,500 130,335 181,556 209,012 179,176 189,090
Bulgaria 6,200 6,863 7,665 8,063 8,360 7,708
Hungary 6,100 6,905 11,527 12,608 12,191 ...
GDR 6,600 5,969 8,760 8,970 8,952 9,737
Cuba ... ... 397 666 667 511
Mongolia 35 289 366 369 331 259
Poland 12,300 15,627 21,261 20,016 17,570 18,561
Rumania 8,600 11,101 16,976 19,272 19,626 20,306
Czechoslovakia 500 5,658 9,636 10,030 9,300 10,992
Yugoslavia 6,700** 11,200*** 11,800**** 15,700***** 15,779 ...

*) Preliminary data, except 0558. **)1950. ***) 1960. ****) 1970. *****) 1976-78.

food potatoes, and fruit. At the same time, the plan was not fulfilled uith respect
to the procurement of oil-producing crops, sugar beets, and vegetables.

Table 6. Cross Harvest of Potatoes
(1n Thousands of Tons)

Average per Year

 

Countries 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1979 1980*
USSR 81,628 89,782 86,658 90,956 67,023
Bulgaria 600 355 387 626 315
Hungary 1,998 1,602 1,596 1,512 1,366
GDR 12,066 10,806 10,038 12,263 9,297
Cuba ... 81 176 201 263
Mongolia 21.3 25.5 50.6 72.6 39
Poland 63,682 67,083 66,830 69,572 26,396
Rumania 2,600 3,387 6,506 6,562 6,135
Czechoslovakia 5,635 6,571 3,928 3,725 2,713
Yugoslavia 2,711 2,930 2,787** 2,670 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) 1976-1978.

In LAOS the production of rice and other agricultural crops increased by 31 percent
during the past five years.

Extremely unfavorable weather conditions developed in 1980 for the agriculture of
MONGOLIA. There was a reduction in the gross harvest of cereals, potatoes and
other agricultural crops. The harvest of vegetables cane to 26,000 tons and of
fodder crops--103,000 tons.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In POLAND the harvest of the basic four grain crops (wheat. rye. barley and oats)
amounted to 16.4 million tons, 2.9 percent less than the average annual harvest of
these crops during 1975-1979. In 1980 the wheat harvest came to 5.2 million tons;
ryc--6.6 million tons; barley--3.4 million tons; and oats-2.2 million tons. The
harvest of potatoes and sugar beets was considerably smaller than in 1979.

Table 7. Gross Harvest of Sugar Beets
(For Factories. in Thousands of Tons)

Average per Year

 

Countries 1951-1955 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1979 1980*
ussa 26,000 59,170 75,903 90,668 76,214 79,559
Bulgaria 600 1.4100 1.711 1,931 2.045 1.10165
Bungary 2,100 3,093 3,097 3,988 3.923 3,873
can 5,200 5,373** 5,696 6,026 6,502 6,668
Cuba*** ... a7,5oo**** 50.670* 51,100“ ... ...
Poland 6,500 11,436 13,761 15,152 10,150 10,370
Rumania 1,300 2,637 6,750 6,278 6,109 5,561
Czechoslovakia 5,500 6,277 6,867 7,073 7,613 7,223
Yugoslavia ... 2,306 3.629 5,070” 5,920 ...

*7 Preliminary data, except USSR. **) Including sugar beets for cattle feeding.
***) Sugar-cane. ****) 1960. +) Average for 1971-1973. *‘)1976-1976.

In RUHANIA the average annual production of grain during 1976-1980 increased by 30.8
percent compared to the average annual production during the preceding five-year-
plan. In 1980 they obtained: 11.2 million tons of corn (compared to 8.h million
tons on the average per year during 1971-1975); 1.4 million tons of fruit (compared
to 1.1 million tons; 1.3 million tons of grapes (compared to 1.2 million tons).

During 1976-1980 the production of cereals in CZECHOSLOVAKIA increased by 7.6 per~
cent. In 1980 a good harvest of cereals and rape was brought in. In l980 1.5
million tons of cereals more than in 1979 were obtained. The harvest of rape--
213,000 tons--was significantly larger than in 1979 (and larger than planned)--
which made it possible to limit the import of seeds of oil-producing crops. A good
harvest of perennial green forage was obtained--$.b million tons. 1.5 million tons
more than in 1979. But there was a significant reduction in the potato and sugar
beet harvest. State procurements came to 3.5 million tons of grain, 209,000 tons
of rape, and 988,000 tons of potatoes for sale to the population. The procurement
plan was fulfilled with respect to grain and rape; with respect to potatoes the
plan was underfulfilled to the extent of 33.3 percent.

The intensification of agricultural production in the socialist countries finds
reflection in the gradual growth of the yield of the basic agricultural crops,
regardless of the fluctuations that occur during individual years as a result of
weather conditions.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the SOVIET UNION the average annual yield of food graina roae from 10.2 quintala
per hectare during 1961-1965 to 16 quintala per hectare in 1976-1980. There is
continued growth in the yield of the cotton plant: In 1965 it amounted to 23.2
quintala per hectare; in 1970-25.1 quintala; in 1975--26.9 quintala; in l980--3l.7
quintals per hectare. In 1980 216 quintala of augar beeta (for factoriea) were
harvested per hectare, 10.7 quintala of aunflower, 96 quintala of potatoes, and 167

quintala of vegetables per hectare.

A stable and high yield of cereala waa attained in the agriculture of HUNGARY: The
average annual yield of wheat during 1976-1980 came to 40.6 quintala per hectare;
corn--68.6 quintala per hectare--which in both cases in approximately 7 quintala
per hectare higher than during the preceding five-year-plan.

ln VIETNAM the yield of the basic food crop--rice--which occupiea more than 5.5
million hectares. in 1980 amounted to 20.8 quintalo per hectare (according to pre-
liminary data); augar-cane--610 quintala; jute--20.5 quintala; and peanuta--9.6
quintala per hectare.

In 1980 the yield of practically all baaic agricultural cropa in the GERMAN DEMO-
CRATIC REPUBLIC exceeded their average annual yield during 1976-1979. Ihua, 38.1
quintaia of grain per hectare were obtained in 1980 as compared to 35.2 quintala
per hectare on the average during 1976-1979; oil-producing cropa--23.6 quintala
(compared to 22.5 quintala); potatoea--180 quintala'(170 quintala); augar beets--
278 quintals (266); cultivated fodder cropa~-604 quintala (341); and corn for

green fodder and ailage--312 quintala per hectare (288 quintala per hectare).

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘DR‘OFFICIAL.UEEZ(MVLY

1n RUHANIA the yield of wheat during 1976-1980 increased by 4.7 quintals per hectare.
corn--by 6.6 quintals per hectare. sunflower--by 1.6 quintala per hectare. sugar
beets-~by 27 quintels per hectare. and tomatoes--by 10.7 quintals per hectare. A
higher yield was also achieved in the basic fodder crops being cultivated: Alfalfa
for hay—-by 14.7 quintals per hectare, fodder root crops-~by.5.3 qnintals per hec-
tare, and silage crops-~by 16.3 quintals per hectare, although the low production

of fodder crops was noted, especially in an area of 4.5 million hectares of meadows
and pastures.

The Output of Livestock Production

In all socialist countries the necessary conditions are being secured for the fur-
ther development of livestock production. the increase of its productivity, and the
expansion of production of the most important types of production.

In the USSR the gross production of livestock‘in 1980 increased by 4 percent com-
pared to 1975 and surpassed the level of 1965 by 39 percent and the level of 1970
by 17 percent. Large cattle livestock increased by 4 million head during 1976-
1980; while in the kolkhozea. interfarn organisations, sovkhoses and other state
organisations it increased from 87.6 million to 92.1 million. it decreased somewhat
in the private subsidiary farms of the population (from 23.4 million to 23 million
head). At the end of the past five-year-plan the livestock of cows reached 43.4
million, of which 30.2 million were in kolkhozes, interfarm organizations. sovkhozes
and other state farms, and 13.2 million head-in private subsidiary farms of the
population. The livestock of swine increased by 15.6 million during the 10th Five-
Year-Plan, that of sheep and goats practically remained at the same level. The
average yield of milk from one cow in all categories of farms in 1980 amounted to
2,143 kilograms, including in sovkhoees-2,246 kilograms; in interfarm agricul-
tural enterprises--2,952 kilograms. The average annual production of meat during
the years of the 10th Five-Year-Plan increased by comparison vith the average
annual level of its production during the 8th Pive-Year-Plan by 27.6 percent;
milk--by 14.9 percent; eggs-by 76.3 percent; and wool-by 15.6 percent. '

Table 9. The Output of Livestock Products in the USSR
(In All Categories of Farms)

Average per Year

 

 

 

 

Products 1966-1970 1971-1975 1976'1980 1979 1980
Heat (in dead weight,

millions of tons) 11.6 14.0 14.8 15.4 15.0
Milk (millions of tons) 80.6 87.4 92.6 93.2 90.7
Eggs (in billions) 35.8 51.4 63.1 65.8 67.7
Wool (thousands of tons) 398 442 460 478 462

State procurements of cattle and poultry (in live weight) in 1980 amounted to 15.9
million tons (recalculated as dead weight: 9.9 million tons); milk and milk
products (recalculated as milk)--57.3 million tons; eggs--43.1 billion. The

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established volume of egg purchases was overfulfilled; that for cattle and poultry,
as well as eggs was underfulfilled. The relative weight of kolkhoaes, sovkhoaes and
other state farms in the total volume of procurements in 1980 amounted to: Cattle
and poultry-96 percent (in l975--87 percent): milk-96 percent (95 percent); eggs--
97 percent (96 percent): and wool-83 percent (in 1975-86 percent).

During the years of the past five-year-plan (1976-1980) a gradual increase in cattle
livestock was noted in BULGARIA. Domestic poultry livestock increased from 38.1
million in 1975 to 61.6 million in 1980. The output of the basic types of livestock
production in 1980 exceeded the level of the preceding year: Meat-by 0.7 percent,
amounting to 692,000 tons (in dead weight); milk-by 0.3 percent (2,166 liters);
eggs--by 8.6 percent (2,680 million units).

Table 10. Large Cattle Livestock
(In Thousands of Heads, at the 8nd of the Year)

 

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979 1980*
USSR 57,089 75,780 99,225 111,036 115,100 115,057
Bulgaria 1,967 1,662 1,353 1,725 1,839 1,863
Hungary 2,022 1,965 1,912 1,906 1,950 1,911
60R 3,615 6,675 5,190 5,532 5,596 5,722
Cuba ... 5,000 5,738 5,500 5,212 ...
Mongolia 1,988 1,906 2,108 2,627 2,677 2,397
Poland 7,200 8,695 10,220 12,766 12,166 11,335
Rumania 6,502 6,530 5,216 6,126 6,513 6,685
Czechoslovakia 6,303 6,387 6,288 6,555 6,915 5,002
Yugoslavia ... 5,297 5,202 5,938 5,566 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR.

Large cattle livestock in HUNGARY amounted to 1.9 million at the end of 1980. The
livestock of swine during 1976-1980 continued to increase; in 1980 they numbered
almost 20 percent more than in 1975. Sheep livestock grew by approximately 1 mil‘
lion head during the five-year-plan; there was an increase in domestic poultry
livestock. Approximately 56 percent of the total number of slaughter animals during
the past few yecrs were swine. and the proportion of the production of beef de-
creased, having avounted to 17 percent in 1980. In the production of meat the

share of dressed poultry increased: In 1980 it reached 20 percent. The production
of milk increased by approximately 60 percent thanks to the increase in uilk yield.

In VIETNAM the buffalo livestock increased during 1976-1980 by 5.7 percent; cows--
by 11 percent; and svine-by 16.7 percent.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC livestock of all types of farm animals increased.
Large cattle livestock increased by 126,000 during the year; moreover the livestock

of cows--from 2,126,000 to 2,138,000. The livestock of swine increased by 739,000
during the year, including sows--by 10,000 and sheep-~by 59,000. Laying hens
numbered 26,500,000 in 1979 and 26,866,000 in 1980. The average annual milk yield

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
from one cow continued to increase: During the year it increased by 50 kilograms
and reached 3,923 kilograms in 1980. The plan for state purchases of all livestock
products was overfulfilled. The procurements of cattle ready for slaughter in-
creased by 2.7 percent during the year and reached 2,336,000 tons; milk--by 1.7 per-
cent (to 7,919,000 tons); and eggs--by 5.7 percent (to 6,709 million units).

Table 11. Swine Livestock
(Thousands of Heads, at the End of the Year)

 

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979 1980'l
USSR 26,372 58,676 67,683 57,899 73,898 73,382
Bulgaria 818 2,553 2,369 3,889 3,830 3,806
Hungary 6,782 6,388 7,311 6,953 8,355 8,265
60R 5,705 8,316 9,686 11,501 12,132 12,871
Mongolia 2.5** 3.9 10.7 12.5 36.5 33.9
Poland 9,350 12,615 13,863 21,667 20,983 18,728
Rumania 2,197 6,300 6,359 8,813 10,899 11,562
Yugoslavia ... 6,210 5,566 7,683 7,767 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) 1952.

Table 12. Sheep Livestock
(ThOusands of Heads, at the End of the Year)

 

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979 1980*
USSR 82,595 133,016 138,059 161,636 163,599 l67,687**
Bulgaria 7,820 9,333 9,678 10,016 10,536 10,633
Hungary 990 2,250 2,316 2,039 2,927 3,000
COR 1,085 2,015 1,595 1,883 1,979 2,038
Cuba*** ... ... 76.2 101 165 ...
Mongolia , 12,575 12,102 13,312 16,658 16,610 18,797**
Poland 2,199 3,662 2,661 3,178' 3,633 6,200****
Rumania 10,222 11,500 13,818 13,865 15,820 16,212**
Czechoslovakia 596 666 981 805 875 967**
Yugoslavia ... 11,669 ' 8,976 8,175 7,339 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) Sheep and goats. ***) State sector
****) In mid-year.

Certain successes were achieved in the livestock production of LAOS, where the
number of large cattle in 1980 exceeded 1.2 million.

In MONGOLIA 8.5 million head of young animals were raised in 1980. The plan for
purchases of cattle for the country as a whole was fulfilled to the extent of 93
percent.

30
1N3R OWTHCIAI.USEZ(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The insufficient provision of livestock feeds in POLAND in 1980 led to the reduc-
tion in large cattle livestock compared with 1979; sheep livestock also decreased

by 0.4 percent. The production of meat amounted to 3.2 million tons (in dead
weight)--2.6 percent less than in 1979; milk-~16.2 billion liters (1.6 percent
less); eggs--8.9 billion units (2.1 percent more). State purchases of livestock
products in agricultural enterprises of the socialized sector increased by 5 percent
compared to 1979; in the non-socialized sector they decreased by 0.6 percent, re-
gardless of a significant increase of prices for agricultural products.

In RUHANIA large cattle livestock during 1980 increased by 5.9 percent; swine--by
31 percent; sheep and goats--by 13.3 percent; domestic poultry--by 26.6 percent.
The growth of cattle livestock took place primarily in the socialist agricultural
organizations. in which the breeding and fattening of cattle in modern livestock
complexes on an industrial basis expanded. The average annual production of meat
during the five-year-plan (in dead weight) amounted to 2,333,000 tons; cow milk--
68.9 million bectoliters; wool--35,000 tons; and eggs--6,566 million units. The
production of livestock during 1976-1980 exceeded the average annual level of the
preceding five-year plan: With respect to meat-by approximately 560,000 tons; cow
milk--by 10.3 million hectoliters;wool--by 4.800 tons; and egg production--by
approximately 1,920 million units. However, state plan targets with respect to
the growth of cattle livestock, meat,mi1k and wool production were not fulfilled.

Livestock production in CZECHOSLOVAKIA is developing at steady rates. During
1976-1980 the production of meat and milk increased by 13 percent. Cattle live-
stock is growing gradually, and its productivity is increasing. At the end of
1980 large cattle numbered more than 5 million head (including 1.9 million cows),
swine-~7.9 million. The average annual yield of milk per cow increased to 3.089
liters--which is 133 liters more than at the end of 1979. The total increase in
milk production amounted to 237 million liters. The average annual egg output of
hens reached 228 eggs (in 1979--22h eggs). In the socialist sector of agriculture
the average daily gain in weight of cattle being fattened came to 0.72 kilograms,
of swine--0.Sl6 kilograms. For every 100 cows an average of 98.5 calves was
raised, for one sow--l6.7 suckling pigs. By comparison with 1979, 27,000 more
calves and 488,000 more suckling pigs were raised in 1980.

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAT, 1981

8970
050: 1825/36

31

INJR 0FFN]AI.USEI)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRD-dWMJHICS All) ORGﬁNIZA'fION

[DC 338.109.3

ACCOUNTING SYSTrM HANS IN SOVKIDZ, ENTERPRISB. INTKRRHATIONS

Moscow MNIROVANIYA I UCHEI‘ V SEL'SWIGDZYAYSTVENKH PREPRIYATIYAKH in Russian
No 12, Dec 81, pp 13-16

[hrticle by V.N. Bauer, chief of the Control-Auditing Department of the Agricultural
Production Administration of the Kenerovskaya Oblast Executive Committee: 'Tb
Intensify Control Over the Accounting §ystem of Kolkhoses and Sovkhoses With Their
Service Enterprises and Organizationsﬂl '

[Texg/ In carrying out their economic activities, kolkhosas and sovkhoses utilize
the services of various enterprises and organisations created for this purpose.
However, quite often these relationships turn out to be unacceptable to the former,
since they cause harm to their economies. Let us examine this problem using farms
in our oblast as an example.

Numerous checks carried out on the correctness of mutual accounts, conducted by
agricultural enterprises with enterprises and organizations of Goskomsel’khortekhnika
associations, Sel'khozkhimiya and others, have revealed crude violations of the
effective prices by the latter, as well as all types of overcharges and
miscalculations.

The enterprises and organizations of Goskomsel'khoztekhnika, for example, when
carrying out computations for completed work, must be guided by Statute No. 36 of
the USSR Council of Ministers, dated 13 January 1970, entitled 'leveling Off Those
expenses of Kolkhozes and Sovkhozes and Other Agricultural Enterprises and
Organizations That Are Associated with Shipments of Logistical Resources" and by
Instruction No. l3-l7l52/l of Rossel'khostekhnlka, dated 20 October 1975, entitled
"0n the Procedures For the Use of Price Harkups By Supply Organizations of
Rossel'khoztekhnika." But what are we seeing in actual practice?

In 1980 and 1881, incidents of overcharging were uncovered in connection with the
transporting of cement by units of Goakomsel'khoztekhnika. In violation of the
established system, the kolkhozes and sovkhozes were initially presented with a
rebate for having used their own transport for hauling the cement (in percentages
of the value of the cement sold, depending upon the distance of the shipment) and
subsequently additional bills were presented for the motor transport services.
Thus, more than 14,000 additional rubles were obtained from farms in Kemerovskiy
and Novokuznetskiy Rayons alone. This money was subsequently returned to the
kolkhozes and sovkhozes.

32
Incidents of overcharging also took place in the case of shipments of machines and
equipment from the supplier-plants. Here the kolkhozes and sovkhozes were
presented with a bill for motor transport services which exceeded the 12.5 percent
price markup of the consumer-farm. Following a suitable explanation by RSPSR
Coskomsel'khoztekhnika, the money wrongly obtained from the farms was returned to
them.

The expenses associated with a motor vehicle run from the supplier plants, using
the plants' own motor vehicles, are often reimbursed by the agricultural

enterprises, althOugh they must be applied to the Goskomsel'khoztekhnika account.

In accordance with existing instructions, the computations for the capital repair of
agricultural machines, units and assemblies are carried out based upon wholesale
prices (Price List No. 26-03-31) and those not included in it -- according to the
estinmted cost, that is, according to the actual expenditures. This is of

advantage only to Goskomsel'khoztekhnika, since it is allowed to establish the
charge for the capital repair, for example, of combines, at its own discretion. As
a result, the kolkhozes and sovkhozes sustain annual losses.

Thus, in June 1981, inspections established the fact that the Chebulinskiy
Raysel'khoztekhnika collected a payment of l,050-1,200 rubles for the capital
repair of SKD-S Sibiryak combines. One can only wonder why wholesale prices have
still not been approved for the capital repair of SKD-S Sibiryak, Niva and Kolos
combines. In the case of the former, it is already being removed from production
owing to obsolescence.

suite often the enterprises of Goskomsel'khoztekhnika overcharge the farms by
selling spare parts to them and charging them for the repair of agricultural

equipment.

Many abuses are being tolerated by the production association of Kemerovosel'khoz;
montazhkomplekt and particularly by its subordinate PHK [mobile mechanized column/
and administration for start-up and adjustment work. Thus, last year, for the
repair of an electric boiler at a secondary school of the Bannovskiy Sovkhoz, the
administration for start-up and adjustment work presented a bill for an amount
which exceeded the value of the boiler by a factor of four. For just eight of the
work completion documents checked (Form No. 2), the overcharges amounted to 5,200
rubles. The materials Erma this check were reviewed by the oblast people's

control committee. The officials who composed the fake job orders and who tolerated
the overcharges for work volumes completed were called to account for their actions.

In any of this year, similar violations were also uncovered during an audit
conducted at the Kemerovo Sovkhoz-Technical School. In December 1980, for the
purpose of achieving plan fulfillment, the leaders of the Kemerovo PHK and the
sovkhoz-technicsl school prepared a fake document for work carried out in
connection with the installation of a metal fence around the machine yard of the
savkhoz-technical school, with a value of 19,400 rubles assigned to the work. It
was later revealed that this work was carried out only partially and considerably
later. The materials of the mentioned check were turned over to the investigatory
organs.

The Kemerovosel'khozmontnzhkomplekt association is not providing the agricultural
enterprises with the necessary price handbooks for installation, finishing and

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

electrical work. Thus they are unable to check, in a timely manner, on the
correctness of the rates being employed.

Overcharges are also occurring in connection with the technical servicing of the
machine-tractor pool and the equipment of animal husbandry farms.

Numerous overcharges in freight transport volumes were uncovered during a check on
the accounts for motor vehicle services. At the Chumayskiy Sovkhos in Chebulinskiy
Rayon alone, these overcharges amounted to more than 2,000 tons, valued at 12,300
rubles. The materials of a documentary audit conducted at this sovkhoz were turned
over to the investigatory organs and to the rayon people's control comaittee.

It bears mentioning that the kolkhozes and sovkhoses, being dependent upon
Goskomsel'khoztekhnika, were quite often forced to accept its conditions for the
provision of motor transport vehicles, which are based upon the principle: "If a
ton of freight is not scheduled for the return (empty) trip, a vehicle will not be
made available."

quite often the enterprises and organizations of Goakomsel'khoztekhnika require
payment to be made for motor transport services for transporting silage bulk and
grain from the combines and other freight based upon temporary rates and this brings
about a sharp increase in the cost of such transport operations.

we are devoting a great amount of attention to carrying out checks on the
correctness of the accounts being maintained on motor vehicle services by the
motor transport enterprises. First of all we ascertain who fills out the
commodity-transport documents. since the drivers are forbidden to do this.

Overchsrges in freight transport volumes and falsifications in official and signed
documents can be brought to light by comparing the data contained in the log of the
weigh master (Form No. 175) against the records for the shipment of grain and other
products from the fields and the commodity-transport invoices attached to the bills
for payment. Unfortunately. soae farms are not following the system established for
accounting for grain earmarked for ensiling. In particular, the commodity-transport
invoices for transporting such bulk are written out only for the drivers involved.
The absence of the appropriate documents at a farm precludes the possiblity of
checking upon the correctness of the bills being presented by the motor vehicle
establishments.

In violation of Point 23 entitled "Unified Rates for Freight Shipments by Motor
Vehicle Transport" (Price List No. 13-01-01), individual motor vehicle
establishments are not granting a reduction in price, in the established manner, to
those kolkhozes and savkhozes which carry out measures aimed at raising the
coefficient of use of the freight carrying capability of motor vehicles above 0.6.

In conformity with the decrees of the CC CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers on
crop harvesting problems, motor vehicles of the USSR Ministry of Motor Transport and
other ministries and departments are employed each year for transporting the crops.
However, violations are being observed in the system of accounts being maintained
with the owners of trucks for transporting the crops.

The instruction issued by the USSR Ministry of Finances, USSR Gosbank and the USSR
CSA entitled 'The lccounting System for Freight Shipments by Motor Vehicle

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Transport" was approved on 28 December 1977. Since 1 January 1979, new forms have
been introduced for commodity-transport invoices and the method for filling them out
regulated. The RSPSR Council Of Ministers, in Decree No. 253 dated 13 Hay 1980,
also introduced changes into the RSFSR regulations for motor transport operations.
In particular, the punitive fines were increased for above-normal idle time of
motor vehicles (from 8 to 15 kopecks per minute) and for the incorrect or untimely
preparation of the commodity-transport invoices or route documents. Notwithstanding
the existence of all of these normative documents, errors in the preparation of

the commodity-transport invoices are still occurring on a frequent basis. As a
result, the motor vehicle establishments are able to apply fines incorrectly against
the kolkhozes and sovkhozes.

Over the past 3 years for example, Motor Vehicle Column No. 1960 of the oblast

motor vehicle administration furnished 273,000 rubles worth of motor vehicle
services, for harvesting the crops, to six sovkhozes in Prokop'yevskiy Rayon. At the
same time, it exacted 93,000 rubles in fines for above-normal vehicle idle time.

This constituted 34 percent of the total value of the services rendered.

In 1980, the Ugol'shchik Sovkhoz paid 12,000 rubles in fines to this same motor

vehicle column, or 54 percent of the total value of the motor vehicle services
rendered.

when collecting fines, the motor vehicle establishments refer to Price List

No. 13-01001 and to the regulations for motor transport operations, even though in
the majority of instances the idle time was not caused by the kolkhoaes or
sovkhozes.

The discussions we held with motor transport enterprises on this problem and also
the articles which appeared in the oblast press produced no results. The money
obtained without basis from the sovkhozes was not returned to them. The farms were
not allowed to bring suit or seek state arbitration.

In response to a question which we submitted in this regard, the RSPSR Ministry of
Agriculture explained that the loading and unloading of motor vehicles is closely
associated with the crop harvesting technology and with the operation of the
harvesting units and thus the idle time of motor transport vehicles that is caused
by weather and other factors which are not dependent upon a farm is not considered
to be above-normal. In this instance, fines must not be applied for the idle time
of motor transport vehicles.

But since this problem has not been coordinated with the RSFSR Ministry of Motor
Transport or with the RSFSR State Price Committee, the motor transport enterprises
do n0t accept this explanation.

In our opinion, the USSR Ministry of Agriculture, jointly with other interested
ministries and departments, must deve10p and approve a special instruction
entitled 'hccounts 41th the Owners of Trucks for the Transporting of Agricultural

Freight." Such an instruction existed earlier, during the 1960's, but it has since
become obsolete.

The new instruction should ideally call for a unified System of accounts for motor
transport services, approved inter-departmental forms for the commodity-transport
documents, a system for preparing them, property responsibility for the parties

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

involved and other questions associated with accounts for the transporting of
crops and particularly in connection with intra-farm freight shipments (grain,
fodder and so forth).

Last year, our department, jointly with the price department of the oblast executive
committee carried out a check on the correctness of the accounts maintained by
elevators for grain delivered by the kolkhozes and sovkhozes and for motor transport
services. In the process, incidents of incorrect preparation of the commodity-
transport invoices, in connection with grain deliveries to the state, were uncovered
in some rayons: the documents failed to point out the affiliation of the motor
transport vehicles, the distance of the shipment, who supplied the grain (section,
brigade) and other items of information required for the accounts. Thus quite often
the cXpenses incurred for delivering the grain to the farms were not reimbursed.

The associations of Sel'khozkhimiya are also tolerating many overcharges. During the
first 0 months of this year, such overcharges amounted to 63,000 rubles, or three
times more than at enterprises and organizations of Goskomsel'khoztekhnika.

In June 1981, jointly with oblsel'khozkhimiya, we carried out a check on the
correctness of the accounts maintained by the Kemerovskiy Rayon Sel‘khozkhimiya
Association with the rayon's sovkhozes. For only four of the accounts checked, the
overcharges amounted to 7,200 rubles. For the clamping and loading of humus, rates
were employed for the preparation of frozen grOund of the second and third categories.
As a result, according to bills presented to the Lugovoy and Baranovskiy Sovkhozes,
the cost to the farms for norm-shift work by a T-lOO tractor was 330-410 rubles.

The materials from this check were examined by the management of oblsel'khoz-
upravrcniye. A recmmmendation was made to return the excess money to the
sovkhozes.

In Cheuulinskiy Rayon, it was discovered that the kolkhozes and sovkhozes had been
overcharged by the Mariinskiy Inter-rayon Sel'khozkhimiya Association. In the case
of just two farms, these overchages amounted to more than 2,000 rubles. For the
transporting of mineral fertilizers using the farms‘ transport vehicles, the
latter were not allowed an appropriate reduction in price.

It was also established that the Novokuznetskiy Rayon Sel'khozkhimiya Association
inflated its rates for the carrying out of soil liming work.

Some rayon associations of Sel'khozkhimiya are not observing the system for
mineral fertilizer and other freight shipments, based upon the conditions of the
consumer-farm: they are levying a price markup (8 rubles and 20 kopecks per ton)
and in addition they are presenting bills to the farms for the transporting of
fertilizers from the central farmstead to the production subunits.

it should be noted that in connection with the approval by the USSR State Price
Committee, in May 1981, of the new price markups and reductions in prices in favor
of the supply organizations of Soyuzsel‘khozkhimiya, with their being placed in use
commencing 1 January 1982, the RSFSR Ministry of Lgriculture should issue a new
instruction on the procedures for employing them, in place of the old 1975
instruction by Rossel'khoztekhniks.

36
IIAL USE ONLY
iach year the milk losses on the farms amount to hundreds of tons valued at tens of
thousands of rubles. And here the kolkhozes and sovkhozes are to a large extent

the guilty parties. Not all of them have organized their milk accounting procedures
in the proper manner. Some farms are still maintaining their records in liters
rather than in kilograms. In accepting the product, the milk plants as a rule do
not weigh it but rather they accept the amount indicated in the accompanying
documents.

The milk cisterns of milk trucks are not always calibrated according to schedule
(once every 2 years) and the absence of a valid rating plate deprives a farm of
the possiblity of checking upon the correctness of a milk plant's milk acceptance
procedures.

Audits and checks have established the fact that the milk plants are not fully
reimbursing the farms for the transport expenses associated with milk deliveries

from summer camps. This results from the absence of information that has been
approved by the rayon executive committee on the transport distances.

The overcharging of farms is also Caused by the incorrect preparation of the
accompanying documents for shipping livestock to a meat combine. A random
inspection conducted in 1980 at the Kemerovo Meat Combine revealed that of 783

herd registers approximately one fourth were filled out incorrectly. On some farms,
the herd registers for young large-horned cattle stock of raised weight conditions
are not being filled out separately and the weight of each animal is not being
shown.

Last year the price department of the oblast executive committee uncovered mass
overcharging of the kolkhoses and sovkhozes, in the sale to them of mixed feed and
forage grain by elevators. Instead of wholesale prices minus the turnover tax, the
oblast grain products administration maintained the accounts based upon the retail
prices. As a result, the farms were overcharged 53,000 rubles.

Quite often the kolkhozes and sovkhozes are overcharged by petroleum-product storage
and distribution centers and also by various construction organizations. In 1980
and 1981 the Novokuznetsk, Kiselevskaya, Leninsk-Kuznetsk, Yurginskaya and

Yashkino petroleum-product storage and distribution centers inflated the density of
the petroleum products they issued. As a result, the farms sustained losses. The
materials obtained during inspections were turned over to the investigatory organs
and the people's control coumuttee.

Unfortunately, it should be noted that strict measures are not always employed in a
timely manner against those officials of petroleum bases guilty of overcharging
kolkhozes and sovkhozes and of creating surplus amounts of benzine, which

subsequently is plundered.

The implementation of controls at the kolkhozes and sovkhozes over the density of
the petroleum products being received is complicated by a lack of petroleum
measurement instruments (petroleum densimeters). Meanwhile, in conformity with
Decree No. 403 of the RSFSR Council of Ministers dated 7 August 1979, entitled
"Improving the Use of Petroleum Products in Agriculture," the enterprises of
Goskomsel'khoztekhnika must conclude agreements with the farms for supplying them
with suitable instruments.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This year, with the accounts with kolkhozes and sovkhozes in Novokuznetskiy Rayon

in violation of the effective price lists No. i3-Ol-Ol and No. 13-05-01 for the
hauling of peat and farmyard manure, the PHK [mobile mechanized column] of the
Heliovodstroy Trust added additional charges to the unified rates (overhead expenses,
planned savings, mobile nature of the work and so forth) and this doubled the charges
for work carried out. Tens of thousands of rubles that had been withheld from the
farms without basis were returned to them only after claims had been filed.

In turn, the enterprises of Hezhkolkhozstroyob"yedineniye are overcharging the
kolkhozes when selling construction materials to them, by illegally imposing price
markups for storehouse expenses in the amount of 21 percent. There were incidents
of price markups being imposed upon kolkhozes in the amount of 6.5 percent of the
cost of construction-installation work carried out, owing to the mobile nature of
this work, despite the fact that it was carried out in the rayon center.

The director of the Kiyskiy Sovkhoz in Hariinskiy Rayon, S. Hinikayev, stated in
the oblast KUZBASS Newspaper that the rayon Remburvodstroy Association is literally
flourishing on the basis of accidents. Such relationships with the specialised
service branches of agriCulture arouses just criticism. Truly, no harm would he
done ii the agricultural enterprises and their partners operated under the same
conditions for technical supply. But it is unfortunate that the spare parts funds
are in the hands of the partners. The specialized enterprises, which operate on a
cost accounting basis, are not interested in their rational use but only in obtaining
their profit. The work of these enterprises is in no way associated with the
operational results of agricultural production. Thus the kolkhozea and sockhozes
are forced to take advantage of their services to the detriment of their own
economies.

The dependent and subordinate status of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes, with regard to

their partners, is not promoting production growth or development or a strengthening
of the economies of the agricultural enterprises. In View of the above, a solution

must he found for this problem without delay.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Kolos", "Planirovaniye i uchet v sel‘skokhozyaystvennykh
predpriyatiyakh.198l

7026
cso: 182M180 END