FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10083
29 October 1981

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE
(FOUO 5/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOO
29 October

USSR REPORT
CONSUMER. Goons AND DOMESTIC TRADE
(POUO 5/81)

CONTENTS

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTIO"

. f

Food Program, Organizational Structure of Food Couple): Reviewed '
(Vladimir Pntapovich Harbin, El'mirn Nikolayevne Krylntylth;
VOPROSY WIKI’ Jul 81) OIOIOCOCIICOOIOOOICOOOI.COOOCCI.

CONSUMPTION TRENDS AND POLICIES

Supporting Economic Calculetiono for New Consumer Technology Urged
(I. Rakhlin; VOPROSY BKONOHIKI, Jul 81)

- a - [III - USSR - 38b
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION

FOOD PROGRAM, ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OP POOD COMPLEX REVIEWED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 20—30

[Article* by Vladimir Potapovich Mozhin, corresponding member of VASKhNIL and
director of the Central Scientific Research Institute of Economics of RSPSR
Cosplan, El'mira Nikoleyevne Krylatykh, doctor of economic sciences and professor
at Moscow State University imeni M. V. Lomonosov, end Anetoliy Nikitovich
Lifanchikov, candidate of economic sciences end department head at the Central
Scientific Research Institute of Economics of RSPSR Gosplen: "The Food Program
and the Structure of the USSR Food Complex"]

[Text] The Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th

party congress points out that "the party is advancing a broad program for

further improvement in the well-being of the people in the 11th Five-Year Plan and
the 1980's as a whole." Paramount importance in this is assigned to reliably
providing the population with a broad assortment of high-quality food products.
The production and consumption of food products has risen steadily in recent five-
year plans. In the last five-year plan, however, the growth rate of production of
agricultural output slowed down and difficulties arose with supplying animal
husbandry products to the population. This was related to unfavorable weather
conditions. To achieve a fundamental solution to the problem of uninterrupted
supply of food products to the population. it has been recognised as necessary

to develop a special food program which should serve as the basis for planning,
financing, and managing the unified agroindustriel food complex. The program
measures outlined for the current five-year plan are an organic part of the State
Plan of Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985.

A large volume of technical-economic and socioeconomic substantiation and calcula-
tion must be done during development of the food program. Many scientific
institutions and planning agencies are working on the food program, so it is
essential to develop a methodological foundation for their joint work.

The food program is one of the special-purpose comprehensive national economic
programs. The ultimate goal of the special food program is full satisfaction

 

* The article is offered as a formulation of the problem.

'1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONBY

of public need for all types of food products in conformity with scientifically
recommended diets. The immediate objective is to insure a stable food supply to
the population in all parts of the country, to create reliable reserves, and to
increase the quality of products. When establishing the goals of the food pro-
gram we should envision lessening dependence on importing food products which
can be efficiently produced in the country.

Because the goal is stated as satisfying the need for food products. the ques-
tion of how to calculate this need arises. There are a number of methodological
approaches to estimating this figure, including the normative method which in-
volves determining physiological needs for food substances and working out
balanced diets on this basis, as well as the method based on an estimate of
solvent demand for food products. In this case demands can be viewed as a func-
tion of personal monetary income with different elasticities of demand for
particular products depending on the growth rate of income. It seems to us that
both approaches must be used to frame the quantitative indicators of the food
program.

The norms of a balanced diet should be the basis for establishing the strategic
goal and long-term developmental trends in the production of the most important
food products. Estimates of solvent demand may be used to work out guidlines
for development in medium-range planning and to supplement the dietary norms.
The main goal should be broken down into a number of sub-goals and particular
tasks in order to obtain quantitative estimates of needs and to determine the
structure of the food program.

Various foods are needed to maintain normal metabolism, form the tissﬁes of the
organism. and regulate the process of supplying energy to the person. The most
important result of scientific research in recent years has been the theory

of the balanced diet, from which it follows that optimal functioning of the
organism requires not only adequate amounts of energy and protein, but also
observance of definite proportions among many ingredients of the diet, each of
which has a specific role in metabolism. Despite their great diversity, it is
customary in economic calculations to consider five basic food groups, which

are the basis of the diet: proteins, including both proteins of agricultural
(animal and plant) origin and the proteins in the meat of fish and sea animals;
fats, including animal, fish, and vegetable fats; carbohydrates, including
simple sugars (fructose, glucose, and others), disaccharides (saccharose,
maltose, and lactose), and polysaccharides (starch, cellulose, and others);
vitamins; minerals, other substances, and water. In conformity with this the
overall goal of meeting public needs for food products can be broken down into a
series of detailed sub-goals which includes satisfaction of public needs for the
basic foods: proteins. fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, and mineral and other
substances.

An orientation to satisfying human needs for food substances greatly expands

the possibilities in searching for alternate ways to satisfy a particular need.
For example, the animal protein requirement can be met with different variations
of consumption of meat, meat products, fish, fish products, and dairy products
on the condition that the diet is balanced in terms of essential amino acids.

2
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Problems of maximum receipt of protein or minimum expenditures of public labor
can also be solved with different combinations of consumption of the meat of
cattle, hogs, sheep. and poultry. Furthermore, it is possible to work out al-
ternatives for using different types of raw materials to produce the same food
products. For example, starch can be obtained from potatoes or from grain.

Each of these alternatives, while solving the problem of meeting a certain need,
has different levels of expenditures and efficiency.

The set of goals involved in providing the population with the most important
dietary elements and food products should. in our opinion. be the basis of
special first-level sub-programs. We suggest the following basic sub-programs:
supplying public needs for proteins, fats, sugar and other carbohydrate-
containing foods. fruits, berries. and vegetables and rationalizing the structure
of production and consumption of drinks.

The question of the priority of particular sub-programs is difficult. During the
last five-year plan the growth in per capita consumption of a number of food
products slowed down. and for some it practically stabilized. The dietary level
now attained does not fully provide the population with animal protein, vege-
tables, fruit. and berries. At the same time, the consumption of grain products,
sugar, and potatoes, which means food products containing large amounts of
carbohydrates, exceeds rational norms. And although the total caloric value of
the actual diet provides for the energy needs of the population, its imbalance

in terms of basic food substances prevents us from considering it fully satis-
factory at the present time.

Carrying out all the sub-programs will demand enormous capital investment and
other types of resources, most of which are in limited supply. Therefore,

we must identify the programs that are most important and concentrate our efforts
on them. In the first stage of working out the food program it seems wise to
give preference to two special-purpose sub-programs: to supply the population
with meat and dairy goods, and to supply fruit and vegetables.

He must also race up the question of the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Significant resources of agricultural raw material. labor. and the like are

taken for the production of alcohol. Despite a number of measures the con-
sumption of alcohol has not dropped in recent years. In the future the struc-
ture of consumption of alcoholic beverages must be modified in the direction

of a significant increase in the proportion of grape wine, above all champagne
and high-quality dry and semidry wine. This will require further development of
viticulture, an expansion of lands given to vineyards, a rise in their yield, and
an increase in capital investment for the development of viticulture and wine-
naking. This is not only a major economic problem, but also a social problem.
Within the food program this problem should be reflected in a special sub-program
to rationalize the consumption of alcoholic beverages.

In addition to the special sub-program the structure of the special—purpose com-
prehensive food program should also single out what are called "service" sub-
programs. The most important of the common sub-programs should be, in our
opinion, the following: raising soil fertility and improving the use of land

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resources; full mechanization and electrification; development of the non-
production infrastructure and solving social problems in the countryside; de-
velopment of scientific research (in the fields of agriculture and the sectors
that serve it) and raising its efficiency; developing socialist economic inte-
gration and cooperation in the production of food products; and. foreign trade
in agricultural raw material and foodstuffs.

Combining special-purpose programs with assignments to supply them with re-
sources makes the food program a special-purpose (tselevoﬁ and comprehensive
program. Within the framework of the food program priority elements should be
identified and distribution of resources must be organized in such a way that it
is possible to carry out the necessary structural changes in the entire food
complex.

The food complex, for which the food program is becoming the basis of develop-
ment, is a part of the national agroindustrial complex. In terns of gross
output the food complex accounts for 76-76 percent of the agroindustrial tom-
plex. The food complex should also include production, not related to the
agroindustrial complex, which uses the wealth of the world ocean and internal
bodies of water for food and fodder needs. According to rough estimates, the
total volume of gross output of the food complex was 260-230 billion rubles in
1979, and about 150—170 billion rubles in final output.

Three spheres can be identified within the structures of the food complex that
define its functional structure. The first sphere is the production of means of
production for all the sectors. It includes tractor and agricultural machine
building. machine building for animal husbandry and feed production, the pro-
duction of equipment for land improvement work, the production of equipment for
the food industry, trade, and public catering, the production of specialized
motor vehicle transportation, shipbuilding (for the fishing industry), the pro-
duction of agricultural and other accessories, the production of containers,

the sectors of basic chemistry (for production of mineral fertilizer and
chemdcal plant protection means), construction for all spheres of the food com-
plex, the mixed feed and microbiological industry, and the production of special
equipment and instruments for the sectors of the food complex. The second
sphere is the production of agricultural (crop farming and animal husbandry)
output, fishing and fish culture, salt mining, raising pedigreed stock, nursery
plantations, raising seed material for pond culture, and various other types of
activities. The third sphere comprises the processing of agricultural and
other output of plant and animal origin and production of the final output

of the complex. The sectors of food (with the exception of the perfume-
cosmetics and tobacco sector), meat and dairy, fish processing, and flour-

bran industries should be classified with the third sphere.

As the food complex develops there is an increase in the role of infrastruc-
tural elements that affect primary production and its efficiency as they
gradually become independent sectors. Therefore, it is useful to single out
one more structural element in the food complex. This is the production
infrastructure of the complex, or the fourth sphere. It includes systems for
production-technical support and service to agriculture; material-technical

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

supply to the industrial sectors of the food complex, procurement of agricul-
tural output and the elevator system; storage of output; transportation and the
road system; specialized retail trade; communications and information-computer
services; and, applied scientific research and design for all spheres of the
food comlex.

The product structure of the food complex is a set of vertically integrated sec-
tors, the product subcomplexes. Bach vertical link connects technologically and
economically interrelated types of activity of the food complex spheres and
infrastructural elements that are integrated to achieve the final objective of
meeting needs for particular types of food products. Product aubcomplexes must
be singled out within the structure of the food complex in order to substantiate
the economic proportions which are defined by technologically interrelated sec—

tors, subsectors, and types of activity in the process of producing and selling
the final output.

Each special sub-program is a tool for managing a set of intersectorial product
complexes, particular sectors, and types of activity. The set of suboprograms,
subcomplexes, and sectors that insure achievement of the established goals may
appear as follows: sub-program to supply protein-rich products to the popula-
tion, including programs for the development of the meat-dairy and fish sub-
complexes; sub-program for development of the subcomplex to produce and process
vegetable oils and animal fats; sub-program to supply the population with carbo-
hydrate-containing foods, including sub-programs for the development of the
grain product subcomplex, the sugar beet eubcomplex, and the potato products sub-
complex; sub-program for the development of the fruit-vegetable subcomplex;
suhprogramto rationalize the production and consumption of beverages, including
the program to develop the vineyard-winemaking subcomplex, the beer and non-
alcoholic beverage subcomplex, and the tea subcomplex.

But what should be the structure of the product subcomplexes, which in this case
are considered to be objects of planning? In the opinion of some economists.

it is best to include all the sectors of the first, second, and third spheres
and the production infrastructure of the food complex in the product subcomplex.
The most highly debated point is the issue of including the sectors that produce
means of production for the second and third spheres of the food complex in the
product subcomplexes. In our opinion, we should only deal with narrowly spe-
cialized sectors that produce means of production for a definite subcowlex.

For this reason it seems advisable to include the sectors of the second and
third spheres of the food complex in the product subcomplexes, but from the sec-
tors of the first sphere to take only the narrowly specialized subsectors that
are especially important for the development of the subcomplexes. For example,
mechanization of harvesting and, accordingly, the problem of designing and
series production of machines to harvest fruit, vegetables, and berries are impor-
tsnt for the fruit-vegetable subcomplex. Another, equally important program
is development of the production of containers for storing and transporting
fresh produce (glass containers. tin cans, and aluminum containers) as well as
polymer films and materials for preserved and quick-frozen products. The em-
phasis here should be on determining the need for the output of sectors of the
first sphere and their requirements with respect to its quality, productivity,
and other technical-economic parameters.

5

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The main advantage of switching to comprehensive planning of the development of
the sectors that make up the product subcomplexes is that it permits the possi-
bility of balancing the development of the particular sectors belonging to a
subcomplex, eliminating disproportions, and on this basis shaping an effective
structure and achieving a significant reduction in losses, more rational use of
raw materials, and an increase in production efficiency. The comprehensive ap-
proach makes it possible to identify "bottlenecks' in the functioning of the
entire chain from production (extraction) of the original output to sale of the
final output. It helps overcome the narrowly departmental approach to the uni-
form process of planning and coordinating different sectors involved in the
production. processing, and delivery to the customer of the actual products,
and this results in optimal distribution of capital investment.

As the meat-dairy subcomplex takes shape and develops still-existing inter-
sectorialdisprOportionswill be eliminated. The most pressing problem now is
to balance available feed and the number of stock. A protein imbalance at the
15-17 percent level is the cause of failure to receive animal husbandry output
worth 9-11 billion rubles. This shortfall can be eliminated by increasing the
production of protein-rich feed crops such as peas. alfalfa, clover. soybean,
rape, and the like. The document "Basic Directions of Economic and Social
Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and the Period Until 1990" poses the
challenge of raising the average annual production of legume crops to 12-13
million tons (the average crop in the 10th Five-Year Plan was 6.8 million tons).

Another way to overcome the protein shortage in feeds is accelerated development
of the microbiological industry. It is common knowledge that protein-vitamin
concentrates obtained from liquid paraffin contain 56 percent protein and using
one ton of them in animal husbandry produces a gain in output of 700-900 rubles
(for an expenditure of 80-90 rubles per ton of liquid paraffin in the micro-
biological industry). Chemical hydrolysis of wood has even better prospects in
this respect. Output in the microbiological industry is to increase 1.8-1.9
times in the 11th Five-Year Plan. The development of a comprehensive program to
establish a reliable, balanced feed base in the country, an important part of

the overall feed program, must be completed in the near future, as envisioned
in the document "Basic Directions."

One of the main areas of imbalance is in production capacities, their technical
level, and the amount of meat and dairy raw materials arriving for processing.
This is the reason that all the useful components are not extracted from raw
material and that the assortment of output is not expanding rapidly. Milk
serum. for example, is a valuable raw material that is only 10-12 percent used
at present. For technological reasons 8-12 percent of the slaughtered meat
remains on the bones turned over for further processing; this is 20,000-
25.000 tons of a valuable product. Large losses of raw material occur during
intensive periods of large-scale processing because production capacities can-
not keep up with the flow of raw materials. Sometimes excessive concentration
of industrial production and the establishment of very large enterprises in-
creases the radius of delivery for livestock and milk so much that the in-
evitably resulting losses nullify the benefit from concentration. Therefore,
the question of the rational size of meat-dairy industry capacities should be

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decided together with development of plans for specialization and concentration
of animal husbandry, provision of special means of transportation, and estab—
lishment of a reliable road network. This entire set of questions applicable
to particular regions should be reflected in the food program. Balance among

all elenents of a subcomplex is an important condition for raising the efficiency
of meat and milk production.

At the present time significant diaproportions have occurred in the process of
production because of failure to coordinate the economic interests of the sectors
that belong to the fruit-vegetable subcoeplex and owing to departmental conflicts.
These disproportions cause significant losses of output and an inadequate level of
production efficiency. Failure to coordinate interests leads to a situation where
many farms try to fulfill the plan with higher-yielding and less labor-intensive
crops, which are more advantageous to the producers. Therefore, cabbage, table
beets. and carrots, which have limited use in the canning industry, take up some
45 percent of the planted area designated for vegetables in the RSPSR, for example.
At the same time, crops which are valuable for processing such as green vetch,
pepper, narrow squash, and eggplant make up just five percent of the gross harvest
of vegetables (including just 1.3 percent for green vetch) and very small amounts

of early cucumbers and tomatoes. sweet peppers, bush scallop, spinach. garlic,
lettuce, and various other crops are raised.

The sane factors cause the unsatisfactory structure of perennial plantings. Por
example, in the RSPSR fruits with seeds occupy 77 percent of the area, pitted
fruits are 16 percent, and berry patches are seven percent. Among the seed-type
fruits the proportion of winter-keeping varieties is extremely low, while summer
varieties of apples which are ill-suited for processing predominate. There are
not enough mazrard cherries. apricots. and peers in the structure of pitted fruit
orchards. In many regions, for example the North Caucasus. the area planted in
pitted fruit trees is decreasing.

The level of specialization and concentration of production in orchard farming
and vegetable and potato raising is still low in many parts of the country.
Industrial methods of production are being introduced very slowly. The low level
of concentration and specialization in the production of fruit and vegetable out-
put with a concurrent increase in the level of concentration of production in
the canning industry leads to a significant increase in the number of supplier
farms and the radius of delivery of raw materials. For example, the Adygey
canning plant in Krasnodsrskiy Kray receives raw material from 68 farms with an
average delivery radius of 160 kilometers. when the shipping length for
tomatoes, for example. is increased from 25 kilometers to 80-100 kilometers, the
proportion of first-grade tomatoes is cut in half; increasing the shipping

radius by 10 kilometers raises expenditures by two percent.

Existing disproportions in price formation and narrowly sectorial and depart-
mental interests hinder rational use of fruit and berry raw materials. For
example, while overall consumption of fruit is inadequate a growing amount of
fruit and berries is used to produce fruit and berry wine because its production
is more profitable than canning. In the RSFSR in 1979, about 70 percent of the
fruit and berries sent for processing was used to produce wine.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0BR?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lack of coordination of departmental interests leads to certain elements of the
fruit-vegetable subcomplex lagging sharply behind. At the present time. the
labor-intensiveness of producing vegetables on open soil is four times greater
than the labor-intensiveness of producing grain crops. while for potatoes it

is 2.3 times the figure for grain crops. The labor-intensiveness of raising
grapes. fruit. and berries is even higher. Harvest vork accounts for a large
part of the labor expenditures. Hechanization of harvesting is one of the

key problems of further development of vegetable and potato growing. orchard
farming, and grape growing.

Expenditures to harvest the grapes today reach 20-35 percent of labor expendi—
tures for raising the grapes. With an average harvest norm (3-3.5 quintals per
person per day). more than 500,000 persons are already employed for a month in
the grape hetVESt. and by 1990 the number of persons employed in the manual
grape harvest should exceed 1 million. Therefore, it is essential to switch

to combined methods of harvesting industrial grape varieties. A number of
successful designs have already been developed, including the Kuban'-l combine
which is being tested in the vineyards of the North Caucasus and Crimea. But
lack of departmental coordination makes it impossible today to concentrate the
efforts of the design organizations of the interested ministries on development
and series production of a grape-harvesting combine.

Significant disproportions have developed between agricultural production and
storage capacities for fruit and vegetables. The material-technical base for
storing fruit and vegetables does not match the current scale of fruit and
vegetable procurement. The 60 percent increase in capital investment to improve
the storage of agricultural raw material, which is planned for the llth Five-
Year Plan, will make it possible to significantly reduce losses of output.-
Systems management and planning of the subcomplex on the basis of target-program
methods will make it possible to eliminate the existing disproportions between
the volume of production of fruit and vegetables and capacities for processing
and storing it. thus insuring balanced development. ‘

The question of the system of planning indicators is an important one. The over-
all system of indicators of the food program should be worked out with due
regard for the following principles: correspondence between the system of food
program indicators and the structure of the food complex itself; orientation of
all indicators in the program to final goals; integrated systems of program mea-
sures and development of the entire food complex as a whole; reflection in the
system of indicators of intersectorial links and vays to improve them for the
purpose of intensifying the production of the entire food complex; delivery of
program indicators and assignments to specific accountable performers in
directive form; coerdination of the system of indicators of the program with the
overall system of national economic plan indicators.

The main target indicator of the program is final output. The calculation of
final output must be based on balances of the output of agriculture and the food
industry. By itself. however. the indicator of final output does not fully re-
flect the goals of the complex. even though it is very important. It is
necessary to introduce indicators of public need for food goods taking account of

rational consumption norms and predicted trends in solvent demand for food. The

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

most significant harvest evaluation indicator of the food program should be
the ratio between the volume of output going for personal consumption and the
volume of public needs. An indicator established in the program that reflects
the degree of attainment of rational norms of per capita consuqtion can play
the same role. The target indicator should be represented in natural terms

by the consolidated groups of products adopted in the USSR State Plan of
Economic and Social Development.

It is useful to recalculate and give indicators of needs for the basic nutri-
tional elements (proteins, fats, carbohydrates. and vitamins) in reference form
and to introduce indicators of the degree of satisfaction of these needs by the
stages in which the comprehensive food program is being developed. The intro-
duction of this kind of indicator will make it possible to coordinate the
summary section of the program more closely with the indicators of the sub-
programs for satisfaction of requirements for the basic nutritional elements.
In addition to the target indicators the summary section of the program must
represent resource indicators, above all those which can be allocated for the
entire food complex and distributed among its product subcomplexes, sectors,
and subaectors. The distribution of capital investment should be done from

the standpoint of the priority of the problems. Thus, 1: the present time the
proportion of capital investment in the production infrastructure and for
storage and processing of agricultural output should be increased, which will
permit a significant decrease in losses of output.

Among the generalizing cost indicators that can be used are the indicators of
final and net output (normative) for the entire food complex and per employee

in material production in the food complex, return on capital, rate of repayment
of capital investment, the indicators of relative savings of production re-
sources, and many others. The indicators of the food complex should correspond
to the indicators of the state plan of economic and social development, and the
structural cross-section of the programs should be an organic part of the struc-
ture of the national economic plan.

The sub-programs of the second level, related to creation and development of
the material-technical base of the food complex, should have indicators for
production of program output (agricultural machinery, fertilizer, equipment.
means of transportation, and the like) and development of its capacities
through reconstruction, technical re-equipping, and new construction in the
actual sectors that produce means of production.

For the sub-programs that aim at meeting public needs for food products it is
necessary to introduce the indicators of final and gross output in a group
assortment and the introduction of capacities in agriculture and the processing
sectors and to set a limit on capital investment for the development of each
product subcomplex for it to fulfill its assignments to deliver final program
output. These sub-programs should define the requirements of the product sub-
complexes for material, labor, and financial resources and the sources or ways
to provide these resources. It is very important to achieve a realistic
balance between the total requirement of the product subcomplexes for production
resources and the volumes of production and delivery of these resources in the
sub-programs for development of the material-technical base.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the sub-program for foreign economic links it is essential to represent
indicators on the volume and structure of export and inort of foodstuffs. This
sub-program should include indicators and assignments from long-term special-
purpose (target) conprehensive program concluded within the cm framework.

Preplanning and planning materials can only be worked out with broad application
of mathematical economic methods and computers. We believe that the best re-
sults can be obtained where systems of mathematical economic models of develop-
ment of the food complex are employed. Different variations of balance models
of production and distribution of the output of the food complex with blocks

for distribution of fixed capital (capacities), capital investment. and labor
can be used as a summary modal. Such models are designed to correlate the in-
dicators of production volume of the sectors. determine consumption within the
comlex given an assigned final product. and to identify needs for fixed capital,
capital investment. labor, and — most important - output from agriculture and
fishing. The cost versions of these models, covering the sectors of the food
complex in consolidated form, will permit a full calculation of expenditures for
the production of the basic types of output of the food complex and determination
of total expenditures per unit of final output from the complex.

The development of optimization models will help substantiate the most rational
structure for the food cowlex with maximum production of final output in an
assortment that corresponds to a rational public communion structure. The
constraints in these models are land and labor resources, production capacities
in the industrial sectors, fixed productive capital. and capital investment.

Another type of model is designated to optimize the development of the most
important product subcomplexes of the food corplex. The purpose of these models
is to define balanced development of all the main vertically integrated areas of
production. Unlike the consolidated models of the entire food complex, there
should be a much greater degree of detail in the variables and constraints

here. The most important in them is to choose the best technological procedures
in each element of the technological chain from production of the means of pro-
duction and raw materials to receiving the final output.

All these models are framed as a whole according to the national economic food
complex and its sectors and product subcomplexes. They are supplemented by an
optimization model of the composite location of production with the number of
blocks in the largest territorial-production subsystems of the food cowlex.
Because location is based on zonal specialization and concentration of agricul-
tural production. during development of this model experience with construction
of the model of location of agriculture must be used as much as possible. Bx-
perience from optimization of the location of food industry sectors is also
useful. The general comprehensive model of territorial location of the food
couplex should be supplemented by more detailed models of the development and
location of regional food complexes and the most important product subcomplexes.
Considering the stochastic nature of agricultural production, probablistic and
simulation models should find broader application.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The special-purpose comprehensive program is becoming a realistic management
tool when reliable systems for controlling its uselmNe been created. The es—
tablished departmental sectorial structure of control is not adequate to the
target program approach which must be followed in the food program. The docu-
ment "Basic Directions" formulates the challenge as follows: "Establish and
use efficient systems in control programs."

It seems to us that we must have an agency that coordinates the activities of
the many ministries and departments that produce food products. within such

an agency it would be possible to gradually change the structure of management,
carrying out a transition from the aectorial principle that is now prevalent

to the principle of managing intersectorial product subcomplexes of the food
complex. Management forms of this type have already been established. for
example by the USSR Ministry of Fruit and Vegetable Industry and the correspond-
ing republic agroindustrial committees such as the RSFSR State Committee
for wine Industry and other agroinduatrial formations.

But this transition should not be limited to the sphere of planning and estab-
lishing coordinating management bodies alone. It is equally important to work
out a new kind of relations between partner-sectors. The general principle of
this reorganization is accountability of each element for final results, which
will strengthen plan discipline and contract relations. The time has already
arrived to switch to concrete forms of this. One of the forms is evaluating
the results of work by sectors considering not only the sectorial impact but also
the impact from the use of output of this sector in other sectors of the food
complex. The unreliability of material-technical supply makes it difficult to
employ such evaluations. For example, the sectors that produce agricultural
machinery cannot beaccountable for its efficient use in the fields and at live-
stock units becsuse it is produced from low-grade metal. Therefore, we cannot
fundamentally improve the economic mechanism of management of the agro-
industrial complex without making profound changes in the system of inter-
sectorial relations of the national economy as a whole.

Nonetheless, a great deal can be done at the lower levels, in particular with
respect to the relations among enterprises that belong to different sectors of
the food complex. Thus. the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR
Council of Ministers entitled "Improving Planning and Economic Stimulation of
the Production and Procurement of Agricultural Output" contains a number of
important ways to improve the economic mechanism. Procuring ministries and
enterprises are given responsibility for accepting all the output delivered by
agricultural enterprises. They can now accept above-plan nonstandard output at
prices set by agreement of the party. This will make it possible to reduce
direct or concealed (used for livestock feed) losses of output. It is also
important to switch to receiving all output at the place of production and
hauling it from the farms in vehicles belonging to the procurement agency.

Along with centralization of receiving. transporting, storing, and processing

agricultural output, we must develop decentralized systems of different sizes

for storing and processing output, which will make it possible to reduce peak
loads in technological chains and to reduce losses. A procedure must be

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established by which output is counted in the procurement plan for the year in
which it is actually marketed. The general conditions of material-technical
supply for containers, fuel, and other resources that apply to enterprises of

the food industry must also apply to the industrial enterprises of the kolkhozes
and sovkhozes.

The role of state and cooperative trade in the entire structure of the economic
mechanism should be strengthened. The operational influence of trade on shaping
the assortment of industrial output, its quality, preparation and packaging.
should be based on a study of public demand in each region by seasons of the
year.

Hhile strengthening the centralized principle in planning, above all in de-
fining the structure of the food complex. me should give the farms greater
opportunities to show initiative, to maneuver, and to employ healthy socialist
entrepreneurship in resolving ongoing management problems. This will make it
possible to receive a significant benefit while carrying out the food program.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

11,176
C80: 1827/100

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSUMPTION TRENDS AND POLICIES

SUPPORTING ECO“OHIC CALCULATIONS FOR NEW CONSUMER TECHNOLOGY "REED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 7. Jul 81 pp 8bv93
[Article by I. Rskhlin: "New Technology and Personal Consumption"]

[Text] The problem of raising the material and nonmaterial standard of living
received a great deal of attention at the 26th CPSU Congress. As L. .
Brezhnev observed, for the 11th Pive-iear Plan and the 1980's as a whole the
Communist Party is advancing a broad program of further improvement in public
well-being, a program that covers all aspects of the life of Soviet people:
consumption and housing, culture and leisure activities, and working and living
conditions. The document "Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development
of the USSR for 1981-1985 and the Period Until 1990" envisions implementation
of a system of measures to consistently raise public vellsbeing. Among them
are improving housing conditions, medical services, working conditions, and
supply of consumer goods and solving a number of other social problems. It is
contemplated that special-purpose comprehensive programs will be developed and
carried out in stages for the most important socioeconomic problems. Foremost
among these programs are the food program and the program for development of
consumer goods production.

The growing role of scientificotechnical progress and its social consequences

in fundamentally solving the problems of raising public well—being has raised

a new economic problem in recent years, one that has not yet been treated
thoroughly in the literature. I am referring to the methodology and techniques
of determining the socioeconomic efficiency of new technology (new products and
services) in the sphere of personal consumption. The greater social orientation
of scientific-technical progress means that the many different variations of
developing, incorporating, and introducing new technology should not be carried
out without a competent and detailed consideration of their socioeconomic conse-
quences.

In design and planning practice (beginning from the achieved level of development
of efficiency theory), economic evaluations are given primarily for measures

that accelerate scientific-technical progress in the sphere of material produc—
tion. The steady rise in public well—being, the saturation of everyday life
with new goods and services. and the rapid growth in expenditures to achieve
social goals objectively demand a transition to evaluations that encompass the

'13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

social consequences of the introduction of new technology in material produc-
tion, the nonproduction sphere, and everyday living.

In the personal consumption sphere new technology is used in the form of new
goods and services. The new consumer benefits and services offered to people
through the use of scientific—technical advances in production can be condition-
ally put in three groups: (1) new technology for private use (cars. electric
refrigerators, washing machines, television sets, and the like); (2) new perish-
able products (food products, clothing, footwear, household chemicals, medi-
cines, toys, and the like) and durable goods (furniture, floor coverings and
wall finishing material in apartments, cultural-domestic and household goods)

or products with improved qualities produced on the basis of new machinery and
technology or using contemporary materials; (3) new types of paid and free ser-
vices rendered using new types of equipment, aaterials, or technological
processes.

Widespread electrification, mechanization and automation, chemicalization, and
cybernetization under current conditions have fundamentally transformed the
principal types of everyday human activities: preparing and storing food
(gasification and electrification of the processes, new types of kitchen equip-
ment, electric refrigerators, and the like); cleaning and maintaining comfort—
able apartments (electric vacuum cleaners, electric floor polishers, air
conditioners, electric fireplaces, and so on); maintaining the wardrobe (sewing
machines, domestic chemicals, and the like); washing laundry (washing
machines, synthetic detergents, and the like); maintaining health (medicine and
sports equipment); cultural use of leisure time (television sets, tape re-
corders, radios, and other cultural-domestic goods); travel (cars, motorcycles,
and bicycles), and so on.

Each year the volume of domestic, municipal~housing, transportation, medical,

and other services increases, the assortment broadens, and the quality of the
services rises. For example, our country now produces more than 80 types of
machinery and equipment for everyday living. we have incorporated the production
(in some cases without proper substantiation, it is true) of many models of
goods: bicycles - 89; electric shavers - 35; television sets - S6; tape
recorders - 38; radios and victrolas - 51. About 1 billion domestic machines
and appliances are used by the population.‘ In the period between 1965 and 1979
the number of durable cultural-domestic articles per 100 urban and rural

families rose as follows (number of articles at the end of the year): television
sets, from 24 to 83; refrigerators, from 11 to 82; washing machines, from 21 to
70; electric vacuum cleaners, from 7 to 26, and so no.2

As public well-being rises there is a corresponding rise in the level and change
in the structure of the material and nonmaterial needs of the people which are
satisfied. The intensity of satisfaction of these needs can be judged by the
fact that each 15 years the socialist society moves to a qualitatively new
level of consumption.3 In the last 15 years the sectorial structure of the con-
srmption fund (without considering wear on fixed nonproductive capital) has
changed significantly: the share of food products has dropped from 62.0 to 53.6
percent while nonfood goods have risen from 38.0 to 66.4 percent (including a

‘16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

rise from 4.9 to 10.0 percent for output from machine building and from 0.8
to 2.3 percent for chemicals).“ This same trend is confirmed by changes in the
ratio between food and nonfood goods in the total volume of com-odity turnover

in state and cooperative trade, including public catering (see table below, in
percentages).s

Type of Goods 1940 1970 1979
Food Goods 63.0 55.5 51.6
Nonfood Goods 37.0 64.5 68.6

 

In the structure of use of the aggregate income of worker and kolkhoz member
families (according to date from a sample survey of the budgets of 62,000
families), there is intensive growth in the share of expenditures for the pur-
chase of furniture and cultural-domestic and household goods. fabrics,
clothing and footwear. and savings (growth in cash and savings deposits), in
addition to a rise in the share of free services from public consumption funds
for education, medical care, and the like. At the same time, there is a sharp
decrease in the share of expenditures for food.

These data on actual changes in the structure of consumption of material goods
and services, in particular the rise in the share of nonfood goods and expen-
ditures for the purchase of cultural-domestic and household goods and new
everyday services testify to the growing influence of scientific-technical
progress on the process of satisfying public needs.

A more detailed outline of the problem of the impact of the socioeconomic
efficiency of new technology on the personal consumption sphere can be done, in
our opinion, by formulating the most important social components according to
similar types of consumer goods and material services. The following basic
social components of human life, with a material character. can be identified
on the basis of data on public well-being: food products, property. health,
living conditions (manmade and natural). the consumption budget, and free time.

The material foundation for the production of foodstuffs (food products) and non-

food goods (property) is the group a sectors as well as the sectors of heavy
industry (the latter account for more than half of the nonfood goods that are

produced). As noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, new technology and bolstering
the scientific and design bases have a decisive role in renewing the assortment
and raising the quality of various consumer goods and in technical re-equipping
of group B sectors.

Let us look at the role of new technology in changing the social components of
life in more detail using the example of human health. The question of the
negative consequences of accelerating scientific-technical progress, which must
be identified and eliminated in time, deserves special attention here.

The intensification of production, urbanization, psychological stress, pollution
of the biosphere, and other factors have a negative effect on human health.
These consequences may lead to enormous losses when they are underestimated.

‘15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, more than 600,000 various chemicals are dumped in the environment in the
contemporary world each year; 12 billion tons of carbon monoxide is put into the
atmosphere and thousands of tons of petroleum products and other waste are dis-
carded into the oceans and seas. The human race has exterminated 150 animal
species in various ways, one of which is environmental pollution, and some 1,000
species are threatened with extermination or have become rare.6 The negative ef-
fect of noise reduces human longevity in the cities by 8-12 years.7

Effective steps are being taken in our country to improve human working and living
conditions from the standpoint of establishing medical norms for permissible en-
vironmenta1effectson the human organism. In recent years medical norms have been
developed and introduced in public health practice for approximately 1,000 chem-
ical compounds that are potential environmentalpollutants. In other words. the
negative consequences of accelerating scientific-technical progress can and must
be averted in time.

At the same time scientific-technical progress has a direct and beneficial effect
on human health through medicines and new medical procedures. Thus, Soviet
medical practice uses some 3,000 drugs that have been authorized by public health
agencies. The list of products of the domestic medical industry covers more than
6,000 items, including about 1,600 medicines.

There are three contemporary methods of treating malignant tumors: surgical,
radiation (based on ionizing radiation before and after surgical eradication
of the tumors), and medicinal (hormone preparations and about 60 types of chemo-
therapy substances). Among the techniques for early diagnosis of cancer are
endoscopy using fiberoptics, examination of tumor cells under the microscope,
x-rayexamination, ultrasound "transluscence," and others. Thanks to effective
use of anticancer procedures (including early prevention), the standardized indi-
cators for mortality from cancer for men in the USSRhave not increased in the
last 10-15 years and for women show a clear trend to decrease. Therefore, the
country today has more than 500,000 persons who cempleted treatment for onco-
logical diseases 10 or more years ago.

New principles of treating eye diseases (glaucoma, cataracts, and the like) are
based on microsurgery. laser and ultrasound technology, and the use of new
medicines, artificial crystalline lenses, new tools (for example the tubular
probe), and the like.

The meaning and orientation of economic measurements in the area of new tech-
nology should be defined by the purpose of socialist production. The main
criterion of the socioeconomic efficiency of production is the extent to which the
requirements of the basic law are not. There is reason to think that the social
orientation of production takes on the role of the primary criterion for optimi-
zation of social and economic proportions in the national economy. It follows
from this that now, even though it is a very important indicator for formation of
the consumption fund, national income cannot be either the initial or the primary
expression of the socioeconomic impact of socialist production. The socio—
economic result of production is this impact.8

16
FOH.OFF"JAJ.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The socioeconomic national economic impact has two facets: as a goal it is a
certain socioeconomic result in the form of a mass of output and services of the
appropriate structure and quality produced; as a means, a source for achieving
this goal it represents cost economies (raising the aggregate productivity of live
and embodied labor calculated for a given socially useful result).9

The main difficulties in working out the methodological foundations for deter-
mining the socioeconomic efficiency of new output and services in the personal
consumption sphere are related chiefly to the fact that the concept of the so-
cial result is much broader than the concept of the economic result and certain
parameters of social efficiency cannot be adequately described in terms of eco-
nomic efficiency. In the opinion of Academician T. Khachaturov, we must not
restrict ourselves to attempts to reduce the entire impact of the nonproduction
sphere to an economic effect expressed in rubles, especially where such calcu-
lations are in many cases extremely crude and unconvincing. 0 One must also
agree with the opinion of Corresponding Hember of the USSR Academy of Sciences
L. Gatovskiy that "the human being, human life and health, and satisfying human
needs are goals-in-thenselves and cannot, certainly, be reduced to the savings

of resource expenditures which occur as the result of the inverse impact of
social factors on economic factors."11

It is evident that a partial, local approach to solving the problem of the
socioeconomic efficiency of the sphere of final personal consumption is
inevitable. The first subject of economic evaluation can be the basic social
components of human life which have a material character. But even with such a
limited consideration of this problem. the sphere of calculations of socio-
economic efficiency will include such extremely important objects as the impact
of new products and services on the human diet, property, health, living condi-
tions, consumer budget, and free time. These social components, which have
their own values that are not measurable in economic categories. unquestionably
influence the economy indirectly. As we see, eliminating the economic evalua-
tion of other social components, especially nonmaterial ones, does not at all
mean refusing to determine the socioeconomic efficiency of the sphere of final
personal consumption in the "narrow" sense.

Let us consider the problem of determining the socioeconomic efficiency of new
technology in the personal consumption sphere from the standpoint of two inter-
related factors: the socioeconomic result, and the cost savings.

The socioeconomic result as a category of public reproduction through production
and nonproduction (public and personal) consumption is an inalienable condition
of human and product reproduction. Determining the socioeconomic result may be
considered a new class of problems in the field of the socioeconomic efficiency
of new technology, one which has not been adequately treated in the literature
and methodological writings. Specifically, the "Methodology (Basic Principles)"
for determining the economic efficiency of use of new technology, inventions,
and efficiency proposals in the national economy (published in 1977) does not
disclose the essential features and content of the socioeconomic results.

The social factors of production and use of output (including the environmental
impact) are mentioned in paragraph nine in connection with insuring the com-
patibility of variations of new and base technology being compared for national

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic efficiency. The influence of the social factors of Introducing new tech-
nology is not revealed in the indicators of cost accounting efficiency either.

As a result, no techniques are provided for economic evaluation of the social
factors of the use of new technology in material production, the nonproduction
sphere, and personal consumption.

The appearance of public and personal needs under the influence of scientific-
technical progress is an objective process that reflects the interaction of
production and consumption. At the same time, the extent of satisfaction of the
people's material and nonmaterial needs, which means the socioeconomic result,
is assigned by society ahead of time in the plans for economic and social de-
velopment of the national economy as a reflection of the requirements of ob-
jective economic lsws.‘2 Therefore, we believe that applied to the sphere

of personal consumption it is advisable to use a preassigned socioeconomic re-
sult of the corresponding structure and quality for calculations. In a number
of cases this result may assume more concrete forms related, for example, to
preservation of health; buying, preparing, and storing food; buying, using, and
preparing clothing, footwear, and domestic appliances; washing and ironing
white goods; cleaning the apartment, and the like.

The novelty of the problem of the socioeconomic result lies not only in the
framing of its structure, but also in the economic evaluation of social com-
ponents that have grown. The heterogeneity of the social components included in
the socioeconomic result sh0uld be noted. Applicahle to the sphere of personal
consumption socially useful socioeconomic results of the use of material goods
and services are divided into two parts: those which have immediate economic
content (growth and the volume of public consumption of material goods and
services as the final result of material production); those which do not have
immediate economic content, but do influence the magnitude of this result
(working and leisure conditions, human health, environmental protection, and
the like).

An economic evaluation of the social components with ilmediste economic content,
for example, food products and property, can be done (depending on the purpose
of the calculations) on the basis of wholesale prices and rates, normative net
output, and retail prices and rates. The situation is more complex with an
economic evaluation of the social components that do not have immediate economic
content. To solve this problem it is necessary to formulate the socioeconomic
result in natural physical terms for these components on the basis of at elabor-
ate system of social norms and standards that cover all the processes of vital
human activity with some degree of completeness. For example, the sanitary-
health conditions of human life and labor (size of rooms, sound levels, air
exchange, lighting, temperature conditions, and the like) can be standardized

in terms of norms. The central question of a health evaluation of materials

and articles is controlling harmful substances released into the environment.
From the standpoint of the esthetic aspects (new output) it is necessary to
control colors and various other design parameters. For the ecological aspect
the central problem is to establish the maximum permissible concentrations of
harmful substances in the natural environment (water, air, soil, and the like).

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The social norms serve as both standards and limitations on variation in par-
ticulsr parameters of the process of vital human activity. In the broad sense,
we are speaking of the need to define the list and quantitative values of the
social norms that regulate compliance with the requirements for creating normal
human living conditions.

As the sphere of personal consumption is saturated with new goods and services.
all the variations of their introduction being worked out should meet compulsory
normative requirements for socioeconomic results. If this is not true, the vari-
ations will not be comparable in terms of socioeconomic results, which will make
it impossible to compare them in cost terms. If correspondence to mandatory
normative requirements is observed, the socioeconomic result can be determined
for variation in natural physical form. This is quite a complex problem because
it covers a multitude of initial social norms.

Comparing the socioeconomic results for the variations of conditional and new
technology makes it possible to determine the increment of growth for the new
technology variation in natural physical form. we propose that the economic
evaluation of the increased social results for the most important social com-
ponents be based on a set of varied, interrelated. and interdependent factors,
some of which are given in the section below. [Social components are under-
lined, followed by factors that generate the savings.]

Food Products. Increase in the length and improvement in the
conditions of storage and also preparation of food products

by the population as the result of the use of new refriger-
stors, polymer packing materials. and fresh-frozen dishes and
intermediate products; decrease in losses of food products from
a worsening of their properties based on organoleptic and

other evaluations; increase in the proportion of high-quality
food products by preservation of their nutritional and taste
properties.

Property. Expansion of the assortment and improvement in the
quality of new material goods and services; rise in the ar—
tistic and design level of new output; reduction in expendi-

tures for storage and use of new material goods and for new
services.

Health. Improvement in the quality of medical services, a re-
sulting decrease in the length of therapeutic, diagnostic. and
preventive procedures. time spent by patients in the hospital,
and expenditures for repair of medical equipment; an expansion
on this basis of the contingent of persons employed in material
production and the nonproduction sphere and an increase in the
additional volume of output produced and services rendered by
them, a decrease in expenditures to pay for disability cer-
tificates and the like; higher sanitaryohealth specifications
for medical equipment, medical instruments, medicines, and
food and industrial goods and for sanitary conditions in the
food industry, retail trade, and public catering.

 

19

FOR OF11CJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Living Conditions gnanmade and Natural). Improvement in the
quality. comfort. and convenience of housing and in housing.

municipal services; reducing the level of soil, air. and
water pollution with domestic waste. wornout articles. and
packaging materials; obtaining an additional savings from re-
cycling material resources.

Consumer Budget. Improvement in the quality (technical-economic,
use. esthetic. and other properties) of new goods and material
services; decrease in the labor-intensiveness. prime cost. and
capital expenditures for the manufacture. maintenance. and re-
pair of goods and rendering of material services; savings of
resources in connection with refusal to Buy goods Because their
qualities have been made available in the domestic services
sphere; lowering of retail prices for goods and rates for ser-
vices and the related savings of resources in personal con-
sumption.

Free Time. Reduction in labor expenditures, lightening of work-
ing conditions. and change in the nature of labor; increase in

the number and improvement in the quality of new types of machines,
equipment. instruments. and mechanized devices used to render
material services in public health, retail trade. public catering.
the domestic services sphere, housing and municipal services,

passenger transportation. the public communications sector. and
in the home.

Let us note specially that the economic evaluation of the increased social re-
sults must be based not on an economic evaluation of the enumerated component
as such. but on an economic evaluation of the impact of scientific-technical
progress on change (growth) in these components. For example. we are far from
the idea of evaluating human health in economic terms; we are posing a conr
pletely different problem. to evaluate the savings from maintaining health at
the proper level by the use of new medications. new treatment procedures. and
other means. Therefore, we are talking about an economic evaluation of social
components by an indirect. not direct. method. through change in costs for the
different alternatives before and after the use of new technology. Therefore,
the social component should have corresponding quantitative measures which can
be adequately described in economic terms. The other quantitative measures

that are new subject to economic evaluation can be described by their dis-
tinctive natural indicators.

In the sphere of final personal consumption. the following cost indicators can
be used for an economic evaluation of the social components that do not have
immediate economic content: growth in the volume of normative net output in

material production and the nonproduction spheres; capital savings in the budgets
of social security, public health. and state and personal insurance; capital
savings in the personal consumer budget for medical treatment. purchase of food
products and medicines. purchases. maintenance. and repair of articles of
clothing and cultural-domestic and household goods. and acquisition of housing;

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAI.US£GDNLN

personal time savings resulting from using the services of the service sphere
and in the performance of housework.

The different goods and services are comparable in terms of their ability to
meet public and personal needs. It can be assumed fron this that the social
components listed above. despite their differences. are similar and comprise a
unified complex that aims at realization of the supreme goal in socialist
society. It becomes possible to add together the results of an economic evalu-
ation of the factors of different social components and obtain an overall
evaluation of the increased social result in cost form.

The savings from the increased social results plainly is different in nature fro-
the savings of costs, for example. calculated costs. In the first place, these
economic indicators are designed to solve different problems. A savings of calcu-
lated costs (a category of comparative efficiency) is. of course, determined in

a calculation to obtain the identical (assigned) socieconomic result. As for a
savings from an increased social result. it manifests itself in the process of

an economic evaluation of different socioeconomic results, the base result and
the new result. This increase is caused by the different possibilities of at-
taining technical-economic and social norms using traditional and new technology.
In the second place. the savings of calculated costs reflects a savings of pri-
mary resources in the sphere of material production, while the savings from an
increased social result has a different basis, a social basis, and reflects a
decrease in expenditures from sources (above all the consumption fund) formed

on the basis of the mechanism for distribution and redistribution of primary
income. A savings on such expenditures is more likely to be evidence of more
efficient use of the consumption fund (national income) than growth in the fund.

We believe that the savings from an increase in social results cannot be com-
pared at all. in any form, with a cost savings (comparative or absolute). It

must be used as an independent indicator to substantiate the socioeconomic result
of new technology (in cost form), social norms and the order of their introduction,
technical policy in the field of the development of production and use of new
technology for social purposes. new consumer goods and services, and the like.

The second component of the final socioeconomic impact of new technology is the
cost savings calculated for a given socially useful result. This is linked to
production efficiency and the level of rational use of resources. When de—
termining the socioeconomic impact of new goods and services in the sphere of
final personal consunption. the expenditures necessary for this may have two
evaluations: from the national economic standpoint (calculated costs for
development, production. transportation. use, and repair), and fro. the stand-
point of the personal consumption sphere (personal expenditures for purchase,
delivery, use, and repair of goods and enjoyment of services). These evaluations
are interrelated. Thus. goods and services in the sphere of final personal con«
sumption are a concrete expression of the proportions invested earlier at the
national economic level. In other words, the consumption of goods and services
signifies realization of the national economic socioeconomic impact, its conver~
sion into a personal use effect.

21
FOR 0FFK]A[.USE!)NLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Because national economic impact is widely used to select the most efficient
alternatives of new technology, it is important that at the same time the socio-
economic result itself is formed because the amount of the increase in this
result depends on the technical-economic and social parameters of the new
technology. This is an iterative process and should reflect the inverse effect
of expenditures to form the socioeconomic result.

A number of problems in the methodology of determining the national economic
socioeconomic effect of new consumer goods have been worked out in the sector
on efficiency of scientific-technical progress at the Institute of Economics
of the USSR Academy of Sciences.13 The essential feature of the methodology is
that such new elements as additional calculated expenditures for measures to
attain the normative socioeconomic result with the use of the traditional con-
sumption goods and expenditures for measures to eliminate or compensate for a
certain negative social result must be included in the sphere of calculations
of the socioeconomic impact (in comparison with the economic impact). This
makes expenditures in the stages of the manufacture and use of new and tradi-
tional goods comparable in terms of socioeconomic result.

The amount of the socioeconomic use effect as a savings of personal expendi-
tures for the purchase. transportation, storage. use and repair of all
possible consumption goods and enjoyment of services depends. on the one hand,
on the technical-economic parameters and properties of these goods (dura-
bility, reliability, electricity consumption, and the like), and on the other
hand. on the level of retail prices and rates.

The impact of scientific-technical progress on the personal consumption sphere
naturally appears as a systematic decrease in costs in all stages of the manu-
facture, purchase, and use of consumption goods and services. At the same
time. the real changes in retail prices and rates must be taken into account.
Despite the level and the changes in retail prices (rates) however, they are
an essential indicator for determining the use affecting the sphere of final
personal consumption.

The transition to substantiating the socioeconomic efficiency of new tech-
nology not only in material production, which is envisioned in existing
methodologies and done extensively at the present time, but also in the sphere
of personal consumption creates a basis for: using efficiency calculations to

study variations of new consumption technology. goods, and services more com-
pletely; formulating uniform technical policy for the development of material
production. the nonproduction sphere, and the sphere of final personal con-
sumption; raising the efficiency of capital expenditures to broaden and renew
the assortment of consumption goods and the service sphere.

The 26th CPSU Congress identified the socioeconomic problems of scientific-
technical progress as one of the research areas in which social scientists
should concentrate their efforts. One of the research areas within the field
of the socioeconomic impact in the sphere of personal consumption should be
development of norms of cost savings for similar types (groups) of new con-
m-mtion goods and services. This is essential to substantiate an optimal as-

sortment of consumption goods and services.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

work on the questions of deternining the socioeconomic efficiency of new
products and services in the personal consumption sphere is a further and
more concrete step towards solving these proﬁle-s and will promote work to carry

out the policy of the Communist Party vith respect to solving the problems of
raising the well-being of the Soviet people.

FOOTNOTES

1. See L. A. Kostin, "Proizvodstvo Tovarov Narodnogo Potrebleniya (Sotsial'no-
ekononicheskiy Aspskt)" [The Production of Consumer Goods (The Socioeconomic
Aspect)], Izdatel'stvo '1lononika”. l980. pp 189, 208.

2. See the statistical yearbook "Narodnoye Khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979 3." [The
USSR National Economy in 1979]. Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", 1980, p 633.

3. See "Materialy XXV s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress].
Politizdat. 1976, p 114.

4. See Kostin. op. cit., p 52.
5. See "Narodnoye...," op. cit., p 457.

6. See A. M. Izuktio and G. I. Tsaregorodtsev. "Sotsialitisticheskiy Obraz
Zhizni i 2dorov'ye Naseleniys v Svete Resheniy XIV S"yezda KPSS" [The
Socialist way of Life and Public Health in Light of the Decisions of the
25th CPSU Congress]. Izdatel'stvo "Heditsina". 1977, p 173.

7. See "Nauchno-Tekhnicheskaya Rsvolyutsiya i Chelovek" [The Scientific-
Technical Revolution and Human Beings], Izdatel'stvo "Nauka". 1977, p 116.

B. For greater detail. see "Ekonomika Razvitogo Sotsialisticheskogo
Obshchestva (Osnovnyye Cherty, Zakonomsrnosti Razvitiya)" [The Economy of a
Developed Socialist Society (Basic Features and Developmental Patterns],
Izdarel'stvo "Ekonomika", 1977, pp 277-278; "Osnovnoy Ekonomicheskiy Zakon
Sotsializma" [The Basic Economic Lav of Socialism], edited by V. N.
Cherkovets. Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1978. pp 174-175, 179.

9. See L. M. Gatovskiy, "Voprosy Razvitiya Politicheskoy Bkononii
Sotsializma" [Issues of the Development of the Political Economy of
Socialism]. lzdatel'stvo "Hauks", 1979, pp 465-666.

10. See T. S. Khachaturov. "Effektivnost' Kapital'nykh Vlozheniy" [The Efficiency
of Capital Investment], Izdatel'stvo "Ekonomika". 1979. p 183.

ll. Catovskiy. op. cit., p 373.

12. we do not consider here the question of the formation of personal needs under
the influence of individual tastes, preferences, motivations, and the like.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. See "MethodologicheskiyeVoprony Opredeleniya Sotsial'noc-Ekononicheskoy
Bffektivnosti Novoy ‘rekhniki" methodological Issues of Determining the
Socioeconomic Efficiency of New Technology]. Izdotel 'ctvo "Nam". 1977;
"Oanovnyye HetodicheskiyePolozheniya Opredeleniya Sotsial'no-
Ekononicheskoy Effektivnosti Novoy Tekhniki" [Basic Methodological
Principles of Determining the Socioeconomic Efficiency of New Technology],
draft version. Institute of Beauties of the USSR Academy of Sciences,
1980 (rotaprint).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekononilzi", 1981

11,176
050: 182 7/101 BN0

2’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY