FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10608
2'4 JUNE 1982

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 6/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8011-:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was srmnarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

ﬁle contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR'REPDRT
Ecouonxc AFFAIRS
(P000 6/82)

CONTENTS

BCOWC POLICY. 03601126110“ AND W

Balanced Development of National Economy
(3. Gorbunovsvm’ROSY W.Apr 82) 1

Effectiveness of Consmtion. Intensification of Social
Production
(V. Pavlyuchenko; VOPROSY momma. Feb 82) .............. ll.

Conversion of Economy to Intensive Path of Development
(1.. Abalkin; VOPROSY mm. Feb 82) 25

Iwroving Bcononic Management Techniques
(V. Ivanchenko; WPROSY WWI. Feb 82) ................ 38

Inn-wing Bcononic Hechanion Based on axe-pie of Holdavian SSR
(Yu. Kanna; VOPROSY mama. Hat 82) 51

Collections Devoted to Current Problm of Management Theory .
Practice
(A. Polezhayev; WPROSY momma, Har 82) 58

- a - [III - USSR - 3 POGO:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR1DFFMJALIJSEINNLY

ECONOMIC POLICY, ORGANIZAIION AND MANAGEMENT

BALANCED DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL ECONOMY
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOMIKI in Russian No :. Apr 82 pp 102-112
[Article by B. Gorbunov]

[Text] The materials cf the 26th cpsu Congress articulated concrete tasks
regarding the dynamic and balanced development of the Soviet economy as

a unified national economic complex, the proportional growth of all its
branches and of the economies of the union republics, the progressive modific-
ation of the structure of the national economy, and the improvement of
interbranch and intrabranch proportions. They particularly emphasise the

need for balanced growth in the volume of capital construction as the nation's
economy develops, for closer agreement between the increase in the prod-
uctivity of social labor and the population's aggregate incomes and between
the latter and the increase in the production of consumer goods and services.
for balance in the development of the manufacturing and extractive

branches of industry. and for closer conformity between the needs of the
national economy and the work of transport. and the functioning of the

complex of branches belonging to the production and social infrastructure.
They advance the following demand: l"I‘o implement a comprehensive approach

to planning the development of interconnected branches of the national

economy and the country's economic regions. To ensure the drafting of

plan targets that are balanced in all indicators. To use progressive
technical and economic norms to this end."

In the light of the tasks posed by the 26th Party Congress, the investigation
of the methodological basis of the balanced structure of social production
per se and its realization in the national economic plan. in socialist
economic management acquires great theoretical and practical importance.

The degree to which these problems are elaborated in large measure determines
the efficacy of measures designed to improve the economic mechanism and

to promote the conversion of the nation's economy to the path of intensive
development.

Balanced social production under developed socialism is a concrete manif-
estation of broader categories of regularity and proportionality and is
determined by changes in the correlation of basic factors of production
(means of production and labor power) which in turn influence the proportions
of expanded reproduction.

l1)lt0l1ﬂ(1Al.IISII(MVLY
I"). UI'I'ILIAI- UM Vl‘Ll

lntcnsification has a decisive influence on the dynamics of proportionality
of the basic factors and proportions of reproduction. He can identify,
first, the partially intensive type of reproduction in which part of the
production resources are economized, capital per worker grows and there

is an increase in material expenditures in the structure of the social
product and in the total'qusntity of embodied labor whereas the output—
capital ratio declines. Second, we can point to the predominantly intensive
type of reproduction in which the economy of expenditures of certain production
resources is coupled with additional expenditures of others but exceeds

the latter. Third, there is the totally intensive type of reproduction

on the scale of the entire national economy, in which the economy of the
means and objects of labor is a means of economizing labor resources as
well. i. e., the lowering of the capital-, materials- and labor-output
ratios is achieved simultaneously'. This in turn alters the proportions

of social production with regard to value--between expenditures of embodied
and live labor--which promotes the relatively more rapid growth of all
indicators of effectiveness of resource utilization.

The conditions of realization of the social product under the intensive

type of reproduction according to the resource-saving variant are characterized
by the fact that national income and society's final product increase faster
than the gross social product. At the same time. the share of productive
accumulation in national income stabilizes or declines and there is corresponding
change in the share of the replacement fund, the growth of which requires

an increase in the growth rates of implements of labor and a synchronous
increase in the production of consumer goods. The share of the work force

in material production stabilizes or begins to diminish and the development

of social production is secured primarily through the growth of labor product-
ivity. The structure of social production changes: the share of branches
producing the final product grows and the share of the raw-materials and
extractive branches diminishes accordingly. The population's consumption

of consumer goods and services grows at a rapid rate and the share of the

work force and output in the nonproductive sphere grows. Au a result,

the conditions of intensive reproduction according to the resource-saving
variant simultaneously become conditions to the balanced structure of the
nation's economy on the whole.

The structure of social production is manifested in various combinations

of types of productive and nonproductive use values, in relationships that

form a complex system of interbranch and intrabranch pr0portions. The degree
of complexity of these relationships, their dynamicity and stability depend

on the level of development of the productive forces, on the effectiveness of
social production, on technical progress, etc. The entire complex of the

given factors forms the requirements of socialist society, in accordance with
which society's working time is distributed among various spheres of production.

“See "Voprosy intensifikatsii i sbalansirovannosti rasshirennogo
vosproizvodstva v period razvitogo sotsializma" [Problems of Intensificstion
and Proportionality of Expanded Reproduction in the Period of Developed
Socialism], Izdatel'stvo "Nauka," 1981.

FOR OFTHCJALIEEiONLY
FCNKCHWHCIAI.USE(NVLY

This characterizes the socioeconomic aspect of the effectiveness of the
actual structure of the national economy and the ability of a given socio-
economic system to make full use of society's production and labor resources
as well as to realise the economic objectives that stem from its social
nature. 'Bffectiveness,‘ T. s. Khachaturov writes. "expresses the quality
of economic management that is characteristic of a given formation and

the correlation between expenditures of social labor and the return realized
on them.“

The structure of social production under modern conditions is extremely
complex. In industry alone, more than 12 million indicators are used to
determine the volume of production in physical terms. There is a certain
hierarchy of structural economic relations, of their co-ordination and
sequence. The macrostructure of social production, which comprises a system
of the most important national economic proportions in the process of expanded
reproduction on the social scale, forms the upper level of these relations.

It is possible to identify the basic macroeconomic proportions of reproduction
which determine the proportionality of the economy in general. These
proportions exist (1) between the quantities of embodied and live labor
(technical and organic structure of social production) applied in the production
process; (2) between spheres of social production: production proper,
distribution. exchange and consumption; (3) between expenditures and final
national economic results, intermediate and final forms of the aggregate
social product; (k) between the parts of the social product that are accumu-
lated for the expansion of production and that are consumed by the population:
the fund for productive and nonproductive consumption of the final social
product, production of the means of production and consumer goods (goods

and services); and (5) between the parts of the gross social product that

are replaced in the process of simple reproduction and the parts that are
accumulated for the needs of expanded reproduction.

The macrostructure of social production organically combines indicators

of the final national economic results (realized social requirements) and
expenditures made on the scale of all society in order to attain (satisfy)
them. The level of expenditures and results and the proportion between

them will in the future also predetermine the magnitude of society's productive
and nonproductive requirements that must be satisfied.

All of society's economic requirements are internally connected to form

a single system. This system is determined by the laws of social production.
"Production," Harx wrote, "creates objects that correspond to requirements.
distribution distributes them in accordance with social laws; exchange

once again already distributes that which has already been distributed

in conformity with individual requirements; finally, in consumption, the
product is removed from this social movement. directly becomes the subject

0?. S. Khachaturov. 'Bffektivnost‘ kapital'nykh vlozheniy” [The Effective-
ness of Capital Investments]. Iadatel'stvo “Bkonomika,” 1979, p 2!.

IN)! 0FIIC1AI.[ENE(HVLY
I'UI Vl'l'lktﬂlo Us," VIVLI

and servant of an individual requirement and satisfies it in the process
of consumption."' Therefore, while the resources of social production

are determined by the level of economic deve10pment and technical progress,
by demographic factors. by the development of science and by the degree

of its utilization in production, the level of satisfaction of the needs
of production and the nonproductive requirements of society in the future
will also be economically predetermined by these some factors.

Final national economic results of the current period (which are contained
in the macrostructure of social production) will in future periods
predetermine the levels of capital-. materials- and labor—output ratios.

1. e., the necessary volume of increase in capital investments, means of
production (fixed productive capital, raw materials, supplies, fuel. energy)
and manpower and thereby predetermine the degree of satisfaction of society's
production requirements. In the sphere of nonproductive consumption. the
existing volume of production in Department II determines (with due regard
to the effectiveness of utilization of production resources) the degree

of satisfaction of requirements and the growth of the volume of personal

and social consumption on the basis of existing norms depending on the

level attained in the preceding period. It is for this very reason that
proportionality of social production is also manifested in the balance

of the basic factors of production (means of production and labor force)

and proportions of expanded reproduction. The lowering of expenditures

on the satisfaction of society's productive and nonproductive requirements
leads to a higher degree of proportionality in the economy. The “Basic
Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985

and the Period Up to 1990" pose the following task: "To secure the most
rational use of material, labor and financial resources as the most
important condition to improving the proportionality of development of

the national economy. the creation of the necessary reserves and the attainment
of high final results." The decisive role here belongs to measures in

the realm of economic policy especially at the level of the economy's
macroatructure.

Since it possesses a certain volume of financial. material and labor

resources earmarked for productive and nonproductive use. society can use

them in various combinations of means of production and labor power. This

on the one hand forms various levels of capital per worker, capital-intensiveness,
material-intensiveness. and labor-intensiveness of production and normative
nonproductive consumption and on the other hand. forms the volume of the
replacement and accumulation funds and the gross social product consumption

fund. Hence the need for greater centralization in national economic planning

at the upper “levels" is a natural consequence of the higher maturity of

socialist production in the period of developed socialism.

From this follow the special demands that are made on the planning of indicators
of the gross. final and net social product. The indicators reflect both

”X. Marks and P. Engel's. "Sochineniya" [Works], Vol 12, p 715.

4

FOR 0F1ﬂ€lAl.USE(DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the structure and the objective magnitude of society's economic requirements.
The orientation of national economic planning toward the realization of

the total aggregate of productive and nonproductive requirements presupposes
that the calculation of the balanced structure of the economy is a kind

of supporting pillar for the entire national economic plan-~a pillar on
which its remaining assemblies and units are built.

A balanced economy is characterized by an optimal correlation between
levels of satisfaction of nonproductive requirements and the requirements
of current production and accumulation. At the same time. all types of
economic requirements are divided into two large groups: productive and
nonproductive requirements. The satisfaction of nonproductive requirements
(the population's personal consumption of means of subsistence in the form
of goods and services and consumption in organs of government) is the final
objective of society which is attainable given the realization of the

national economy's requirement for manpower, equipment. raw materials,
fuel, energy, etc.

The degree to which each material good promotes the attainment.of the goal
of society determines its social utility under socialism. Prom this point
of view. the difference between consumer goods and the means of production
consists solely in the fact that the former perform their given function
directly while the latter perform their function indirectly. Therein also
lies the difference in the useful effects of their application which must

be taken into account in the process of distributing social labor between
various spheres of social production.

On the basis of all the foregoing, the following schema can be proposed
regarding social economic requirements in a socialist society.

Schema l. Society's Economic Requirements Under Socialism

I. Society's nonproductive requirements
1. The population's personal requirements (food, clothing, housing.
consumer and cultural services. etc.).
2. The population's social requirements (health care. medical care,

education, sociocultural requirements, public service requirements.
etc.).

II. Society's Current Productive Requirements
1. The requirement for means of production and labor resources for the
satisfaction of the population's personal and social requirements
(the productive requirement of Department II of social production):
a) for current production of consumer goods and services; and
b) for servicing the personal consumption process.
2. Requirement for means of production and labor resources required

in order to satisfy the productive requirement of Department II
(the productive requirement of Subgroup II of Department I).

3. The productive requirement of Subgroup I of Department I
(production of means of production for the production of means of

production). .
III. Productive Requirements of Expanded Reproduction

IV. Aggregate Social Requirement for Consumer Goods, Services and Means
of Production

 

'Por the same points as in II.
"I+II+III. 5

FOI.OFFICIA1.USE(DNLY
Since society's economic requirements take not only physical form. but

also the form of services of a material and nonmaterial nature, there

is an integral unity of social labor that satisfies the requirements of
society as a whole irrespective of whether the labor is expended in the
production of material goods or in the performance of material or non-
services. A definite quantity of social labor required for the satisfaction
of social requirements must correspond to the total aggregate of these
requirements.‘

Proceeding therefrom. society's final national economic results (national
income) can be depicted as the total surplus product created in branches
of material and nonmaterial production and the necessary product for workers
in these same spheres of social production. when we consider the purpose
of products relative to the satisfaction of society's productive and non-
productive requirements, we can identify the following subdivisions in
utilized national income: (1) the productive accumulation fund, including
the growth of productive capital in the sphere of material production;

(2) the nonproductive accumulation fund--the growth of nonproductive funds
in the service sphere and in branches of the superstructure; and (3) the
population's personal consumption fund--consumer goods and the value of
services.

Proportionality of social production in accordance with the structure of
society's economic requirements and the planned magnitude of final national
economic results (national income) is expressed in value and physical form.

In the process of satisfying society's requirements. there is full realization
of the products of Department I and Department II of social production;

the satisfaction of the population's personal requirements presupposes

the use of the most effective means of production; the necessary reserve

of production of the means of production is created in order to insure

future growth of consumer goods and services sufficient to meet the population's
higher requirements.

Calculation of the necessary resources and anticipated national economic
results of production makes it possible to determine the possible correlation
between social requirements and expended social working time and to secure
rational distribution of the latter between various spheres of its applic-
ation. Thereby, planning based on society's requirements influences the
magnitude of socially necessary expenditures corresponding to the satis-
faction of every given production need. i. e., influences the magnitude

of the value of a product (resource).

‘Concerning the question of the need to include the value of service branches
in national income, Ya. Kvasha and V. Krasovskiy wrote: “There is no reason
for embarrassment over the fact that such changes do not agree with the

usual concepts. Least of all should one fear the lack of comparability

of series because there is nothing more menacing to the comparability of

a dynamic series of a rapidly developing economy than the preservation

of branches of unchanging composition in the classification of production
facilities" (see Ya. Kvasna and v. Krasovskiy, "Long-Range Planning and
Economic Measurements," VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No ﬂ, 1968, p 72).

6
FOI(NWWCJA1.USE(NNLY
IKII(HWNCLAL|£SE(NVLV

Harx was the first to describe the mechanism underlying this regularity.

He determined the value of a commodity on the basis of expenditures of
socially necessary working time and attached great importance to ascertaining
the correlation between expenditures of aggregate working time and its
distribution in proportion to the volume and structure of society's require-
ments. Marx considered the correspondence of expenditures of social working
time to the aggregate of society's requirements to be the most developed
expression of the 'law of value in general“. which measures the value of

a commodity as part of socially necessary expenditures.

Thus the balanced structure of the economy presupposes (l) the correspondence
of the distribution of individual spheres of application of social labor

to the quantitatively determined requirements of society and (2) minimal
expenditures of social labor per unit of satisfaction of society's require-
ments. These points are specifically taken into account in the determin-
ation of the final results of the functioning of the socialist economy.

The improvement of national economic planning in the direction of securing

a balanced economy also presupposes the reclassification of a number of
elements in the structure of social production.

The elaboration of the scientific classification of the structure of social
production has major significance both in the scientific aspect and as
effective instrument in the planning and substantiation of measures of
structural policy, and in the management and organization of the national
economy. At the-present time. there is a need for in-depth research in

this area, particularly in connection with processes involved in the formation
of production and science-production associations. territorial production
complexes, and special programs of an interbranch character.

'K. Marks and P. Engel's, 'Sochineniya' [Works], Vol 25, Part II, p 186. He
note that in our view, our literature devotes unconscionably little attention
to problems regarding Marx's ”law of value in developed form." In A. Yeznov's
words, this area is a "blank space" in the study of value and price processes.
In his research, the author shows that socially necessary expenditures

of labor are directly determined by social requirements and deviations

of the latter from demand (and vice versa) are a factor underlying the
formation of prices and their deviation from socially necessary expenditures
of labor (see: A. N. Yezhov. "Factors Underlying the Formation of

Socially Necessary Expenditures of Labor,“ IZVESTIYA AKADBHII NAUK SSSR.
SERIYA EKONONICHBSKAYA, No 5, 1919, p 32).

"The classification of the national economy's branches contained in the
”Guidelines on Drafting state Plans for the Development of the National
Economy of the USSR" has been repeatedly subjected to Justified criticism
in the economic literature. No classification of branches of the national
economy is contained in the latest edition of Guidelines.

It“!(lﬂl(1Al.lEﬂi(MﬂLY
[UK Ul‘l‘l‘JAL 05". UZ‘L‘

Shortcomings in the elaboration of problems in the classification of the
national economy are primarily associated with their branch orientation

which corresponds to the existing scheme of management of the national
economy. At the same time. most global economic tasks of a structural
nature in the present stage stem not so much from various problems of a
purely branch nature as from interbranch problems arising at the interface of
severalbranches,which is occasioned by the higher level of social

division of labor under the influence of the scientific and technological
revolution.

In calculations of the interbranch balance [input-output tables]. it is
necessary to single out pure branches that incorporate only the specialized
products characteristic of a given branch. The practice of compiling inter-
branch balances indicates the increasing fragmentation of the 'pure" branches.
Thus, the interbranch balance for 1959 covered 83 "pure“ branches of social
production and 157 types of products; the balance for 1966 was compiled

for 110 branches and included 237 types of products. The interbranch balance
for industry in 1959 was compiled for 73 branches; in l966--for 95 branches.

The interbranch balance for 1972 was also characterized by a further increase
in the number of branches

Given the increasing diversification of products. raw materials and tech-
nological processes. it is important to determine the economic criterion

for establishing a unit in the classification of the structure of the national
economy. This in turn will make it possible to substantiate the inclusion

of production that specifically meets the given criterion in its structure.

For all the importance of the commonly accepted "three—aspect" criterion

of classification of branches of the economy (uniformity in the intended

use of the product, in the use of certain types of raw materials and of
technological processes). the role of each of the indicated aspects (features)
is not uniform. Thus the significance of the technological feature diminishes
in proportion to the ever increasing diversification of technical processes

in modern production. It essentially holds unconditional significance

only for the group of "old“ branches and for certain production facilities
whose formation into an independent branch is still continuing. 0n the
whole. however. for such branches as machine building and the chemical
industry. technological homogeneity is gradually losing its significance

as a classification criterion.

Obviously. with the increasing complexity of the raw material base of
production. the role of the corresponding criterion in the classification

of branches will also diminish. Their uniformity with regard to the intended
use of the product. i. c.. relevance to the satisfaction of various economic
requirements of society will serve as the basic criterion to the transformation
of homogeneous production facilities into a branch.

The proportion between productive and nonproductive requirements does not
provide an exhaustive characterization of the complex process of their
satisfaction on the whole. The products that are earmarked for productive
use (the same also applies to productive services) can be used to realize

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the requirements of capital construction. to create or replace resources

in the fuel-energy complex, and to satisfy nonproductive requirements.
Branches form as an independent element in the system of social production
against the background of the growing significance that the so-called infra-
structure holds for the development of branches in the modern economy.

Their economic role consists in providing productive services to branches

of material production (freight transport, electricity-fuel supply, sewage.
communications, etc.) and sociocultural, communal, and consumer services

to the population. Thus, this group includes branches of the productive

and social-service infrastructure. The former participate directly in

the reproduction of the social product while the latter service the population's
consumption process and are closely associated with the reproduction of

labor power. As an organic element of the social reproduction process,

these branches play a subordinate role with regard to branches of material
production proper since their development is determined by the increase

in the volume of production in industry, construction and agriculture,

by the technical level of these branches, by their interbranch and intrabranch
relations, etc.

The realization of a balanced economy requires certain changes in the planning
of interbranch proportions of the national economy. The basic means of
resolving interbranch problems is the elaboration and implementation of
special comprehensive programs that can be classified as interbranch programs
for the development of branches of material production and as social and
territorial production programs. with the expansion of the sphere of
application of program-goal methods in planning, there is increased emphasis
on their relationship with the methods of purely branch-oriented planning,
which promotes the elimination of shortcomings in the latter. This also
depends in large measure on surmounting the mental block regarding new
methods of management.

It is occasionally said that the process of ”apportioning” capital investments
on the basis of national economic programs rather than according to branches
means 'supplanting the branch by programs“ thereby violating the system

of production relations.’ In our view, such contrasting of the program-

goal method to the principles of branch planning is inappropriate. A rational
national economic program must consider the interests of branches of

material production participating in its implementation and of other entities--
territorial organs, cities. enterprises and ministries in the nonproductive
sphere, etc. Programs for conserving fuel and metal, for the development

of the BAH zone, for reducing the application of manual labor. and for
increasing the production of new consumer goods--programs in whose imple-
mentation tens of branches of social production participate in keeping

with the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers

on improving the economic mechanism—-can serve as an example. As T. S.
Khachaturov correctly observes “the application of program-goal planning

does not mean that it replaces branch planning. At the same time that
program-goal planning makes it possible to make full use of the production
capacities that are created and permits their rational coordination. it

also makes possible a significant saving in capital investments and

 

'See 'Sotsial'no—ckonomlcheskaya effektivnost' perspektivnykh vlozheniy‘
[The Socioeconomic Effectiveness of Long-Term Investments], Izdatel'stvo
'Nysl'“. 1919, pp. 60—61.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
current expenditures."' Therefore, the decisive criterion in the classi-

fication of branches of social production is the functional significance
of their products. This makes it possible to combine them to form large
national economic complexes (see Schema 2) and to use the classification
to increase the effectiveness of interbranch planning.

Schema 2. Consolidated Schema of the Functional Structure of Social Production

      
    
  

Spheres of social production Branches of social production"

I. Social sphere of social
production

of which:

1. Food complex (final

1. Agriculture, food industry, food production
product)

in other branches; subsidiary farms of
enterprises; personal household plots

2. Complex for consumer
goods production

2.

a) goods in everyday demand a) production of clothing, textiles, footwear,

hygiene, sanitation and toilet articles
in branches of light, local and heavy
industry and other branches of the
national econosy

b) durable goods

b) production of consumer durables. vehicles,
construction materials and housing for the

population in branches of industry and
other branches.

3. Social and service infra-
structure complex

3. Retail trade, public catering, consumer
and communal services for the population;
passenger transport, communications,
housing, health care and physical

culture, social security, environmental
protection, etc.

———_——_——————————

‘T. s. Khachaturov, ”Effektivnost' kapital'nykh vlozheniy,' p 253. The

transition from the existing system of branch planning and management to
the combination of the branch principle with program-goal planning given
the predominance of the latter holds major significance not only for the
agro-industrial but for all other types of interbranch complexes (see V.

Tikhonov, "The Essence of thc Agra-industrial Complex," VOPROSY BKONOHIKI,
No 8, 1980, p 12).

“The list of branches is based on “Klassifikstsiya otrasley narodnogo
khozyaystva" [Classification of Branches of the National Economy] and
"Netodicheskiyc ukazaniya k razrabotke gocudarstvennykh planov razvitiya
narodnogo khozyaystva SSSR," Izdatel'stvo "Bkonomika," 197“.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
18X

lex

complex

.re

2.

5.

11

Crop production, animal husbandry,
production of raw materials on
subsidiary farms of enterprises and
personal household plots

Oil, gas. coal, shale, timber and
other branches of the fuel industry,
electric power production

Extraction of nonmetallic raw material.
production of metals, materials of
chemical origin, glass and ceramic
materials for processing, other
materials

Production of metalware and metal
components, machine building for
branches of the national economy,
electrical equipment and instrument
making, repair work of a machine
building character

General construction , installation .
specialized and other organizations
performing construction and install-
ation works on a contract and direct
labor basis, organizations engaged in
operational drilling

Organizations engaged in geological
surveying, hydrogeological, geological
engineering, topographical-geodetic,
geophysical, geological exploration and
prospecting for all types of useful
minerals; organizations and enter—
prises engaged in deep exploratory
drilling for oil and gas

Irrigation and reclamation, prot-
ection. conservation and reprod-
uction of animals and plants, land
and forest management, freight
transport. roadbuilding and transport,
communications, wholesale trade,

material-technical supply, procurement,
e c.

DURINHNCIAI.USB(NVLY
m we. vs a absces- vua- anus

 

8. Foreign trade complex 8. Export and import organizations,
all-union export associations of
the Ministry of Foreign Trade. the
State Committee for Foreign Economic
Relations of the USSR Council of
Ministers, and the USSR Foreign Trade

Bank
9. "Science and science services. 9. Scientific research, design, roJect-
complex planniagiorganizations, or an cations
sng s n

he servicing 0 research
subd visions, experimen al plants,
hydroseteorological service

10. "Finance and credit" complex 10. Finance-credit institutions belonging

to the Ministry of Finance, Gosbank
and Stroybank. and the USSR State
Committee for Insurance

1]. "Government" complex 11. State-administrative organs. cooper-
ative organs of government, Judicial.
legal organs, HVD and state security
organs

 

In accordance with the classification of social requirements. all branches

of social production are divided into two spheres: the social sphere

which satisfies society's nonproductive requirements and the production

sphere which is the basis for satisfying the production requirements of

the national economy. The classification of the social sphere of socical
production includes the following major interbranch complexes: food. consumer
goods (including items in everyday demand and durable goods), the social

and service infrastructure, and nonmaterial production. The production

sphere is divided into agro-raw materials, fuel-energy, metal producing,
machine building, construction. infrastructural and other interbranch complexes,
each of which includes a certain number of social production branches.

The indicated complexes of branches encompass the entire system of social
productionof both final and intermediate products that are realized in
final national economic results. For example. the material-producing and
agro-rav materials complexes for the most partproduce raw materials and
supplies in national economic complexes that create products earmarked

for final use. The separation of the first group of complexes from the
second promotes research on the functional use of objects and means of
labor as well as consumer goods (and services) in the process of satisfying
society's need for the corresponding types of material and nonmaterial
goods.

Considering the growing diversification of production and the need for
corresponding organizational changes, for the in-depth theoretical investigation
of the aforementioned processes in the structure of social production,

12

FOR'0I1ﬂCIA1.USE(HNLY
FINI¢MHHCJAI.[EHE(M§LY

it is expedient to single out national economic cocplexes that are charact—
erized by the strictly directed use of the product. The agro-industrial

or interbranch construction complex. can serve as an example of them.

The branch structure of these complexes includes: branches that produce
means of labor for branches of the complex; branches that produce objects
of labor; branches for the performance of material services and repair

work, transport. nature conservation, and supply and sales work; branches
of financial-credit, managerial. and social activity; branches in the social
and service infrastructure; branches producing the final product of the
complex.

The branch structure of territorial production complexes is also organized
according to the same scheme. Analysis of reproductive probless based

on the functional classification of the structure of social production

and its elaboration with due regard to modern demands have great theoretical
and practical significance and combine scientific research and administrative
planning activity into one.

One of the most important conditions to intensification is the realization

of structural policy of the balanced proportional development 0: the socialist
production. Ita realization presupposes inprovement in the economic mechanism.
the elaboration and application of new methods of planning. organization.
material incentive. management of the national economy and its subdivisions.

 

 

‘The structure of the agro-industrial complex is investigated in the monograph
'Agrarnyye problemy razvitogo sotsialiama' [Agrarian Problems of Developed
Socialism] (Izdatel'stvo "Naukova dumka," 1980); the structure of the inter-
branch construction complex is investigated in our article ”The Construction
Complex as a Part of the Investment Potential“ (VOPROSY BKONOHIKI, No 11,
1980).

COPYRIGHT: Izdatsl‘stvo 'Pravda’, "Voprosy ekonomiki', 1982

5013
CSO: 1820/15?

13

FOI¢0IFNJA1.UBE‘DN1Y
EFFECTIVENESS 0F CONSUMPTION, INTENSIPICATION OF SOCIAL PRODUCTION
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp lQ-23
[Article by V. Pavlyuchenko]

[Text] The further economic development of mature socialism, the higher
degree of satisfaction of social needs. and the improved well-being of

the people simultaneously presuppose both an increase in production and
higher product quality and also the rationalization of consumption and

the observance of strict economies at all levels of the national economy.
The urgency of increasing the effectiveness of consumption and the integral
relationship between this problem and the intensification of the economy
were emphasized in particular at the 26th Party Congress and the November
(1981) Plenum of the CFSU Central Committee.

The consumption process realizes the potential of products of labor to
satisfy needs. The level and quality of their satisfaction depend on
the effectiveness of this process. At the same time, consumption has
a significant impact on production and expanded reproduction.

The dialectics of the interaction between production and consumption consist
in the fact that the latter not only largely predetermines the realization
of the objective goal of production under socialism but is also its organic
element because "production." as K. Harx notes. "is indirectly also
consumption." Consumption is an integral part of the reproductive process.
It is involved in this process as the concluding state of the given
reproductive cycle, being at the same time the starting point of the new
cycle as well. By securing the continuity, the I'linkage" of reproductive
cycles, consumption influences both the effectiveness of current production
and the formation of its future level. Therefore the raising of the
effectiveness of consumption is one of the most important conditions to

the intensification of the national economy.

with the growth of the eagle of the economy. the role of consumption as a
factor actively influencing the effectiveness of social production and its
growth rates grows significantly. The increase in production naturally

 

‘K. Marks and P. Bngel's. "Sochineniya" [works], Vol 12, p 716.

16

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

leads to the expansion of the volume of consumption, both productive and
personal. The volume of production attained under the conditions of
mature socialist society creates material prerequisites for the ever more
complete and consistent realization of the requirements of the basic economic
law of socialism and for orienting all economic activity toward securing
the improvement of the people's well-being. As L. I. Brezhnev notes,

in developed socialist society “the palpable conversion of the economy

to the increasingly complete satisfaction of the diverse material and
cultural needs of the people has become possible. In other words, today
the supreme goal of socialist production directly and indirectly becomes
the center of the party's practical policy. The historical advantages of
socialism as a mode of production and a way of life. and its genuinely
humane essence are thereby more clearly and vividly revealed.”. Between
1965 and 1980, real per capita income in our country increased 1.95 fold.
There was a major increase in the general volume of personal consumption.
The increase in consumption was most rapid in the case of valuable, high
quality foodstuffs and manufactured goods.

The raising of the level of the people's well-being is simultaneously

the main goal of socialist production and one of the most important conditions
to its successful further development. The rise of the working people's
living standard is accompanied by improvement in the entire complex of
conditions for the reproduction of labor power, by the creation of the
prerequisites for the all-round development of the individual. by the
increased opportunity for the material stimulation of the working people.

by the strengthening of its ties with the effectiveness and quality of

work, and with the attainment of optimal final national economic results.
Promoting the improvement of the main productive force of society--man

the worker. i. e.. by promoting the 'high development of man as a producer
and the all-round development of his productive abilities,”.. the improvement
of well-being is also one of the decisive prerequisites to the growth

of the effectiveness of social production.

The development of the personal factor of production is closely linked

to physical factors of production. Progress in science. the creation

of new equipment and technology, and their effective utilization in the
national economy are to a significant degree determined by the raising

of the skill level. by the vocational-technical training of the working
people. 'by the improvement of the quality of their labor. and by their
creative activism. In other words, the physical factors of production

are improved in proportion to the development of the latter. There is
also a relationship between physical and personal factors. The improvement
of the physical factors of production in turn makes man‘s labor not only

'L. I. Brezhnev. “Leninskim kursom' [The Leninist Course]. Politizdat,
vo. 6. p 62“.

 

"K. Harks and P. Engel's, ”Sochineniya" [Works]. vol 26, part III. p 51.

15

FOIIOFFICIAI.lEﬂ!(HQLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. USP. ONLY

more productive but also more creative, interesting and meaningful and
creates the prerequisites for the freer and more comprehensive development
of the individual thereby ultimately transforming labor into the primary
vital need of every person. Thus the improvement of physical and personal
factors of production is mutually complementary: progress of one of them
is invariably the prerequisite to the development of another.

In order to realize optimal final national economic results, i. e., the

most complete satisfaction of social requirements it is important not

only to create certain use values in the necessary volume and mix. it

is also important to see how their useful effect is realized in the process
of satisfying the need. The tie between production and the degree of
satisfaction of needs is not as simple and single-valued as is often believed:
the more that is produced, the better the requirements are satisfied.

In reality, everything is much more complex. One and the same volume of
output may satisfy a larger or smaller requirement depending on the degree

of rational organization of the consumption process. If production capacities
are underutilized, if the useful properties of a product are not used

to the fullest, if raw materials, energy and supplies are overexpended,

th‘s essentially means that in order to satisfy needs of equal magnitude

and quality, society Lust produce more. must expend additional labor and
material resources above and beyond those that would be needed if consumption
were rationally organized. It is important not only to produce the products
that society needs but also to realize their useful effect in full measure.

The consumption process is associated with the expenditure of human labor
and other resources. Thus, approximately 110-180 billion man-hours a

year are spent on housework throughout the nation as a whole, 1. e., a
little less than the total amount of time spent working in the national
economy. The growth of the production of passenger cars, refrigerators,
television sets and other consumer goods necessitates the development

of an appropriate service and maintenance network in which social labor

is expended not on the production of new use values but on the creation

of conditions for the utilization of existixg use values, is used in the
consumption sphere to secure the normal process of consumption. A similar

situation also exists with regard to the consumption of the means of production.
Expenditures of this type include the total aggregate of operational,

repair and other costs required to keep equipment, buildings, structures.
means of transport, roads, etc., in operating condition. This point was

made by K. Marx who wrote of the need for expenditures of live labor in

order to preserve and use "the products of past labor as use values."'
ACCurdingly, the effectiveness of consumption reflects the degree of effective
utilization of use values (or of their entire mass on the scale of the
national economy) and the required expenditures of social labor. And

this in turn means that economic effectiveness is characterized by two

main components: the effectiveness of production proper and the effective-
ness of consumption.

 

'K. Marx and P. Engel's, "Sochineniya" [Works], Vol 23. p 19h.

. 16

FOIiOFFKJALlEﬁZONLY
FOR(Mﬁﬂ[JAl.USB(NVLV

The effectiveness of consumption acquires ever greater importance with
the growth of society's wealth and the volume of current consumption.
This is primarily because social expenditures associated with consumption.i.e.,
with the utilization and preservation of the use value are very high and
in a number of instances may exceed many fold the productive expenditures
on its creation. Thus, according to the existing estimates, the national
economy spends approximately 27.8 billion rubles a year on the capital
repair of machinery and equipment. Seven million persons and one-fifth
of the metal produced are involved in the manufacture of spare parts and
in the maintenance and repair of machinery. As much as no percent of

the rolled metal planned for the production of new motor vehicles is used
for their repair; for the restoration of tractors--h7 percent.

For this reason, aggregate expenditures of labor in the national economy
directly associated with both productive and personal consumption evidently
tend to rise in proportion to the growth of the scale of social consumption.
The main reason for this is the slower growth rates of the productivity

of labor that sustains the consumption process compared with the rate

of increase in labor productivity in the sphere of material production.

For example, for every percent of increase in trade turnover there is

an almost 0.6 percent increase in the number of trade personnel; for every
percent of increase in housing, the number of housing service personnel
increases by 0.75 percent. whereas in industry for every percent of increase
in the volume of production. there is only a 0.2 percent increase in the

size of the work force. Therein lies one of the important reasons for

the rapid expansion of the nonproductive sphere, a considerable percentage
of whose labor is used to preserve use values, their rational use or to
secure movement through marketing channels. Consequently, the functioning

of the nonproductive sphere with regard to the direct servicing of consumption
(this does not included health care, education, etc.) predetermines expenditures
of labor in the final stage of production in the broad sense of the term.
From this it follows that unless a certain level of development in this
sphere is attained, it is impossible to secure effective social consumption;
under the conditions of a large scale economy, it has more and more influence
on the effectiveness of the entire national economy and intensification.
Therefore the accelerated development of the nonproductive sphere should

be regarded as one of the important conditions to adapting the structure

of the economy to the effective consumption of a substantially higher

volume of newly created material goods.

The continuous interaction of the effectiveness of production and consumption
is manifested in the fact that production on the one hand exerts an active
influence on expenditures of labor in the future, which society will make

in the process of consumption--they depend on the technical level and

the quality of the product, the volume and structure of the use values,

and the degree of their preparedness for practical use. 0n the other

hand, the consumption process can influence the effectiveness of the lowering
of expenditures of economic resources in the consumption process and the
most complete realization of the useful effect of the product. This is

the basis of the possibility of satisfying various social needs with the
lowest possible expenditures of labor.

17

FOIIOFIIClAl.lEﬂ£(HWLY
a vet vs's'sssnu vol. Vail-I

In this regard. it is important to consider the following: losses or

the overexpenditure of resources in the consumption sphere cannot by any
means always be compensated by the expansion of production. This is graphic-
ally seen in the case of a number of raw-material resources when it becomes
not only economically expedient but also absolutely necessary to increase
production and to reorient it toward the significant increase in the effective—
ness of its utilization: the reduction of expenditure norms, in-depth
refining, the creation of waste-free production. the use of secondary
resources.etc. Without this. in the future it will be increasingly difficult
and sometimes simply impossible to satisfy the requirement of a growing
economy for many types of products.

The need to rationalize consumption is also dictated by the fact that
frequently the satisfaction of growing requirements as a result of the
more economical use of resources in spheres of their application is more
effective than the further increase in production. Thus a 10-15 percent
saving of electric power is two times more economical than the cost of
producing the same quantity of additional energy. The 26th Party Congress
noted: "The effect of saving every ton of oil, coal and metal becomes

weightier and weightier and the damage inflicted by their irrational use
becomes more and more palpable."

The importance of rationalizing consumption is graphically evidenced by

the improvement in product quality: such improvement usually increases
expenditures on the part of the producer, while the effect is primarily
enjoyed by the user. The producer who creates, e. g.. new equipment,

to a considerable degree predetermines through properties "incorporated"

in it (such as productivity, reliability. service life, operating costs.
etc.) the “potential" aggregate effect (the total saving of live and embodied
labor) that it can provide during its entire useful lifetime. But the
economic effect actually realized by the user depends not only on the
technico-economic level and quality of the new equipment, but also largely
depends on the concrete conditions of its operation, i. e., on productive
consumption. In other words, the actual "return" on the potential of

the new equipment is determined in the consumption sphere. Under different
conditions. the actual effect of using one and the same piece of equipment
may vary signinlcantly and may be substantially lower than the "potential"
effect. What is more. the rapid increase in the complexity of equipment

in the course of the scientific and technological revolution renders its
effective utilization more and more difficult and therefore it is specifically
in the consumption sphere that there may be serious losses of the national
economic effect.

Economic practice shows that a considerable part of the potential effect

of new equipment is lost owing to protracted lead time. to the unsatisfactory
maintenance and repair of equipment. and to idle time. Many enterprises
underutilize the capacities of metalcutting machine tools and other production
facilities. In agriculture up to 10-15 percent of the average shift is

spent on technical maintenance. Average losses due to tractor idle time
amount to 9-12 rubles an hour, including h-S rubles an hour in the form

of underharvesting; during the height of field operations they increase
3—u fold.

18

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR!OFFEJAI.USE(HVLY

Open and hidden squandering of resources hinders the intensification of
production. Even the relatively slight overexpenditure of these resources

per unit of output, which in the past did not entail particularly serious
consequences in view of the significantly smaller volume of production,

can under present conditions lead to major losses in the national economy.

The obvious underutilization of economic resources is manifested in the
underutilization of production capacities, in the “freezing" of vast resources

in incomplete construction, in shipping and storage losses, in the excessively
high material-intensiveness of production, etc.

The hidden forms of ineffective utilization of resources include. in

particular the unduly hi h investment-intensiveness of construction..'
the underutilization of t e potential for the development of specialization

and cooperation. etc. Significant losses of all types of resources result
from the deconcentrated nature of the repair base. the underdevelopment
of interbrsneh production facilities, the lack of enterprises specializing

in the production of tools, accessories, and standardized assemblies and
parts.

The cost of producing machinery and equipment for animal husbandry and

feed production is extremely high. This production involves a large number

of unapecialized enterprises belonging to various ministries. Between

1976 and 1980 the losses sustained by the state from such production under

the so-called "broad cooperation" program at unspecialized enterprises

that produced assemblies and machine parts outside their area of specialization
amounted to approximately 600 million rubles. The large number of small,
obsolete, inefficient boiler rooms used to supply heat in the national

economy and individual home heating plants overexpend approximately Mo-

50 million tons of standard fuel.

Consequently, the expanding scale of the economy is accompanied by the
growing objective need to economize, to combat waste. ”No matter how

the wealth of our society might grow," L. I. Brezhnev emphasized at the
25th CPSU Congress, "the strictest economy and thriftiness continue to

be the most important condition to the development of the national economy,
to the improvement of the people's well-being." Conservation is one of
the key principles of socialist economic management. Given the vast raw-
material, fuel-energy and other material resources that will be drawn

into production under the 11th Five-Year Plan and during the 1980's, the
economical and rational use of all types of resources acquires national

 

“Major reserves for effecting economies can be found in virtually every branch

of the national economy. Thus the losses of fuel and energy resources

in the major branches of heavy industry and machine building in 1980 were
estimated at 20 million tons of standard fuel, the extraction of which
cost at least ~50 million rubles, not counting the capital investments
required for the creation of the production capacities (KOHNUNIST, No'8,
1980. P. 53).

"Thus in the course of 10 years, the cost of a livestock-place on dairy
farms more than trebled; in hog fattening complexes--quadrupled. It is
often the case that unduly heavy materials are used in construction and
facilities are saturated with unwieldg equipment. For some livestock

farms. expenditures include up to 8 m of concrete per cow and too kg of
metal per calf (KONNUNIST, No 10. 1978. p. 38).

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
19
. _.. -..._...~ a...“ uncut

economic importance. It is this consideration, in particular, that
underscores the urgency of more efficient consumption.

The resolution of the problem of making consumption more effective includes.
in addition to the rationalization of short-term consumption (for example,
the productive use of metal, raw material, fuel, electric power, etc.).
significant improvement in the long-term consumption of objects that comprise
the bulk. the basis of national wealth, and especially of fixed capital.
More and more national wealth is amassed as the scale of social production
increases. However, society's consumption of national wealth (and society
"consumes" it and "wears it out” over an extended period of time) demands
the replacement of the worn-out part of national wealth and its simple
reproduction in its previous volume. Moreover, short-term expenditures

are required to maintain the use value of its elements (e. 3., expenditures
on the operatiOn of housing. structures, the infrastructure, equipment
repair. etc.). the magnitude of which depends on the scale of the national
wealth. The greater the national wealth, the more social labor must be
spent on its "maintenance."

Aggregate expenditures of labor in social production can be divided into
f'ur functional groups: (1) expenditures on short-term consumption (labor
inputs in the production of the corresponding material goods, services

and their consumption); (2) the maintenance of the national wealth (expend-
itures associated with its simple reproduction, with the use and preserv-
ation of the use value of its elements); (3) supporting the growth of
consumption and of the national wealth; and (A) expenditures that increase
the effectiveness of social production, 1. e., such labor inputs that

alter the ratio of national economic inputs to outputs and that create

the potential for the more complete satisfaction of society's requirements
at a lower expenditure of economic resources (they include primarily expenditures
of labor on scientific and technical progress. education and the part

of capital construction that raises the technical level of production).

The effectiveness of consumption exerts a substantial influence on the
distribution of expenditures of social labor among the functions enumerated
above and thereby influences the process of expanded reproduction. At

every specific point in time, the proportions between individual types

of labor inputs are determined primarily by the existing level of production
and consumption and also by the magnitude of accumulated national wealth.
Short-term consumption and the functioning of the national wealth obJectively
predetermine the necessary expenditure of social labor which cannot be
urbitarily reduced (at any rate, without lowering the volume of production
and consumption). And only after the given processes have been secured

can society use the remaining resources to perform other functions: increase
the effectiveness of social production. the increase in consumption and

the national wealth which determine the dynamics of development of the
national economy, the rate of increase of its effectiveness and of economic
growth. The first-named expenditures of social labor far exceed the second.
The relationship between these two types of expenditures of social labor

is conditional upon and fixed by the results of economic activity. The
second type of expenditures ensures the future development of the economy

and changes over time.

20

IN)! OFFICJAI.USII(MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The growth of the national wealth and social consumption, while enhancing
associated expenditures of labor and other economic resources, limits

the possibility for a relative increase in their use in other spheres

of activity. In other words. as the scale of the economy grows, it begins
to work ”for itself." for the preservation of the existing volume of
consumption thereby narrowing the fields of activity whose function is

to expand the economy. The resolution of this contradiction presupposes
first of all the reduction of expenditures of labor and other resources
associated with consumption and the planned improvement of elements of
national wealth, the protection of the national wealth against the accum-
ulation of inferior plant and equipment. and the designing of new technology
and capital construction projects with regard to the need to minimize
future operating costs.

Analysis of the problems in the effectiveness of consumption permits us

to draw the following conclusions. First, we must strive for planned.
optimal proportions that will ensure the highest national economic effective-
ness in the distribution of labor between production and consumption.

We must develop a methodology for determining the given proportions both

at general economic and branch levels as well as for individual types

of products. Second, the growth-inhibiting tendency to increase expenditures
of social labor in order to secure the consumption process must be countered
by the acceleration of the rate of labor productivity in the given sphere.
This rate must not be lower than the rate that is attained in production

and occasionally must be even slightly higher than the latter. The realization
of such a rate is a necessary condition to improving the distribution

of labor resources among the types of activity that “serve“ consumption.

This is also important for the balanced growth of effectiveness and espec-
ially for labor productivity in all spheres of the national economy.

Lag in any of these spheres inevitably affects the overall dynamics of
intensification of the economy. And if the coordinated increase in the
effectiveness of production is not realized in all branches of the national
economy. i. e., if there are branches in which the level of effectiveness
is low and the growth rate of effectiveness is slow, then ultimately the
resources that are conserved in the effectively operating branches will
have to be transferred to the other branches that will use them with a
lower degree of effectiveness compared with the socially necessary level
and especially the level attained in the leading sectors of social production.
Obviously it is specifically the marginally effective elements of the
national economy that are now exerting the greatest inhibiting influence

on the intensification of the economy. Prom this it follows that the
elimination of effectiveness bottlenecks is one of the most important
conditions to the conversion of the national economy to the intensive

path of development. As emphasized at the November (1981) Plenum of the
CPSU Central Committee. the acceleration of the curtailment of expenditures
of manual labor, in which approximately no; of the workers in industry

are presently engaged. acquires special timeliness in this regard.

The reduction of expenditures of social labor in consumption and the more
complete realization of the potential effect of the created use values

amalgam éMES‘ﬁiﬁSs sESBicESSSESE ﬁéﬂi‘pisvlsSgﬁiﬂrttﬁe'i‘éé‘s‘ﬂng
of labor resources (and other resources) required for consumption. The
result is a kind of "feedback“ effect in which one complements the other.

21
I30! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run UPCILIAL we. UI‘LI

The detailed program of concrete measures for increasing the effectiveness
of consumption (outlined in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and
USSR Council of Ministers 'On Making More Economical and Rational Use

of Raw-Material. Fuel-Energy and other Material Resources") lakes provision
for the planning of enterprise cost of production targets (starting in
1983) and for establishing a limit (maximum level) for them. for the develop-
ment of progressive norms governing the expenditure of resources, for

the greater stimulation of conservation, and for the establishment of
stiff penalties for the ineffective expenditure of materials, fuel and
energy. The plan for the economic and social development of the USSR

in 1981-1985 establishes higher targets than the 10th Five-Year Plan
regarding the reduction of the expenditure of the basic types of raw-
material, fuel—energy and other material resources. Thus the national
economy should conserve over 200 million tons of standard fuel in 1985
compared with 125 million tons in the last five-year plan, while the saving

of rolled ferrous metals in machine bulding and metalworking should amount
to 8.5 million tons.

The dissemination of progressive know-how and the further development

of the competition for conservation and thriftiness are destined to play

a major part in increasing the effectiveness of consumption. Many collectives
have amassed valuable experience in reducing the material-intensiveness

of production, in the introduction of low-wasteand waste-free technologies,
in the total utilization of raw materials, and in expanding the application
of secondary resources. The working people in Moscow and Kemerovo Oblast
have made a maJor effort toward securing the economical expenditure of

raw materials, fuel and energy, while enterprises in Chelyabinsk Oblast
saved hundreds of thousands of tons of metal during the last five-year

plan period. He must increase the planned character of the use of the
given experience. he deem it advisable to establish a procedure whereby
ministries and departments will include in their plans appropriate norms
based on the attainments of the leading collectives and will provide for
the broad use of their work methods at other enterprises of a given branch.

The resolution of the task of increasing the effectiveness of consumption
must commence from the earliest stages of development of new technology
and other products. In the process of evaluating the effectiveness of
future products, already in the design stage it is essential to consider
not only their production costs but also future expenditures of resources
associated with their use (during their entire service life). Engineering
solutions and variants of capital construction must be based on minimum
aggregate expenditures in production and consumption. Such an approach
will result in capital construction projects and new technologies that

are less "resource-intensive" and will also offer greater incentive to
improve product quality, which will in turn reduce the costs of consumption.
This determines the need to make the appropriate changes in the existing
methods used to evaluate the economic effectiveness of new technology

and capital investments.

The failure of designers of new equipment and other products and of planners
of capital construction to take into account future expenditures in the
consumption process hinders the correct distribution of national economic

22

FINI()FF1CLAL USI2CMNLY
FtHRCMﬂNCJAl.USE(M‘LY

resources between production and consumption from the standpoint of the
perspective of increased effectiveness and leads to the development of
equipment that is "resource-intensive" in operation. However for many

types of products the correlation of the expenditure of resources in
production and consumption now (at a time when. e. g., the labor expenditures
on the repair of trucks are 30-l0 times higher than the labor-intensiveness
of their manufacture) makes it feasible to increase their expenditure

in production in order to improve the quality of the product, to reduce

its 'resource—intensiveness' in operation. to secure a future economy

that will outweigh the given expenditure, or to shift part of this
expenditure from production to the development of material conditions

for increasing the effectiveness of consumption (better service. maintenance.
etc.) so as to realize a significant national economic effect.

One of the main directions in increasing the effectiveness of consumption

is to improve product quality. The higher the quality of new equipment,

for example, the lesser will be the subsequent outlays on its operation

and maintenance, and the more fully will its useful properties be realized
over a longer period of time. And conversely, low quality will require
subsequent additional outalys that are sometimes very high in order to
restore the short-lived consumer properties of the product, will cause

the product to go out of commission prematurely thereby necessitating

the accelerated replacement of products of labor retired from the consumption
sphere.

There is yet another aspect of the interrelationship between product quality
and the effectiveness of consumption that is not sufficiently taken into
account at the present time. This refers to the fact that in order to
increase the degree of realization of the potential effect of new equipment
and to transform it into an actual effect. it is also important to secure
balance in the level of quality of the output of allied branches of the
national economy and enterprises (both at any given point in time as well

as over time). In many instances. the production of products that do

not meet the quality requirements a: the client branch will preclude

the full "disclosure" of the potential inherent in new equipment and technol—
ogies. Thus, if the quality of a manufactured tool were made to conform

to the technical specifications for metalworking equipment, it would be
possible to increase labor productivity on existing machine tools by 25-

30 percent. Consistent quality in production acquires special importance

in the production of fundamentally new, highly effective types of products.

In general, a negative influence can be exerted on the effectiveness of
consumption by any imbalance in the economy which results in the loss

of part of the potential effect of new equipment, the actual realized
effect of which is lower than possible. The shortage, e. g.. of hook-

on implements leads to the lowering of the effectiveness of utilization

of the fleet of powerful up-to-date tractors with which our agriculture

is supplied. and the lack of highly productive loading and unloading equip-
ment result in excessive idle time of means of transport, and the disruption
of the delivery schedule for raw materials. supplies and components leads

to the deterioration of the utilization of production capacities and reduces

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘VI Vl'l‘lbll‘l- U65 VI‘LI

 

the output-capital ration. Therefore the improvement of proportionality
at all levels of the national economy and it all its elements is a general
condition for increasing the effectiveness of consumption. The reference
is to proportionality in the broad sense of the term. This includes not
only the correspondence of production to consumption in physical volume and

value terms but also their precise agreement in time and space and also in
terms of the quality of output.

The intensification of the economy depends directly on the increased effective-
ness of personal consumption. In order to resolve this problem, it is
important first of all to formulate a system of needs, which meets the

full and comprehensive development of the individual. promotes the capacity

for highly productive and quality work, and eliminates the excessive absorption
with “things" in consumption. There is a need for a long-range model

of consumption. In our view, it should be developed within the framework

of the "Twenty-Year Comprehensive Program of Scientific and Technical

Progress" (and should include the avenues and stages of its realization).
Second. it is important to implement a complex of economic, social,
organizational and technical measures aimed at improving the quality of
satisfaction of requirements, at lowering expenditures of social labor

involved in "servicing" the consumption process. at saving the population's
personal :ime, and at reducing the expenditure of labor in the home.

To this end, it is important to create new labor-saving technology for

the nonproductive sphere and the home, to develop new types of services,

to develop collective forms of consumption, to make more efficient use

of the free time of the working people who are the greatest productive

force and who influence the productive power of labor'.

The rationalization of consumption. the calculating attitude toward everything
that our economy disposes over has nothing in common with miserliness.

Such rationalization should not be viewed as the deterioration of satis-
faction of needs. To the contrary, the creation of the complex of the
necessary economic conditions ensuring "resource-saving" consumption is

in the present stage a necessary prerequisite to the ever more complete

and better satisfaction of the continuously growing requirements of developed
socialist society and its members.

Given the gigantic scale of the economy, as L. I. Brezhnev notes, at a

time when the nation's economy produces two-three and even several times
more of all types of products than 15-20 years ago. the effective. rational
use of that which is produced is of paramount importance... This factor
now acquires decisive significance. If it were used to the fullest, even
now with the present level of production. it would be possible to better
satisfy the country's needs for metal, fuel, construction materials. and
consumer goods.

*Sec K. Marx and P. angel's, "Sochineniya'I [Works]. Vol #6, Part II, p.221.

"See L. I. Brezhnev. "Leninskim kursom" [The Leninist Course], Vol 7,
Politizdat, p. 619.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", 'Voprosy ckonomiki”, 1982

5013
650: 1820/156 25

FOR 0FF1CIAI.I£SE Ohﬂdf
FOR|OFFIJA1.USEGNNLY

ECONOMIC POLICY, ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

CONVERSION OF EOONOHY TO INTENSIVE PAIH OF DEVELOPMENT

Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 2. Feb 82 pp 3-13
[Article by L. Abalkin]

[Text] One of the basic characteristics of the reproduction process in
the present stage is the changeover to consistently intensive economic
growth. The conversion of the Soviet economy to the intensive path of
development will be complete in the 1980's. The practical implementation
of this policy entails far-reaching changes in the national economy. in
the content and directions of scientific and technical progress. and in
the entire reproductive structure. L. I. Brezhnev stated that the intensific-
ation of the economy--translated into practical terms--means first and
foremost that the results of production grow more rapidly than inputs.
that more can be produced while drawing relatively fewer resources into
production.

The conversion of the economy to intensive development presupposes the
substantial restructuring of the systems and methods of planned management,

and the abandonment of the stereotypes that formed at a time when the quantit-
ative approach prevailed over the qualitative. It will be necessary to

make an in-depth politico-economic analysis of the essence and regularities

of the intensive type of expanded socialist reproduction. The investigation
of the factors that necessitate the conversion of the economy to intensive
development, the study of criteria that make it possible to Judge the complete-
ness of this process. and the elaboration of an integral concept of the
intensification of socialist production acquire special urgency.

Theoretical analysis and historical experience prompt the conclusion that

the intensive form of expanded reproduction is intrinsically inherent

in socialism and its economic system. The affirmation of public ownership

of the means of production creates objective prerequisites for the rational

and effective use of public resources. for orienting economic growth toward

the attainment of optimal end results. The technical improvement of production,
the growth of labor productivity and strict economy regimes are questions

that have always occupied an important place in the party's economic policy.

However, under present conditions the intensification of production is
a problem that is not simply more urgent than ever before. The problem

25
I'UI UI'I'ILIAL USE. UNLI

today arises in a significantly new light due to the greater social orient-
ation of economic growth and deep, essentially radical changes in the
conditions of reproduction. The point is that the higher the level of

maturity of the socialist economic system. the more completely is its humanistic
nature revealed, and the more consistently is the development or production
oriented toward the solution of problems associated with the betterment

of the well-being of the people and the all-round development of the individual.

In preceding stages. socialism'a intrinsically intensive form of economic
development could be realized only in part. The main reason for this was
not the availability of substantial reserves for extensive growth but rather
the absence of thoroughly developed economic and scientific and technical
potential. Until this potential was created, it was impossible to make

the transition to the consistently intensive form of economic growth.

The situation changes radically with the construction of developed socialism.
The creation or a highly developed production potential based on the latest

advances in science and technology is a necessary and obligatory condition
to the maturity of socialism.

At the present time. the USSR produces one-fifth of the world's industrial
output. This was more than all countries in the world produced in 1950.

As the following data show. the share of our country in the world production
of many of the most important types of products increased substantially:

 

  
    
 
 

World production Share of USSR
in I of world

production

 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 

Electric power (billions of
kw/hrs)

011 (including gas condensate
(millions of tons)) 3
Natural gas (billions of m

Steel (millions of tons)
Mineral fertilizers (computed in
terms of 1002 nutrient matter

(in millions of tons)
Cement (millions of tons)

)

As the 26th CPSU Congress indicated, the Soviet Union entered the 1980's

with a mighty economic and scientific-technical potential and with highly
skilled cadres.

26

FIIICMWQCJA1.USE(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the increased social orientation of economic growth, the creation

of a highly developed potential and the need to shift the center of gravity
to the more effective use of this potential are the principal factors
underlying the conversion of the economy to the intensive path of development.

The growing raw materials problem and the scarcity of manpower are not

a factor in the intensification of production but are only additional conditions
that make the solution of the given problem more urgent. In both a theoretical
and practical sense it is wrong to link the need to convert the economy

to the intensive path of development entirely or predominantly to the

scarcity of resources.

The scarcity of resources is of a relative and by no means absolute nature.

It relates not to the scale of existing resources but rather to the potential
for their further growth. Today. our country leads the world in the overall
extraction of raw materials and fuel and in the production of primary materials.
This also applies to such a resource of expanded reproduction as the volume

of capital investment. The magnitude of capital investment in the USSR

in 1980 was approximately 100 percent of the given volume in the USA even
though the volume of [Soviet] national income was approximately two-thirds

of the American level.

Analysis of the data shows that in the llth Five-Year Plan. there was a
reduction of growth of resources for only individual types of raw materials
and fuel.

Growth of Output of the Fuel-Energy Complex in the 10th and llth Five-
Year Plans

 
   

  
 
 
   
  
    
 

  
   

10th Five-Year
Plan

llth Five-Year
Plan

 

Electric power (billions of kw/hr)

Oil (including gas condensate 27
(millions of tons)

Gas (billions of m ) 195

Coal (millions of tons) 59

In 1981-1985, the production of finished rolled ferrous metals will increase
by 15 million tons compared with h million tons in 1976-1980.

Even when the increment of resources is lower, there are significant unutilized
resources available. Thus the deceleration of the growth of labor resources

in the 1980‘s is relative since it limits the growth of production on an
extensive basis but is accompanied by major losses of working time and

is characterized by a quite significant share of manual labor. In industry.

it is approximately no percent (among workers). It is still higher in
construction and the service sphere. Under these conditions, the shortage

of live labor is relative but not absolute.

27

ms omcuu. use ONLY
a vm‘ vs a Iva-om. vain we nus

The clarification of the main factors that necessitate the intensification

of production makes it possible to indicate the most important directions

of practical activity. Today it is concretized in the problem of the best.
fullest and most effective use of the country's economic. scientific-technical
and labor potential, of everything that the national economy has at its
disposal. When we speak of the essence and avenues of consistent intensi-
fication of social production, we should consider that neither economic

nor social progress are possible without it under modern conditions. There
are no alternatives to this course.

It is of fundamental importance to determine the criteria that can be used
as the basis for Judging'the completeness of the conversion of the economy
to the path of intensive development. The complexity and manysidedness

of the intensification process require its comprehensive characterization

which takes into account various facets of the given process.

It is necessary first of all to examine the question of the correlation
between extensive and intensive factors of economic growth. In economic
literature and statistical practice it is a common practice to compare

the share of increase in output or national income resulting from the increase
in labor productivity and additional manpower. It is commonly believed

that the higher the share of increase resulting from the increase in

labor productivity, the more intensively does the national economy, an economic
branch or a production link develop. However, for all the importance of

the given correlationI it possesses a very limited potential for evaluating
actual attainments in converting the economy to the intensive path of develop-
ment. The reason is that given such an approach. the total diversity and
complexity of the process of expanded reproduction reduce to but one albeit
very important point.

Naturally. the growth of labor productivity has been and continues to be

a decisive factor in increasing the effectiveness of social production

and occupies a leading place among the various directions of economic
intensification. The llth Five-Year Plan indicates higher labor productivity
growth targets compared with the actual indicators of the 10th Five-Year
Plan.

Growth Rates of Labor Productivity Under the 10th and llth Five-Year Plans
(in Z)

———_———————

   

  

10th Five-Year
Plan

llth Five-Year
Plan

       
 
     
 
 
 

Industry 123

oo009.000.00.00000000QOOOOOOOO

Agriculture (annual average).,,,....,. 123
“0Mtruct10n.......................... 115
Rail transport 110.5

 
 

ouc-ooooc-co-oo-oo-oooo.

28

FoaiﬂﬂﬂCLALlEHEONLX
Ft”!(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.US£(NVLY

The share of output that is to result from the growth of labor productivity
is rising. Thus. in industry the share of the product that is to be produced
as a result of higher productivity under the 11th Five-Year Plan will be

nine-tenths of the total growth of this share compared with three-fourths
under the 10th Five-Year Plan.

However, even if the entire increase in output is realized as a result

of higher labor productivity (as is the case in agriculture, in a number

of branches of industry. and in individual regions), we are still not entitled
to conclude that the transition to the intensive form of economic growth

is complete. however this also does not mean that the share of labor
productivity in the growth of output cannot serve as the only, exhaustive
criterion for evaluating the intensive or extensive form of economic growth.

It is also necessary to take into account the effectiveness of utilization
of all other resources. '

The dynamics of the output-capital ratio, the raising of which acquires
ever greater urgency at a time when the economy is being converted to the
intensive path of development, should be viewed together with the analysis
of labor productivity. The factors impeding the rise of the output-capital
ratio are numerous: the need for the primary mechanization of labor in

a number of branches and production facilities, the deterioration of raw
materials extraction conditions. structural changes in social production.
The low coefficient of shift operation of equipment, the rising cost of
means of labor, and shortcomings in the organization of production are
reflected in the dynamics of the output-capital ratio.

At the same time, there are quite powerful factors and trends toward improving
the existing production potential, its technical retooling and modernization.
If ably and effectively used, they can offset (or eliminate) the action

of negative factors, can promote stabilization and the subsequent stable
growth of the output—capital ratio. The consistent intensification of

the economy presupposes the improved use of both live labor and embodied
labor,particu1arly labor that is embodied in fixed productive capital as

the most important element of national wealth. The dynamics of these
indicators does not always form in the same direction. Thus while the
productivity of social labor increased by 17 percent under the 10th Five-Year
Plan. the output-capital ratio in material production declined by 1! percent.
Given such a combination, we can speak only of the partial or incomplete
intensification of the economy. The partial intensification of production
takes place if there is an increase in the effectiveness of the utilization
of one factor (or several but not all factors) of expanded reproduction.

The attainment of complete. all-round intensification of social production
and the culmination of the conversion of the economy to the path of
intensive development is integrally linked to the improved use of fixed
productive capital. The solution of the problems that arise in this area
is a complex matter requiring considerable time and effort. The November
(1981) Plenum of thc CPSU Central Committee noted that even though the
11th Five-Year Plan indicated high targets for effectiveness indicators,

29

FOI10FFKJAI.USE(HVLY
I‘ll Writ-ILL UM URL!

the implementation of the plan still does not eliminate the trend toward
the lowering of the output-capital ratio in a number of branches of the
national economy. The elimination of this trend will take the entire 1980's.
However. it is very important that the new five-year plan envisages the

lessening of the gap between the growth of labor productivity and capital

per worker and thereby the deceleration of the rate of decline of the output-
capital ratio.

Dynamics of Labor Productivity. Capital per Horker and Output-Capital Ratio
in the 10th and 11th Five-Year Plans (in x)’

 
 

10th Five-Year Plan llth Five-Year Plan

capltal

 
 
  
 
 

Industry..............
Agriculture...........

 

I’I‘he output-capital ratio is counted a the quotient resulting from the division of
the index of labor productivity by the capital per worker index.

The conversion of the economy to the path of intensive development

can be considered complete if high growth rates of final national econoaic
results are accompanied by a comprehensive increase in labor productivity
and the output-capital ratio, by the improved use of all other resources
of expanded reproduction (capital investment, raw materials, fuel. power.

etc.) This is the main. decisive criterion of completeness of the conversion
of the economy to an intensive path.

Integrated indicators that form the basis for concluding the predominant
significance of one or another factor are frequently used to evaluate

the correlation of extensive and intensive factors of economic growth.
without going into the question of the legitimacy of integration of various
factors. it should be noted that under present conditions the possibility
of "compensating” the deterioration of the utilization of some factors
through the more effective utilization of other factors is very limited.

The complete conversion of the economy to the intensive path of develop-
ment does not mean that economic growth will be solely and exclusively
the result of qualitative, intensive factors. In real life, intensive

and extensive factors are always in a certain combination. complement
one another, and hence it is possible to speak of the dominant signifi-
cance of one or the other.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The dominant influence of intensive factors characterizes one of the
criteria of converting the economy to the path of intensive development.
The determining role of the increase in labor productivity (in correlation
with the increase in the size of the work force) finds expression in

the fact that it accounts for up to 90-100 percent of the growth of
output or national income. The absolute actual (rather than conditional
and estimated) reduction in the size of the work force in many branches

of material production and at existing enterprises acquires ever greater
importance today.

As regards the output-capital ratio. it is necessary to halt its decline
and to secure its subsequent growth which will make it possible to
expand the field of operation of intensive factors of economic growth,

to include in their number the supplementary and relatively independent
resource of economic growth, the multiplication of the country's wealth
and the enhancement of the effectiveness of social production.

The rational use of raw materials, fuel. energy and other material
resources acquires a special role under present conditions. As stated

at the 26th Party Congress. the increased effectiveness of their use
together with the growth of labor productivity are the decisive. most
effective way of multiplying the country's wealth and of rapidly increasing
socialist accumulations and resources for consumption. The significance
of the conservation of resources is determined by the vast scale of

their production, by their large losses and by the fact that conservation
is the least expensive and most effective way of multiplying the resources
for expanded reproduction. Thus calculations show that the capital
investments required for the conservation of fuel and energy resources

are 3-! times lower than the investments required to increase the extraction
of fuel.

The scale of conservation of material resources under present conditions
approximates the volume of resources that are drawn into the process
of expanded reproduction as a result of the growth of their production.
Such a factor in the intensification of the economy as the broad use

of waste in production and consumption (metal. glass, paper, secondary
energy resources. etc.) and the application of relatively or totally
wastefree technologies acquires ever greater significance. The attainment
of large-scale conservation and the recycling of material resources,
which is the equivalent of their additional growth as a result of
production are important criteria of the degree of completeness of the
conversion of the economy to the path of intensive development.

The only answer to this argument is that the potential for conserving
material resources is not unlimited. Indeed, it is impossible to endlessly
reduce the expenditure of fuel on the production of a kilowatt-hour

of electric power, the expenditure of cement on the construction of

a square meter of housing, etc. These limitations exist but only if
techniques and technology, the structure of production and consumption
remain unchanged. The application of fundamentally new techniques

and technologies. progressive changes in the structure of production.

and radical improvement in product quality open up a real way to

the systematic lowering of material-intensiveness both of social production
as a whole and of the production of concrete use values.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The need for heightened effort to make rational use of labor, material
and natural resources determines the growing role of scientific and
technical progress in converting the economy to the path of intensive
development. Under present conditions, scientific and technical progress
and the use of more effective means of production are the decisive
condition to the intensification of the economy.

At the same time. today the demands on the actual determination of

more effective means of production are in large measure formed in

a new way. This is connected with the fact that the criteria of effectiveness
of new technology and of means of production in general do not remain
stable. They are imposed on technology from without--by the general
conditions of reproduction in a given stage which express these conditions
through the goals and tasks of the party's economic policy.

In the present stage. the effectiveness of the means of production

and the progressiveness of various technical solutions depend on

the degree to which they promote the comprehensive and consistent
intensification of production. In our opinion, this means that the

only means of production that can be unconditionally considered as
effective are those that simultaneously raise the productivity of live
labor, reduce the cost of a unit of capacity. that increase productivityor
other useful effect of new technology. and that lower expenditures

of raw materials, fuel and power per unit of final output. To these
purely economic criteria, there are added social requirements that
consist in the need to improve working conditions, to reduce physically
arduous and unskilled labor, etc.

Proceeding from the task of converting the economy to the path of
intensive development. the 26th CPSU Congress articulated the basic
directions of further development of science and the acceleration of
technical progress. Under the nth Five-Year Plan, the development

of science and technology must to an even greater degree be subordinated
to the solution of the economic and social problems of Soviet society.

to the acceleration of the conversion of the economy to the path of
intensive development. to increasing the effectiveness of social production.

Thus the consistent development and application of labor-. capital-
and resource-saving techniques and technologies are in line with the
tasks of economic intensification. The transition to such a type of
scientific and technical progress is one of the most important criteria
of the completeness of the conversion of the economy to the path of
intensive development.

Naturally the given combination cannot be realized in each individual
case. However it is specifically the comprehensive improvement of

all components of effectiveness, including the change in technological
parameters. that determines the socioeconomic demands that are presently
made on scientific and technical progress. All this imposes more rigid
demands on the screening of technical decisions. This point must

be taken into account both in scientific and technical policy and in

the management of scientific and technical progress.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The acceleration of the turnover of material resources in the national
economy is one of the most urgent problems and an important direction
in the intensification of social production. It is an important and
relatively independent factor in increasing the effectiveness of production
which for the same resources makes it possible to obtain greater end

results and thereby to intensify the process of expanded reproduction
signiﬁcantly .

Under the nth Five-Year Plan, there will be a maJor effort to accelerate

the turnover time of working capital in the national economy. The
improvement of technological resources. the rationalization of inventory,

the improvement of commodity and monetary circulation , and the development
of the production infrastructure play an important part in the acceleration

of the turnover of resources. Assessment of the actual acceleration

of the turnover of resources is a necessary condition to the correct
evaluation of measures implemented in the indicated spheres.

The recoupment time of capital investments occupies a leading place

among the various forms of turnover time of material resources in the
national economy. The significant and unjustified growth of the volume
of construction in progress. the prolongation of construction time compared
with the established norm. and the slow pace of development of capacities
substantially slow down the recoupment time of capital investments

and impede the growth of effectiveness of social production.

Today a certain amount of progress is noted in this regard. The absolute
volume of incomplete construction was for the first time reduced in

1980 even though it still substantially exceeds the norm and constitutes
87 percent of the annual volume of capital investment.

Volume of Incomplete Construction (at end of year; actual value)

Year In billions of rubles In x of the volume of

capital investments
for the year

1970....................... . 52.5 73
1975 76.7 75
1979...............................106.§ 91
1980..............................105.1 87

The 26th CPSU Congress posed the task of raising the volume of incomplete
construction to the normative level by 1983. The realization of this
complex but exceptionally important task will make it possible to bring
into play additional factors in increasing the effectiveness of social
production and to make substantial progress on the road to converting

the economy to the intensive path of development.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I U“ UO'I IVQRH UJI. Ud‘hl

A unique feature of the llth Five-Year Plan is that it envisages a considerable
increase in the activation of fixed capital and a lesser increase in capital
investment. The decision was made to reduce the volume of capital investment
and construction and installation work originally envisaged for the five-

year plan period. The plan for 1982 and subsequent years of the five-

year plan calls for preserving the volume of capital investment primarily
at the level of actual fulfillment for 1980.

State Capital Investments and the Activation of Pixed Capital Under the
llth Pive-Year Plan

  
   
   
 

  
 
 
    
     
 

 

Overall volume
(in billions
of rubles)

Increase in 1 of
10th Five-Year Plan

State capital investments

Activation of fixed capital

financed by state capital
investments

21

The given decisions took into account the available material and labor
resources, the capacities of construction organizations and the volume
of incomplete construction. As already noted. such an assessment enabled
the November (1981) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee to formulate a
practicable. more balanced capital construction plan which creates the
necessary conditions for normal work.

Given the high rate of scientific and technical progress and the dynamism

of social requirements. the acceleration of the turnover of material resources
associated with the assessment of obsolescence acquires ever greater significance.
The slow rate of technical retooling of production and the unjustified

use of obsolete if functional machinery and equipment result in large-

scale economic losses. At the present time. there is substantial difference
in the time of physical depreciation and obsolescence of fixed productive
capital and the renovation of capital proceeds at a slower pace than dictated
bythe latest advances in science and technology. In order to bring the
reserves for the intensification of the economy into play in the given

area, it will be necessary to shift the center of gravity from the quantitative
expansion of fixed capital to their qualitative improvement. to retooling

and modernization. to bring about a significant renesal oof the production
potential which also dictates the necessity of reducing the duration of

the cycle of incorporating the latest techniques and technologies in production.

FORINﬂﬂC1A1.USEGMNLY
FOR1OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

All this makes exceptionally high demands on the development of new products.

on the reconstruction of production and on new construction. L. I. Brezhnev
stated at the 26th CPSU Congress: 'He cannot and should not settle for

less than products that meet the best world and Soviet standards. Ue must
accustom ourselves to this and work for it. resolutely brushing aside everything
that is outdated and obsolescent, that life itself has devalued.‘

Thus the systematic acceleration of the turnover of material resources.
which encompasses all types of resources in expanded reproduction, is an
important feature in the conversion of the economy to the path of intensive
development and is one of the criteria that make it possible to Judge the
completeness of this process.

By its nature, the acceleration of the turnover of material resources is

a long-term factor and hence the given problem cannot be examined from

the standpoint of 'instantaneous' results. Otherwise there may be 'erosion'
of reserves and the latter may be underevaluated as an important factor

of intensive economic growth. The creation of reserves for the operational
restructuring of production (under the influence of new requirements and
scientific-technical advances not considered in the plan) and the elimination
of economic "bottlenecks" accelerates rather than decelerates the turnover
of material resources.

The formula regarding the completion of the conversion of the economy to

the path of intensive development in the 1980's must not be viewed simplistically
as something static and unchanging. It presupposes the

transition to a qualitatively new type of expanded socialist reproduction

on a predominantly intensive basis. The criteria mentioned above make

it possible to determine the degree of coapleteness of this transition

with a sufficient measure of precision and completeness. At the same time,
the intensive type of expanded reproduction is also subject to change.

It is a process within the framework of which there is further improvement
of the given transition. The all-round investigation of problems in the
intensive type of economic growth is one of the urgent tasks of the political
economy of socialism, of the entire system of economic sciences.

The active and creative elaboration of the corresponding problems must
ultimately lead to the formation of the total concept of expanded socialist
reproduction on an intensive basis. The reference is to the aggregate

of theoretical principles, analytical elaborations and practical recommend-
ations that form an important component part of the theory of expanded
socialist reproduction and the political economy of socialism as a whole.

The methodological basis of elaborating such a concept is contained in

the works of the founders of larxism-Leninism. Of particular importance

is their analysis of extensive and intensive forms of reproduction, of

the role of scientific-technical progress in the modification of the structure
of reproduction. of the economic aspects of the time factor and its relationship
to the effectiveness of production. to the content of the law of time-

saving as the ”first law' of collective production. etc. Naturally, these

works contain not ready prescriptions but points of departure for the study

of problems advanced by life and by the practice of socialist economic
construction.

35

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(N‘LY
In our opinion. it is important that the total concept of expanded reproduction
on an intensive basis under the conditions of developed socialism strive

for the rational combination of abstract-theoretical analysis with the
concrete historical approach to the given problems. Abstract analysis

of reproduction processes makes it possible to elicit in-depth, most signifi-
cant ties and to develop general conclusions on this basis. At the same
time.it is important to bring the investigation of the general theory of
reproduction to the analysis of the particulars. concrete forms and directions
of intensification of production with respect to the concrete historical
conditions of a given country and of a given stage in the development of

the economy. Only with such a condition is it possible to ensure the
wholeness of the concept of expanded reproduction on an intensive basis.

It should be emphasized that research in the indicated directions is one

of the principal tasks especially of the political economy of socialism.

It has the mission of studying the entire aggregate of production relations
in all their wealth and diversity including both the essence (inter alia

of the first, second order. etc.) of production relations proper and concrete
forms of their manifestation.

The investigation of deep changes occurring in connection with intensifi-
cation in the entire reproductive structure occupies one of the central
places in the concept of intensive expanded reproduction. These changes
affect the correlation of the two departments and their internal structure
and proportions in the development of the productive and nonproductive
spheres and in the distribution and utilization of national income.

The intensive form of economic growth strengthens the dynamism of
the structure of social production and dictates the need for a purposeful
active structural policy. There will be a significant increase in the
significance of socioeconomic and scientific-technical priorities that
are the b asis for the relatively more rapid development of various branches.
production facilities and regions and for establishing a given sequence
in the realization of economic and social tasks.

The determination of priorities in the development of the economy is an
exceptionally complex matter requiring deep scientific substantiation,

careful consideration of objective regularities, trends and available possibil-
ities. Particularly inadmissible here are decisions that are not reinforced

by the comprehensive analysis of the entire complex of scientific-technical,
economic and social conditions and possible consequences.

The intelligent establishment of priorities and their practical application
complicate the attainment of proportionality of the economy and at the

same time make it extremely necessary. Under the conditions of the existing
unified national economic complex, the solution of any priority tasks can

be successful only with the complete and effective proportionality of the

national economy.

36

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOI:0FFN3AL.USE(NHLY

Priorities are helpful in determining the share of resources that are allocated
for various purposes, in establishing the growth rates of individual branches
and production facilities. The planned structure of production is formed

in this way. Priorities play a decisive role in the choice of goals and
obJects included in the state plan. After this selection has been made.

all planned targets must be completely backed (on the basis of a system

of progressive norms) by all types of resources: labor, material, capital
investments, etc. This is how the active structural policy is coordinated
with the proportionality of the national economy.

The elaboration of the problem of forming the modern reproductive structure,
including the determination of the system of priorities, must probably

occupy one of the central places in the concept of expanded socialist reproduc-
tion on an intensive basis. It is no less important to closely coordinate

the given problems with the elaboration of ways and directions of further
improvement of the economic mechanism. This is because only on the basis

of the corresponding restructuring of the economic mechanism is it possible

to make effective use of available resources, to accelerate scientific-

technical progress and to convert the economy to the path of intensive
development in general.

The consistent intensification of social production is impossible without
the elimination of the obstacles that frequently arise on this path. The
reference is first and foremost to the need to combat inertia, tradition
and habits that have formed in the style of economic activity and economic
thinking of cadres in preceding stages of development.

It is also necessary to draw the necessary practical conclusions from

the indisputable fact that today, in the 1980's, economic and social progress
cannot be evaluated using old methods--the same methods that produced rather
good results in the relatively recent past. The failure to understand

this fact, the attempt to work in the old way under the new conditions,

and exclusive reliance on past experience are the nutrient medium for inertia
in management and economic thought.

Economic science in general and political economy in particular must play

an important part in overcoming the burden of inertia. It must raise the
level of research of current problems to a qualitatively new level and

bring its conclusions into line with the demand that the economy be converted
to the path of intensive development. There is much that must be reappraised
in this area. Each more attention must be devoted to the quality of economic
growth, to the evaluation of the final national economic results. We must
make a creative approach to the analysis of the reproductive structure

and its dynamics.

The consistent and purposeful work on the implementation of the party policy
aimed at the intensification of production and at increasing its effectiveness
will permit the more complete use of the very rich potential and advantages

of the economy of developed socialism. This will promote the successful
realization of social tasks and the strengthening of socialist positions

in the international arena.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo ”Pravda“, 'Voprosy ekonomiki', 1982

5°13 37 usaomv
cso: 1820/1" morncw.
I‘VI Vl'l'lbll‘h UM Vl‘I-I

ECONOMIC POLICY, ORGANIZAIION AND MANAGEMENT

IIPROVING BCONOIIC IANAGBIBNT TBCRNIQUBS
loscow VOPROSY BKOhOlIKI in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 109-119
[Article by V. Ivanchenko]

[Text] The long-range economic policy developed by the 2ch. 25th and

26th Congresses of the CPSU contemplates the consistent improvement of

the economic mechanism. Here the party proceeds from the Leninist principles
of economic construction. the need for the creative application in accord-
ance with the changing level of development of the productive forces and

the country's production relations.

The economics of developed socialism is characterized by the rising role

of scientific and technical progress and the broad utilization of advances

of science and technology not only in production technique but also in

the system of economic management with the aim of actively influencing

the intensification of production, increasing its effectiveness and the
betterment of the uorking people's well-being. In the substantiation of

the economic and social targets of the 11th Five-Year Plan. primary attention
is devoted to the conversion of the economy to the intensive path of development.
to the rational use of the country's vast production potential, to the
all-round conservation of resources and to the improvement of the quality

of the work.

Proceeding primarily from the task of intensification, the 26th CPSU Congress
advanced the demand that the economy be economical. b. I. Breahnsv's report
emphasized: “Economic methods and management policy must also work for
effectiveness.‘ The distinguishing feature of the new five-year plan is

the higher effectiveness and intensification of the national economy.

At the November (1981) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee. L. I. Brezhnev
noted that given the 10 percent general increase in the overall volume

of capital investments, the draft plan envisaged an 18 percent increase

in national income. This correlation of these indicators characterizes

a sharp turn toward the heightened effectiveness of capital investments

and the strengthening of intensive economic grouth factors. At the same
time, it use noted at the Plenum that the draft of the five-year plan bore

the stamp of objective and subjective factors in the present stage of develop-
ment of the national economy including the fact that 'the style of economic
activity and economic thought, planning methods and the system of management
are not being restructured with the requisite degree of vigor." Accordingly,
the task: ”while working on the fulfillment of the five-year plan, we

must at the same time improve the economic mechanism and the economic management

system." 38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ”Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in
1981-1985 and the Period Up to 1990' contain a special section which envisages
a system of measures to improve management. to raise the level of management

at all levels of the economy irrespective of the fact that each section
formulates demands and paths of attaining higher end results in the work.

A characteristic feature of this section is that it in a manner of speaking
unifies all sections and targets of the five-year plan and is its organisational
part which has the mission of mobilizing all potential and resources and

It should be noted that the given section encompasses measures that are

of a comprehensive nature: the further elevation of the role of planning
as the central element in the management of the national economy; the strength-
ening of the economy regime and of cost accounting; the improvement of

the style and methods of managing the economy on the basis of the heninist
principles of management; the improvement of the organizational structure
of management on the basis of Leninist principles; improvement of the
organizational structure of management; development of the initiative and
creative activism of the working people in the management of production;
and the improvement of the forms and methods of socialist competition.

The reference is to the purposeful formation of a modern, highly effective
system of economic management which in its content and purpose is adequate
to the functioning of the unified national economic complex.

Heaaures for improving management and management methods like all production
targets of the plan are addressed to party, state and economic organs.

to public organizations, to each labor collective. and to each Soviet person.
The 26th CPsu Congress~ emphasized: ”The fulfillment of targets of the

llth Five-Year Plan requires improvement of organizational and political
work...1he raising of the level of management and the inculcation of cadres
with a businesslike attitude. a feeling of responsibility and initiative

are a necessary condition to the attainment of production successes.

In the course of implementing the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress there

were maJor experiments in industry, in construction. in transport. in agriculture.
and in trade and a system of measures were devised to improve the economic
mechanism and to strengthen its influence on increasing the effectiveness

of production and improving the quality of the work. The llth Five-Year

Plan envisages the consistent improvement of the management of the national
econopmy on the basis of the introduction of already elaborated measures

to improve the economic mechanism and to perfect new normative approaches

to the substantiation and adoption of optimal planing decisions.

The section on improving management is elaborated as a component part of

the plan for the economic and social development of the country. At the
ministry, association and enterprise level it articulates concrete periods

of comprehensive implementation of the given decisions, of realization

of new normative principles, of improving organizational structures of
management. of creation of new and development of existing associations

and the use of computers in management plus other measures aimed at increasing
the effectiveness of production and the quality of the work. Unfortunately

at the maerolevel indicators in this section are established only on the .
basis of the general effectiveness of measures and the training of cadres.

39

FIIICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE2(HVLY
s v“ vs a sm—mlmmw 09m. v. sum

Certain conclusions can be drawn from the foregoing. First. there is actual
realization of the principle that the improvement of the economic mechanism

is not a one-time measure but is a scientifically substantiated process

and means the search for new, more sophisticated forms and methods of planning
and management. however. the process of mastering the new is protracted

over a period of many years.

Second, the realization of the new requires not only the rapid and systematic
change of methodological. normative and legal documentation which encompasses
the entire process of planned economic management and also the precise.
planned organization of practical work to master the new and to secure

the psychological restructuring of the cadres and the understanding of

the inevitability of socioeconomic processes. Experience has shown that

the organization of the introduction of the new lags behind its reflection
in norms and methods.

Third, the slow mastery of the new in the economic mechanism leads to the
parallel functioning of the replaced forms and methods of management, which
has a negative impact on effectiveness and the return on the implemented
measures. Therefore, under the llth Five-Year Plan, it is important to
imxiement the given measures comprehensively and in the shortest possible
period of time. This point was noted at the November (1981) Plenum of

the CPSU Central Committee. However, some ministries and enterprises fail
to take prompt action to implement key management-improvement measures

and are slow in mastering new indicators and principles regarding the improvement
of the economic mechanism.

In the planned management system, the mastery of the new begins with planning.
A decisive role in this work belongs to the planning organs and to USSR
Gosplan. Socialist economic planning is not only a research and forecasting
method but is also an actual method used to control socioeconomic processes
on the basis of mandatory plans. Management is based on the comprehensively

substantiated scientific methodology, organization and technique of compiling
and implementing plans.

Taking into account decisions made by directive organs, in recent years

USSR Gosplan has stepped up its attention to the improvement of the methodology
and methods of planning. to the development of the balance method, and

to the elaboration of a system of programs. This work is conducted with

due regard to the new requirements and the task of converting the economy

to the intensive path of development.

The complex, interbranch dynamic economy of developed socialism makes higher
demands on the strengthening of the role of centralized planning. on the
quality of state plans for the development of the national economy and
sociocultural construction. on improving the coordination of the branch,
territorial and program sections of the plan, and on the development of

the economic independence and initiative of enterprises, associations and
organizations in the attainment of plan objectives. Cost accounting, economic
levers and stimuli are an integral part of the unified economic mechanism.

The system of cost accounting relations and stimuli are now addressed not only
to enterprises but primarily hapnmhmthmn associations and is gradually

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF1C1AI.USIZ(H‘LY

attaining the level of a subbranch (VPO) or branch (ministry) as a whole.

In this process an important place is assigned to the increased social

division of labor. to the development of the specialization of production

and to cooperation based on the planned creation of the optimal structures

of production. science-production and industrial associations. Such associations
make radical changes in the improvement of planning. in the technical

retooling and specialization of production, in the establishment of direct
economic ties with suppliers and customers, in the development of cost

accounting relations within the limits of the targets of the five-year

plan. They offer a new solution to the entire complex of tasks in the

social development of collectives and expand the participation of workers
in the management of production.

The questions of attaining optimal balance in the plans, of increasing

their stability, of creating the necessary state reserves, of raising the
role of long-term planning in the coordination of long-range and current
plans, of concentrating manpower and resources in the main directions,

of securing the comprehensive solution of state interbranch problems. etc.,
are formulated in a new way. Scientific validation is provided for the

need to orient all economic activity of enterprises toward the attainment

of final national economic results, toward the strengthening of the influence
of the economic mechanism on concrete factors of increased national economic
effectiveness. A special task is that of raising the role and strengthening
the influence of the customer on the formation of the plan coupled with

the strict fulfillment of the contractual obligations of producers and
consumers and the strengthening of plan discipline at all levels. The
system of measures includes the further development of economic management
techniques based on the improvement of cost accounting relations and the
rational use of such categories as price. profit. bonuses to strengthen

the stimulation of resource conservation. to improve product quality, and

to increase the effectiveness of production.

The decree of the CPSU Central Committee 'On the Further Improvement of

the Economic Hechanism and the Tasks of Party and State Organs' and the
decree of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers ”0n
Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism
onIncreasing the Effectiveness of Production and Improving Work Quality"
articulated the concrete directions of improvement of all planning work

in the national economy. The task of the 11th Five-Year Plan is from the
moment of its inception to orient all activity of all work collectives
toward the enhancement of the effectiveness of production and work quality,
toward conserving all kinds of resources. and toward the attainment of

high final national economic results for the more complete satisfaction

of the growing social and personal requirements of the working people.

The measures that have been taken envisage the further elevation of the

role of the five-year plan as the main instrument in the realization of

the party's economic policy on the basis of the elaboration of a system

of plans and the application of new indicators and criteria in the evaluation
of economic performance.

“1

FOR(Nﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(NVLY
I'Vl VIIILML WI. UI‘LI

The principle of campiling long-term. five-year and one-year plans as a

system of plans and as a unified process was for the first time practically
realized in the process of drafting the 11th Five-Year Plan. The comprehensive
program of scientific and technical progress up to the year 2000, the Basic
Directions of Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985

and the Period up to 1990, and annual plans for 1981 and 1982 promoted
methodological unity. a certain interconditionality and the interrelationship
of decisions, targets and indicators.

in order to ensure that all advances in the development of science and
technology are taken into account in good time. the system of plans realizes
the principle of continuity in planning and in the action of the plan.

In the process of compiling the current five-year plan, the necessary adjust-
ments are made in the Comprehensive Program of Scientific and Technical
Progress and the Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development of

the USSR for 10 years with their simultaneous elaboration (augmentation)

in the subsequent five-year period. This means that the data of the Comprehen-
sive Program for 20 years and of the Basic Directions for 10 years will

be used in the compilation of each five-year plan. They are continuously
substantiated with due regard to the new demands of development of science
and technology and society's changing requirements. Consequently the action
of these plans becomes continuous. This is manifested in the fact that

even now. in addition to the completion of the given cycle of work. an

effort is in progress to complete the second stage of development of the
Comprehensive Program of Scientific and Technical Progress up to the year
2005 and for 10-year periods, which will include the study and endorsement

of the plan for the 11th five-year period.

Under the 11th Five-Year Plan. new elements and principles are included

in the methodology. methods and forms of planning. Principal among them

is the system of five-year balances for labor and financial resources.

for production capacities with the substantiation of their passport data

and balances and plans for the distribution of the most important material
resources for individual years of the five-year plan with the application

of progressive norms. In order to increase the responsibility of USSR
Gosplan, ministries and departments for the substantiation of plan targets
and the satisfaction of requirements for concrete types of products. the
product mix is defined more precisely and balances and plans are elaborated
and endorsed by USSR Gosplan, by USSR Gossnab, by ministries and departments
of the USSR and by councils of ministers of the union republics. The head
ministry bears responsibility for satisfying the requirement of the economy
and population for products of the requisite mix and quality. Production
associations (enterprises) are also coming to play a more important part

in the timely and completely satisfaction of the given requirements, in

the fulfillment of reciprocal commitments on deliveries of a specific product
mix. Nonetheless. in actuality this demand has not yet become the norm

in economic practice and is realized inconsistently.

He must note the growing role of balances of labor resources in securing
the proportiopnality of the economy. These balances must be developed

for the USSR as a whole, for union republics, for oblasts and regions,

and in the RSPSR--for economic regions as well. This places added emphasis
on the role of the USSR State Committee for Labor and Social Problems,

and republic and local organs in the elaboration of manpower balances and

42

e

IIHICHHNCJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

organizational measures to secure their planned distribution and redistrib-
ution, and in reducing personnel turnover. The significance of these measures

takes on added meaning in the light of the further deterioration of the
demographic situation.

lethodological and legal principles in the system of progressive norms

is a most important part of measures to improve balance work, to raise

the level of validation of economic indicators in the plan, and to implement
the resource conservation program. Targets have been developed for individual
years of the five-year plan. These targets embrace the average lowering

of norms for the most important types of raw materials, supplies and fuel-
energy resources and the reduction of resource inputs per unit of output.
Nonetheless, the entire system of norms is still being introduced at a

slow rate in associations, enterprises and organizations.

Not enough energy is displayed in the effort to develop a unified method-
ology for reflecting the saving resulting from the lowering of expenditures
of resources due to measures in the realm of scientific and technical progress,

the scientific organization of labor. production and management in norms
and plan indicators.

The June 1981 decree of the CPS” Central Committee and USSR Council of
linisters “On Strengthening the Conservation and Rational Use of Raw laterial.
Fuel-Energy and Other Material Resources“ was aimed at securing the relatively
more rapid growth of results over the growth of resources. This requires
improvement in the structure of the national economy and its branches,

the lowering of material- and energy-intensiveness, the implementation

of measures to reduce the weight and metal-intensiveness of machines, and

the broad application of wastefree and resource-saving technology. The
aforementioned directions must find reflection in the improvement of the
system of norms. The decree indicates the task of improving the system

of norms, of redefining normative expenditures in physical terms for the

most important types of resources, and of conveying progressive norms governing
resource expenditures to associations and enterprises. The decree envisages
expanding the product mix and the list of materials for which the target

of bringing about a lowering of the average level of expenditure can be
established and individual norms governing the expenditure of basic types

of resources.

Targets for lowering the enterprise cost of production (work) and limits

on material inputs per ruhle of output in value terms should be instituted
starting in 1983. stronger incentives and economic sanctions will be instituted
for the conservation and overexpenditure of resources. It is essential

that measures taken in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and by

the government to secure a strict saving program in the national economy

be integrally incorporated in the unified economic mechanism, yield an

actual return in the elaboration of one-year and five-year plans, and become

an effective instrument in converting the economy to the intensive path

of development.

43

FOIIOFF1CIAI.llﬂE(NULY
The full realization of the established procedure for developing special
programs that envisage the comprehensive solution of large-scale national
economic. interbranch and regional problems and the preclusion of a parochial
approach to planning is one of the important directions in the further
improvement of planning and management under the llth Five-Year Plan.

At the same time. comprehensive programs. vhich are one of the methods

used in the scientific validation of plans, are also a means of organizing
their fulfillment.

The llth Five-Year Plan provides for the elaboration of a system of special
comprehensive and other scientific-technical. economic and social programs
and programs for the development of regions and territorial production
complexes. Comprehensive programs must become an effective instrument

in optimizing plan decisions, in improving the reproductive structure,

and in increasing the effectiveness of social labor. Comprehensive programs
play an especially great part in long-range plans where. together with

the system of forecasts, balance and mathematical economic methods, they

are an important stage in the optimal planning decision making process.

In five-year plans, the system of comprehensive programs is most closely
associated with the technical and economic indicators of all sections and
especially with resource distribution plans. They specify forms for coordin-
ating the management of each program. the deadline for completing the vork.
and the general effect resulting from the realization of the given objectives
with due regard to additionally discovered reserves.

Annual plans make provision for the elaboration of the necessary measures

to ensure the fulfillment of the programs. Ministries. associations and
enterprises compile long-range programs for the social development of the
collectives of associations, enterprises; programs for the technical retooling
and reconstruction of production. for the improvement of the system of

branch management based on the implementation of master plans. on the drafting
of plans for the development of production associations.

The development of program-goal planning makes it possible: to raise the
level of economic substantiation of structure, proportions. the degree

of coordination of goals and resources with due regard to the evaluation

of the national economic effectiveness of the decisions; to improve the
organic relationship of the economic, scientific-technical and social
aspects of the plan; to integrate its branch and territorial sections;

to make interbranch relations more purposeful in order to attain the end
results of programs; to apply the systems principle in the objective con-
centration of resources in the most important directions of economic. scientific-
technical and social development of the country; and to strengthen the
responsibility and coordination of the activity of executors in the solution
of large—scale national economic problems.

In the 11th Five-Year Plan and the immediate future. the comprehensive
development of the west Siberian, South TaJik, and Bratsk territorial
production complexes and the Kursk Magnetic Anomaly; the long-range program

of agricultural development (including the development of the Non-

chernozem Zone of the RSPSR); and the elaboration of programs for scientific—
technical progress; for the conservation of metal and fuel; for the development
of the Baikal-Amur Hainline Zone; for reducing the application of manual

labor; for increasing the production of consumer goods; and the food program

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFﬂJAl.USEIONL¥

largely determine national economic proportions. the location of the
productive forces. interbranch and territorial relations. the improvement
of specialization and cooperation in production. the use of labor resources,
and personnel training.

Now that it is essential to strengthen the organizing role of state and
especially five-year plans, the system of comprehensive programs is one

of the most important levers for realizing the given target. For example,

the solution of the fuel conservation problem requires--in addition to

targets and norms established in branch plans--a whole system of organizational
and economic measures at various levels of management, which can be coordinated
and realized only with the aid of the program-goal method. A similar situation
also exists with regard to the metal conservation program. Fuel and metal
conservation measures are still elaborated within the framework of individual
branches or enterprises. These measures are presently developed on the

basis of comprehensive programs on a national scale. They are also a part

of the long-range plans for the country’s economic and social development.

This permits the more precise determination of the necessary capital invest-
ments in the plans, including expenditures on metal and fuel conservation.
which are 1.5-2 times more effective than expenditures on the construction

of new enterprises for the production of the corresponding quantity of metal

0' fuel energy resources.

The program-control method is coming to play a considerably more prominent
role in the planning of scientific and technical progress. In addition

to the Comprehensive Program of Scientific-Technical Progress which was
compiled for a period of 20 years, ways of improving the elaboration of
interbranch and intrabranch programs devoted to maJor scientific and technical
problems have been articulated. Thus in the five-year plan for the

economic and social development of the country in 1981-1985, a special

place is taken up with programs developed by the State Committee for Science
and Technology and USSR Gosstroy, by programs designed to resolve the most
important scientific and technical problems and the problem of the comprehensive
utilization of natural resources with due regard to the introduction of

basic and applied research. These programs envisage final goals and technico-
cconomic results as well as deadlines and stages for performing the work
starting with scientific research and ending with their practical real-
ization. including the organization of the quantity production of new products
and the introduction of progressive technology. Measures indicated in
previous programs were usually limited to the development of a prototype,

i. e., to the coordination of the organization and financing of the research
and development effort.

At the same time. intrahranch programs are also beginning to play a more
important part. Ministries and councils of ministers of union republics
develop plans for raising the technical level of branches. These plans
contain measures pertaining to the creation, development and diffusion
of new high quality machinery and equipment, progressive technology and
materials, and the improvement of product quality as a part of the five-
year plans. Ratified indicators include targets for the fulfillment of
scientific and technical programs, the implementation of which becomes
obligatory on a par with other indicators of the five-year plan.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m use sum-suns- yum. v. name

The completion of work on the development of a comprehensive program for
standardization of the most important types of products is of great importance
in improving the quality of consumer goods. This program contains coordinated
specifications for raw materials, supplies, components and finished products.

However, practice shows that a complex of planned economic and organizational
measures is required to accelerate scientific and technical progress and

to improve product quality. In addition to improving planning methods.

plan indicators and economic incentives, it is necessary to create organizat-
ional conditions and to increase the effectiveness of state control over

the development and diffusion of new technology and over the production

of high quality products. In this regard. special importance is acquired

by such measures as: the formation of production and science-production
associations in the next 2-3 years and their increased specialization and
cooperation; the establishment of stiffer demands on new technology in

state standards; systematic supervision over the technical level of machinery,
equipment and other productive machinery; extradepartmental expertise
regarding technico-economic indicators of newly developed and manufactured
products and the introduction of other forms and methods of monitoring

the technical level and quality of products.

Analysis of the elaboration of programs indicates that the organization

of this work still lags behind modern demands. A number of branches are
remiss in resolving the question of effectively raising the technical level
of production on the basis of the retooling and reconstruction of production,
the elaboration and organization of the mass production of machinery for

the total mechanization and automation of production processes, and the
large-scale production of products using the latest technology. The lag

of the deadline for compiling programs complicates the elaboration of the
system of indicators of effectiveness of social production and reduces

the possibility of improving the balance of plans.

The improvement of the methods of organization and technology of planning
must secure the subsequent observance of the optimal deadlines of the entire
process of compilation of the system of plans. programs. balances and norms
and in plan indicators must reflect the effectiveness of projected measures
pertaining to scientific and technical progress. the improvement of manage-
ment, methods for organizing labor and production with respect to the
development of foreign economic relations. It necessitates the evaluation

of the effectiveness of the system of measures that strengthens the role

of factors of intensive growth and of enhancing the effectiveness of production.
Such evaluation must reflect the effectiveness of measures in prices, norms
and cost accounting indicators and must secure the closer relationship
between value and physical categories and criteria in the planned management
of the socialist economy. This is a complex scientific and practical problem.

In the process of drafting the 11th Five-Year Plan, we applied for the

first time a system of control figures for the most important indicators,

norms and limits as the necessary demands of society to increase the effective-
ness of resources. production potential and the attainment of end results

with the.minimum expenditure of raw materials, supplies, energy resources,
and labor.

(.6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NNLY

Qualitative parameters and characteristics are evaluative indicators and
criteria: the sale of products in accordance with delivery plans on the
basis of concluded contracts with customers; the increase in the production
of high quality products; lower inputs per unit of output; the growth of
labor productivity; and the activation of production capacities and facil-
ities. Performance is evaluated on the basis of indicators that are reckoned
cumulatively in one-year and five-year plans.

The new indicators, norms, criteria and evaluative methods are still not
sufficiently reflected at all levels of branch management and are not entirely
included in the system of indicators of the economic mechanism. This is

to a certain degree associated with objective conditions of individual

branches and production facilities that require a differentiated approach

to such indicators as normative net output and criteria and the evaluative
methods. Some ministries do not devote sufficient attention to the introduction
of a new system of indicators and norms. As experience shows. these indicators
and norms have a significant influence on the quality of the work, promote
conservation and raise the level of responsibility and discipline in management.
For example. the use of the net output indicator obligates enterprises

to take a stricter approach to the fulfillment of the plan with respect

to product mix. In the event of deviations from the assigned product mix.
enterprises must produce products with the same share of labor inputs in

the wholesale price. This corpels enterprises to search for possible reserves
for increasing the return on labor.

The net output indicator permits the more substantiated characterisation
of the correlation between the growth of labor productivity and the average
wage since the change in output per worker corresponds more closely to

changes in labor expenditures expressed in wages (assuming the proper substant-
iation of the definition of normative net output.

Ministries must accelerate the all-round testing of indicators of output

for each branch with due regard to their individual features. It is important
to exclude the negative impact of gross physical and value assessments

and yardsticks. This will determine the solution of many questions in
improving the economic mechanism.

Labor and social development indicators are elaborated and ratified on
the basis of net (normative) output or other indicator that more correctly
reflect the change in the expenditures of labor. They include: the labor
productivity growth indicator; wages per ruble of output; manual labor
curtailment targets; and norms governing the formation of the material

incentive fund. the fund for social and cultural measures
and housing construction. In view of the complex demographic situation,

in the near future a limit will be placed on the number of workers and
employees in order to secure the optimal distribution of labor resources.

The normative planning of wages strengthens the tie between wages and

the volume of production. the growth of labor productivity, the distribution
of output in various years of the five-year plan, months and quarters of

the year, and increases the independence of enterprises and associations

in planning the wage fund.

67

FINR(MHH(JAI.USE(MNLY
As regards indicators of scientific and technical progress. the most important
of them is the target of fulfilling scientific-technical programs and indicators
of the technical level of production and production of the basic types

of products. The annual plans additionally establish targets relating

to the diffusion of progressive knowhow in technology, the scientific organiza-
tion of labor, production and management. For the first time,annual plans
include indicators of the economic effect from the development and diffusion

of new technology and other measures pertaining to scientific and technical
progress. To a certain degree. they characterize the effect (the saving

of current and one-time expenditures to the producers and users of new
technology) realized in the national economy. However, we still do not

fully secure the close linkage between the national economic and cost accounting
criteria in prices, in norms and in normative expenditures of all types

of resources per unit of output. Only the first steps have been taken

in this area.

The five-year financial plan provided a basis for establishing not only
targets for profits (and where expedient, targets pertaining to the lowering
of the enterprise cost of production) for various years of the five-year
plan but also for specifying the absolute sums of payments to the budget

and allocations from it. and to affirm stable norms for distributing profit
between ministries (associations. enterprises) and the state budget. Virtually
all ministries and departments have been assigned targets regarding profit
and the enterprise cost of production for all years of the five-year plan.
Here it is important to increase the share of the growth of profit as a
result of the lowering of the enterprise cost of production which under

the 10th Five-Year Plan comprised a little more than 25 percent of the

total increase in profit.

In 1982 the plan calls for the use of the profit distribution norm in 20
ministries and departments as a key element in the diffusion of developed
forms of the cost accounting branch system of management. Seven industrial
ministries and four construction and certain other republic ministries

have alread acquired experience in the use of such a system. He must make
a critical study of this experience in order to accelerate the total and
effective application of the financial and credit mechanism and other economic
levers in the realization of the task of intensifying and increasing the
effectiveness of production. This is a new stage in the improvement of
financial planning which makes it possible to restructure the economic
mechanism including the development of socialist competition. and incentive
systems based on the indicators and norms of the five-year plan. however,
some ministries are not displaying the proper initiative in making the
transition to this system of cost accounting relations which sakes high
demands on branch management.

The realization of the new principles in the course of compiling the llth
Five-Year Plan. the plan for 1982 and the fulfillment of targets of the

first year of the five-year plan makes it possible to point to certain
attainments. The system of plans is now in operation. Bach plan is developed
not in isolation but in the interrelationship of programs which involve

the total development of balances. production and distribution broken down

for various plan periods. Comprehensive programs for scientific and technical
progress are articulated not only as a system but take the form of concrete
targets and indicators. This also applies to a considerable part of the

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFKJALIﬂﬂEONLY

large. special, integrated national economic programs which made it possible
to exert a substantial influence on the concentration of resources. on

the solution of important structural problems and on the improvement of
proportionality of the economy first and foremost as a result of indicators
of higher effectiveness and targets for conserving metals, fuel-energy
resources and other materials.

At the same time. we are not consistently raising the technical level of
production on the basis of the latest technology and production techniques,

the development of the specialization and concentration of production,

the standardization of its elements, and the elimination of trends towar:

the growth of the investment-output and fixed capital to output ratio.

In this direction. we auat analyze in depth and utilise the growth of

capital per worker envisaged in the llth Five-Year Plan: in industry (by

3n percent); in agriculture (by ‘5 percent); and in transport and communications
(by 25 percent).

It is important to note that capital per worker is closely associated with
labor productivity and the output capital ratio. The main criterion of
effectiveness and the intensification of production is to secure the relatively
more rapid growth of labor productivity over the growth of capital per

worker.

The 1982 plan for enterprises, associations and organizations belonging

to 27 ministries and departments contains targets and indicators that are
computed in terms of normative net output. Unfortunately, normative wages
per ruble of output have been established for only seven ministries. USSR
Gosplan. ministries. departments and scientific organizations must analyze
in depth the course of diffusion and results of utilising these indicators.

It should be noted that the stimulating functions of plan indicators are
manifested first and foremost in the growth of effectiveness when all elements
of the economic mechanism are used to the utmost. when there is a skillful
approach to the use of new forms of the brigade organization of labor and
wages. Such an approach is e ssential at every level of management.

The conversion of branches, associations, enterprises and research. design
and supply organizations to cost accounting relations on the basis of stable
five-year plan indicators and norms (wages. profit distribution, formation
of economic incentive funds. formation of the fund for the development

of science and technology. etc.) must become the decisive criterion in

the comprehensive implementation of the decree of the CPSU Central Committee
and USSR Council of Ministers on improving the economic mechanism and on

the implementation of the decisions of the 26th Congress of the CPSU on
improving the management of the national economy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. V. I. Lenin, ”The Immediate Tasks of Soviet Power' ('Polnoye sohraniye
sochineniy” [Complete Collected works]. Vol 36. pp 165—208).

2. V. I. Lenin, ”On the Unified Economic Plan," lbid.. Vol #2. pp 339-

3'7.
49

FOB‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
10.

COPY

5013
080 :

I U“ VO'UIMCI‘H VJ” U] Q”.

V. I. Lenin, ”How Should the Competition Be Organized7," Ihid., Vol 35,
99- 195-205-

"Materialy XXVI s'yezda 055' [Materials or the 26th crsu Congress],
Politizdat. 1981.

L. I. Brezhnev, 'Rech' na Plenume Tsentral'nogo Komiteta KPSS 16 noyahrya
1981 g. [Speech Delivered at the 16 November 1981 Plenum or the CPSU
Central Committee]. Politizdat, 1981.

”0 dal'neyshem sovershenstvovanii khozyaystvennogo mehhanizma i
:adachakh partiynykh i gosudarstvennykh orgsnov. Postanovleniye Ts!
KPSS“ [Oh the Further Improvement of the Economic Mechanism and the
Tasks of Party and State Organs. Decree of the CPSU Central Committee,
Politizdat. 19793 "0b uluchshenii planirovaniya i usilenii vozdeystviya
khozyaystvennogo mekhaniama na povysheniye ertektivnosti proisvodstva
i hachestva raboty. Postanovleniye Tax KP85 1 Soveta Ministrov SSSR.
Politizdat, 1979 g. [on Improving Planning and Strengthening the
Influence of the Economic Mechanism on Increasing the Effectiveness

of Production and Improving the Quality of the work. Decree of the
CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers]. Politizdat.
1979.

"Oh usilenii raboty po ehonomii i ratsional'nomu ispol'zovaniyu
syr'yevykh, toplivno—energeticheskikh i drugikh material'nykh resursov.
Postanovleniye Tsx KPSS i Soveta Ministrov SSSR' [On strengthening

work on the Conservation and Rational Use of Raw Material. Fuel-Energy and
Other Material Resources. Decree of the CPSU Central Committee and

USSR Council of Ministers] (PRAVDA. a Jul 81).

"0 Vsesoyuznom sotsialisticheshom sorevnovanii za uspeshnoye vypolneniye
1 perevypolneniye zadaniy odinnadtsatoy pyatiletki. Postanovleniye Tel
KPSS, Soveta Ministrov sssn, VTsSPs 1 Tax VLKSM' [0n the All-Union
Socialist Competition for the Successful Fulfillment and Overrul-
rillment of llth Five-Year Plan Targets. Decree of the CPSU Central
Committee, USSR Council of Ministers, AUCCTU and Central Committee

or the All-Union Komsomol] (PRAVDA, 29 Mar 81).

'0 dal'neyshem sovershenstvovanii kontrolya i proverki ispolneniya

v svete resheniy XXVI s'yezda KPSS. Postanovleniye TsK KPSS' [0n the
Further Improvement of the Monitoring and Verification of Execution
in the Light of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. Decree of
the CPSU Central Committee (PRAVDA, 16 Aug 81).

'80vershenstvovaniye khozyaystvennogo mekhanizma. Shornik dokumentov'
[Improving the Economic Mechanism. Collection of Documents]. Izdatel'stvo
'Pravda," 1980.

RIGHT: Izdatel'stvo “Pravda'. "Voprosy ekonomiki'. 1982

1820/1N7 5°

FKHRCHHHCIAI.USE(M8LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC POLICY, ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT

IMPROVING ECONOMIC MECHANISM BASED ON EXAMPLE OF MDLDAVIAN SSE

Moscow VOPROSY BKONOIIKI in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 60-65
[Article by Yu. Kanna]

[Text] The “Basic Directions of Economic and Social Development of the
USSR in 1981-1985 and the Period up to 1990' envisage the incorporation
of a complex of measures to improve the economic mechanism in the 11th
Five-Year Plan. They also pose the task of improving the organisational
structure of management and the style and methods of the work.

The union republics devote special attention to the implementation of the
principles of the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council
of Ministers “On Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of

the Economic lechanisa on Increasing the Effectiveness of Production and
Improving the Quality of the work." A system of organizational measures

has been elaborated at all levels of management in the Holdavian SSR.

The concrete tasks of Gosplsn, ministries, state committees and departments
in the Moldavian ssn have been articulated regarding the resolution of
maJor economic and social problems. the fulfillment of the most important
state and republic programs, the acceleration of the materialization of
research and development work, the rational use of production capacities,
material, labor and financial resources, and the intensification of the
conservation effort. Priorities are presently being established for the
development of the republic's branches and zones for the purpose of securing
progressive changes in national economic proportions and for increasing

the effectiveness of capital investments, of all social production. Additional
measures have been developed to iaprove the forms and methods of economic
management, to strengthen financial planning. labor and contractual
discipline.

The balance of all items and indicators in the one-year and five-year plans

and their greater orientation toward the solution of social prohleas are

an important prerequisite to raising the quality of these plans and to
strengthening the role of the latter in the management of the national

economy. The republic's 11th five-year plan of economic and social

development contains for the first time a sumsary financial balance, balances
of money incomes and expenditures. and balances of material and labor resources.

51

FOI¢Oi1ﬂCJAl.USEGONLY
a vs. vs a Ass...- yua— vac-.-

This has in large measure predetermined the higher degree of balance of
key factors of reproduction. has facilitated the detection and elimination
of bottlenecks in the development of individual branches of the national

economy of the Koldavian SSR. and has made it possible to identify the
primary directions of capital investment.

There are numerous measures to improve plan indicators, yardsticks of-output
volume and quality, and methods of making a correct evaluation of production
potential. In the 10th Five-Year Plan, the first steps were taken to master
the normative net output indicator as more objective in determining the
labor inputs of each collective. More than 15 percent of the republic's
associations and enterprises plan and evaluate performance on the basis

of this indicator. Enterprises belonging to the Ministry of Procurement,
the Ministry of the Heat and Dairy Industry and the Ministry of the Food
Industry of the Holdavian SSR. a number of enterprises belonging to the
Ninistry of the Forestry Industry and the Ministry of Local Industry of
Moldavia, Goskomsel'khoztekhnika [state Committee for the Supply of Production
Equipment for Agriculture] of the Moldavian $83, and others, have been
converted entirely to normative net output. From 1982 on—-following the
ratification of new wholesale prices and rates--enterprises belonging to
union-republic and republic ministries and departments are to be converted
to the normative net output indicator. This is the basis for expanding

the application of wages per ruble of output in the planning of norms.

The republic has amassed a certain amount of experience in the elaboration
of special comprehensive scientific-technical and economic programo--especially
programs of development of individual territorial production complexes—-

as a key component part of long-range state plans of economic and social
development. One of the largest of these programs--the program for the
economic development of southern loldavia-—is oriented toward the accelerated
development of viticulture, fruit and vegetable farming. the processing
industry, grain farming, and fodder production in the 11th and 12th Five—
Year Plans. Tentative estimates show that all expenditures indicated in

the program will be recouped in 7-8 years. There are plans to create plant
nurseries at the level of modern requirements, to plant new intensive and
hyperintcnsive industrial orchards, to develop a complex of machines for

the mechanization of labor-intensive processes, to strengthen the material-
technical base for the production of canned goods, to expand irrigated

land area, to resolve a number of sociocultural measures, etc.

The conversion of agriculture to an industrial footing, the creation of

a powerful food industry, and the development of branches associated with

the procurement. shipment and storage of raw materials have given rise

to an agro-industrial complex in which effective production and economic
relations between branches have been established. Large specialized interfarm
enterprises, complexes and associations have been created and technical

means have been concentrated in regional interfarm associations. There

are 301 interfarm enterprises successfully operating in the cooperative
sector. They comprise the basis of approximately no percent of the republie's
agricultural output and perform uoo million rubles' worth of mechanized,
construction and transport work. Forty territorial agro-industrial assoc-
iations are operating with a high degree of effectiveness on the basis

52

FOItOFFﬂJAI.USE'0NLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE10NLY

cooperation and agro-industrial integration. Thirteen science-production
associations have been created on the basis of branch scientific research

institutes, specialized sovkhozes, experimental plants, and design offices.
The given integrated production facilities account for 50 percent of two
billion rubles‘ worth of agricultural and industrial output.

Republic programs devoted to the solution of interbranch scientific and
technical problems devote much attention to the conservation and effective

use of water and land resources, to reducing losses of plant products.

to improving the mechanism of functioning of agro-industrial complexes.

etc. Branch programs have been developed for 19 basic scientific and

technical problems (for 1981-1985). The solution of these problems will
promote higher agricultural output. These programs will become a part

of state plans for the economic and social development of the loldavian

SSR. The development of the republic's agro-industrial complex is an important
aspect of the national economy’s food program.

There is a consistent effort to raise the technical level of production

and to reduce the use of manual labor. A high level of mechanization and
automation has been attained in the leading branches of republic industry--

in the power. food, light and furniture industry; the basic production

of 127 enterprises has been thoroughly mechanized. There has been a consider-
able amount of work on the further mechanization and automation of production
processes and on making physical labor easier. In individual branches.

this has made it possible to raise the technology of auxiliary processes
(transporting, warehousing) to the level of basic production, and to systemat-
ically reduce the share of manual laborers. Constant attention is devoted

to the latest technology which makes it possible to save live labor and
material resources. Food industry enterprises have begun producing biol-
ogically valuable products. canned fruits and vegetables, and Jellies.

The USSR has developed a progressive. asceptic method of preserving Juices

and prepared foods in large containers. The introduction of the continuous
extraction method has made it possible to achieve the lowest losses of

butter in production in the USSR.

The 11th Five-Year Plan calls for the development of metrology and standardiz-
ation which will make it possible to raise the technical level and quality

of output, to reduce the material-intensiveness of products. to expand

the mix of consumer goods, and to improve the quality of consumer services.

In 1981, more than 50 standards in agricultural production were embraced

by the comprehensive standardization program. Comprehensive product quality
control systems were instituted at 223 republic enterprises. Production
associations and enterprises have completed the compilation of passports.

An important role in increasing the effectiveness of production plans

and in making these plans more balanced belongs to the organization of
material-technical supply. to work on the further development of direct.
long-term economic relations. To date, 277 of the republic's production
associations and enterprises have been converted to this system. The given
associations and enterprises deliver “1 percent of the chemical products.
80 percent of the rubber products, 5“ percent of the timber products. 67
percent of the paper products, and 18 percent of the rolled ferrous metals.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. monm asses—scan.- you vote--

Proposals to convert 285 enterprises producing 37h types of products, i.e..
53 percent more than during the 10th Five-Year Plan, to direct long-term
economic ties under the 11th Pive-Year Plan were developed and submitted
to USSR Gossnab.

Moldavia has amassed positive experience in supplying enterprises with
materials through territorial material-technical supply organs based on
orders filed by construction organizations. However this progressive form
of supply has not yet been widely developed owing to the lack of a decision
by USSR Gossnab and the corresponding construction ministries on procedures
and guidelines governing its introduction.

A system of measures to improve the economic mechanism has been actively
introduced in construction and in estimate-design work. In 1981, the

volume of commercial construction output was incorporated in the plans

of ministries and departments engaged in construction-installation work

and of construction organizations. Resources and capacities are concentrated
in the decisive construction sectors. Forty percent of the republic's
capital investments (compared with 26 percent in 1980) are channeled into
reconstruction and technical retooling. Naturally the increase in the

share of capital investments in the technical retooling and reconstruction

of existing enterprises does not mean that attention to new construction

is waning. In deciding on new construction, we must first and foremost
consider the need to improve the branch structure of production, to accelerate
technical progress and to increase the balance of the economy. leasures

are being taken to promote an annual increase in the activation of fixed
capital and to reduce construction time. The search for reserves of an
organizational and technical character has resulted in the reduction in

the volume of incomplete construction. As a result, fixed capital increased
by almost 1.5 fold during the 10th Five-Year Plan alone.

Por the first time. republic customers [for construction work] and design
organizations are assigned given volumes of completed and accepted work

that serve as the basis upon which accounts are settled between customers

and design organizations. starting in 1980, these organizations have designed
large projects in two stages thereby making it possible to reduce design

time and the time required to produce blueprints before the commencement

of construction work. Estimates and norms are being converted to labor
productivity planning based on normative. conditionally net output.

At the same time. there are instances of imbalances with regard to resources
and the potential of contracting organizations in capital construction

plans. In our view, the violation of the principles underlying the new
methods of management and discrepancies in the formulation of the construction
work program are the result of the absence of precise normative documents.

In particular, USSR Gosstroy still has not developed methods for calcul-

ating the capacities of construction organizations and the mechanism for
coordinating branch targets for capital construction with the potential

of capacities and the production base of territorial contracting organiz-
ations.

The 11th Five-Year Plan will continue the effort to convert republic mini-
stries and departments to cost accounting methods. to the introduction

of distributing profit while simultaneously increasing the effectiveness
of the credit mechanism in the economic stimulation of production and

54
FIHICMWWCJAI.USE‘0NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capital construction and in improving the organization of calculations.
Starting in 1980. associations and enterprises have been granted credit

(in excess of the limit on state capital investments) to finance measures
relating to the production of new products, to improve product quality,

and to expand consumer goods production. There has been an increase in

the amount of credit that is extended to customers so that they may settle
their accounts despite a temporary shortage of their own funds. while

there was a certain amount of increase hapayment credit. there was improvement
in indicators characterizing the financial state of enterprises: the average
time it took the customer to pay the supplier's bill dropped from 23.1

days in 1979 to 22.1 days in 1981. Preparations are nearly complete for
converting scientific research. design, project planning, and technological
organizations in the republic to a cost accounting system of planning and
organitstion of work on the development and diffusion of new technology

on the basis of order-warrants [zakasy-naryady].

The Moldavian SSR devotes a great deal of attention to the introduction

of the brigade form of organization of labor and wages. At the present

time. 11 percent of the total number of brigades are working on a cost
accounting basis and are paid on the basis of coefficients of labor partici-
pation for end results. There has been an increase in the share of construction
and installation work performed by brigades operating on a cost accounting
basis: 18.9 percent in 1976 and 38 percent in 1980 (for certain indicators
calculated by the republic's Central Statistical Administration). By the

end of the 11th Five-Year Plan, the target is to secure the participation

of 10 percent of Moldavian workers in the brigade form of labor organization.

The sphere of establishment of work norms is being expanded. At the present
time. in republic industry work is normed for 11.6 percent of the piecerate
workers. for 66.1 percent of the engineers and technicians. and for 62.1 percent
of the white collar workers. In all, the work of 83.1 percent of the industrial
work force is normed. The quality of the norms applied has been improved some-
what. By April 1980. the share of technically substantiated norms had

increased by 2.1 percent compared with the corresponding period in 1979

and reached 71.8 percent. Eighty-four out of 100 persons are working on

the basis of norms established on the basis of interbranch and branch

norms.

The implementation of the principles in the decree of the CPSU Central
Committee and USSR Council of Ministers (July 1979) in loldavian SSR made
it possible to indicate a number of measures relating to the realization
of not yet fulfilled targets posed by the 26th CPSU Congress.

The organization of planning and the substantiation of the deadlines for
drafting plans in the first stage by the republic's enterprises. associations
and ministries proper and in the second stage when USSR Gosplan examines
proposals of the union republics, ministries and departments of the USSR
require serious improvement.

USSR ministries and departments and councils of ministers of union republics
must now submit drafts of five—year and one-year plans of economic and
social development to USSR Gosplan within the same period of time. The

55

FOR‘0FFKJAL.USE¢M‘LY
rvm VI'I'ILII‘I‘ UGO VI‘LI

result is that some sections of the drafts of the plan are not sufficiently
substantiated and balanced. For example. the basic data (in addition to
other data) used in drafting admissions quotas for vocational-technical
training schools take the form of the increase in the number of [pupil]
places. i. e., projected construction and activation of vocational-technical
training schools. However, at the time republic planning organs submit
their drafts to USSR Gosplan, they do not have at their disposal data on
the projected construction of vocational-technical training schools in

the republic by USSR ministries and agencies. In order to increase the
degree of substantiation of drafts of the plan, the deadlines for drafting
and submitting plans to USSR Gosplsn should be staggered. In particular,
the deadlines for the republic should be one month later than the deadline
assigned to USSR ministries and agencies.

The quality of balance work in the plan is adversely affected by the absence
of methods for compiling ex ante and ex post balances of labor resources

for cities and regions. The Central Statistical Administration still lacks
procedures and methods for developing summary ex post financial balances.

In our opinion, there is a need to modify the procedure for adjusting the
plan targets assigned to union republics in the republic. At the present
time. union republics are assigned only the initially endorsed plan (not
always within the specified time limits) and the altered plan target can

be established only on the basis of statistics. Union ministries should
review union enterprises' requests to adjust plans only after the given
question has been considered beforehand by the gosplans of union republics.

The further development of the agro-industrial conp1ex requires the
establishment of optimal proportions between agricultural production and

the processing industry. At the present time. agriculture. as a part of

the agro-industrial complex, is subordinate to republic organs while the
processing industry is subordinate to the USSR Ministry of the Food Industry
and the USSR Ministry of the Fruit and Vegetable Industry. In our opinion.
the subsequent solution of questions associated with the development of

the agro-industrial complex should be made the responsibility of republic
organizations.

There is also need for improvement in the system of relations between assoc-
ications and financial organs with respect to payments for capital under

the conditions of integrated production. A number of capitals serve agriculture
and industry. Therefore it is important to examine the question of applying

an average weighted normative payment for fixed productive capital in such
cases.

It is an alarming fact that many enterprises violate the sales volume plan
(with due regard to the fulfillment of contractual obligations regarding
deliveries). To a certain degree, this situation can be explained by the
fact that the fulfillment of contractual delivery obligations is not a
basic condition to the awarding of bonuses to executives, engineers, tech-
nicians and white collar workers of industrial ministries. associations
and enterprises. USSR ministries assign to associations and enterprises

a norm of nonfulfillsent of the sales plan (taking contractual commitments

56

FINICHWNCIAL.USEZONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into account) without proper economic validation. This norm is frequently
sany times higher than the attained norm governing the fulfillment of this
indicator. The resulting situation is such that the permissible shortfall

in deliveries becomes a kind of guaranteed norm which. if observed. entitles
the supplier to let the customer down and to collect a material reuard

at the same time. Such a situation downgrades the responsibility of assoc-
iations and enterprises for the fulfillment of contractual commitments.

In our view, it is essential to revise the methodology underlying the
ratification of norms in order to strengthen the responsibility of assoc- _
iations and enterprises for the observance of their contractual commitments.

The republic devotes special attention to the improvement of product quality.
However, the existing guidelines for determining the share of products

in the highest quality category do not always motivate enterprises to
increase the volume of production. Practice has shown that it is disad-
vantageous to the enterprise to increase the volume of production of run

of the mill, uncertified products which are nonetheless needed by the
national economy. The volume of production of products in the highest
duality category are the same but its share in general production has
declined; this decline has been accompanied by the diminution of incentive
funds. The present methodology that is used to determine the volume and
share of products in the highest quality category requires substantial
modification. Under these conditions, it is obviously expedient to evaluate
the work of enterprises and ministries not on the basis of the share of
products in the highest quality category but rather on the basis of its
volume thereby making it possible to increase the production of products

that are uncertified but needed by the national economy without detriment
to labor collectives.

At the present time, ussa Gosplan and republic ministries and departments
have completed the drafting of organizational plans for the total imple-
mentation of decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress that fully reflected unre-
solved problems regarding the implementation of the July (1979) decree

of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers and new
tasks posed by the congress with regard to the improvement of management
and the raising of the level of management in all elements of the economy.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki'. 1982

5013
C80: 1820/1!7

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UK WI‘ILIAL Ubl'. UNLI

ECONOMIC POLICY, ORGANIZAIION AND MANAGEMENT

COLLECTTONS DEVOTBD T0 CURRENT PROBLEMS OF MANAGEMENT THEORY. PRACTICE

Moscow VOPROSY BKONOIIKI in Russian No 3, lar 82 pp 137-1u3

[Article by A. Polezhayev]

[Text] Ten years have elapsed since the publication of the first collection
"The Organization of Management.'. This and subsequent editions of the
collection attracted the attention of both scholars and specialists in

the field of managesent. This is not by chance. The collections are charact-
erized by the purposefulness of the formulation of the probleas treated

in then, by the selection of the most important problems in each tine span,

by the breadth of their coverage, and by the coabination of theory with
practical reconnendations. Especially important is the fact that the
collections posed and examined the most urgent probleas in the science

of management during its difficult formative period.

This approach corresponds fully to the demands of the 26th CPSU Congress that

the present developsent of the theory and practice of nanagement must be entirely
subordinated to the solution of the most urgent economic and social probleas

of Soviet society, to the accelerated conversion of the economy to the

path of intensive developsent, and to increasing the effectiveness of social
production. 'Today, as we look 5 or 10 years ahead," L. I. Brezhnev stated
at the 26th CPSU Congress,'we must not forget that it is in those years
that the national economic structure Iith which the country will enter

the 21st century will be created. It should eabody the basic features

and ideals of the new society, he in the vanguard of progress, and symbolize
the integration of science and production and the indestructible union

of creative thought and creative labor.“

The broad front of research and development in manageaent that followed

the 2hth crsu Congress, which formulated the long-range program for improving
the systea of sanagenent in our country, objectively deaanded increasing

the effectiveness of co-nunicating findings to their potential 'users,’
their constructive analysis and practical utilization. As is known, all

 

O'Organizatsiiya upravleniya' [The Organization of Management], Izdatel'stvo
'8konoaika.‘ The collections have been published since 1971.

S8

FOR'0FFKJAI.USE(MVLY
information and managerial information in particular rapidly becomes obsolete
in the age of the rapidly developing scientific and technological revolution.
Accordingly, the editors and authors of 'The Organization of Kanagement'

have folloved the most correct path in our opinion: they rejected multiple
voluses generalizing basic theoretical research and a collection in the

form of separate. disconnected articles.

”The Organization of Management" is a unique publication. Its structure

has been continuously improved in connection with the particulars of the
problems that are to be solved in concrete periods of time. The collections
reflected the structure of the crsu's comprehensive long-term program for

increasing the effectiveness of the national economy. which incorporates
the following basic problems:

--the further development of the economic methods of management of socialist
social production in breadth and depth; the complete utilization of all
reserves in the economic mechanism”;

--the improvement of planning; the organization of long-term forecasting;
the elaboration of programs for the development of the socialist economy;
the compilation of optimal five-year plans broken doun by year and their
timely communication to ministries. production associations and enter-
prises;

--the improvement of the organizational structure of management of the
national economy and the specialization and refinement of the functions

of economic organs; the transition to a two- and three-element system of
branch planning; the elimination of superfluous managerial elements; reduction
of the complexity and cost of management;

--the broad application of mathematical economic methods in management;
the use of computers, business machines and communication systems;

--the improvement of the decision making mechanism; raising the responsib-
ility of officials for the quality and consequences of the given decisions;

--improving the state system of training and advanced training of management
cadres with due regard to the new demands made by the scientific and technolog-
ical revolution and modern management systems and methods;

--the further democratization of management; the development of social

planning and collegial forms of management; and the broad involvement of
e

the working masses in the management of production.

Scientific information on the most significant research in management science
in our country and abroad plays an important part in the realization of the
attainments of scientific and technical progress. This information is
contained in all issues. Each collection also contains a list of the most
interesting new books and articles on problems of management.

 

'Scc "Organizatsiya upravleniya," 1911, p 6.

S9

Fill(ﬂﬂﬂCJAJ.lJSE2(MWLY
a use we a sun-a. num- v. on.

Thus the systems approach. which corresponds to the complex character

of the management improvement problem proper. was used in the elaboration

of structure and in the selection of the problems treated in the collections.
The authors of the published materials were party workers, leaders of prog-
ressive branches of the national economy. general directors or production
associations, and our country's leading scientists in the field of economics
and management. This made it possible to discuss the most important problems
in the theory and practice of management on a “real time scale" and to
develop scientifically substantiated measures for their solution.

"The Organization of lanagement‘ is published approximately once a year.

This is obviously insufficient. Given the acceleration of scientific and
technical progress and of socioeconomic processes in our society, the need

to analyze and resolve current problems of management requires the more
frequent publication of this unquestionably popular Journal. Bach of the
collections has examined a certain circle of interconnected problems which
has ensured their continuity. At the same time, the considerable flexibility
of the rubrics has created the possibility of maneuvering the topics of

the articles depending on the particulars of the period examined within

thL sections. It seems to us that the basic rubrics of the issues are

quite apt: ”The Five-Year Plan and the Improvement of lanagement.‘ "Problems
of Theory, "The Improvement of Territorial Hanagement." 'Automation of
Economic Management Processes,” 'Rationalization of lanagement.“ 'lanagement
Cadres." 'Poreign Knowhow,‘ "Literature on Management,I etc.

At the same time. analysis of the structure of already published issues

shows that editors and authors are not paying enough attention to territorial
problems. While it is true that the 1979 issue contained a special section
“Improving Territorial lanagement.‘ it could more readily be called “inter-
branch' than "territorial“ if we are to adhere to the generally accepted

terms in management theory. The collection's authors themselves also write

of the need to improve territorial management. Thus the article “Bringing
lanagement to the Level of the New Demands" (1977) by V. Afanas'yev. corresp-
ponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, directly states that 'despite
the numerous ministries and departments that supervise the development

of the complex (the reference is to the west Siberian oil and gas complex.—-

A. 9.), there are still numerous shortcomings. The fragmentation and lack

of concentration lead to unjustified costs and losses and delay the solution

or major problems.’ And yet there are colossal possibilities in the solution

of this problem. It is estimated that the integrated approach to the management
of the development of the economy in the Nest Siberian lowlands can mean

up to a 10 percent saving in capital investments and up to 20 percent in

current expenditures,‘ Since the national economic expenditures involved number
in the tens of billions of rubles, the advantage of the integrated management

or the creation of territorial production complexes becomes especially evident.

But the saving of resources is not the only consideration. The integrated
approach to the management of the development of the territorial economy
envisages the coordinated and proportional development of the productive

—__——————

”See VOPROSY GBOGRAPII. No 109. 'lysl'.‘ 1978. p 97.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and nonproductive spheres, of all necessary elements of the production

and social infrastructure according to a single plan. Conditions are created
that reduce personnel turnover. There are broad possibilities for the
centralized maneuvering of manpower and for upgrading the skill levels

of the work force. All this promotes the growth of the output-capital

ratio, the early recoupment of expenditures, and wins time.

Thus there are numerous important but still unresolved problems in the effort
to improve territorial management. They include: the elaboration of method-
ology and concrete integrated programs for controlling the creation and
functioning of territorial industrial complexes and agro-industrial complexes;
the problem of the integrated utilization of natural resources in a given
region; the problem of integrating enterprises in different branches on

the same industrial sites with a single production infrastructure; the

use of a single regional construction base in a rational sequential system

of activation of various proJects; the creation of a single transport system
in regions serving various branches of the national economy; the integrated
use of labor resources in the region; the creation of a unified system

of settlement and the social infrastructure in the region as an important
component in raising the population's living standard; the reproduction

and conservation of territorial natural resources; the creation of favorable
ecological conditions for human life, and other problems. The examination
and solution of these problems of territorial management unquestionably

merit the attention of scholars and laymen alike and must find an appropriate
place in the annusl's pages.

I would like to say a special word about the problem of improving the
structure of "The Organization of Management." The increase in the breadth
and depth of relations in the present stage of development of our country's
economy poses yet another urgent task--the task of overcoming the lack

of coordination in the actions of various ministries. This task can be
effectively resolved only on the basis of integrated programs of state
interbranch and regional significance. Obviously it will also be urgent

in the future. In this regard. there will be a sharp increase in the role
of the program-goal method of managing the national economy. the effective-
ness of which has been proven in the solution of major national economic
problems. This is why the 26th CPSU Congress once more emphasized the
importance of improving the system of integrated control of large-scale
interbranch programs.

Therefore future collections should devote more attention to the methodology
and organization of the control of such programs. Special emphasis must

be placed on the improvement of the planning and management of entire
complexes of interconnected branches that develop under the given program
and that determine qualitative changes in the structure of production,

its technical and organizational basis. and indicators of effectiveness.
Therefore the development of the interbranch, program approach is an
effective way of realizing the advantages of the centralized planning of

the development of socialist society.

This emphasis on integrated planning and management confronts scientists
and organs of state and economic management with a number of theoretical
and practical problems, the discussion and search for possible avenues

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of solution of which in the pages of I'Organiaation of hansgement' would

be very useful. As repeatedly emphasized in various issues of "Organization
of Management" and in the Journal VOPROSY BRONOHIKI., the urgency of this
work consists in the fact that the state system of interbranch integrated
program-goal management in our country should essentially be formed for

the first time. Hence the importance of the problem of elaborating prob—
lems regarding the methodological, organisational, legal and normative
support of this newly created mechanism management.

Today "Organization of lanagement' devotes little attention to the examin-
ation of the problems and the search of possible avenues of their solution
in proportion to their importance. Here we can only note articles by

G. Popov (“The Program-Goal Approach' (1977) and by Ye. Golubkov (“The
Organization of Program Planning and hanagement in an Industrial Branch“
(1973). The elimination of this shortcoming will unquestionably increase
the scientific and practical worth of the publication.

Analysis of various issues of 'Organisation of Management' shows that the
authors have lost sight of such an important problems as the social aspects

of management of the national economy (this problem is partially treated

in articles by Academician D. Ovishiani ("The Scientific-Technological
Revolution and Social Progress' (1915). by Academician T. Khachaturov

and I. Popov ("Forecasting Socioeconomic Processes and Scientific and

Technical Progress" (1977). and by Ye. Kayminas and V. Tambovtsev ('Interbranch
and Regional Aspects in the Formulation of the Goals of Socioeconomic
Development" (1979). It is specifically these questions that play an ever
increasing role in the modern age--the age of developed socialism.

At the same time, decisions of the CPSU have repeatedly emphasized that

national economic planning is an integral part of social planning, the

goals of which are determined by the need for the maximum satisfaction

of the continuously growing material and nonmaterial requirements of members

of socialist society. The communist party has devised a long-range,
scientifically substantiated strategy for the development of our country

on the basis of the realization of a complex of programs. An increasing

place among these programs is occupied by social development programs associated
with improving the people's well-being, with raising the level of education

and health care, with the mechanization of manual and physically arduous

labor, with city planning, with the protection of the environment, etc.
Moreover, these problems become critical in the examination of all aspects

of economic development including the purely production-related aspects.»

Our national economic plans are comprehensive plans, plans for economic

and social development which make a definite imprint on the system of management
of their elaboration and realization. Many new methodological, organization,
informational, technical and legal problems arise here.

While our country has amassed vast experience in planning the management
of scientific-technical and production processes, further research and

development is required in order to create a reliable working mechanism
and instrumentation in the realm of social planning and management. In
our opinion, by expanding the scale of discussion of the social aspects

 

“See vomosv sxonounu. No 6, 1979, p :3.

62
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHICHNNCJAL USEZ(HNLY

of management of the national economy, individual branches and associations.
the Journal will help to resolve the important problem of increasing the
scientific validation and effectiveness of elaboration and implementation
of state plans for the economic and social development of our country.

A distinguishing feature of the content of every issue of “Organization

of Management' is the timeliness of the material and the attempt to answer
the most pressing questions in the theory and practice of managnement.

In this regard. attention is merited by articles by D. evishiani (“Management
Science Today“ (1971). by Yu. Tikhomirov "The New Constitution of the USSR
and Management" (1979), etc. These articles are called upon to perform

a dual role: first, to analyze and evaluate the status of management theory
and practice in the period under review and to formulate and outline pos-
sible ways of resolving the most urgent problems; secondly, to serve as the
logical basis, the scientific-methodological foundation of the material
published in each issue. Similar "revelatory" materials will hopefully be a
part of the journal‘s permanent future practice.

The feature "The Five-Year Plan in the Improvement of Management“ attracts
the attention of the readers by virtue of the fundamental character and

the scale of the investigated questions of national economic management.

At the same time. the materials contained in the Journal make it possible

for progressive leaders of branches to 'view' the urgent and pressing problems
in the development of branches. or major interest from this standpoint

are articles by A. Antonov (“The Ministry--The Headquarters of the Scientific
and Technical Development of the Branch" (1972) and 'Scientific—Technical
Development of the Electrical Equipment Industry Under the New Conditions"
(1977); by K. Rudnev (“The Branch System of Management of Instrument Making"
(1971); by V. Shashin ("The System of Management of the Petroleum Industry“
(1971); by V. Boytsov ("Quality Control of Industrial Production” (1919);

by s. Orudzhev (“The Experience of the Ministry of in Improving Management”
(1979) and a number of other specialists. This feature is a kind of tribune
of progressive experience in the area of branch management. Unfortunately,
interbranch, integration problems have not yet been adequately examined

(with the exception of the 1979 issue) in the Journal.

The feature “Problems of Theory“ is of great interest. And this is not

by chance. It was stated at the 26th CPSU Congress: "The tasks that are
posed by life require the development of theory and economic science and
closer ties between economic science and the needs of economic practice."
The given feature has published articles on economics and management:
articles by Academician N. Pedorenko ("0n the Optimization of Control Systems
and the Stimulation of Scientific-Technical Progress (1971); by B. Mil'ner
("Improving the Organizational Structure of Management" (1977); by c. Dzhavadov
("The Methodology of Investigating the Economic Relations of Management

of Socialist Production“ (1911) and "Problems in the Integrated Improvement
of Management" (1977) and a number of other materials.

The comprehensive examination of the most urgent fundamental and applied
problems of management science at a high level is a characteristic aspect
of this feature. At the same time, we should call attention to the fact
that the "across the board' approach to material in the feature does not
sufficiently use the principles of the systems approach. Bach individual
article is of unquestionable theoretical interest. However. the

feature on the whole appears to be slightly lacking in uniform logic.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I use V. I I‘mll‘k V9.9 00‘“.

There is definite interest in the new feature I'Improvement of Territorial
lanagement' which first appeared in 1979. In it, the following shared

their thoughts and experience regarding the party's direction of the solution
of integrated national economic problems: P. Pedirko, first secretary

of the lrasnoyarskiy Kraykom of the CPSU ("The Program of Comprehensive
Developmentof'Krasnoyarskiy Kray'); P. Taov, head. Agricultural Department

of the Kabardino-Balkarkskiy Obhom of the CPSU ("0n Improving Territorial
Planning and Management“); and A. Dumachev, secretary, Leningradskiy Obhom
of the CPsu ("The Role of the Party Organization in the hanagement of Production
Associations"). The remarks of heads of party organizations of various
regions in the pages of the collections are unquestionably of great
theoretical and practical value. These articles contain a wealth of material
that graphically illustrates the effectiveness of the integrated approach

to the management of complex scientific-technical. production, social.
branch, and regional programs. The valuable experience that has been amassed
must be more widely analyzed and propagandized in the annual's pages in

the future as well.

Also deserving of attention is the feature ”Rationalization of lanagement

in the Association" and especially the articles contained in the 1979 issue.
The importance of this feature is determined by the role that is assigned
to associations in the development of the economy. in increasing the rates
of scientific-technical progress, in raising labor productivity, and in

the solution of complex social problems.

The feature's materials are devoted to the analysis of scientific and practical
problems aimed at increasing the effectiveness of the activity of associations.
It should be noted that Leningrad City and Oblast industry alone operate

more than 150 production and science-production associations and combines

that account for more than 62 percent of the total output volume.’ The
effectiveness of the associations is indicated by the following data:

on the basis of the advantages of associations. the 10th Five-Year Plan

calls for the sale of more than one billion rubles' worth of industrial
products in Leningrad City and Oblast and for surpassing the consumer goods
production targets by tens of millions of rubles. Industry is supposed

to realize at least 95 percent of the increase in output as a result of

higher labor productivity . This is why the methodological, organizational,
legal. and socioeconomic aspects of the creation and optimal functioning

of all types of associations are of unquestionable interest for scientists

and laymen. Descriptions of experience amassed in the solution of these
problems were offered by: 0. Pilatov, general director of the "Svetlana'
association and Hero of Socialist Labor; R. lamedov. chief of the 'Soyuznefte-
mash' VPO; Yu. Vladychin. Chairman of the Estonian SSR Committee on Prices;

S. Parinov, deputy general director, KamAz association, and others.

 

'“0rganitataiya upravleniya," 1919, p 99

"See "Organizatsiya upravleniya," p. 111.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the same time, the 26th CPSU Congress emphasized the importance of intensifi-
cation of the effort to improve management at the association and enter-

prise level. Therefore the given questions must become the program of

the content of this important feature.

Attention is merited by materials in the features “Automation of Economic
Management Processes“ and "management Cadres' but the specifics of the
collections should be considered in their future formation.

He should also mention the feature “Foreign Experience" which appeared

in the first issues (1971-197!) and then disappeared. The need for this
feature would seem to he beyond question. however, the material presented

in it should be more closely linked to the content of every concrete issue
and the professional. management level of articles published in it should

be raised. There should be wider discussion of the problem of management
theory and practice in the fraternal socialist countries and leading scholars

and specialists in these countries should be invited to participate in
the annual's work.

On the whole. "The Organization of Management“ is a very important publication
devoted to the theory and practice of the management of socialist social
production which has won wide acclaim among management specialists and
among the broad readership. The particulars of the Journal include: the
high scientific level of content of all basic materials; the presentation
of issues in comprehensible form; the comprehensive discussion of problems
of management; the timeliness and scientific and practical significance
of the topics. The shortcomings noted above--insufficient attention to

a number of neglected problems and the vagueness of individual rubrics--
can evidently be attributed to the fact that the collections are published
on an irregular basis. Hence the difficulty entailed in the formation

of the basic materials.

The positions won by the "Organisation of lanagement' collections can be
Judged on the basis of numerous positive reviews in the central press and
in specialized Journals. This is primarily due to the good work of the
editorial collegium, compiler G. Dzhsvsdov and Izdatel'stvo 'Bkonomika.‘

At the same time, in our opinion certain features. especially "Management
Cadres' require a certain degree of bolstering. lore attention must be
devoted to the problem of further improving the style and methods of man-
agement of the national economic complex. Here. too, there are major
unutilised possibilities. The collection devotes too much space to such
questions as the automation of management processes and unconscionably
little space to management theory and cadres and to the effectiveness of
management.

Only in the first collection (1971) did the editors publish the list of
organizations in our country that are concerned with problems of manage-

ment and an index of research in progress. since then, many years have passed
and the qualitative and quantitative composition of organization has also

changed. Similar material should be prepared and published in the next issue. In

65

FOI‘OFIICJAI.USE(N‘LY
1973, the collection introduced its readers to useful abbreviations most
commonly used in ASU terminology. And why should the collection not estab-
lish a regular feature that would interpret certain terms and concepts

used in management science? This would be useful to both theorists and
laymen especially in view of the fact that we still have not published

a reference dictionary on the management of socialist production.

The 26th CPSU Congress formulated the complex new tasks confronting management
specialists: I"l‘o introduce in the 11th Five—Year Plan a complex of

measures that have been worked out to improve the economic mechanism and
strengthen its influence with regard to increasing efficiency and improving
quality, and to improve the organizational structure of management and '

the style and methods of work. To orient the administration of the national
economy toward fulfilling Party decisions with respect to the country's
economic and social development, accelerating the economy's conversion

to intensive development. and raising the people's standard of living."

The cor” ess also indicated the main directions in which the maximum effort
of scholars and laymen should be concentrated: the raising of the role

of planning as a central element in the management of the national economy;
the intensification of the economy regime; the strengthening of cost
accounting; the improvement of the style and methods of economic management
based on Leninist management principles; improvement of the organizational
structure of management; the development of initiative and of the creative
activism of the working people in the management of the economy. The realiz-
ation of these party program principles must become the basis of publication
of the “Organization of management" collection.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". 'Voprosy ekonomiki'. 1982

5013
C50: 1820/14? END

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY