APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: clA-RDP02-00060R0001000100‘7-8
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010047-8

FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8240
24 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRADE AND SERVICES
(FOUO 1/79) |

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010047-8
.II'RS publicnai - urtain inl'r-rmntion primarily from foreign
newslmpe.'<, p- rim'ir'nls and books, but also Lrnm In-wn .|_r,-.-nc\-
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from l-aniish-lamguage sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phat-in". and
other characteristics retained.

Ileadlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
II (in .,..-!i.-(! h)- .II'RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
.-r iimcerpti in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

l'ui‘nmiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

We contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

-' ' ...-.i|' -.-\iu'S :‘.\'D REGULATIOXS GWERNING WNERSHIP 0?
.".-'F RL‘. 9 REPR’IDL’CED liERElN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIMTION
' .‘S '."'3? ICAT ION [)8 RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
u a a u e open an

' rwsuuous ou ussa mans AND snmces. (FOUO 1/79) 24 Janna 1979

0- Framing G‘aaisatiea Ms:

'0. onkec/‘l‘aak/Vouk Uau No.

”- Ty e ol la a Period
95ch M

        

         

  

      
  
   
  

 
 
 
  

  

9. man... Omanisauoo Name and Adda”
Joint Publications Iaaearch Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

 

     
   
    
      
    
   
   
     
 
 
  
  
  
   
      
     

12. Spending Ouanixuloo “one and Mines

As above

16. Abmatla

  

This serial report contains information on international econonic relations.

coununications. consumer goods. domestic trade. transportation, manpower. and
industrial sociology.

   

. Key Votes and
USSR
International Relations
Commerce

Consumer Goods

Domestic Trade
Economics

Henpouer
Telecommunications
Transportation

ore-an Analysis.

at “caribou/Waited Tar-a

t7:.cosnlr.¢u/Gcoep 5c, 51, 173

3!. Availabvhiy Statement

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Liuited Nuaber of
Copies Available From JPRS

    
   

    

.‘onaa an...» n-(v. D-Iu

'nm you an st atnoouceo ““°“"°‘ “'"""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/B

24 Jenna

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRADE AND SERVICES
(moo 1/79)

Conreurs

MWIOIIAL ECONOMIC RMIOICS

Water Conservation, basement in CM Countries
(In. 9. Belicbenko; 12mm mm mm
8353 5mm osooamcammm, No 5, 1978)

DOMESTICTRADEANDOOWGOODS

Innroving the Quality of Consumer Goods Between 1976-80
(11. P. Ksbsnov Interview; ammo I W, Nov 78)

mm: m, EDUCATIW, W

USSR Minister of Education Addresses All-mien Teachers
Conference

(M. A. Prokot'yev; SOVBI‘SKAIA mm, No 9,

1978) ................n...........................

Book Describes Demographic Problems or the Penny
(‘1‘. B. Rysbnshkin; WWW $03131! 8301,

1978) .0OOI0.0....0...O...to...OOCUOOCIIOOOOIOOOOOO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL ECONONlC RELATIONS

HATER CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT IN CEHA COUNTRIES

Moscow 1211mm smear: mum sssa scam caocnancnssnm No s, 1978
pp 121-127

[Article by Yu. P. Belichenko USSR Ministry of Hater Resources: "CEHA
Member Country Efforts in the Field of Protecting Hater Resources"]

[Text] Under present conditions, society, drawing more and more natural
resources into the sphere of production to meat its rapidly rising needs,

can hardly fail to be concerned about replenishing renewable resources and
protecting man's environment, because the very possibility of the existence
of life on earth depends on their condition. Under such conditions. economic
and ecological processes are tightly interwoven.

The present level of productive forces makes it possible to draw more and
more natural resources into the production process. The geography of re-
source utilisation is expanding and changing. Not only are traditional
natural resources such as soil, forests, and water being put to economic
use but also resources of the world Ocean, the atmosphere, and even outer
space. The state and quality of natural resources can be affected not only
by the scale on which they are extracted but also by pollution of the air
and water basins, changes in the species makeup up the forests, soil er-
osion and so on. These processes may have an adverse effect on the bio-
sphere as a whole.

The problem of the environment cannot be understood and resolved correctly
if it is reduced to more technical-economic and ecological aspects without
taking account of its social nature. As experience has shown, ecological
regulation is essentially and primarily linked to the resolution of a number
of social problems.

The communist and worker's parties and governments of the CEHA member coun-
tries are focusing special attention on problems of protecting and enhancing
the environment, also on the most rational utilisation of natural resources
in the interests of the present and future generations. Since the goal of
socialism is to further raise the uellbeing of people, to improve working
and living conditions, and to advance health care, education, and culture.
the socialist countries-have set forth the task of comprehensively utilising

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the results of scientific-technical progress to resolve problems of the
environment. For the CEMA member countries, the rational utilization of
natural resources. the protection and deliberate transformation of the en-
vironment, constitute an organic component of all economic activity.

The commonality of political and economic interests and the social structure
constitute the firm foundation of cooperation among the CEMA countries.

The development of socialist economic integration has also brought forth

new effective forms of cooperation with regard to problems of protecting

and making rational use of resources. 0n the basis of mutual aid, special-
ization, and cooperation in production the CEMA member countries are cap-
able of using Joint efforts to resolve complex national-economic tasks

whose implementation in the individual countries would be difficult. Scien-
tists, technicians. and designers in the socialist countries are seeking
fundamentally new ways to radical solutions to the highly-humanistic prob-
lem of protecting the biosphere against harm. An illustration of this is
the accomplishment of Joint efforts undertaken in July [971 within the
Master Program of Further Deepening and Perfecting Cooperation and Develop-
ment of Socialist and Economic integration of the CEMA Member Countries,
which calls for working out major problems in the field of rational utilisa-
tion and protection of natural resources.

Considering that international cooperation on these problems is a vital
condition on their successful resolution, in l972 the CEMA Committee for
Scientific-Technical Cooperation set up the Council for Protecting and
Improving the Environment, constituting a permanent organ. The Council is
responsible for preparing proposals, measures, and draft programs on prob-
lems of the development and expansion of scientific-technical cooperation
among the CEMA member countries and Yugoslavia in the field of protecting
and improving the environment and, in connection with this, rational utili-
zation of natural resources.

In 1976 the Council drew up the “General Expanded Program of Cooperation
Among CBMA Member Countries and Yugoslavia for the Period Through 1980

in the Field of Protecting and Improving the Environment and, in Connection
with this, Rational Utilization of Natural Resources." This Program incor-
porates ll major problems in the field (155 themes), including problems of
a social-economic and organisational-legal nature, in the field of protect-
ing the atmosphere against pollution, protecting water resources, hygienic
and meteorological aspects of environmental protection, protection of
ecosystems and landscape,and so on.

Cooperation among the CEMA countries in this field is developing success-
fully. On the basis of international socialist division of labor, the
socialist countries are concentrating their efforts on resolving individual
scientific-technical and technical-economic problems of theoretical and
practical interest; they are striving to conserve funds and time, eliminat-
ing inefficient duplication in research.

One of the central points in the Council's efforts with regard to protect-
ing and improving the environment involves scientific research relating

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the protection of surface and underground water against pollution. Sci-
entific-technicnl cooperation on this problem is directed toward perfecting
existing effective methods and technological processes and creating new
ones to promote the recycling of water and minimise contamination by enter-
prises of various sectors of industry.

Special attention is being focused on technological processes which make it
possible to use water recycling.

In all the CEHA member countries a substantial increase in industrial water
consumption is anticipated. By 1990 the anticipated rise in industrial
water consumption compared with l970 is as follows: l.5-fold in Czechoslo-
vakia and the GDR. 2.2-fold in Poland, 2.3-fold in Bulgaria. 2.9-fold in
Nungary.and burfoldln Romania; compared with 1965 industry's water re-
quirements, including TETs for Romania at the 1990 level, will rise about
tenfold. In the future. plans call for raising the proportion of water
consumed in thermal power plant secondary use and recycled water systems

to about 80 per cent compared with the present level.

Below we present a brief characterisation of the basic completed projects
within the framework of the problem "Protecting Hater Against Pollution."
with regard to which scientific-technical cooperation is being implemented
within the framework of SRVO [Conference of Directors of Water Management
Organs of the CZHA Member Countries] and permanent CBHA sector commissions.

Starting in 1966. specialists from the CBHA member countries have prepared

a number of reports on methods of cleaning and treating waste water from
various types of operations involving 27 basic sectors of industry. These
reports have given detailed discussions of problems of cleaning waste water
from enterprises of essentially all sectors of industry. They characterise
various types of waste water and describe cleaning technologies; they form-
ulate standards on the composition of waste water destined for treatment
facilities; they present the cost indicators of constructing various types
and forms of treatment facilities. These treatment methods, as a check into
their use under production conditions has shown. are effective and economical,

and they are utilized on the basis of local conditions in all of the OSHA
member countries.

in 197b-l975. work was done on a number of themes incorporated in the over-
all expanded program. They include, for example. a project completed in
1975 "Determining Hater Management Standards with Regard to Protecting
Surface and Ground Hater, including Seacoast Zones." The project was per-
ticipated in by specialists from Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR. Poland. Romania,
the USSR, and Csechoslovakia. ln research on this theme, primary attention
was focused on problems of protecting ground water against pollution by
petroleum and petroleum products. by waste water and chemical enterprise
wastes. and also protection of surface and ground water against bacterial
contamination. 0n the basis of research completed in the USSR. the summary
report presents methodological recommendations with regard to calculating
and laying out protective belts for ground and artesian water and the char-
acter of restrictions within such zones.

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Also discussed were standards now in force in the con and Czechoslovakia
providing detailed regulation of the necessary measures of protecting

ground water against pollution by petroleum and petroleum products, includ-
ing problems of the construction and operation of facilities and installations
for storing and transporting petroleum and petroleum products. Also dis-
cussed were problems of protecting water against accidents and transport
breakdowns and problems of implementing the necessary prevantive measures

to be carried out by water management organs.

Also completed was the formulation of revised norms of water consumption
and withdrawal for industrial and communal-domestic supply. This project,
carried out by stages and by industrial sectors, was participated in by
seven CEHA member countries. with the USSR serving as coordinator. In in-
dustry, norms cover 18 basic sectors of industry involving 2,045 types of
facility. The results of this vast undertaking are set forth in nine books
totalling approximately 100 printed sheets.

These norms on industrial water consumption and withdrawal are intended for
the formulation of forecasts, technical-economic substantiations and design-
ing of water supply and sewer systems for industrial complexes and economic
and administrative zones, and also for the formulation of master plans of
integrated utilisation and protection of water resources in particular re-
gions or whole countries. They can also be used both in planning for new
building and rebuilding of water supply and sewer systems of industrial en-
terprises and zones, also for evaluating the rationality of water utilisa-
tion by any existing enterprise.

A third edition of Standardized Methods of investigating Water Quality was
examined and agreed upon (1976).

in 1976, a procedure of economic substantiation was worked out for select-
ing the directions and sequence of capital investments in water-protective
measures, also the location of water-using and water-consuming facilities,
taking account of the quality and quantity of the water of the source, under
conditions of meeting all the needs of all sector water users and water con-
sumers.

On the theme "Formulation of Proposals on the Creation of Automatic Monitor-
ing Stations for Surface Hater Quality and Electronic Information Processing,
Also Their introduction into the Practice of Hater Management" proposals
were worked out to create automatic monitoring stations for surface water
quality and the processing of information on computers, also their intro-
duction into the practice of water management.

0n the theme "Formulation of Procedures of Evaluating the Impact of Agri-
cultural Chemicalisation on the Quality of Surface and Ground Hater and
Measures to Prevent Hater Pollution" a procedure was proposed for evaluating
the impact of agricultural chemicaliaation on the quality of surface and
ground water and measures to prevent water pollution. Research was conducted
on the harmful impact of man-made fertilisers and poison chemicals (in-
secticides and pesticides) used in agriculture on the quality of water
basins, water flows, and ground water.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition, within the framework of the CBMA Permanent Commission on the
Coal industry, methods of concentration, storage and utilization of [lo-
tation rejects andwastc water treatment were drawn up. The summary re-
port on this theme presented an analysis of the status of industrial
development and research in coal concentration in each CBMA member coun-
try. lt presented recommendations on directions in resolving the problem
of dehydrating and storing flotation rejects and coal concentration wastes
and organising systematic research into expanding the sphere of utilising
flotation rejects in the building materials industry.

Hithin the framework of the CEMA Permanent Commission on Petroleum and Gas
Industry, methods were worked out for preparing waste water for incorpora-
tion into the recycling system. Laboratory and semi-industrial research
was carried out in order to find optimal indicators, and a suitable system
was worked out for secondary utilization of biologically treated water;
The basic optimal indicators of biologically treated waste water for water
reuse and recycling systems were determined.

0n the theme "Development and introduction of New and More Effective Means
of Treating Stratal Hater to Reduce the Petroleum Content in Haste Hater"
work got underway on introducing enclosed, hermetically-sealed (pressure
and non-pressure) systems of preparing waste water. in the pressure treat-
ment system (with a pressure of up to six kilograms per square centimeter),
use is made of hollow and shelved settling tanks, mechanical filters, fil-
ters with coalescing load, flotators, and so on. For treating water with-
out excess pressure, use is made of vertical steel settling tanks and
flotators.

For waste water treatment, unitized automated pressure installations have
been designed with a productivity of 1,600. 2,500, 6,000, l,000 cubic meters
per day, operating on the settling principle, and also productivity of

750, 1,500, 3,000, and 1,000 cubic meters per day, treating water in sett-
ling tanks with subsequent pressure flotation. Experimental models of the
installations are undergoing testing and in the near future will go into
series production.

Also worked out and recommended for series production are a coalescing
filter using filter material of polyethylene granules and a "Multihydro-
cyclone" apparatus which makes it possible to remove petroleum and mechan-
ical impurities from industrial wastes and at the same time degas the water
in order to remove oxygen and other aggressive components to prevent corro-
sion of the piping in the system for injecting waste water into formations.
To eliminate the consequences of accidental oil spills, the reagent BPN-S
has been developed and undergone field tests; its action is based on biolo-
gical decomposition of the petroleum.

0n the theme "Development of Methods of Preparing Haste Hater for Recycling,"
a highly-promising method has been checked out for the final cleaning of
industrial waste water that has undergone biochemical treatment, for reuse--
final treatment is on filters with granular load.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The filtration of biochemically treated water reduces the amount of active
silt input by 95 per cent and reduces the total contamination of water

flows with respect to BPK S [biological oxygen demand] by 50 to 60 per cent.
It also substantially reduces the amount of deposits on heat-transfer
surfaces and raises the average coefficient of heat transfer and the ex-
change time of heat-transfer and refrigeration equipment.

With regard to the problem of "Dehydrating and Recovering Domestic, Indus-
trial, Agricultural, and Other Wastes," the Council's authorities on this
problem have drawn up a nomenclature of solid and liquid industrial. house-
hold, agricultural, and other wastes. With regard to the same problem. the
CBHA Permanent Commission on Petroleum and Gas Industry working in the theme
"Utilisation of Waste Products" has worked out a method for burning wastes,
based on the principle of rotating gear drive. This method can be used to
burn almost all liquid, paste, and solid industrial wastes, also garbage.

On the theme "Recovery or Elimination of Sediments Obtained in the Treat-
ment of Haste Hater," a technology has been proposed for burning petroleum
sludge by means of a rotation burner which makes it possible to make the
sludge harmless and obtain just the solid (ash) and gaseous (smoke) produc-
tion wastes. The dry ash is hauled to ash dumps. An experimental-industrial
installation to burn petroleum sludge has been in operation for more than
three years at one of the petroleum refineries.

0n the theme "Removal of Petroleum Pollution from Port Haters," the OSHA
Permanent Commission on Transport adopted recommendations for eliminating
petroleum residues in seaports and confining oil spills, directives on pre-
venting petroleum pollution of the seas, basic technical standards on the
bulls, equipment, and systems of seagoing vessels. designed to prevent pet-
roleum contamination of the seas, technical specifications on systems of
flushing cargo tanks, and information concerning the operation of floating
oil spill collectors in USSR seaports.

A number of themes are being implemented in the Council for the Protection
and Improvement of the Environment within the framework of coordinating
centers and authority councils dealing with specific themes. Thus, for
example, the program for cooperation on environmental hygiene called for

the scientific hygienic institutions of the CEHA member countries to do
research in five themes through 1975; one of the themes is "Hater hygiene
and Hater Supply to Population Centers." Hithin this theme, research was
conducted for purposes of standardizing chemical and microbiological methods,
also methods of studying the impact of chemical pollutants on warm-blooded
organisms and the sanitary status of water sources. A number of investiga-
tions dealt with substantiating normatives governing the maximum content of
toxic substances in water basins and the hygienic evaluation of the effect-
iveness of methods of treating drinking water. As a result 13 microbiological
and nine sanitary-che_-cal methods of water investigation were worked out

and tested, also recommendations for determining the maximum permissible
contents of a number of chlorinated hydrocarbons in water, based on study-
ing their impact on organoleptic, physical-chemical, and bacteriological
indicators of water quality and on biological models; a monograph was also

6
son OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prepared on problems of water body eutrophlcation, and recommendations on
the use of the method of osonized water to reduce the content of surface-
active agents, phenol, and certain pesticides.

The Council on Problems of Protecting and Improving the Environment has
drawn up a large number of other themes relating to the rational use and
protection of surface water against pollution and depletion.

The scale of development of cooperation in the field of protecting the
water environment is growing year by year. Thus, for example, within the
framework of this cooperation there is ongoing development and perfection
of methods of protecting and treating waste water from thermal and nuclear
power plants (including thermal pollution), coal mines, coal concentration
mills and drying minefields, petroleum refineries and petrochemical plants.
enterprises of the chemical and food industries, nonferrous and ferrous

metallurSY, agricultural production, seagoing ship pollutants, and urban
waste water.

Scientific-technical cooperation is underway on developing methods for
determining and monitoring water quality, including the development of
methods of automatic monitoring, the designing of new instruments to equip
automatic monitoring stations for the petroleum industry, enterprises of
the chemical industry and nonferrous metallurgy, also the formulation of
recommendations on alarm signal systems and protection methods in the event
of accidental pollution of the water by petroleum, acids, and toxic sub-
stances.

Plans call for working out and introducing measures to reduce chemical and
thermal pollution of water basins from the operation of thermal power
plants, also drawing up and implementing measures relating to environmental
protection during the project planning, construction, and operation of
638's. Cooperation will continue to determine the most effective methods
and facilities for treating mine water, waste water from coal concentration
and briquette mills, water from the draining of minefields, and also the
recovery of coal concentration wastes.

It is proposed that work continue on developing new technological methods

of treating waste water in petroleum facilities, including the design and
adoption of enclosed block-built automated installations to treat and prepare
facility waste water to be fed into the system for flooding petroleum strata,
with a productivity of up to l0,000 cubic meters per hour. Research is
continuing into preventing the contamination of bodies of water by enter-

prises of the petroleum refining and petrochemical industry and protecting
seaports against petroleum product contamination.

in the chemical industry, work is continuing on the design and industrial
adoption of waste-free technologies, also the use of new methods of treating
waste water by means of technological processes, as developed in world
practice. Plans call for working out effective processes for treating in-
dustrial waste water to achieve maximum water recycling to reduce total
consumption of fresh water used in nonferrous metallurgy enterprises, also

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems and processes of preparing water [or reuse in concentration mills
in order to minimise consumption of fresh water and flotation reagents.

Hork will continue on reducing consumption and making effective use of water
in metallurgy enterprises, including problems of recirculation, evaporative
cooling, and prevention of salt deposits in the water system, also the de-
velopment of rational methods and facilities for thermal dehydration of
waste water and sludge from metallurgy enterprises; plans call for the im-
provement and adoption of biochemical methods of treating phenol waste water
from coke-chemical plants.

Cooperation is underway on the development of wholly-enclosed systems of
water supply for food industry enterprises.

In the field of eliminating and recovering industrial, agricultural, and
houshould wastes. aiter [980 research will be continued into the quantitative
and qualitative makeup of industrial, agricultural, and household wastes,

the development of effective technologies for their collection, transport-
ing, and disposal. Plans also call for working out the parameters of prom-
ising technical means for the recovery and disposal of wastes, with an eye
toward their cooperative production. It is proposed that work continue on
the formulation of measures relating to the secondary utilisation of wastes
and the organization and project planning of population center treatment
systems.

It is planned, therefore, that after 1980 cooperation will continue among
the CEHA member countries with regard to formv' ting the basic problems
crucially relating to meeting the water needs .1 the population, industry,
and agriculture, protecting the water against .ontamination, and resolving
problems of the economics of water management, hydraulics, hydroengineering,
and water management construction. The protection of water resources will
continue in the future to be one of the most important problems in the over-
all matter of protecting and making rational use of natural resources. In
order to resolve it successfully it rill be necessary:

—-to continue the development, deepening, and perfecting of cooperation
among the CEHA member countries in the field of water management both on a
multilateral basis and by means of bilateral agreements, utilising such
forms as the coordination of long-term plans of scientific and technical
research, the exchange of experience in project planning, construction,
and operation of water management systems and facilities, joint research,
and the formulation of progressive procedural and normative materials and
documents:

--to systematically perfect methods and practice in the drawing up of fore-
casts oi water management development in the CEHA member countries so that
these efforts may become a permanent factor making it possible to correct
the data of forecasts in accordance with changes that take place;

--to work on standardizing methods of water management research and project
planning, normatives. equipment standards, construction norms. and regulations

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In water management In order to ensure comparability of data and achieve
n hlgh technical and technolog(cal level In water management.

corvnlcurn lzdatel'ntvo "Nnuka". "leventlyn AN SSSR neriyn geosrnflchelknya".
1918

0856
CSO: 1823

9
son orrtcm cs: cm!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W'PIC TRADE MID CONSUMER 00008

WING m ”LIT! OP comm 000m 3mm! 1W5.”
Ibecow am I mum in ﬂmeien low 78 pp 2-5

terview with it. P. Kehenov, Deputy liinieter of Construction intern»
nduetry, IBSR; an. end piece not any

ﬂag? An eddreee by Deputy Minieter of Conetruction Ib-
teriele Induetry of the 138R N. P. Kehenov, "0n the Deve-
lopnent in the Ieere 1976-1980 of Conn-er Goode Produc-
tion end lieeeuree to Ilprove Their Quelity,” wee heerd in
the Secreteriet of Aucc'ru. At our uqueet Journeliet V.
0. Krupenin net with I. P. Kebenov end interviewed hin.

@mtiog] HihoIey Pewlovich, your indmtry, the induetry of conetuction
uterine, for the noet pert euppliee ite produete on en ever-increeeina
eoele to the conetruction pmJecte of the netion. Along with thin the nin-
ietry hee en eeeigaeent in reepect to the output of coneuer anode. low
euch ettention ie etteched to thin inportent ntter in your induetry end
how in their production oraeniud?

[ineweﬂ In recent yeere the perty end the aoverneent heve been peyina
epeoiel ettention to the queetione of expending the production end imm-
in; the quelity of cultural, conemer, end houeehold anode. fulfilling the
decieione of the petty end the anvernnent end the directivee of Generel Sec-
retery of the 6760 CC, Cheirlnn of the Preeidiu of the 1888 Buprene Soviet
Coerede L. I. Brezhnev, the einietry end the enterprieee ere cerryina out
precticel nohilizetion of the collectivee for the increeee of output, ex-
peneion of the eeeortnent, end ieprovenent of the dulity of coon-er anode.

The arenteet ettention in given to the increeee in the production of anode
which ere in high de-nd none the populetion. With e twofold increeee in
the tote]. output of euch aoode in the ninth rive-Yea ﬂee, the output of
cryetelwere hee increeeed fivefold; of quelity diehee, 2.7-fold; of them
hottlee, 3.3-fold, end no forth.

In the current five-yeer pin it wee pinned to hrina the production of cul-
turel, coneueer, end homehoid anode throuahout the ninietry to 520 einion

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ruhlee, or to increeee their output to percent, of quelity dieheo to 300 nil-
lion rublee, or No percent. Output of ouch itene ee enll, rcguler, end hig
winegleeeee, in high demand, ehould increeee 70 percent, of synthetic cerpete
end cerpeting 3.6-fold, of chine end feience weree 2.7-fold. A high growth
rete wee deternined for cut gleee veree (50 percent).

‘1‘) eneure the fulfillment of teeke, eetehliehed for the Tenth Five-feer Plen,
the ninietry developed end epproved orgeniutionel end technicel neeeuree.

Socieliet conpetition for the ehove-plen output of goode end inprovenent of
their quelity hee been leunched et the enterprieee. ‘l'he indicetor of the
fulfill-eat of the netionel plen end of the pledgee taken in reepect to the
nenufecture of culturel end coneuner goode ie one of the chief indicetore
in the conditione of eocieliet coupetition enong the collectivee.

[amount] It in very nice that e conpetition to expend the output of con-
euler goode hee been hunched et the enterprieee. Couldn't you explein thie
in are deteili

[Inner] The orgeniution of e coepetition in the industry in reeponee to
the letter of the mo Centrel 00-ittee, 388 Council of Ninietere, AUCC‘N,
end the Centrel Coneittee of Koneonol ehout the launching of eocieliet con-
petition to fulfill end overfulfill the 1978 plan end etrengthen the etruggle
to increeee the efficiency of production end the quelity of work in any re-
epecte contributed to the eucceeeful fulfillnent of thie yeer'e plen end of
eocieliet pledgee.

Along the it collectivee of the Iinietryninitietore of the All-Union eociel-
iet coepetition in the induetry for only fulfillment of thie yeer'e netionel
plen end teehe of the ‘i‘enth FiveoYeer Plen-owee the collective of the Lenin-

gred Artietic Gleeeuorhe.

The won-here of the pint nde e pledge to increeee in 1978 the output of
cryetel weree with the exieting cepecitiee to 620,000 ruhlee, eeeinilete
10 kinds of weree end produce then to e totel of 250,000 rublee, end in-
creeee the reletive ehere of goode with the Stete Seal of Quelity fro-

19 percent to 35 percent. ‘l'heee pledgee ere being cerried out eucceeeful-
ly. In the firet helf of the yeer 325,000 ruhlee' worth of cryetel weree
m mufeetured, lehor productivity wee increeeed 10.3 percent (with en
eeeignnent of 5.5 percent), end from econonieed rev nteriele cryntel weree
t: e)totel of £5,000 rublee were unufectured (with e pledge of 30,000 ru-
h ee .

According to the reeulte of the lm All-Union eocieliet conpetition the col-
lectivee of four enterprieee, unufecturing culturel end coneuner goode only,
were ewended the perpetual Red Bennere of the ninietry end of the Centre). Geno
nittee of Construction end Conetruction luteriele Industry Uorkere ‘i‘rede Union,
end the Dyed'hovo Order of the led Benner of labor Cryetelvorhe wee ewended
the perpetuel Red Benner of the can 00, (383 Council of linietere, mom,

1].
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

end th_e_ cc of Koneoeol end pleced on the All-Union Honor Roll et the With
seen [Nihition of Achievenente of the letionel new of the my.

‘lhe Dyed'kovo pleat nude e pledge to eeeiellete thie yeer 21 hinde of cryo-
tel weree end nnufecture then to e total of 2 nillion ruhlee, increeee ite
unufecture of goode with the atete Beel of Quelity by one third end eneure
their delivery to e total of 2.35 eillioa ruhlee, end reiee the inoreeent in
the output of goode through the growth of lebor productivity to 62 percent.

The collectivee of the 8eretov end Pervonyehiy Gleeeworhe, lie-ea, Oueew
Cryetelworhe, end othere heve echieved e greet deel of eucceee in eocieliet
coepetition ee well.

In 1978 the collectivee of ehope end eectore, eenufecturing concur goode
et enterprieee where they do not repreeent the min line of production, heve
Joined the All-Union eoeieliet competition

The collectivee of ehope at the Volgogred Cereeice Pleat, the Kuybyehev
atroykereeike Pleat, end the Vomezh Ceneic Heree Pleat heve echieved
good indicetore. In the couree of the coepetition the culturel end coneue-
er goode ehop of the Kuybyehev pleat in the firet helf of 1978 hee owerful-
filled the plea for the mufecture of the whole noeencleture of ite-e:
veeee, kettlee, eeto for drinke, huge, eouvenire. All producte beer the
firet category of quelity. the output of 6 different iteee of high quelity
with the Glynic eyebol bee been eeeieileted. 'nae herdworhiag were of
the chop heve been holding the title of the collective of co-Iniet lehor

for any yeere now.

The collective of the conetruction ceraeice end coon-er anode ehop of the
Volgograd plent hee fulfilled the plea for the firet helf of the yeer on
28 June, unufectured 8,000 rublee' worth of goode in exceee of the plea,
end eeeieileted two new hinde of goode. All iteee (porcelein-feience weree,
decoretiwe gift iteee, eouvenire) are of the firet category of qmlity.
Advenced experience echoole of ceetere end gleeiere ere working in the
chop. he chop ie ectively engeged in the etnule for the title of the
collective of co-uniet lebor, 85 percent of ite woe-here ere outetending
woe-hero of coemniet lehor.

hang the hrigedee end workere of enterprieee end ehope Ienufecturing coa-
eueer goode e hot coepetition ie going on to fulfill the plea of the firet
three yeere of the {Ive-ml“ plea on or before the firet eanivereery of the
edoption of the new Conetitution of the man. In the couree of the ccepetio
tion peceeekere in production ere achieving greet eucceeeee. for eneple,
leader of the hrigede of gleeeblowere of the Dyed'hovo Cryetelworhe, holder
of the etete Pripe of the USSR V. 8. Se-ehko, operatore of gleee-eoulding
nchinee of the eeee pleat A. P. hnuehhin end I. s. ‘l'ikhonov, end cutere
of the Kuybyehev atroyhereeihe Pleat z. 8. hrhclove end A. P. Kireyeve
heve Mfilled the tube of the five-year plea in June end ere now working
towel-d the production of 1981. The brigede of I. D. Konotheye at the

.12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shchekino Kislotnupor Plant hoe fulfilled the tasks of the first three years
of the five-year plan for coloring the products in 2 years and l nonth and
pledged to coaplete the five-year plan in 3.5 years. At the sane plant, the
brigade of glaciers, headed by N. I. Yensl'yanov, acconplished the tasks of
the first three years of the five-year plan in 2.5 yeare.

The collective of the coneuaer goods shop or the Voronezh Cenaic Hares
Plant is colpeting under the motto "lot a Single tagger Close By.” There,
a school for the study of the fore-oat experience of caster A. I. Feline
has been created. All workers fulfill production assignaents 120-125 per-
cent. Many have welcooed the anniversary of the adoption of the new Consti-
tution of the user with early fulfillnent of the plan of the first three
years of the five-year plan.

In the work calendar of outstanding workers and bripdes of the 8aratov In-
dustrial Glaseworks 1979 started already long ago. 'Ihey are: crystal
grinder, experienced tutoress L. N. Yudina, brigades of crystal grinders of
V. T. Sinneva and N. N. vaa, and others.

he collective of Kraanyy thy Glassworks, having launched socialist coapeti-
tion to inprove the efficiency of production and the quality of work and to
fulfill the 1978 plan successfully, in the first half of the year realized
in encese of the plan goods aaounting to 236,000 rubles, or 17.2 percent,
including quality dinnerware amounting to 110,000 rubles, or 28.9 percent.

It received a profit of 160,000 rubles in excess of the plan, and econoaiaed
raw nterials and asterials asounting to 66,000 rubles. This: year the work-
ers of the plant pledged to develop 2% kinda of goods and ensure their output
to the sun of 550,000 rublee. During the first half of the year alone 7 kinds
of goods were assiailated, and the total alount of their output constituted
758,000 rubles.

0n the initiative of the brigade or polishers of Shop Ito 8, where the leader
is B. M. Belov, a coupetition was launched to Mfill the tasks of the first
three years of the five-year plan on or before the first anniversary of the

new Constitution of the man. This initiative was supported by 82 brigades

where 1077 people are working.

'nae brigade of polishere of the ease shop, headed by M. P. ﬂair-nova intro-

duced the initiative to fulfill the tasks of the five-year plan in ‘0 yearn.

‘Ihis initiative was upheld by 36 bripdes, amering 310 persons. Socialist
pledges are being succeaefully fulfilled.

The collective of the Roetow Glaseworka pledged in 1978 to nnufhcture in
excess of the plan £0,000 rublee‘ worth of quality dinnerware, in the first
half of the year 61,000 rubles' worth was nnufactured, and 6 kinds of goods.
instead of 5 according to the pledges, were assiailated as well. After a reo
view, new, higher pledges were nde.

All this enabled the ainistry to over-fulfill the plan of two years of the
five-year plan in respect to the mufacture of cultural and consuner goods

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by 26.5 aillion rubles, or 3 percent, including quality dinnerware by 13 oil-
lion rubles, hardware and locks by 1.1 sillion rubles, porcelain-reissue
wares by 270,000 rubles, and so forth. The task of two years or the five-
yesr plan in respect to putting in operntion capacities for the production
of guilty dinnerware was also overfuli’illed by 15.9 nillion rubles (in all,
by 26.7 million rubles).

lhs plan of the first half or the current year for the output of cultural
and consumer goods was fulfilled 105 percent, in excess of the plan llJi nil-
lion rubles‘ worth of goods was unutactured, including: 6A aillion rubles
for quality dinnerware, 107,000 rubles for hardware, 26,000 square asters of
carpets and carpeting, and more than 200,000 rubles for airrors. In addi-
tion, growth in the output or goods is nintained by the reconstruction and
the construction or new shops and isprovensnt of the existing capacities, and
also by the intensification of work oi‘ the equipnsnt installed and realisa-
tion of various organizational and technical measures.

The ainistry is doing a great deal or work to expand the mﬂer of enter-
prises nnutacturing consuer goods. In 1970, for enaple, 30 oblaets,
trays, and autonosous republics were Innuracturing goods according to the
ainistry‘s nosenclsture, but at the present tine there are sore than 60 of
then. At sany plants, nnui‘acturing csrsaic tiles or sanitary raience its-s,
shops and sectors for the output of tableware tron porcelain, seaiporcelain,
faience, or nJolica were created. The nusher of such plants throughout the
ainistry increased tron 21 to 1.2. Output of packaged line and chalk for sale
to the population has been started on a large scale.

Ihny sheet glassuorhs and a nuﬁer of glass packing plants (in Saratov,
norshiy, Shapin, lisichansk, Baku, Rostov, Pervonyskiy, and other cities)
have created sectors for the output of quality tableware ninly through bet-
ter utilization oi’ the existing production areas. As a result, the nude:-
or plants nnui‘scturing quality tableware increased tron 31 to 50.

It should be noted that my leasures have been developed and realited in the
nnui’acture of qmlity tableware which nde it possible to considerably ease
labor and silplity operations, for enaple, transfer to the working of crys-
tal and colored glass in tank i’urnaus oi’ continmus action instead of pot
furnaces, application of pipes-self-blowers, diamond instnmnts in process-
ing races and edges, cheaical polishing instead of .chine grinding and In-
usl polishing, and other.

The introduction of a aethod of pressing crystalware, including etc-ware, in
auto-tic presses with subsequent tiniahing with die-nod discs is a very in-
portant assure. his, besides everything else, gives an ecooooy of glass
and, therefore, also of nterials in short supply.

without such iaportant organizational and technical acasures the industry
would not have been able to ensure an increase in output, especially in that
whose nnutacture is highly couplicated. Along with this it should be noted

11‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that a liaited capital invest-ent is allocated for the developaant of cul-
tural and consuaer goods production.

An increaent in the output or airror good-was also ensured through an in-
creaae in the level or aechanization oi’ their production.

In any planta a great deal of attention is paid to the training of cadree,
eapecislly of metcnblowere and netera or the finishing techniques.

taunting] And what kind of deaanda are ads at present on the inroveaent
of the quality or conslner goods? what is done in this connection at the
enterpriaeat

[Inning-7 largo-scale aeaeuree to expand the aesortaent and iaprove the
quality or anode are carried out at the plants. Standarde and specifica-
tions for quality dinnerware and thereon bottles have been reviewed, and
require-ente in respect to their quality have been raised.

a: the whole the quality has undoubtedly iaproved, although auch ban to be
done yet.

In order to increase the reaponsibility of enterpriaee for the qulity of
goods, all newly created item, before their prices are fixed and they so
on sale, are enained in the republic and All-Union artistic councils, con-
siatine or art critics, artiats, and experts of industry and trade, Ons-
snab, Ooeplan, uesa Union of Artists, and other depart-cuts.

l
Intoveaent of the quality is witneeaed by the fact that lately any alase
and ceraaic wares have received high nrka at international exhibitions.
For era-pie, in 1976 at the international exhibition in Czechoslovakia,
where the producto of 6888, OUR, 153R, Hungary, Poland, Austria, and m
were shown, Soviet glans received four Grand Prix prizee and three gold and-
ala. At the interrepublic wholeeale fair, held in )bscow in thy, Ministry
of Trade noted a noticeable iaprnveaent in the quality and aeaortaent or
producte exhibited by the enterprises of the industry.

0! couree, a lot has been done. But it would be incorrect not to aention
ahortcoainga which are still there. Individual types of goods are of low
qmlity, the aseortaent oi’ nnuthctured anode does not aeet the needs of
cuatoaere to the full extent.

The queation or ilpnnvins the tint of pressed ite- has not been resolved,
especially at the Unhel'skiy Glassworke where they are unufactured in
large quantities. The delivery of proceesed quartz eande was mable to
resolve the prohlea. because the furnaces are heated by fuel oil as before.

In such circuastances, when the total nuieer of nnuibctured products has
considerably increased and consuer dennd for some type of goods has al-
ready been aet, iaproveaent or the quality of seeds becnass a vital tank.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be Ministry of Trade and the organizations of public dining are Justly
eoaplaining to our ministry about the insufficient output of tableware
sets for conplete table service and about the assortnent or airrore. its
orders of co-ercial organization. for individual types of products, such
as flower vases, fruit and salad bowls, pitchers, infants baths are not
fully satisfied either.

Such in general is the nature of the drawbacks. However, their reaoval in
any respects depends not only on the work of the sinistry and its termina-
tions, but on other ninistries and departnents as well.

Linestioy Hhat else, in your opinion, has to be done to iaprove the quali-
ty of goods and increase their output?

[inner-7 First of all it is necessary to organize the ntsrial and techni-
cal supply for the plants. I will give you several examles. 'ihus, trans-
fer of the Ursbel'skiy Glassworks to gas heating is being delayed because

of the absence of pipes. Owing to the low quality of polypropylene and poly-
ethylene, supplied by the enterprises of the Ministry of Cheaical Industry,
the outward appearance of thernos bottles does not neat high stanhrds.

Absolutely not enough cardboard is allocated, especially "cbrons-ersatr." for
boxing quality tableware and even highly artistic crystalware, which lowers
their nrhetabls appearance and nhss it difficult to pass certification for
the Seal of Quality.

The Ministry of hchine Building for Light and Food Industry and household
Appliances poorly supplies us with holds for nhing quality tablssare, on
which, as we know, in may respects depends its qmlity. In order to do
away with coaplainte about the unsatisfactory qulity of the surfnce of in-
dividual goods, we were conpelled to create our own enterprise for the .nu-
facture of mlds in the city of Kalinin and organize at a o‘er of plants
shops to produce then.

‘nre sale ainiatry did not fulfill the tasks of the linth Five-Year Plan of
organizing the production and delivery to our plants of equipasnt for the
nechanized mufacture of ate-ware. He are not supplied with this equip-
nent at the present tine either, so the min use of stenaare (acre than

100 nillion pieces) is Innufactured at the plants unually and this prevents
to increasing to output.

(hu- enterprises are experiencing great difficulties because of the insuffi-
cient allocation of niniua and hydrofluoric acid for the nauhcture of crys-
talware. The plants could increase the production of these goods consider-
ably, but for two years in a row now Goesnab and the men Ministries of Ion-
ferrous retail and cneaicai Industry have been allocating (and propose
to do so in 1979 these nterials to our ainietry on the saae level, and the

enterprises’ internal reserves of the econow of these nteriale are already
practically exhausted.

16
For OFFICIAL use our
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

In the ucood quortor the concom- or the lint-try bu can-mod in detail
the rooulto of work and the tub ot momma the output and knowing
tho qmtty of cultural, coon-r, and household good. And detonlnod con-

onto mura- to 0111:1th tho oxlottns shortening.

mun: Stnoyimt, 1W8

8502
$0: 1&3

1?
to: orncm use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MANPOUBR: LABOR, EDUCATION. DEMOGRAPNY

USSR MINISTER OF EDUCATION ADDRESSES ALL-UNION TEACHERS CONFERENCE

Moscow SOVBTSKAYA PEDACOCIKA in Russian No 9. 1978 pp 3~12

[Article by H. A. Prokof‘yev: "The Soviet School-Tha School of the Devel-
oped Socialist Society"]

[Text] He live in the great epoch of the developed socialist society. Over
two years have passed since the 15th Party Congress which outlined the

great tasks of the building of coununisn. Iaplenenting the party's deci-
sions. our people have reached new levels in the creation of the material
and technical foundations for communism. The country‘s econoeic and spiri-
tual potential has grown considerably. Constructive work is being done to
isplenent the 10th Five-Year Plan-a five-year plan of effectiveness and
quality. In the CPSU Central Committee Accountability Report to the 25th
Party Congress Conrade L. I. Brezhnev said that. "con-unist education pre-
sumes the steady improvement of the public education and vocational train-
ing system. This is particularly important today, under the conditions of
the scientific and technical revolution. It ascribes labor and, consequent-
ly. labor training a different nature. Re are doing a great deal in this
respect. However, that which has been and is being sccoapliehed does not

as yet resolve all problena in this area" ("Leninskin Kurson" [The Leninist
Course]. Vol 5. p 536).

It was on the basis of this fundamental conclusion that the party congress
doe-ed the further inproveaent of the entire general educational system
necessary. Last December the party Central Committee and USSR Council of
Ministers passed the decree "0n Improving Further the Training and Education
of Students in General Educational Schools and Their Labor Training." It
stipulates that the nain task of the general educational school is the sys-
teaatic iepleaentetion of the decisions of the 25th crsu Congress and the
stipulations contained in the new USSR Constitution on the develop-ant of
universal aandatory secondary education and the further improvement of the
training and education process whose final objective is to train comprehen-
sively developed builders of a cousunist society. The special attention of
workers in public education was directed to radically improving the labor
training. education. and vocational guidance of secondary-school students.

18
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the need for a decisive turn on the part of the school in training the

young people to work in material production. and to a substantiated choice

of profession. Topical problems of pedagogical education. the efficient
organization of the teachers' work and life. and work with leading cadres
occupy an important place in the decree. The CPSU Central Committee and
USSR Council of Ministers clearly defined the role and tasks of soviet. trade
union. and Komsomol organisations. economic organs. labor collectives.
scientific institutions. creative unions. and mass information organs in

the further advance-ant of the training and education of children and the
youth.

Today the great Lenin's behest of structuring school work in such a way as
to ensure the free and mandatory general and polytechnical training of all
children under 17. and the implementation of the principles of a uniform
labor school in which training and socially productive labor would be close-
ly linked and where the builders of the columnist society will be comprehen-
sively developed is being successfully implemented. The USSR has created
and is perfecting a uniform public education system which ensures the gen-
eral educational. vocational-technical. and specialized (secondary and high-
er) training of the citizens. It serves the molding of a communist outlook
in the Soviet people. It is one of the inportant factors in eliminating
major disparities between mental and physical labor and between town and
country. The conversion to universal mandatory secondary education of the
young generations has been completed in our country. This is an outstand-
ing success of the CPSU and the Soviet people achieved through the exten-
sive efforts of teachers, scientists. method workers. and public education
organizers. It offers convincing proof that in the developed socialist
society objective conditions are being created for the full revelation of
the natural gifts of all people and for molding the builders of a communist
society. and that concepts of the natural limitations of individual categories
of people and of the primacy of the biological factor in human development.
on the basis of which bourgeois education operates. preserving an elitist
educational system. are entirely groundless. In the course of the implemen-
tation of the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers decree
"0n Measures for Improving Further the work of Rural General Educstional
Schools." adopted on the basis of L. I. Breshnev's personal initiative, con-
ditions were created enabling the rural youth. on an equal footing with the
urban youth. opportunaly to acquire full secondary education.

The teaching staffs of schools and other training institutions are adamant-
ly working on the consolidation of this victory. Promoting an interest in
studies. arousing a thirst for new knowledge. inherent in man. and molding
the inner need for the steady increase of one's knowledge is a very ilpor-
tant task. Today training does not end at the stage of the all-embracing
eighth-grade school level. It is continued in the senior grades and the
vocational-technical and secondary specialized schools. In accordance with
the needs of the national economy and the individual interests and capabil-
ities of the students. millions of graduates of incomplete secondary
schools must be helped to choose a proper type of training for life. Upon

19
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

completion of eighth-grade graduation and ninth-grade enrollment, the
teachers' collectives must pay particular attention to leading the graduates
along the various channels of further training. Achievements could be con-
solidsted only by steadily improving the teachers' pedagogical skills. Many
thousands of teachers who can teach in such s way that all their students
successfully master the foundations of the subject taught are toiling in our
midst. These are people with extensive erudition. infinitely dedicated to
their profession, great masters of their work. and exacting toward students
and, above all, toward themselves. The development in secondary school
students of a responsible attitude toward studies is an important factor
which determines the success of the task. Those who fail to experience the
difficulties of surmounting ignorance.ponder over an intricate problem. con-
sider profoundly social phenomena. or show obstinacy. organisation. and per-
sistence in understanding the laws governing social and natural processes
cannot become an educated person. It is indeed true that "the root of learn-
ing is bitter but its fruit is sweet." The secondary specialized schools
and secondary vocational-technical schools are of great importance in train-
ing specialists' cadres and resolving the problems of universal secondary
education. There are 4.7 nillion students attending b.312 technical col-
leges. Nearly 1.7 million students are attending 3.374 secondary vocational-
tethnical schools. These systems. the latter in particular, have been ex-
tensively developed in recent years.

Discussing the problem of universal mandatory secondary education, we must
bear in mind that a relatively large number of young people are employed in
industry, agriculture. and other organizations, young people who. having
graduated from incomplete secondary schools. have been unable to continue
their education for a variety of reasons. In the past 10 years over 7 mil—
lion young people have received full secondary education in evening and
correspondence schools for working youth. An extensive movement entitled
"A Secondary Education for Every working Person" has developed. An ever
larger number of enterprises are including in their social development
plans and socialist competition conditions indicators on the training of
working youth. At one point the opinion prevailed that gradually the activ-
ities of schools offering continuous training should be stopped, since the
young reinforcements are entering production work fromday time schools with
a secondary education. However. this ignored the circumstance that there
still are many workers lacking secondary education. Also ignored was the
fact that such schools have been called upon to play an important and ever
growing role as centers for organising the assistance for the acquisition
of knowledge. contributing to the implementation of the principle of con-
tinuous education of the working population. The CPSU Central Counittee
and USSR Council of Hinisters direct us to bring as close as possible cor-
respondence and evening schools to enterprises. to continue the study of
the foundations of the sciences with raising work skills, and ensure the
further improvement of the training and education process and. consequently.
the quality of the knowledge acquired by graduates of such schools.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL?

Under present circumstances secondary education is a civic duty and a vital
need for every young Soviet person. Helping the young people to fulfill
their duty is an important obligation of the educational syetcn. the
schools. and the individual teachers. The school teaching staffs have done
a great deal of work to improve the organisation and content of the training-
education process. Over the past decade the three-year primary education
stage has been established. As a result of improvements in the content of
education scientific courses have now become saturated with modern scientif-
ic concepts and their ideological and educational functions have been inten-
sified. Our schools offer a secondary education over a period of 10 to 11
years. Its scientific level is adequately high. Experi-ental and labora-
tory facilities and training classrooms, specially equipped. have strengthened
and become a mandatory part of all secondary schools. Positively assessing
this entire tremendous work invested in improving curriculuma.textbooks.

and method works used in school practice, we deem it necessary to focus in
the future the main attention on the profound interpretation within the
training process of the basic laws governing the development of society and
nature. Our general educational school does not train specialists-mathe-
maticisns. historians. chemists. or philologists. It molds comprehensively
and harmoniously developed individuals. Neither the existence of strictly
specialized knowledge in a narrow area not the formal and insufficiently
profound discussion of "fashionable hypotheses" could compensate for true
education and culture.

The abundance of new ideas and discoveries which not only becoee accessible
to the specialists but reach the people extensively demand of the school to
develop in its students the habits of independent study and analysis of the
new. At the sane tine, this strongly emphasizes the need for strengthening
basic knowledge. Unless a conceptual base has been laid the steadily aris-
ing political and social events would be hard to interpret. Failure to be-
come deeply familiar with the basic laws governing the world of natural
phenomena. in their general educational neaning, would lake new developments
in technology and science be conceived as miracles rather than as the result
of the systematic penetration of the human mind into the secrets of nature.
Knowledge of the new cannot be conceived without laying solid scientific
foundations. Self-education habits may be acquired only through the exten-
sive knowledge of the laws governing nature and society. Currently school
curriculumsarebeing reviewed. The deletion of excessively complicated and
secondary material will make it possible to free time for mastering basic
concepts. The amended curriculumsshould bediscussed extensively after
which the necessary changes should be eade in training and Iethod publica-
tions and didactic aids. Conversion to free use of textbooks should be ini-
tiated. A plan has been formulated for the publication of improved text-
books written on the basis of contemporary educational ideas. The struggle
for effectiveness and quality. as a program for raising an entire genera-
tion of Soviet people. as mentioned by L. I. Brezhnev at the 18th Komsomol
Congress. lust be fully revealed in the school training process.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet pedagogical science and practice have on extensive arsenal of ways
and means of training whose skillful use always yields the necessary results.
However. they neither include nor could include means which would bring
about total and unconditional success in all practical cases. handled by

any teacher. whatever the grade or subject matter. In this case everything
depends on the teacher. on his knowledge of the training and education
possibilities of the content and the ways and means of training. and on his
understanding of the mentality of the student. K. D. Ushinskiy himself

said that science and art organically blend in the activities of the educa-
tion worker. This thought is convincingly confirmed by the bearers of lead-
ing experience--educatore who are able to achieve maximum results by apply-
ing a variety of methodical means based on specific circumstances and all
existing factors. Methodology is a specific and equal branch of pedagogy.
It directly links theory with practice. Combining the knowledge acquired

in a specific field of science. and data pertaining to age and pedagogical
psychology with its specific laws. it formulates the ways and means for

the most effective training of school students. The pedagogues must in-
crease their contribution to the improvement of educational and training
methods. They must profoundly and comprehensively bring to light progres—
sive teaching experience and actively contribute to its dissemination and
practical utilization. The strengthening of methodical support of the
training process should contribute to the profound mastery of the founda-
tions of science by all students. That is why the appeal of Volgogradskaya
Oblast teachers "excellent preparation for each class, contemporary methods,
and high quality.“ deserves the broadest possible support and further dis-
semination.

The December 1977 CPSU Central Committee and USSR COuncil of Ministers
decree emphasizes the need to see to it that knowledge gained in school be-
comes the solid foundations for a Marxist-Leninist outlook. Soviet patriot-
ism. and proletarian internationalism. Now. when a student spends 10 to

12 years in school or in other types of training institutions, he must join
the working family with fully formed foundations of a Marxist—Leninist out-
look. The proper organization of training in the humanities is a mandatory
prerequisite for attaining this goal. The history of the development of
human society from most ancient times to the present and the laws governing
changes of social systems are studied in the Soviet schools. Concepts on
the capitalist system and its inevitable doom and of the appearance of
socialism and the laws governing its growth into a communist system. and of
the role man plays in this process are taught at the final training stage,
in the social science course. The course in literature. through its specif-
it means which combine the impact on the mental and emotional areas success-
fully contribute to the molding of communist views and convictions and to
the moral molding of the individual. The study of economic geography of
foreign countries and the USSR. and of the foundations of the state and the
law contributes to acquiring a knowledge of the laws governing social devel-
opment. The humanities play a particularly important role in shaping a
Herxist-Leninist outlook. That is why it is adamantly necessary to avoid

a formal attitude toward their study. This offers a broad field of work

for the authors of textbooks. method workers. and teachers. Training and
upbringing must be corbined particularly closely above all in these subjects.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Filli lWFHIIAI. "SH UNLY

Many schools have organized the study of Lenin's theoretical legacy on a
well-considered basis. The All-Union Practical Science Conference on "Study
of V. l. Lenin's Life. Activities. and Burke and of CPSU Documents in Secon-
dary School" was of major importance to the dissemination and su-Iatien of
gained experience. Comrade L. l. Brezhnev. (2980 Central Co-ittee general
secretary. addressed a special letter to those attending the conference.
assessing this work done by the school as the basis for ideological and
political education and as a powerful means for shaping a Marxist-lenient
outlook. we must most firmly emphasise the exceptional significance of the
study in school of the most important party and government documents. The
tremendous amount of experience gained in the struggle for' mature socialism.
stained up from the positions of Marxist-lenient science. and the roads fol-
lowed by the country in its progress toward cos-unis- have been defined in
the materials related to the preparations for and celebration of the 60th
anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution. the new USSR Consti-
tution. and Comrade L. l. Brezhnev's speeches. L. I. Brezhnev's works
"Malaya Zemlya" and "Vosroahdeniye" [Rebirth] provide the teachers with
extremely rich material for developing in the adolescents a life-bringing
feeling of Soviet patriotism. loyalty to the Cesmunist Party. and under-
standing of its unbreakable ties with the people.

It is impossible to mold a Harxist-Leninist outlook without profoundly
mastering the foundations of the natural sciences. The ways for the prac-
tical utilization of natural laws clearly reveal the class nature of the
society and prove the laws of historical materialism. In its struggle
against imperialism. world socialism acts as the leading progressive force
of the epoch. asserting in life the age-old expectations of all mankind.
It is very important. therefore. for the teachers of natural-mathematical
subjects to make skillful use of the rich opportunities inherent in such
disciplines in shaping an outlook.

Particular attention should be paid to improving the teaching of the Russian
language as the language of international consultation of the peoples of
the USSR the pull towards which is tremendous. Interesting practical
science conferences on problems of the study of the Russian language in

the national schools were held in Tashkent. Baku. and many other cities.
The pedagogical institutes of the RSPSR. Ukrainian SSR. and Belorussian
SSR are providing selfless aid to the fraternal republics in training the
necessary cadres. Public education workers. method workers. and pedagogues
must adopt energetic measures to sum up acquired positive experience. They
must help in the writing of good textbooks. training aids. and didactic
materials. and in upgrading the skills of Russian language teachers. The
study of the Russian language in normal schools for elementary grade teach-
ers aust be improved further. The positive experience gained in teaching
the Russian language in pro-school institutions should be disseminated.

Upgrading the ideological and educational function of the school is a many-
fsceted process. Unity of word and action. intolerance toward manifesta-
tions of bourgeois ideology and anti-social phenomena. a respectful attitude
toward elders and parents. modest behavior. sympathetic attitude toward

23
FOR orncuu. use 0qu
FOR OFVlClAL USE ONLY

one's cosredea. the aspiration to cone promptly to the aid of people. and
infinite loyalty to the homeland and the Communist Party are qualities which
nuat be pronoted through the entire school system. The task of turning
knowledge into a neans for noral advanceaent and to conbine knowledge with
norality. subordinating thee to the objectives of the hereonious development
of non is one of the tasks facing the Soviet school and one of .ne objec-
tives of universal secondary education.

The CPSU Central Cornittee and USSR Council of Ministers have drawn our
attention to the existence of aajor shortcomings in the labor training and
upbringing of school students. Under the conditions of a universal nenda-
tory secondary education the present organization of labor training. up-
bringing, and vocational guidance is inconsistent with the stricter require-
nents governing social production and scientific and technical progress.
The CPSU Central Cosaaittee and USSR Council of Ministers have demanded of
the school decisively to improve the training of young people for work in
material production and the substantiated choice of profession. This task
has a nunber of aspects. It in inportant for the topic of labor-and the
greatness of the working people to be heard whatever the subject and in
the course of all education measures fron the first to the senior grades.
The labor topic must be vividly enbodied in the poems studied by children.
the cowoaitions of senior classnen. and in the study of history and geo-
graphy. Labor is the motive force of progress. The laws of physics.
chenistry. and biology are implenented in industry end agriculture through
hunen labor. School walls must be decorated with the portraits of noted
workers. nastera of high yields. and school elumi who have pleased the
country with their high production successes. The school students nust
gain the necessary idea on the work of a sponsoring enterprise and on the
labor problems resolved by the working people of the rayon. oblest. or
republic. The effectiveness of labor classes must be upgraded. The labor
education curriculum have already been reworked on the basis of acquired
experience and their drafts are being published for purposes of comrehen-
aive discussion. In the i-ediete future all eighth-grade and secondary
schools nuat develop their material and technical bass for labor education.
covering first to eighth-grade students.

The organization of labor education in the senior grades requires particu-
lar attention. Experience has shown that it would be expedient to base it
on the facilities of training shops at enterprises, interscholastic

tra hing-production combines. workshops. nearby vocational-technical schools
and individual school workshops. and student agricultural brigades. Thus.
Moscow schools have virtually completed the conversion of labor training
on an industrial base. Eighty percent of senior-grade students are under-
going their trsining in 60 interscholestic combines totalling 186 shops.
186 classrooms. and 6 laboratories. In the capital 532 enterprises have
their own structural. subdivisions in such combines and have assigned 885
master instructors selected among production workers. Each codine offers
10 to is different types of training based on the econonic require-ants of
the rayons for personnel. Thia makes it possible to nest adequately the

2';
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interests and wishes of the students in choosing a skill in accordance with
their inclinations. The combines have set up 29 vocational guidance offices
and 5 labor glory museums. Self-management by the school students has been
successful: A brigade leaders' council has been set up and socialist com-
petition organised. Nearly one-half of last year's trainee graduates are
working and learning the field of their chosen skill. This method is being
extensively developed in Voroshilovgredskaya Oblast. Ukrainian SSR. Rural
interscholastic combines are being developed. particularly in the Ukraine.
Belorussis. Uzbekistan. and a number of RSFSR krays and oblasts. A greater
number of rural school students are participating in agricultural brigades
and school forestry projects.

Addressing the 18th Komsomol Congress. Cosrade L. l. Brezhnev. CPSU Central
Committee general secretary and USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium chairman.
highly rated the initiative of the graduates of Kostroms rural schools.
Yesterday’s school students are new grain growers. livestock breeders. or
mechanisers. engaged in outstanding noble work. The decision of rural
school graduates in the oblast to continue working in the fields and live-
stock ferns of their native kolkhoses and sovkhozes was a result prepared
by the entire training and education activities conducted by these schools.
here. along with solid and deep knowledge. the students develop love for
the land and respect for fern labor. Training in the foundations of mech-
anization. livestock breeding. and crop graying. and work in experimental
training plots and as members of student production brigades convinced the
boys and girls deliberately to choose rural work as a career. All in all.
considerable experience has been acquired. The task is to offer all school
students the opportunity. within the immediate future. to attend a course
of intensified labor training. This will call for the creation of new
training shops. interscholastic cosbines. and the use of other efficient
practically tried forms of training. Many enterprises are effectively
helping the schools in this important project. Those who think of the
future of s sovkhoz or plant must think of the schools as well. The country
has nnny rayons. oblasts. and republics which. in the light of the CPSU
Central Co-ittee and Oomcil of Ministers decree, have earmarked measures
to create by the end of this five-year plan the necessary base for labor
training.

The development and improvement of labor training calls for enhancing the
prestige of labor instructors. Their lessons must be such as to accustom
the young people to work and to inspire their active participation in the
building of comaunism. They play a particular role in shaping in the young
generation character features such as industriousness and respect for the
working people. and in developing the necessary practical habits and skills.
The sin of the entire education staff to promote labor education and a

good labor organization. paralleled by the necessary explanatory vork.
should firmly encourage every graduate to master a specific skill. Each of
our alumni sust develop a stable interest in a certain type of labor so
that. ismediately following graduation or after additional vocational
training. he could successfully work. in material production above all. The

25
ran omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

result of this entire work should be gauged. above all, by the speed with
which our graduates begin their labor activities and the extent to which
their work skills are consistent with the needs of the national economy and
the training they acquired in school.

The task of molding a harmoniously developed individual presumes the close
and organic link between curricular and extracurricular occupations. Activ-
ities in school must be undatorily supplemented with a planned system of
extracurricular measures and with the organization of comprehensive activ-
ities within the collective. for it is precisely within the collective that
the habits of a highly moral behavior are shaped and consolidated. Let us
note in this connection that in the last decade boarding and semi-boarding
schools have become widespread. in the course of which the children spend

8 to 10 hours or more in the collective. Extended day schools and groups
are attended by 8.6 million students. Boarding schools of the general and
specialised variety and other boarding institutions are attended by 1.1
million children while 1.3 million children live in boarding facilities
attached to schools. Many students join circles and enroll in sports and
music courses. and attend palaces and houses of pioneers and school students
or stations for young technicians and naturalists. Over seven million
children are under the influence of extracurricular institutions. We have
a number of societies of young technicians. chemists. geologists. and
astronomers. Millions of school students participate in the "Hope Start.”
"Suncr Lightning." or "Eaglet" military-sports games. and the All-Union
Tourist Trip Expedition "The USSRnMy homeland." The CPSU Central Co-ittee
and USSR Council of Ministers decision on the schools directs us to the
further development and advencanent of extracurricular forms of work with
the children.

The pioneer and student Kouomol organisations play an important role in
the co-unist education of the children and in premoting in them feelings
of responsibility for collective affairs. their own behavior. and their
attitude toward their obligations. Their current tasks are defined in the
decisions and documents of the 18th Komeomol Congress. The Soviet teachers
deem it their direct duty to give all youslole old and assistance to the
pioneer and Komsoml organizations in the co-unist education of school
youth. In the new school year students' comittees will be elected in all
eighth-grade and secondary schools to help in the development of united
collectives as an effective means for ideological and moral education. The
upbringing of an active individual aware of his civic duty to society is
inposaihle without active participation in social activities. The school
must accustom the children to engage in organizational work.

In our country concern for the growing generation is a canon, nationwide
cause. now. what the party and the governsent have faced the schools with
new responsible tasks. the alliance among school. family. and society must
be particularly strong. It is impossible to achieve success in labor educa-
tion and vocational guidance of school children or in any other matter
separately from the family or the production process. The councils for

26
ran orncw. use ONLY
FOR OFHCIM. USE ONLY

family and school cooperation at enterprises are assuming eve: greater
Importance. Parents' comaittees are successfully operating in many schools.
They help to organise various circles. studios. and labor associations. They
help families needing particular attention. Further energizing of the work
of parents' coauittees will be a good support for teachers and educators.
There is practically no family in our country directly or indirectly not in-
volved with schools. Forty aillion school students have fathers. mothers.
grandfathers. grandmothers. and other relatives. Bearing this in sind we
cannot be satisfied with the scope of adult pedagogical education. we hope
that the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences will complete very soon its
work on an interestingly planned series of books on the family education of
children. adolescents. and young men and women. Re are confident that our
mass information media will address themselves more extensively to such
matters.

Children's ore-school institutions play an important role in the communist
education of the growing generation. Thanks to the tireless concern of the
party and the government our country has set up a broad system of pre-
school children's public education. At the present time about 13 million
children attend nurseries, kindergartena. and combines. last school year
about two million kindergarten pupils entered the first grade. and most of
them successfully completed their first school year. Teachers note that
these children are distinguished by their inquisitiveness. activeneas. and
ability to work within the collective. They have developed certain habits
for school work and behavioral standards. Many teaching staffs of schools
and pro-school institutions have organised close contacts contributing to
the successful solution of problems of continuity in the upbringing of
children of pre-school and school age and in organizing work with the
parents. Yet. reality demands considerable improvements in the organisation
of public pro-school education. Measures to strengthen the health of the
children. promote their physical development. and create in all collectives
an atmosphere of concerned and responsive attitude toward every child and
his individual characteristics must be intensified. It is important to con-
tinue to isprove the efforts to mold in every child. since early childhood.
the habits and skills of organised behavior, active interest in useful
creative work. and industriouaaess. The practical training of the children
for school must be intensified. paying particular attention to the develop-
ment of pre-school children's thinking and speech processes.

The Communist Party has invariably ascribed great importance to the people's

teacher. The Soviet teaching corps is large. The total number of teachers
in secondary schools is nearing 6.5 nillion. The teachers' educational
level and skills are rising steadily.

The high appreciation for the work of the teacher has been expressed through
the establishment of the honorary title of "People's Teacher of the USSR."

awarded to school teachers. instructors in vocational-technical schools.
workers in training-educational. method. and other institutions and educa-
tion organs for particular merits in the training and coamunist upbringing

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of children and young people and for outstanding activities in the field of
public education. The entire Soviet public welcomed with great satisfac-
tion the decision to award the title of Hero of Socialist Labor to L6 edu-
cators and the awarding of orders and medals to s large group of leading
teachers.

Life feces the teachers and public education organs with new responsible
tasks. The aodern teacher is an able educator, a great expert in his sub—
ject. a caster of the art of inventively presenting scientific truths. pro-
aoting through his own life end work among the youth the moral principles
of coamunisn. He must chow laxiaua concern in creating for every teacher
all the necessary conditions for his professional growth and increased
knowledge of Marxist-Leniniet theory. The movement launched by hoscow
teachers under the slogan of "Every Educator With higher Political Educa-
tion" is worthy of approval. Teachers' schools oust be lectured more ex-
tensively by experienced cducetorsonaaters of their work, scientists. and
public figures. Currently qualification upgrading faculties in vuz's for
individual categories of education workers are becoming ever more popular.
however, such faculties need constant attention. They should be considered
an important connection linking the teachers' V02 and practical work. The
teachers expect workers in the field of educational publications to broaden
the publishing of new subscription series of method and teaching aids and

to improve the presentation of the material. They would like method journals
to lend their space more frequently to experienced teachers. method workers.
and leading scientists.

In recent years pedagogical training in the country has changed substantial-
ly. It has become more effective and enrollment in daytiee departments of
pedagogical schools in Siberia, the Far East, and Kazakhstan has increased.
The normal schools have developed the training of non-specialised educators
for children's pro-school institutions. Enrollment in primary education
faculties has risen. This very year a number of pedagogical institutes will
begin to train teachers in history and social science with the additional
subject of "Foundations of the Soviet State and law." The systea of cor-
respondence pedagogical education has been redirected. The structure of

the psychological-education subjects has been modernized substantially.
Particular attention is paid to'improving the teaching of basic sciences

and seeking the most effective means for their study. The number of special-
ised courses has been increased and pedagogical training has become more
productive. As a rule. each teachers' V02 assigns its students to practical
training in rural schools. Unouestionsbly, this will promote the psychological
readiness of the future teacher to work in the countryside. Rowever. a
number of problems and unresolved matters remain in the training of special-
late. A nuabor of critical remarks have been addressed to pedagogical insti-
tutes and universities. criticizing them for the poor training of their
students in education work. In this connection we should think of intro-
ducing within the psychological-pedagogical disciplines a mandatory special-
ized course on "Education Uork Hethods.” The selection of students for
pedagogical schools aust be improved further. Education VUI'a active in

28
roe orncm. use can
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

professional education guidance are acting properly by organising so-called
future teacher faculties. promoting in school students love for the teach-

ing profession and actively selecting students anong the future graduates.
boys in particular.

The historical decisions of the 25th Party Congress and the 6980 Central
Committee and USSR Council of Ministers decree "0n Inproving Further the
Training and Education of Students in General Educational Schools and
Preparing Then for Labor" have opened new outstanding possibilities to the
Soviet school. The Communist Party and Soviet govern-eat have created all
the necessary conditions for the training and education of the growing gen-
erations as ideologically convinced patriots and interaationalists worthy
of our epoch. having mastered to perfection the foundations of the sciences
and labor skills. and ready to defend the historical gains of the Great
October Revolution. The Soviet schools and teachers will always actively
work for the good of our hoseland and do everything possible to ieplesent
the party's ideas and sake their contribution to the great cause of con-
Iunist building.

COPYRIGHT: "Sovetskaya pedagogika". 1978

5003
C80: 1823

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WMBR: LABOR. EDUCATION. DEMOGRAPIIY

BOOK 038031338 WMIC PROM-DIS 01’ THE PMILY
lioecov omrmlssnrz PROBLDIY 8811’! in Rueeien 1978 pp 1-6. 208

[Book by the Scientific Council of “Socioecono-ic Prohleue of the Popoletion,"
reeponeible editor 1'. l. Ryehoehkin]

[uterpte] Title Pege:

Title: WPICRESKIYE rnoaum SM'I (Do-ogrephic Problem of
the Penily)
Author: Scientific Council of “Socioeconouic Problem of the Po-

puletion). reeponeihle editor 1‘. h. Ryehuehkin
Publieher: Itdetel’etvo Neuke

Plece end year of puhlicetion: noecw. 1978
Signed to Preee Due: 28 Pehruery 1978
Ito-her of Copiee Puhliehed: 3.700
Ill-her of Pegee: 208
Brief Deecription:

Thie hook is the firet topicel collection of the ”hobby denogrefii" [Proh-
lene of holography] eeriee. The mnogreph enelyue the demogrephic. econo-ic
end sociel composition of the fe-ily. It develops the concept of e fe-ily-
hy-fenily epproech to etudying the well-being of the popoletion. en epproech
bend on the neceeeity of undying the fenily in e dyneeic, in the prooeee of
its vitel ectivity. The work provider en enelyeie of the demrephic coupo-
eition of lodern urhen end rurel feliliee end deaonetretee the necceeity of
tekin; the deeogrephic end eocioecononic composition of Eeniliee into ec-
count when plenning homing conetruction. The hook ie intended (or deno-
grephere. eociologiete end e broed reue of ecientiete end precticel workere
concerned vith problem of lehor reeourcee end houeio; conetroction.

Introduction:

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The family is the primary socioeconomic cell of society; in it. the popula-
tion is reproduced. children are brought up and socialized. the structure of
the population's needs and incones is shaped, and consular needs are met.

it is for precisely this reason that the family has attracted the attention
of a broad range of specialists -- economists and denographers, ethnograph-
ists and lawyers, sociologists and pedagogues, scientists and practical work-
ers. ‘

The family becene the subject of thorough study in the late l950’e. in con-
nection with the development of housing construction. Research on the fanily
became significantly more active after the All-Union 1959 Census. vhosc pri-
nary materials contain extensive interaction on the sociodenographic compo-
sition of families. Their processing enabled us to reveal changes which had
occurred since the preceding census in family distribution by nunber of mem-
bers. with regard to the nuber of single people and people living in fami-
lies. and it enabled us to study the features of the age-sex conposition of
these eegeenta and other eociodenogrsphic characteristics of the population.

In the 1960’s and early 1970‘s. special sample surveys vere conducted to
study individual aspects of the sociodemogrephic structure of faailiea, their
econonic status, and trends in their foreation and development. The task vas
set of working out methods and nodels for forecasting fenily size and compo-
sition. The All-Union 1970 Census provided extensive information on the fam-
ily structure of tho population; vhen that information was processed, faeilies
were grouped by demographic type, determinined by the specifics of blood re-
lations. for the first time since the All-Union 1926 Census.

The urgency of researching family structure and functions and trends in its
formation and develop-nut is increasing in connection vith the devclopment
and implementation of the long-range program and socioeconomic development
of socialist society.

Raising the level of well-being of the people. improving their working and
living conditions. and perfecting the socialist way of life are the center
of attention for the Cos-unist Party and the govern-ant of our country. The
materials of the 25th CPSU Congress point out that: "The econoay of the de-
veloped socialist society, with its powerful production and scientificotech-
nical potential. enables us to use increasingly extensively the advantages
and opportunities of socialist society, and in particular. to define in the
draft of Basic Directions an extensive lpro ram of social development and a
better standard of living for the peoplel." This general line was concre-
tired in the State Plan for Developnnt of the National Economy in 1976-1980,
which outlined: expanding the proportion of consumption in the national in-
come. increasing real per-capita incomes. wage increases, developing housing
and nunicipal services construction, perfecting the public health and social
security system. and increasing social consumption funds, including improving

l. "ﬂaterialy XXV s"yerda ms" [Materials of the 25th CPS" Congress]. Po-
litisdat. l976. p no.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR orncw. USE ONLY

pension security end introducing pertinlly-psid leeves of ebsence to working
wonen to cere for children until they reach one year of ege.

For the first ties. the 25th 9’80 Congress set the tesk of working out en
effective deeogrephic policy. One ieportent upset of thet policy is to
create conditions which enable working woeen who ere eothers to successfully
coebine the functions or orgenieing the household. cering for feeily eeebers
end bringing up children with ective perticipetion in sociel production. The
creetion of e specisl USSR Supreme Soviet cos-ission on problees of ieprovim
the working end living conditions of women in our country testifies to the
ettention peid in the USSR to the fenily end to the working end living con-
ditions of working wo-en. The progren of reieing the level of well-being of
the Soviet people end inplenentetion of en effective denogrephic policy de-
lend the developsaent end inpleeentetion of concrete socioeconomic eeesures.
‘i'hey touch verioue strete of the population -- wonen end een, those working
end pensioners, children end the eged. end consequently the feeilies of which
they ere neebers es well. Given the development of concrete socioeconoeic
neeeures end in «dating their effectiveness, it is necessery to study the
fenily structure of the populstion, the trends sheping fenily sire end coe-
position, end the distribution of individual populetion segments by fenily
deuogrephic type. The coepiletion of e longorenge eociel development pro-
gren oust be preceded by denogrephic forecests es en insepereble pert of
socioeconoeic forecssts.

txperience in fenily rceeerch end its specific results ere increesingly the
subject of scientific discussion. The All-Union Syeposiun on Deeogrephic
Problems of the Peeily. which wee convened on the initietive of the USSR
Acedeey of Sciences Scientific Council "Socioecoeoeic Problems of the Popu-
letion." the Centrel Bcononic-Hetheeetics Institute of the USSR Acede-y of
Sciences. the Institute of :conoeics end Plenning of the Amenien 888 Gos-
plen end Yereven Stete University, and held in Yereven in the fell of 1975.
use devoted to these questions.2 Representetives of core then 1.0 scientific
research institutions end theirs of higher ecedeeic inetitutione. es well es
plenning end stetietice orgene workers, perticipeted in it. Seen 6: reports
on e breed renge of deeogrephic problems of the feeily were presented et the

eyepos inn.

1. 'ﬂeteriely XXV s"yeede 1088," p 73.

2. See: "Vecsoyurnyy sinporiue po deeogreficheskin problem see'i. Vyp.
l. Sotsiel'no-deeogreficheskiye probleey foreiroveniye i reevitiye seeey.
Vyp. 11. Probleey nodeliroveniye seneynykh structur. Vyp. 1n. Deeogrefi-
cheskoye povedeniye se-ey" [All-Union Synposiu- on Deeogrephic Problem
of the Peeily. Pert I. Sociodeeogrephic Problem of Penily Porestion
end Developennt. Pert 11. Problem of Modeling Peeily Structures.
Pert Ill. Deeogrephic lehevior of Pseiliee], Yereven. 197$.

32
For omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Symposium participants'concludsd that the scat promising lines of scientific
research on the fnrsily. from the scientific and practical points of view.
were the following: a) studying the influence of socioeconomic factors on
family formation and development; b) researching the social, economic and
psychological aspects of the demographic behavior of families; c) developing
dynamic models of family structures; d) formulating methods of scientific
forecnsting for family site and composition.

within the framework of these lines, broadening and deepening theoretical da-
velopmsnt of the essence of the modern family as an institution and prospects
for its development, studying the structure of family needs as a factor in

its denographic behavior, and also researching the interrelationship of the
family's reproductive function with its other functions during the course of
social development merit special attention. Revealing the internal ties and
interactions between the system of population reproduction indicators as an
aggregate of families and an aggregate of individuals. including the influence
of migration processes on the family structure of the population within regions,

merits attention.

This eonograph is based on the reports and addresses given at that symposium
which dealt with questions of the methodology of researching problems of wall-
hcing from the positions of the family and the modern demographic structure
of faeiliee in the USSR; changes in the incomes, needs and consumption of

the family during the course of its vital activity; the evolution of family
requirements as to children ~- one of the most ieportant factors shaping
family sire and composition; the socioeconomic functions of housing and fa”
turee of the structure of migrant families; individual aspects of demographic
policies in the European socialist countries and methods of researching and
forecasting family composition.

The chapters in the monograph differ in the statistic been used and the re-
search tasks. Some rely primarily on data from sample surveys, others on
All-Union Census materials. Some chapters analyze specific statistical ma-
terial and study trends in changes in family structure and needs, and others
present research methodology. however. all approach the family as an inte-
gral, developing organism and study the deep reasons for family formation
and development. The creation of adequate methods of forecasting family
size and composition and the development of scientifically substantiated
measures in the field of socioeconomic policy are impossible without study-
ing the dynamics. structure and functions of the family.

Discussion of the questions posed in the monograph. of their scientific and
practical significance, and of providing the statistical information is es-
pecially urgent in connection with preparations for the All-Union l979 Census.

The eonogreph was written by an authore' collective: introduction and Chap-
ter 1 -- Doctor of Economic Sciences N. ll. Rimashevslteya; Chapter 11 -- Can-

didates of Bconomic Sciences A. c. Volkov and I. A. Cereal-ova; Chapter 111
-- V. Bouhichek (CSSR); Chapter 1‘! .. Candidate of Architectural Sciences

33
FOR orrtcm. us: omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. K. Kartaehove; Chapter v -- Doctor of Economic Sciencee 8. K. Veen'yeva
end V. I. Luktne; Chepter V1 -- Candidate of Scone-1c Sciencee It. A. select-
kayo; Chapter VII -- Doctor of Beonoutc Sciencea A. Ih. lenpetyan; Candi-
datee of Icahn-1c Sciences 1.. A. Coluh and S. A. Karapetyen, and A. V. Shahh-
peronyen.

Table of Contenta:
IntrduttonﬁotO'OOOOOIODOOQOIOOOOOOOIDOOOI...01.000.000.00...0.6.0.000. 3
Chapter I: The Family and In Proepertty............................... 7
Chapter ‘11: 0883 Fatty 3m and Coupoattion............................ 29

Chapter In: Vain; Life-Cycle Hodele to Study the Structure of
Penny Coneuptioh Expenduuru........................... 77

chapter IV: the hotly end llouatng..................................... 97
Chapter V: The Family and Htgretton....................................1M
Chepter V1: Model of e Modern Family in European cm Huber-lotions . . .166
Chapter VII: Block Hodel of a Penny Structure end Ite Applicetton.....180
tomcat: Itdetel‘etvo "ﬂuke". 1978

11052
680: 1823 END

3"
FOR OPFICIAI. USE ONLY