APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-ROP02-00880R000100030001-6

UN
, - IND 'RIBL RFFRIRS
1 NERO" 1979 '(FOUO 3/79)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030001-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8298
1 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030001-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ”RS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion marl: and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. 'rimes within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIWS

JPRs publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Infomtin Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recossnended that the .196 umber, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Coverment hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.3. Coverment Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Washington, 0.0.
201.02.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 6 Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North clebe Road, Arlington. Virginia 22201.
”It”
“000?
v n

MW ‘Wmm _—
'IlO
1 March 1979

.mnsunous on mm more womc m INDUSTRIAL
mans, (9000 3/79)

      

- Peal-ole. (heal-ac Nana no

Joint Publicationa Reaearch Service
1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

n. Speech. Onealaaclea Nam and Menu

  

        
    
   
     
   
      
      
       
   
      
   
    

 
   

I8. 1' al la a Faded

Ae above

The aerial report contains articles on economic. theory, organization, planning
and management; Iajor agree-cute on and develop-eat of trade within can and

outaide the Bloc; articlea on all aapecta of the nteriala, aarvicea, nachine,
electronica, and preciaion equip-ant induatriea; and concepta and attain-ante
in agriculture, foraacry. and the food induatry.

   

_L International Affaira Bconouica
__Albania . technological
_lulgaria

Czechoalovakia

__Baat Ger-any

:llungary

_ Poland

__ Romania

_ Yusoalavia

m. Milka/o'er!“ Tat-e

Hl~l~|

  

31.. team unma- SC. 131

may ate-e00
For Official Uae Only.

Lieited Number of Copies Available Fran JPRS. W“

m “'0." .7.) , VICWDC 0.00""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas usage
1 March 1979
TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Ecouomc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(P000 3/79)
CONTENTS PAGE

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Poland's Participation in cm Multilateral Venturea
Revieved
(Tadeua: Hrzaazczyk; BROWSIIBSKOYE
SOTRUDNICRESTVO STRAN-CKLBNOV 83V. No 3, 1978).........

Pollen-Soviet Production Specialization and Cooperation
Diecueaed-
(Jan Ptaazek; ROWICRESKOYE MWICHBSTVO
sruu-cmsuov 52V. 30 3. 1978)

Electronization of Poland 'e (to-unication Network cm
Cooperation Noted
(Edvard Kwalczyk; EKOMICBBSKOYE SO‘I'RUDNICRBSTVO
STMR-CIILENOV 88". No 3, l978)..........................

Poland'a Participation in can Invention Progress Noted
(Jacek Szonanaki: WICRESKOYE SOTRUDNICRES‘NO
smu-cmuov SEV. No 3. 1978)

CZECIIOSLOVAKIA

Need for Rational Use of Puala and Energy Streaaeo
(1mm PM, Aug 78).

Govern-ent Progran. by Slavoj Odehnal, Joaef Kootnik
Service Induatriee, by Bola-1r 'l'ejnicky
Reasona for Iligh the in CSSR. by Eugen Zunko

HST CM

Kcononic Probleu Seen Leading to Refor-
(CAPI'I‘AL. Dec 78)

-a- [III-BE-64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16

26

30

62
P000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm'nom. APPAIRS

POLAND'S PARTICIPATION Iﬂ CM MULTILATM Wﬁ REVIEWED

Mosgov EKOIOHICHBSXOYE SO‘I'RUDNICHESTVO $11“!me 83‘! in Russian No 3.
197 pp 2-5

[Article by Tadeusz Hrzaszcsyk, candidate meter of the PZPR Central Cos-zit-
tee Political Bureau. deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers and chair-
man of the Planning Comission or the Council of Ministers]

[Text] One of the factors in the overall development of the Polish's Peo-
ple's Republic is the constant development end extension of its economic re-
lations with the fraternal countries which are members of CM. These rela-
tions are helping considerably in performing the socioeconomic tasks out-
lined by the sixth and seventh PZPR congresses. and they are conducive to
the country's dynamic development and to improvement of the living condi-
tions or society. Poland is making aJweighty contribution in line with its
economic potential to create ever stronger integrative relations among the
C3“ mater-countries. This is convincingly evidenced by the mere fact that
Poland holds second place (after the Soviet Union) in the volune or trade
among the CM member-countries.

The Coordinated Plan of Multilateral Integrative Programs of the CW Mem-
ber-Countries in the Period 1976-1980, which was adopted at the 29th Meeting
of the council's session in 1915. was one of a sequence of steps taken to
make cooperation ,within our coal-onwealth more intensive. Implementation of
this worthwhile initiative. which was advanced by Comrade A. Kosygin at the
21th Meeting or the CW Session, opened up opportunities for closer linkage
of multilateral programs being carried out under the auspices of the council
with the nhtionaf-economic plans of the various CHILI. member-countries.

The coordination of plane covering the period 1976-1980 took on a qualita-
tively new character thanks to the drafting of the Coordinated Plan of M11-
tilateral Integrative Prop-ems. That coordination now covers not only for-
eig: trade, but also the production sphere as well as scientific-technical
cooperation.

Pertarmnce of the multilateral integrative programs in Joint construction
or reconstruction of Nor production facilities has given the countries of

1
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the socialist cosmonwealth nev capacities for the production of pulp. asbes-
tos. ferruginous raw materials and femalloys. gas, nickel and other min-
erals. This will make it possible to satisfy'more mm the needs of the
developing economies of the M member-countries, and it will be conducive
to expansion and intensification of economic cooperation. to a strengthening
of integrative relations among our countries. and also to increased trade

Performce or the mutual obligations in the domain of specialization and
cooperation arising out or the agreements included in the Coordinated Plan
guarantees each of the countries optimum and efficient utilization of ex-
isting production capacities and a growth of mutual deliveries. This ap-
plies to the specialized production of electronic computers. chemicals for
plant pest control. the equipment of the container transport system, equip-
ment for nuclear power stations. automobiles. roller bearings. drilling rigs
and equipment for crude petroleum and gas production. synthetic dyes and
other products. It is quite siylificant that the plan also includes impor-
tant problems in the domain of science and technology such as development of
up—to-date production technologies. research and planning-and-design proj-
ects. industrial application of the most recent achievements in science and
technoloy. and development of prototypes of up-to-date machines and equip-
ment for a number of sectors of the economy. Solving these problem will
create opportunities for further economic development of our countries and
for intensification of socialist economic integration.

Poland is taking part in almost all the programs included in the Coordinated
Plan. Since we have insufficient reserves of certain rav materials. we at-
tribute the greatest importance to Joint construction of proJects in the
USSR so as to develop its. raw materials and fuel base. This is eloquently
evidenced. for example, by Poland's active participation in development of
the Orenburg gas condensate deposit and in construction of the Soyuz Trunk
Gas Pipeline in order to obtain mture deliveries of Soviet natural gas to
Poland. In accordance with the general agreement and also the bilateral
treaties the Polish side will receive 2.8 billion cubic meters of gas per --
year after 1980. Poland has assumed the obligation of complete delivery of
the third section of the gas pipeline, which is 583 km long.

Poland is discharging its obligations in the program mentioned above-wit is
building not only the pipeline itself. but also compressor stations and is
carrying out other related operations. The pipeline proper has already been
built. This work was completed 10 months ahead of schedule thanks to a
large concentration of manpower. materials and equipment as well as the pro-
duction conitments assumed by the Polish crew. ktremsly well-qualified
specialists with a great deal of experience are being sent to build the gas
pipeline. The construction machines and devices manufactured in Poland and

being used alongside modern imported equipment have demonstrated their ex-
cellence.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Timely completion or construction or the Soyuz Gas Pipeline has very great
importance to our economy. He are interested in obtaining the planned
amount of natural gas for the chemical industry which is undergoing dynamic
development, especially for production or nitrogen fertilizers and present-
day types of plastics.

Another important problem for our economy is to guarantee the constant
growth or iron ore deliveries. 'mis possibility is afforded us by coopera-
tion with‘the Soviet Union, which for many years now has been delivering
this raw material to Poland. ll'he general agreement concerning Poland's par-
ticipation in developing capacities in the Soviet Union for mining iron ore
and for producing certain types of ferroalloys guarantees that our country
will receive about 2.5 million tons of iron-bearing raw materials (in terms
or pure iron) in the 1919-1991 period. As part of its participation in de-
velopment of that industry Poland will deliver various goods to the USSR.

by and large machines and equipment. industrial goods and consumer goods.

Construction or the Ust'-Ilimsk Pulp Mill should also be mentioned among the
programs included in the Coordinated Plan which have great importance to Po-
land's mture economic development. Under this agreement Poland is guaran-
teed annual deliveries ot h0.000 tone or paper pulp for 12 years. On the
same basis Poland will receive 50.000 tone or raw materials annually from
the Kiyembayev Asbestos Mining and Milling Combine for a period of 12 years.

we are also participating in construction of capacities for the production
of nickel and cobalt in the Republic of Cuba. In return for the credit ex-
tended to that country. after 1980 Poland will annually receive 2,500 tons
of nickel and cobalt for a period of 12 years. Poland's participation in
building the ‘ISOokv electric power transmission line from Vinnitsa in the
USSR to Albertirsa in Hungary deserves attention. Moreover, Poland has
Joined other interested cm member-countries in carrying out geological ex-
plorations in the Mongolian People's Republic.

Our country has assisted Mongolia with a grant or 2.5 million transfer ru-
bles.

Poland is also paying much attention to multilateral programs in the domain
of industrial specialization and cooperation. The reason is that our coun-
try is an important particith in practically all agreements included in
the plan. In most cases this participation involves both exports and in-
ports. Par example, on the basis of specialization and cooperation in the
prediction of chemicals for plant pest control under CM auspices Poland
will receive about '1,500 tons of various agents for plant pest control in
the 1976-1980 period. mainly from Bulgaria. the GDR and Romania, and will
deliver in exchange about 2..000 tons of other chemical products for the same

purpose -

Thanks to our machinebuilding industry's participation in specialization and
cooperation in the production or roller bearings and their deliveries to the

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE QULY.

fraternal countries Poland will receive 100 million bearings of another type
during the current 5-year period. lI'his is also a good place to note the
specialisation and cooperation between Poland and the 088R in building auto-
sobiles, which is developing successfully and has been highly praised both
by managers and also the vqrhers involved. Poland. which is receiving vsz
automobiles and also assemblies and parts for the FIAT-125, is delivering a
sizable amount of assesblies and parts for Soviet V31 automobiles. In the

1976-1980 period these experts will amount to 2.55 million sets of 19 dif-
ferent products.

Deliveries of dyes on the basis of an agreement concluded through Interkhim
concerning specialization and cooperation in the production of synthetic
dyes and certain organic intermediates are an important item among Polish
exports to the CM member-countries. In the 1916-1980 period the Polish
chemical industry will deliver to those countries 2,300 tons of dyes, mainly
dispersed dyes. and will purchase IJJOO tons of organic intermediates.

Poland has also signed agreements on specialization and cooperation in the
production of equipment for the container trmsport system and polyisoprene
rubber based on the cs isoprene haction. Mutual deliveries of these goods
are of substantial help in meeting our needs. then this brief enumeration
of cooperative arrangements shows that participation in these agreements has
essential importance to the Polish econow. 0n the one hand it helps to
raise the technical level and improve the quality of the products our indus-
try produces. and thanks to the expanded scale of production it creates con-
ditions for lover production cost. 0n the other“ hand by guaranteeing deliv-
eries of the relevant products to our partners, they are relieved from
building nev enterprises and thus save funds which are needed for other pur-
poses.

Recogzizing the importance of scientific-technical cooperation to the mture
economic development of the CM member-countries, Poland is actively par-
ticipating in solving the problem included in the Coordinated Plan. Our
scientific research organisations are taking part in work on all 11 problems
envisaged by the plan. Poland is acting as coordinator for some of them.
These include such problems as overall automtion of production and manage-
ment processes at coal mines; standardisation of health and safety specifi-
cations of mining equipment used in the coal industry and figuring in mutual
deliveries; development of new methods and means of effective utilization of
solid fuel and improvement of existing ones, desiy: of a facility for Innu-
facturing building materials and other valuable materials from the waste of
mining and coal enrichment; research on new types of pesticides. development
of biological and other methods of plant pest control and interdisciplinary
stw of the effect of pesticides on the environment. etc. Poland's contri-
bution is to be approximately one-seventh of the total expenditures of the
cm member-countries for programs in the domain of science and technology.

Poland paid close attention to the drafting of the Coordinated Plan of Mul-
tilateral Integrative Programs, and it looks upon its own obligations in

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fulfilling it as the principal yardstick for Judging efforts made to inten-
sify and improve the process of socialist economic integration.

Guided by the decisions of the 27th and 29th meetings of the cm Session.
we worked out a system for incorporating the tasks contained in the Coordi-
nated Plan into the National Socioeconomic Plan of the Polish People's Re-
public for 1976-1980 and later into annual plans. From now on Polish plans
will reflect not on‘y exports and imports. but also tasks performed as part
of Joint integrative prop-ans. industrial specialization and cooperation.
scientific-technical cooperation, credit taken and extended. and so on.

In sulmsary form they haVe been defined in the plan of Poland's integrative
programs with the can member-countries for the 1976-1980 pex iod. which is

a special appendix to the Decree of the Polish Council of Ministers on the
National Socioeconomic Plan for J's‘T6-l980. Provision has also been made for
solving these problems in the various sections of sector and industry plans
for production, product distribution and foreign trade.

On that basis specific tasks have been formulated in the national-economic
plan for the relevant agencies so as to guarantee fulfillment of the coalit-
nents arising out of the Coordinated Plan. To be specific, they consist of
the following:

i. furnishing the necessary funds in the plans of departnents and minis-
tries for mu realisation of contracts and agreements that have been con-
cluded on cooperation. both bilateral and multilateral;

ii. assurance that conlsodity deliveries under the conitments assumed will
be made by the dates envisaged in the contracts and agreements;

iii. 'setting up continuous monitoring and analysis of progress in perfor-
mance of the tasks arising out of the Coordinate Plan both in physical and
value team.

In striving for the further development of higher forms of cooperation con-
ducive to the development of integrative economic relations and to planned
formation of conditions and opportunities for mutually advantageous contacts
between individual sectors and industries in the econonv of Poland and the
other cm member-countries. we are nking preparations for drafting the
plan of multilateral integrative program for the next 5-year period. This
has already been reflected. to be specific. in the relevant orders issued to
ministries and departments in our nationaleeconomic plan for 1918. He at-
tribute great importance to this work. since we feel that the future success-
ml development of the (IBM member-countries necessitates not only sound
fulfillment of certain measures and the mutual obligations assumed by all
the partners. but also timely steps to define future tasks.

The multilateral programs will be carried out mainly on the basis of inten-
sified economic cooperation with the Soviet Union. Its role in Poland's
economic development is very great.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The friendly meeting between Comrade E. Gierek, first secretary of the PZPR
Central Comittee, and Comrade 1.. Brezhnev, general secretary of the CC CPS!)
and chairman of the Presidium of the 08813 Supreme Soviet, which took place
in Auguu 1977 in the Crimea was a particularly inortant factor in the de-
velopment of cooperation and economic integration between the Polish Peo-
ple's Republic and the USSR. The decisions made during that meeting spe-
cifically call for the drafting of prop-ans for development of industrial
specialization and cooperation over the period up to 1990.

The visit to Moscow this January of P. Jaroszewicz, chairman of the Polish
Council of Ministers. is evidence of the consistent implementation of the
decisions of our leaders during the meeting it. the Crimea and did a great
deal toward further development of Polish-Soviet cooperation and improvement
of its principles and mechanisms. This visit was further evidence of the
fraternal relations between the two countries.

During the visit an estimate was made of needs and capabilities in the
sphere of mutual economic relations in the upcoming years of the current 5-
year period and also an assessment of the main lines of cooperation for the
period following 1980.

A determinati. .was made of those fields in which there are especially broad
prospects for development of cooperation. They specifically include cooper-
ation in the production of agricultural machines, trucks, equipment for nu-
clear power staticns. ships and platform for prospecting and developing
offshore petroleum and gas deposits, complete manufacturing installations.
as well as cooperation in the aviation industry.

Performance of this program of cooperation between our countries was highly
praised at the next meeting between Comrade B. Gierek and Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev, which took place in April 1978.

It is of paramount importance to Poland that the outlines of cooperation
with the USSR in the 1981-1985 period are beginning to be sketched even now.

Many Polish industries have come into being and developed as a result of
their relations with the soviet market. That is why long-range definition
of the lines of mutual cooperation is an essential factor contributing to
the development and improvement of Polish planning.

The Moscow talks demonstrated that the Soviet side has also shown a keen in-
terest in intensifying economic relations with Poland. Achievements in this
domain have been well received; at the same time the two sides have ex-
pressed a readiness to intensify their relations, specifically on the basis
of the development of industrial specialization and cooperation.

COPYRIGHT: Sovet Ekonomicheskoy Vzaimpopomoshchi Sekretariat Moskva, 1978

7M5
080: 1823

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IWATIOIML AFFAIRS

POLISH-SOVIET PROWL‘I'ION SPECIALIZATION All) COOPmTIOI DISCUSSED

Moscow EZDMICHEKOY'B SUI'RUDIIOHESTVO S‘I'RAR-C’HLKNOV SEV in Russian No 3.
1978 pp 56-60

[Article by Jan Ptaszek. adviser to the Polish permanent representative to
CM

[Text] Especially good results have been achieved in the last decade in the
domain of Polish-Soviet industrial specialization and cooperation within the
same sector or industry. This is indicated by the relatively high share of
products covered'by industrial specialization and cooperation in Polish
trade with the Soviet Union, which in 1917 was 23 percent.

Polish industry is now an attractive and valuable partner in many fields.
and our capabilities in the domain of economic cooperation will be growing
every year.

The-1968 signing of the agreement on cooperation in autosobile production
was a step of great economic importance in the domin of the division of 1a-
bor.

Mutual deliveries of parts and assesblies for the FIAT automobiles manufac-
tured in both countries were worth about 370 million exchange zlotys in the
1970-1975 period.

This agreement was extended to cover the current 5-year period. It specifi-
cally provides for annual sales to the Soviet Union or 300,000 sets of parts
for the Zhiguli automobile; this is one-third more than in the 1971-1975 pe-
riod. ﬁe list of orders covers 13 items: for example. storage batteries,
headlialts and rear lights. themstats, license plate lights, automobile
dome light fittings, and so on. Poland is receiving from the Soviet Union
glass. bearings, door handles and other parts for the FIAT-125p automobile.

Provision has also been made for annual deliveries to the 0883 of 110,000
sets of parts for the new model of the Zhiguli automobile in that period.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next important direction in the intensification an“ expansion of cooper-
ation between the two countries in the motor vehicle industry was the agree-
ment signed 7 "IV 1975 on collaboration and cooperation-in the production of
trucks. It calls for long-tern deliveries from Poland to the USSR or con-
plete brake systems and push-button switches for trucks manufactured by the
Kama Motor Vehicle Plant.

In exchange for the products delivered to the USSR Poland will be receiving
mu trucks.

'lhe value or the bilateral deliveries under that agreement will be about 1.3
billion exchange zlotys in the 1976-1980 period, i.e., 650 million exchange
zlotys of exports and the same of ilports. Thanks to this agreement Poland
is becoming one or the largest producers of brake systems in Mops, and the
USSR is able to reduce its production cost. We should add that this cooper-
ation will continue after 1980.

Recomendations are being prepared concerning the conduct of Joint experi-
mental design work to develop the construction or an up-to-date truck in the
1.5-3-ton range.

An understanding has already been reached on use of SSO-KP diesel engines in
mm trucks, which are‘ to ‘be manufactured in Poland on a conpeneation ba-
sis.

Industrial cooperation with the Soviet Union is looked upon as a strategic
and long-range direction in development of the Polish motor vehicle indus-
try. ProJects in this field should bring about an expansion of the form or
cooperative agreements.

Our countries are developing cooperation in the ”chine tool building indus-
try. A cooperative agreement has been carried out since 1969 concerning de-
liveries or electrongnetic clutches for Inchine tools from Poland to the
Soviet Union and of metal-cutting machine tools iron the Soviet Union to Po-
land.

‘I'he agreement calls for lutual deliveries of products worth appronaately
550 million exchange zlotys in the present 5-year period. It creates the
basis for large-series production and further specialization of our indus-
try. In the 1970-1975 period Poland sold the USSR 1.25 million electromag-
netic clutches worth 250 nillion exchange slotys.

Poland as a result became a naJor world producer of electrouagnetic clutches.
Poland is the only foreigi supplier of this product for Soviet machine tool
building.

Under agreements on industrial specialization through can we are inporting
a number of models of custom-built machine tools from the USSR. 0n the be-
sis of a bilateral agreement signed in 1913 the Soviet Union is specializing
in the production of‘l9 models. and Poland 5 models of nchine tools.

8
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plant for lathe attachments and chucks in Belostok has broad prospects
for increasing deliveries; in the 1972-1975 period it delivered to the USSR
under a long-term cooperative agreement 75 .000 precision-made lathe chucks
whose value totaled about his million exchange zlotys.

These agreements were extended and expanded by the 1975 s:reement on spe-
cialisation and cooperation in the machine tool building and toolmeking in-
dustry in the 1976-1980 period. Poland is producing 10 types of machine
tools and the Soviet Union 50 types on the basis of specialization.

In connection with the considerable expansion of the list of products pro-
duced under the fresework of specialization. the value of mutual deliveries
of these products in the current 5-year period is increasing and will amount
to about 1.6 billion exchange zlotys.

Thanks to the modern production and scientific research potential of the So-
viet Union and Poland our countries are now well prepared for extensive co—
operation in the production of construction machines.

Since 1970 Polish industry has become a supplier of a number of assemblies
and parts for construction machines, mainly to the USSR. The capacity of
the Soviet market and the stability of relations with Soviet partners gua-
rantee the profitability of our production. For a number of years now the
huts Stalowa Nola Coabine has been delivering to the Soviet Union gearboxes
for heavy construction machines. They are aanufactured on the basis of So—
viet documentation. In accordance with the agreement on specialization and
cooperation the USSR has ceased production of gearboxes for these machines
and is using the Polish product exclusively. In 1975 our exports of gear-
boxes was 13.000 tons. In the current 5-year period their deliveries will
reach 70,000 units.

Cooperation is developing on a similar basis in the production of front and
rear axles for excavators. which the plant in Radomsho has organised. In
the 1976-1980\period 30.000 units will be delivered to the USSR.

Under another agreement on specialization and cooperation that has been in

effect for 3 years Poland is delivering universal Joints for lift trucks to
the USSR. ‘

The present complexion of cooperation has created the foundation for trade

agreements which are based to an ever greater degree on cooperative arrange-
ments.

During the economic exhibition held in Moscow in August 197': and dedicated
to the 30th Anniversary of the Polish People's Republic, another agreement
was signed on cooperation in the manufacture of construction machines in the
1976-1980 period. Mutual deliveries on the basis of that agreement amount
to about 3.5 billion exchange slotys.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\ I

Collaboration in this field is reinforced by the scientific-technical work
which is extensively carried on and which is having an ever greater impact
on cooperative arrangements.

The best example of this might be the activity or two mixed Polish-Soviet
design teams in developing a line of nev designs or hydraulic self-propelled
cranes with lifting capacities of 25, '00. 63 and 100 tons. Their production
vill make it possible to meet the needs or the economies of Poland and the

Soviet Union and also of the other CM countries for up-to-date high-capac-
ity machines or this type.

Expansion of cooperation in the production of electronic computer equipmnt
should be recognized as an important achievement. The agreement signed in
this field in Jule 1971 has considerably promoted the development of one of
the most up-to-date industries in Poland. we are exporting to the. USSR 25

models of peripheral equipment for computers. such as storage. reading and
printing devices.

In June 1977 Poland and the USSR signed an agreement extending cooperation
in this field to 1985. It envisages a broad program of scientific-technical
cooperation. specialization in production and cooperative deliveries or com-
puter control complexes, including minieomputers. peripheral equipment and
other hardware.

The Soviet Union has extended us every kind of technical assistance both in
denim and technology and also in deliveries of equipment and certain mate-

rials important to series production of the integrated circuits of Logika-z
systems.

Thanks to Soviet documentation and deliveries of equipment we have been able

in a short time to organize the production of the Rubin-TOT color television
set.

Expansion of tape recorder production in Poland and the large-series nature
of this production have created the possibility of annual deliveries or 1.5
million tape recorder heads to the Soviet Union.

Cooperative arrangements have also been established for the 1916-1980 period
in the production of automation equipment and measuring apparatus. They
have especial importance since they are nking it possible for Polish indus-
try to reduce the assortment of products produced. to a large series, and
thereby to reduce production costs.

we are exporting to the USSR nanometers. pneumatic position regulators,
switches and torsion balances. keyboard units for Iskra calculators, and
pover assemblies for cash registers.

Poland is importing from the USSR Iskra calculators, Sveda cash registers,
and monitoring and recording devices for process control.

10
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An agreement has also been signed on production in our country of computer
ized process control systems in the manufacture of sulfuric acid and in the
sugar industry. The USSR is specializing in the production of control sys-
tesm for the fuel and power industry and also for ferrous metallurgy.

An agreement was simedin September 1975 on' specialization in the production
of electronic products, radio measuring apparatus and line communication
equipment. Under that agreement sawiet industry is producing 32 different
pieces of cosmunicntion equipment. Poland is specializing in the production
of 12 such products. which it is delivering to the USSR.

Thanks to cooperation among specialists of the two countries who are making
denign changes in the Pentakonta automatic telephone exchanges (designed for
10.000 subscribers). which are manufactured in Poland. Poland will be deliv-
ering these exchanges to the Soviet Union. Our countries are also planning
to engage in cooperation in the development and production of automatic cen-
tral offices using the crossbar and electronic systems.

The agreement signed by Poland and the USSR on specialization in the elec-
trical equipment industry has great importance to that industry's develop-
ment. Under it 18 models and groups of electrical products are to be pro-
duced in the USSR. including soc-megawatt turbogenerators. electric road 10-
comotives. asynchronous electric motors. "bloc" transformers for SOD-mega-
watt turbogenerators. etc. Polish industry will specialize in the produc-
tion of six models and groups of electrical products. including complete mo-
bile substations. distribution installations for agriculture. power switch-
board and Me boxes. etc.

Three countriesnthe GDP. Poland and the USSR--have concluded an agreement
to build a plant at Rovovolynsk in the Soviet Union for the production of
specialized mnufacturing equipment for the electrical equipment industry.

The Joint construction makes it possible to save considerable funds which
would otherwise be spent if this enterprise were being built by only one
country.

Bilateral cooperation is also developing in the production of machines and
equipment for the food industry. Poland is specializing in the manufacture
of 39 products and is delivering them to the Soviet market.

International socialist division of labor is also developing effectively in
the field of textile machines. which was initiated by the December 1971
signing of an agreement on specialization and cooperation in the production
of looms.

The Polish textile nchine industry has organized the production of five as-
semblies for shuttle-free looms on the basis of Soviet documentation and
with the technical assistance of Soviet specialists. In exchange for them
we are receiving from the USSR finished looms for our light industry and

11
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assemblies for their production. The value or mutual deliveries in the
1972-1976 period was 115 million exchange zlotys.

This agreement has been extended to 1976-1980. In the current 5-year period
mutual deliveries are to he tripled over the previous 5-year period. Their
value vill be nearly 1080 million exchange slotys.

Soviet industry is specializing in the production of 73 machines. The ma-
Jority are representatives or high-output equipment: 8TB looms. spinning
and twisting trans, production lines for short flax fiber. and so on.

Our industry will specialize in the production or 11 machines and pieces of
equipment. They consist of up-to-date preparation and spinning equipment
for the cotton industry and also certain machines for dyeing and finishing.

Our country aimed a particularly important agreement on cooperation in the
production of tractors and farm machines on 17 November 1971. It defines
the principles and scope of industrial. specialization and cooperation and
also of Joint design and research programs.

Under the agreement, for instance. Polish industry has ceased the production
or crawler tractors. since Polish needs for them are being met by Soviet
suppliers. Poland in turn is supplying Soviet agriculture complete equip-
ment for crop-drying operations and the like.

Because of the good results in cooperation a decision vas made to extend the
life of this agreement for 1976-1980. Mutual deliveries of machines during
those years are planned in the amount of 1.9 billion exchange zlotys.

The Soviet Union will specialize in the production of tractors in the 0.6-
ton and 6-ton class, plows and harrows or various types and also cultiva-
tors, while Poland will specialise in the production of potato diggers,
clover hullera. and so on.

Technical and industrial cooperation are developing successfully in the avi-
ation industry. An agreement signed in 1911 concerned Joint design develop-
ment and organization or the production of new Jet airplanes for use in ag-
riculture which will be manufactured in Poland and exported primarily to the
Soviet Union.

At the transport equipment plant in Mielec in the spring of 1913 Polish and
Soviet designers developed a new model of this aircraft. designated the

14-15. The most recent design features of world aeronautical engineering are
being used in the production of this up-to-date aircraft. Thanks to cooper-
ation. the aircraft was created in record time. which will make it possible

for our country to hold second place in the world among producers of agri-
cultural aircraft.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Cooperation in the production of the 11-86. a 350-passenger medium-range Jet
aircraft also called the air-bus, represents a new level of cooperation in
the aviation industry from the standpoint of scale and technical complexity.
0n the basis of a Soviet design Polish enterprises will be manufacturing
tail and rudder units. elements of the wing mechanism and screw-type (vin-
tovyye) mechanisms for this aircraft.

Polish industry will also go into the manufacture of the An-28 passenger
plane on the basis of Soviet documentation.

Cooperation in the production of equipment for nuclear power stations, which
is based on an intergovernmental agreement. has essential importance to our
economy. The terms of cooperation defined in that agreement also create op-
portunities for use of the Soviet Union's achievements and abundant experi-
ence in the organization of production and training or personnel, as well as
interaction in developing scientific-technical research.

An agreement on specialization and cooperation in the production of mining
machines and equipment up to 1980 will have great importance to development
of the coal industry in both countries in view of the tasks of increasing

coal mining and the need to further improve working conditions in this in-
dustry. ' ‘ ‘ '

Over the last 5 years there was considerable progress in the division of la-
bor in the chemical industry of the two countries.

Under an understanding on specialisation of production covering 70 products
in the 1971-1975 period, 17 products were manufactured in Poland and 53 in
the Soviet Union.

Cooperation is continuing to develop in this field in the current 5-year pe-
riod. The total value of chemical products involved in trade during this
period is about “.3 billion exchange slotys. which is nearly double the vol-
ume of trade in the 1971-1975 period.

During this 5-year period the Soviet chemical industry is specializing in
the production of 51 chemical products and the Polish chemical industry 31
products.

He should emphasize that this type of cooperation is dictated by the needs
for profitability of production. since in present-day chemistry production
engineering is going in the direction of large-capacity units, which im-
proves the efficiency of capital investments considerably.

The favorable examples we hav~ given to illustrate the division of labor be-

tween our two countries in the manufacturing industries do not, however, ex-
haust the possibilities that exist for cooperation.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic principle governing future projects in the domain of specialisa-
tion and cooperation should be the desire to produce above all those ma-
chines and pieces of equipment. parts and assemblies which are not yet being
manufactured in the socialist countries or are being produced in insufficient
quantities.

A great economic benefit can be achieved through participation in the divi-
sion of labor in connection with the construction of Joint industrial facil-
ities both in the socialist countries and also in the capitalist countries.
Consideration can be given to the following: the desigx of the projects.
agreement on mutual deliveries of machines and equipment. and also partici-
pation in the installation and startup of the projects being built.

There are sizable opportunities for specialization and cooperation in the
field of industrial consumer goods. Achievement of extensive division of
labor in production of this group of products is all the are interesting
and advantageous because design capacity is reached more quickly in the pro-
duction of these products than in other indmtries. 'i'he payoff period for
productive outlays is shorter, and guarantees of effective deliveries and
sales prospects are better.

In accordance with decrees adopted in August 1977 during the Crimean meeting
of Comrade B. Gierek. first secretary of the PZPR Central Conittee. with
Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, general secretary of the CC 0980 and chairman of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the ministries of the two countries
undertook to draft prospective programs for industrial specialization and
cooperation covering the period up to 1990. These programs will have funda-
mental importance to development of division of labor between Poland and the
Soviet Union. They will comprise a set of interrelated programs correspond-
ing to the main lines of economic development of the two countries. The
programs will include proposals concerning the following:

i. the possibility of developing and intensifying specialization in the
production of specific products developed on the basis of an analysis and
assessment of the effectiveness of economic relations and of prospects for
their development. including mller utilisation of the results of scientific
research and project planning and desipi work done in the two countries;

ii. initiation or expansion of the production of articles in short supply
and also articles which at the present are being purchased on the mrkets of
the capitalist countries. as well as achievement of joint production in
cases when it is justified;

iii. possible directions for coordination of capital investments in order
to develop the relevant production capacities to provide for mutual deliv-
eries on the basis of industrial specialization and cooperation, assuming
optimum efficiency in utilization of existing production capacities and
their modernization and reconstruction;

ll.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

iv. measures directed toward preparation of the production of products .cov-
ered by specialization. including the necessary:scientific-teehnical re-
search. drafting of technical documentation, material and technical supply.
and also assessment of the needs and possibilities of meeting than;

V. organization of Joint research and proJect planning and design offices;

vi. possible forms of cooperation on the markets of third countries with a
view to selling deliveries of products manufactured under industrial spe-
cialization and cooperation between enterprises of the two countries. in-
cluding complete manufacturing lines;

vii. programs to speed up standardization and adoption of standards govern-
ing production of industrial products involved in or scheduled for indus-

rial specialization and cooperation in individual industries of the two
countries.

These programs will include the problems of cooperation defined in the pro-
tocol of the talks between Comrade P. Jarossewicz. chairman of the Polish
Council of Ministers, and Comrade A. Kosygin. chairman of the USSR Council
of Ministers. 30-31 January 1978. It was decided to give priority to the
task of developing cooperation in the production of equipment for nuclear
power stations. taking into account organization of cooperation with the
other CHM membercountries and a feasibility study on setting up a special
Joint administration to develop the technology for manufacturing that equip-
ment. cooperative production of large-capacity dump trucks, organization of
the production of ships and platforms for exploration and development of
offshore petroleum and gas deposits and a number of other branches of ma-
chinebuilding.

Problems arising out of the long-range special-purpose cooperative programs
among the CW member-countries will also be stated in concrete terms in the
programs for industrial specialization and cooperation being drafted Jointly.
The sun total of these proJects ought to make for further progress toward
Joint solution of essential problems in economic cooperation between Poland
and the soviet Union and should enlarge opportunities for establishing ef-
fective scientific-technical and industrial cooperation in certain indus-
tries of the two countries.

COPYRIGHT: Sovet axonomicheskoy Vzaimopomoshchi Sehretariat Hoskva. 1978

7055
cs0: 1823

15
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

ELECTRONIZATIOII 0F POLARD'S COIMUNICATIOII IIE'I'HORK (394A coopm'nou ROTH)

Moscow EKONWICHEKOYE WICWO STEAK-WV 83V in Russian Na 3,
1978 rp 61-61:

[Article by Edward Kovalczyk, minister of communications of the Polish Peo-
ple's Republic]

[Text] Adoption of the Comprehensive Program has marked the beginning of a
new stage of cooperation vithin CW. The maJor problem of production, sci-
ence and technology are now crucial to mutually advantageous and highly ef-
fective relations. An ever greater number of scientific-technical problem
are being worked on Jointly by interested countries. The sphere of activity
of coordinating centers and other organizational form of cooperation is ex-

pending.

The results of the activity of the Count i! for Mutual Economic Assistance is
indicative. of the tremendous role which this organization has in the process
of the development, intensification and improvement of econonic and scien-
tific-technical cooperation among the can countries and development of so-
cialist economic integration in all sectors of their economies.

The Standing can Conission for Comications and Postal Service was set
up in 1971 under a decree of the 25th Meeting of the council's session. Its
creation has facilitated improvement and expansion of cooperation of CDIA
member-countries in this field.

In a comparativelv'sho'rt time the conission has worked out the main lines
and tasks of cooperation in the sector of communications and the postal ser-
vice. These directions were approved at the 21th Meeting of the council's
session as a supplement to the Comprehensive Program for Further Intensifi-
cation and Improvement of Cooperation and for Development of Socialist Eco-
nomic Integration of the CM newer-Countries.

One of the fundamental aspects of cooperation in comications and the
postal service is now the question of setting up the VAKSS (multipurpose in-
terlinked computerized conunications system) of the CM member-countries
for transmission of all types of information. A very important task in this

16
FOR OI'PICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connection is to create the communications systems. equipment and apparatus.
including the equipment and apparatus necessary to the creation of tho VAKBS
and the national commanications networks of the can member-countries.

The cooperation of these countries is taking place in the context of the
scientific-technical‘ revolution. Equipment is developing at a fast pace.
and new technologies are being created. A typical feature c'.‘ this process
is the rapid development and ever broader use of electronics in many sectors
of the economy.

There are, of course. progressive trends in the extensive use of electronics
in the comications field, which has given rise to many ideas in this field
of engineering. This applies above all to the question of electronizing the
comunications network, that large technical system in which every success-
ful technical and organizational innovation can be of inestimable use to so-
ciety and bring a large economic benefit.

By electronization of the co-Iunications network we mean initiating the pro-
duction and operation of apparatus that incorporates the most recent techno-
logical achievements of electronics, above all up-to-date electronic elements
and assemblies. This gives rise to problems (mainly in the switching field)
of replacing traditional electromechanical devices by electronic assemblies,
of using integrated circuits in the production of cosnunications apparatus.
for example. in telephone apparatus for various uses, and also of introduc-
ing computer-based automation of measuring and monitoring processes.

It might be asked: Is it sound to incorporate the most recent technology
into the production of comaunications equipment if there are difficulties in
obtaining the required amount and assortment of electronic components, when
consmers using traditional apparatus do not ismediate‘ly feel an increase in
the volume or improvement in the quality of services, nor a drop in service
charges? After all, the present comnications apparatus by and large does
meet all the needs for services (in corresponding amount, of course). it is
relatively cheaper. more accessible materials are used in its manufacture,
and the manufacturing methods were mastered long ago.

This is in fact the view that some specialists take on the utter. But it
is difficult to agree with this approach if we take into account the pros-
pects for development of colmsunications techniques. There is no question
that the right way of solving the problem is to weigh the economic prereq-
uisites and on that basis determine the rate of introduction of the new
equipment, which will effectively bring about technical-and-economic and so-
cial progress.

There should be no fundamental doubt about the actual need for M1 elec-
tronization in the sense of application of the most recent technoloy and
extensive introduction of present-day electronic components in the produc-
tion of comications apparatus. since it affords the following possibili-
ties:

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. improved saving on material;
ii. reduction of equipment size and weight;

iii. higher reliability of equipment and greater resistance to the effect
of external conditions;

iv. greater technological honogeneity in mufacturing;
v. eventual reduction of the cost of apparatus;

v-i. automation of the operation of devices, of attending them, of monitor
ing and of measurements, and also of their operation without preventive
maintenance or repair;

vii. adoption of digital transmission and switching systems which offer re-

liable interaction of commications networks with electronic computer sys-
can;

viii. realization of a unified and integrated conunications network encom-
passing telephone, telegraph. phototelegraph and telemetric co-lunications
and radio and TV broadcasting;

ix. use of new technical and organizational forms of operation that ensure.
for example. automtic control of data flows, message switching and auto-
matic attendance;

at. the rendering of new types of services. including the possibility of
nun-computer dialog; ‘ ‘

xi. more rational use of the electromagnetic spectrum by achieving the nec-
essary electromagnetic compatibility of comnications equipment;

xii. creation of a unified scientific research. production and personnel
capability for production and operation of all types of data processing and
transmission equipsent;

xiii. achievement of high flexibility in the use of new circuit and system
designs.

All of this argued in favor of the decision to gradually adopt in Poland the
most recent achievements in the field of electronics, and especially to
electronize switching apparatus. Production of Ye-lO electronic automtic
central telephone offices has begun on that basis. Polish scientific re-
search organizations are now conducting proJects related to electronization
of telegraph offices. telephone sets and also on development of various
types of co-unications apparatus incorporating integrated circuits of vary-
ing degrees of integration. Multichannel cosIIunications system and radio
and TV broadcasting transaitters mufactured in Poland are being modernized.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relevant industrial enterprises are undergoing reorganization to apply
the newest technologies under foreign licenses.

The process of intensive modernisation of the cos-unicstions network must,
however, be accompanied by serious action to increase the scale of produc-
tion. This compels us to use all possible potential, including equipment
that is still suitable and productive though scheduled for gradual retire-
ment. This situation is having an impact on the methods of planning the fu-
ture development of co-Iunications, in which the interests of the near fu-
ture and more distant future must be reconciled with today's capabilities
and needs.

In addition to giving first consideration to the optimum needs of the pres-
ent, we must at the same time have a clearly defined goal for the future.
That goal is to build on a national scale a single integrated comunications
network, which would be the inteaated technical facility for transmission
of various forms or information so as to meet the needs of administrative
agencies, the econow, culture, the general public and public and political
information. It would have good links with the international VAKSS, which
has been designed and is gradually being set up by the CM membeheountries.

The outlines of the future electronic, digital and integrated communications
network are sketched out distinctly enough, and its advantages are unques-
tionable. Yet this is a far off goal whose achievement will take several
decades. At the same time, in a situation where we have an electronic
switching system coupled with digital transmission system, we already have
the possibility and deed to utilize these advantages.

So far neither Poland nor probably the other CM member-countries has a
completely crystallised conception of how to go about setting up a network
that would use the principle of gradual penetration of promising technoloy
into the present conunications network, which for many years yet will be
meeting the country's needs. Development of that conception is a good topic
for cooperation within the framework of the Standing can Omission for
Communications and Postal Service.

The main problem in this connection is to define and introduce an optimum
mode of penetration of digital electronic equipment into the complex organ-
ism of the existing communications network, whose operation and constant de-
velopment would not be interrupted.

The unified and comprehensive nature of the network predetermines every de-
cision pertaining to its development and is having an important impact on
all the plans for construction and operation. lot a single facility or com-
munications installation can operate separately and independently; full in-
terlinkage of the entire communications network is obligatory. 80, if some
particular section of the network is improperly fitted into its overall
structure, the local benefits obtained will be considerably smaller.

19
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Network structure is a peculiarity of comunications. The facilities mking
it up do not operate independently. but within the fraaework of a single
systea, and services in this field are the result of the operation of the
entire network and not Just of its individual facilities.

In the conunications field it is the unified network that is the subject
matter of planning, end the comprehensive approach is a necessity in plan-
ning. Ehrery co-nmications facility mast be fitted into the overall network
with respect to a whole number of indicators.

To plan development of conunications without this approach would be to run
the risk that the new facilities would not be able to interact and effi-
ciently perform". their functions; in one section there night be a sharp drop
in the network's traffic capacity. This means that in planning development
of the comications network we must be able to foresee the role and place
of every new facility in the network not only in the very near, but also the
remote future. After all, the operating capabilities of the network depend
now on a number of factors and decisions taken in the past and nnifested in
the specific fora and condition of the present equipment. Likewise, the de-
cisions we make new determine possibilities for our actions and the actions
of our successors over the next 10-20 years.

By introducing digital electronic equipment we are trying to fulfill an im-
portant condition for reconciling near and lore distant goals. But it is
considerably more difficult to retain the principle of functional and tech-
nical unity in a network consisting of old and new equipment. As the new ap-
paratus is introduced, it must be adapted to the devices already in opera-
tion. All adaptations-are quite expensive by their nature, so that the new
equipment to be introduced must be capable of the greatest flexibility and
ability to fit a variety of conditions. In planning the use and development
of electronic central offices with the Ye-lo system we met take into ac-
count all the areas in which they night be used: local and tonal, intercity
and international, as well as subscriber and internal systems.

He should note, however, that the cost of switching equipment both for qua-
sielectronic and also electronic systeas is now far greater than that of
switching equipaent of crossbar electroaechanica'. system; the advantages
are realised in construction of the network itself. It is supposed that as
the technology iaproves for production of the components and parts there
will be a substantial reduction in the cost of equipment for the Ye-lo sys-
tem—this trend has been observed throughout the field of electronics. At
the same tine. we should not expect a substantial reduction in the cost of
equipment for the crossbar electromechanical system—its prices are rising
throughout the world.

A feature of electronic switching offices is that they are linked with digi-
tal transmission systems. Consequently, these offices can be used ration-

ally only when combined with such systeas. As a result we obtain a qmlita-
tiveu new telephone network and its construction costs are reduced even at

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOﬂ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the present cost of electronic switching equipment. which is still rela-
tively high. Some specialists feel that it is still too early to introduce
mu electronisation and give preference to quasielectronic system. which
do not have these characteristics and therefore do not yield a substantial
benefit when the network is built. The total cost of networks based on ‘
electronic systems is lower than for quasielectronic systems whenever decen-
tralization of the network is econonically Justified. This is because the
cost of quasielectronic system is now also rather high. but they do not af-
ford higher efficiency in utilisation of the network. From the standpoint
of rendering services. the electronic and quasielectronic systems can today
be regarded as almost equivalent. but in the future the advantage is on the
side of the former. That is wlv the quasielectronic systeas should be looked
on as a transition. .

By way of confinnation we night mention that in many cases the quasielec-
tronis system are being reorganized as electronic system with a switching
field built on the principle of time-division of channels.

ll'he CBIA neuter-countries which have advanced electronic equipment can also
introduce‘it boldly .in the co-unications field.

Electronic switching system are now being developed in the soviet Union in
cooperation with the 003. The results of these proJects are very promising.
and in all likelihood they will becone the basis of experiments in the us:
of certain types of switching devices.

In the industrially advanced countries of the world we see today not only an
interest in the electronization of equipment, but also intensive practical
activity in that direction. In France, Heat Geruny and England extensive
plans are being carried out for development and production of electronic
system. Much attention in the United States is being paid to development
of the conception of the city which has a multipurpose co-unications net-
work. A nultioffice system of digital comtators interconnected with digi-
tal transaissiox. system using optical transnission lines is thought most
suitable for such a network.

lbs American literature also contains an example of a typical rural area in
which a digital network nude it possible to reduce the nulber of offices
from 195 to 70.

New well-known firms throughout the world are putting electronic central
offices into production using recent technological achievements.

The electronic time switching system, combined with digital transmission
systems, is now making it possible to create a commications network with
integrated technoloy. Even new regional networks embodying this principle
can be set up and linked to one another by analog transmission lines. He
should nation in this connection that every electronic switching system can
interact with any other system in the transitional period.

21
'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All these systems will be undergoing constant modernisation. The dynamic
development of the production of electronic components which has recently
been taking place ensures the step-by-step development of the system.
Changes related to development of technology and transmission system will
bring about an expansion of the economically sound field of application of
the electronic switching system. Consequently, this system can be the basis
for the switching system of the telephone network with integrated technol-

0y.

A conunications network with integrated technology is the first stage.
Later the transition will be made to integration of services—to creation of
a single digital comications network consisting of digital transmission
channels and electronic offices with a time division switching system not
only for telephony, but also for telegraphy and other types of services.

The projects being carried out in Poland are aimed at studying the possibili-
ties of using the electronic switching system for data transnission as well.
It is now difficult to say whether the ﬁxture electronic switching system in
a network with integrated technoloy and services will be referred to as the
Ye-lO or by some other designation. The essential thing is that this system
will retain the basic features of the electronic switching system now being
manufactured in Poland and already in practical use.

The approach based on the ”hypothetical ideal system" which no one has yet
built must be regarded as unrealistic. Opponents of electronisation often
deliberately contrive that kind of idealiaation so as to be able more easily
to demonstrate how unrealistic it is.

The Polish People's Republic, in purchasing the license for the Ye-lO elec-

tronic switching system which is promising and advanced on a world scale, '
has assumed the main risk involved in creating the future integrated conmm-

nications network. The results indicate that this decision was correct.

The fraternal socialist countries can in our opinion also take advantage of

Poland's experience and adopt this system as the basis of their work in set-
ting up a future integrated con-unications network. This approach will help
to speed up the creation of that network.

ProJects in this field can be carried out not only on the basis of bilateral
cooperation. but also and above all through multilateral cooperation within
the framework of the Standing CHM Conission for Commications and Postal
Service. One of the topics for scientific-technical research envisaged by
the 1976-1980 National Socioeconomic Plan is development of an integrated
digital comications system and the apparatus making it up. The proJects
under this topic are being coordinated by the Comications Research Insti-
tute of the Polish People's Republic, and scientific research organizations
of the other can member-countries are also taking part. At its llth Meet-
ing. which was held in 1976, the Standing CM Conission for Co-Imications
and Postal Service adopted as a basis proposals concerning the directions of
ﬁxture projects aimed at creating an integrated digital commications sys-
tem and the equipment comprising it.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same till! the conission has been supplencnting the topic list of
projects in the first phase. They consist of the comission‘a drafting and
consideration in 1978 of technical specifications for autonatic electronic
central telephone offices. Adoption of these specifications by the Standing
can Comission for Conunications and Postal Service will make it possible
for work to begin on specialization and cooperation in the production of au-
tonatic electronic central telephone offices vithin the framework of the
Standing CM Cominsion for the Radio Bquipnent and Electronics Industry.

He can therefore say that possibilities exist for solving this problem.
Realization of the first phase of the integrated conunications network in
n Nture that is nov not so far off depends above all on comnicetions ex-
perts of the CW newer-countries.

PHOTO CAPI‘IOlis
l. p 63. top Ye-lo electronic automatic central telephone office in
the Conunications Institute of the Polish People's Re-
public. .

2. p 63. better: Production of electronic autonatic telephone offices at
the ‘i‘elkon-Teletra Plant.

COPYRIGHT: Sovet atononicheskoy Vzainoponoshchi Sekretariat Noekva, 1918

70105
080: 1823

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

INTENA‘I'IONAI. AFFAIRS

POLAND'S PARTICIPATION IN CM IWTION PROOMMS NOTED

Moscow EKONWICHESKOYE SOI'RUDNICHEBTVO STRAN-CﬂlﬂlOV 88V in Russian No 3.
1978 DD alt-87

[Article by Jacek Szonnski, chairman of the Polish Patent Office and chair-
man of the Conference of Heads of Agencies for Patents and Inventions of the
cm Member-Countries]

[Text] Scientific-technical progress is one of the principal factors affect-
ing social development. But under socialism ell achievements in the domain
of science and technology are used for the good of the entire society. V. I.
Lenin attributed great importance to inventions and discoveries as an impor-
tant factor in scientific-technical progress. Clear evidence of this is the
Decree on Inventions which he signed as early as 1919 and which proclaims
the basic principles of socialist legislation in this field.

we should emphasize that the Leninist principles set forth in that decree
have been consistently observed in Polish lav on inventions and discoveries.
For instance. in our legal system provision is made for creation of the so-
cial and economic conditions for development of invention and the movement
of production innovators. Socialist legislation provides protection of the
property and personal rights of inventors and optimally combines social
needs and individual rights. This is an especially valuable proof of the
superiority of socialist lav.

Cooperation among the socialist countries in the field of inventions and
protection of industrial property began in 1959. In the first stage this
cooperation consisted only of organizing conferences of heads of agencies
for inventions and discoveries. They examined questions pertaining to in-
ventions, trademarks and industrial designs, classification and patent in-
formation. and also matters related to international cooperation arising out
of the participation of the socialist countries in VOIS (World Organisation
for Intellectual Property). The Polish Patent Office has taken an active
part in this cooperation.

In 1971 a permanent can organ vas created--the Conference of lieads of Agen-
cies for Patents and Inventions of the CW Member-Countries. The hylavs of

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

the Conference of Heads of Agencies for Patents and Inventions of the cm
Member-Countries state that its most important tasks are to study and work
on matters that pertain to protection and use of inventions and also to pre-
pare proposals concerning multilateral regulation of these matters.

The conference pays particular attention to improving the legal basis of co-
operation in the field of inventions and discoveries.

One of the first documents prepared by the conference was the Agreement on
Legal Protection of Inventions. Industrial Designs. Utility Models and Trade-
marks in the performance of economic and scientific-technical cooperation;
the Polish delegation made a substantial contribution to the drafting of
that agreement. vhich was signed in Moscow on 12 April 1973 by all the CW
member-countries. It has been ratified by the State Council of the Polish
People's Republic and thus has the force of law for Poland. The agreement
touches upon a number of the most important legal issues concerning the pro-
tection and use of Joint solutions (inventions. industrial designs and util-
ity models) arrived at in the process of economic and scientific-technical
cooperation of enterprises. scientific research institutes. organisations.
teams. and so on. That document states that new solutions coming about as
the result of creative economic and financial interaction represent the com-
mon property of the participants in coo." -atioa. Thus the agreement facili-
tates the implementation of one of the buic principles of can activity-
the achievement of mutual and equal benefits. It defines a uniform proce-
dure for obtaining protection of Joint solutions. the equal rights of the
parties. the sale of licenses to third countries, distribution of the income
earned and remuneration of the originators.

During cooperation with can member-countries in the field of inventions the
Polish side has attributed tremendous importance to the study and regulation
of the legal issues and to improvement of national legislation in this field.
regarding them as an essential factor in encouragement of scientific-techni-
cal progress. The proposals for greater uniformity and gradual standardiza-
tion of national legislation in the field of invention. which were prepared
by the Polish delegation as part of the work of the conference. were re-
flected in the Main Directions and Tasks in Cooperation of the can Member-
Countries in the Field of Invention and Patent Affairs. which were drafted
by the conference and approved at the 69th Meeting of the CM Executive
Committee. and in the Measures for Cooperation of the CM Member-Countries
in the Field of Invention and Patent Affairs, which were adopted at the same
time. Those documents stated that the CM member-countries now face the
task of combining the achievements of the scientific-technical revolution
with the advantages of socialism. Applied to the field of invention this
means that by.their Joint efforts the CM member-countries would create
conditions for reliable protection and for their extensive use of scientific-
technical achievements created during implementation of the Comprehensive
Program. The need to speed up application of scientific-technical achieve-
ments confronts the Cm member-countries with a number of important new
tasks in their cooperation in the field of invention. as it does in other

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I ' ' ,
fields. The essential thing here is closer linkage between the field of in-

vention and the other fields of cooperation, and especially an indissoluble
bond with the “scienceutechnologvuproduction-wonsumption" process.

li‘he Main Lines and Tasks for Cooperation mentioned above encompass the en-
tire problem area of the activity of agencies for discoveries and inventions:
matters concerning the awarding of protection of inventions, industrial de-
signs. utility models. and trademarks; the problem of patent intonation.
invention planning and economics. the training of specialists. etc.

Improving the legal foundations for invention helps to speed up its develop-
ment. The space of this article allows us to discuss only the nest important
and promising of the measures envisaged.

0n the basis of a thorough analysis of existing national regulations and in-
ternational treaties in the field of invention the Polish and 00R delegations
prepared the draft of an international agreement. Accordingly on 5 July 1975
eight CM member-countries signed an agreement in Leipzig on standardization
of requirements for the preparation and submittal of patent applications,
which makes it easier to compile documentation when applications are filed

to obtain authors' certificates and other certificates of protection in sev-
eral countries.

The agreement on mutual recognition of authors' certificates and other cer-
tificates of protection of inventions, which were “and in December 1976 in
Havana, is also making it easier to obtain certificates of protection. The
Polish delegation hns participated with the Soviet and Hungarian delegations
in this field in developing the conception of standard regulations on inven-
tions. which should be conducive to further improvement of the national leg-
islation of the can member-countries in this field.

The constant growth in the number of applications for patents and the re-
lated increase in the amount of work to be done by the relevant agencies
have made it necessary to take steps simultsnmly in «moral or even all
the cm member-countries to improve the procedure for obtaining certifi-
cates of protection of inventions.

At the present time an applicant who wants to protect his invention simul-
taneously in several countries has to submit applications to each of those
countries, and their agencies for discoveries and inventions must make an
evaluation of that same invention. This means that the work of both the ap-
plicants and also the agencies is duplicated.

0n the initiative of the USSR delegation the Main Directions and the Measures
mentioned above included the topic of preparating a multilateral agreement of
the Oil-IA member-countries on a single certificate to protect inventions.

This task was assigned to the delegations of Poland and the USSR. The rec-
ouendations for an easement which they drafted and also the draft of the
agreement called for the filing of only one application to an international

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agency which would evaluate the application. would publish it and would is-
sue patent rights or other m-rtificates of protection that would be valid
simultaneously in several or all the cm member-countries. Such an agree-
ment would be very worthwhile. especially in the following respects:

i. it would make it easier for applicants from the CM member-countries to
obtain certificates of protection;

ii. it would make it possible for agencies for inventions and discoveries
to save on the labor and staff of highly qualified specialists. since all
the time-consuming work. especially the patent search and evaluation. would
be done by the international agency.

iii. it would speed up access to information on all applications for pro-
tection and all solutions protected in the cm member-countries by means of
a single international publication. it would facilitate expert evaluation as
to the patent “purity of exported products and would make it easier to get
one' s hearings in a patent situation when a decision is being made on impor-
tant capital investments.

iv. international economic organisations of the CW member-countries and
international scientific research and project planning and design teams
would be able to call upon the international agency for inventions and dis-
coveries to make an evaluation and conduct a patent intonation search for
the purposes of their projects and thus take advantage of the most recent
technical solutions in the world.

Achievement of these goals necessitates a detailed analysis of a nuaber of
essential legal. economic and technical questions so that the decisions made
contribute the maxim to implementation of the Comprehensive Program and
thereby to raising the level of prosperity of the workers in all the CM
member-countries and to the building of advanced socialism and comunism.
The Polish delegation is taking an active part in the study of all these
questions and in the preparation of solutions.

At the present time much attention is being paid to improvement and expan-
sion of cooperation in the field of patent information as well as coopera-
tion of national patent infomtion systems with the International Patent
Information System (MSPI). Performance of these tasks will have great im-
portance not only to agencies for inventions and discoveries. but also for
sectoral standing CW conlssions and for their performance of tasks envis-
aged in the Comprehensive Program and in the long-range special-purpose co-
operative programs. The standing can connissions. using patent documenta-
tion for project planning and design proJects or for purposes of industrial

specialization and cooperation. are the most important consumers of patent
information.

The $891. as a specialized system within the framework of the MSNTI (Inter
national System of Scientific-Technical Information). will help to increase

27
P0! OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICMI. USE ONLY

further the level of scientific research and project planning and design
work. Moreover. 148?! will give consuaers readier access to docunentation
and make it more up-to-date. will make it possible to reduce the costs of
obtaining and processing information thanks to the international division
of labor. and will also promote a rise in the effectiveness of information
activity.

The MSPI will include a number of subsystem in whose developaent the Polish
side is taking an active part. One of them is the Service for Computerized
Processing of Bibliographic Information (ABBA). This system collaborates
with INPADOK (International Patent Docuentation Center). and we thereby ob-
tain on machine-readable data carriers information on the most recent patent
information published in the industrially advanced countries of the world.
The Polish delegation is taking an active part in development and exchange
of this intonation on Iagnetic carriers and also in development of software
for the ABBA. The intonation obtained in this way is a good basis for set-
ting up sector information retrieval systens. 80. this activity helps to
meet the need which the economies of our countries have for intonation con-
cerning the most recent technical achievements in the world. That aim is
also served by the system which has been developed and introduced for ex-

change of infomtion on the most important inventions in the one member-
countries. ‘ '

Agencies for discoveries and inventions have been given isportant tasks in

stimulating creative initiative and performance of programs to help to meet
the most urgent needs of the econow concerning dissemination of technical

achievements and their planned use. Attention has also been paid to these

questions in the Main Lines which we mentioned above.

In Poland there are certain world-recogtised achievements in development of
official administration of invention affairs and also in application of le-
gal and economic incentives to encourage inventive creativity and the fi-
nancial motivation of enterprises and their staffs to create and apply in-
ventions. The Polish side is sharing its experience in this field with the
other can member-countries. For instance. it Joins the Hungarian delega-
tion in working on matters concerning the forms and mechanisms for financial
incentives to encourage technical progress.

One of the principal tasks of the Conference of heads of Agencies for Pat-
ents and Inventions is the aid extended to the Republic of Cuba and to the
Mongolian People's Republic by the other can member-countries.

Poland. represented by the Polish Patent Office. has actively participated
in all sessions of the conference and also in all meetings of groups of ex-
perts assigned by the conference to do the work of preparing materials and
drafts of the decisions of the conference. The Polish People's Republic has
also been the author or a coauthor in the work done on certain problems in-
cluded in the annual plans of the conference.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI'ICIAI. ”SI-2 ONLY

All we have said concerns only a few of the nest important problems in coop-
eration of the CM member-countries which the Polish side has a particular
interest in solving“ At the same time the Polish aide is participating in
work on a number of other problems related to protection of the achieVements
of technical progress and their use. Joint study and solution of those
problems is multiplying the achievements of those countries.

It is also very important to coordinate the viewpoints of the CW member-
countries in connection with their presentation to the World Organization
for Intellectual Property.‘

In December 1977 the Conference of Heads of Agencies for Patents and Inven-
tions held its 13 meeting at which important decisions were made on further
cooperation in the field of invention and patent affairs.

The conference discussed the tasks arising out of the decrees of the Execu-
tive Connittee of the council pertaining specifically to preparation of
drafts of long-range special-purpose cooperative programs and further im-
provement of the effectiveness of cooperation in the field of invention.
During the session consideration was given to the draft of an agreement on
mutual legal protection of indications of origin and names of origin of com-
modities. the draft of a standard regulation on inventions and a report on
preparation of a draft of an agreement on a single certificate of protection
of inventions of the CM member-countries.

J The conference approved the Method for Conducting Patent Research, which
makes it easier for agencies for inventions and discoveries and other orga-
nizations of cm member-countries to conduct patent research in order to
raise the technical level and competitibility of new technical contributions
being developed. recomeudations to standardize the title page of the de-
scription of inventions in the CM member-countries. and proposals concern-
ing use of the results of preliminary patent research conducted by organiza-
tions in the process of government evaluation. Further steps were outlined
toward setting up the International Patent Information System of the CM
member-countries.

In 1978 the Polish side directed its activity in accordance with the rules
of procedure of the conference. we made every effort to step up activity
even more in order to make our contribution to implementation of the resolu-
tion of the Seventh PZPR Congress, which stated: ”The Polish People's Re-
public will continue to Join the other can countries in advocating expan-
sion and enrichment of the process of socialist economic integration and
faster dynamic socioeconomic development of the entire camonwealth and of
each country individually."

COPYRIGHT: Sovet Ekonoaicheskoy Vzaimopomoshchi Sekretariat Moskva. 1978

10h5
080: 1823

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECROSLOVAKIA

NEED FOR RATIONAL USE OF FUELS AND ENERGY STRESSED
Government Program
Bretislsva TECHNICKA PRACA in Czech Aug 18 pp 11-12

[Article by Engrs Slavoj Odchnnl, CSc. and Josef Koutnik: “The State
Frogrem for Rstionsliting the Consumption of Fuels and Energy"]

[Text] In comparison with s number of countries. our economy is quite
demsnding in terms of energy; average consumption of fuels and energy in
a number of branches and sectors surpasses the amount customary in indus-
trially developed countries. partly because of the composition of our
fuel and energy resources. based predominantly on solid fuels utilizable
basically with lower effectiveness; in addition. there era the structure
of production and the size of productive capacities. But it is not pos-
sible to soy that thrift regarding fuels and energy is on a good level
and that thus there do not exist genuine preconditions for lowering con-

sumption.

The lbth CFCZ Congress already was concerned with these basic questions.
and on the basis of its conclusions the State Program for Rationalization
in the Conservation of Fuels and Electric Energy which the CSSI govern-
ment issued in February 1972 was formulated. with this program. systems-
tic csre was established for lowering the energy demands of production in
all decisive branches of our economy.

The state was based on the principle of ensuring savings of fuels and
electric energy through the planning of rationalizing programs in indus-
try. orienting efforts toward the solution of selected aocietywide sig-
nificant problems directed at lowering the energy demands of the productive
and the nonproductive spheres. and formulating economic instrusents and
measures to support the rations] use of fuels and electric energy. Along
with specific measures with potentials for implementation in the course of
the Fifth Five-Year-Flan. it contained a number of tesks of a more long-
term character forming the preconditions for lowering the energy demands
of production and raising the level of conservation in the utilizstion of
fuels and energy in the long run.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL US! ONLY

For orienting productive and nonproductive spheres on the realization
of societywide significant measures bringing a saving of fuels and
energy. partial rationalization programs were formulated aiming at:

--moderni:ation of selected energy-demanding consumers such as boilers.
fuel and electric furnaces. compressors. distributing transformers.
pumps. ventilators. and electric motors;

--the use of secondary sources of energy. especially waste heat in metal-

lurgicnl and chemical industry and from compressor stations of transit
pipelines;

--the implementation of heavy-current semiconductor technology in tramways
and railroad transportation and in industrial mechanisms;

-raieing the technical level of burners for the combustion of gas and
liquid fuels;

--raising the quality of lining materials for industrial furnaces to lower
the loss of heat;

--raising the technical level oftheheating systems of central heating,

equipment for individual heating and warming up of warm water in the non-
productive sphere;

--protection of chimneys against the corrosive effects of condensates
rising during the burning of gas and liquid fuels;

--raising the heat-insulating capacities of the outer surfaces of buildings.

It is necessary further to intensify systematic care for the conservation
of fuels and energy. Aware of this fact, the 15th CPCZ Congress resolved
in the Guideline for the Economic and Social Development of the CSSR in

the Years 1976 to 1980 to ensure savings of fuels and energy at least in

an amount of 2 to 2.5 percent and to mobilize for the attainment of this
goal technical means in the area of production technology and energy con-
sumers. and thereby systematically lower the average consumption of fuels
and energy. 0n the basis of this basic directive. an updated state program
of rationalization of consumption of fuels and energy for the Sixth Five-
Year Plan was drawn up and approved by the CSSR government in December 1976.

This program contains a collection of technical and economic measures in
the area of industrial production. transportation. communications. and
agriculture. as well as housing and community economy. It proceeds from
the fact that the decisive share of savings of fuels and energy, the
attainment of which is anticipated in the Sixth rive-Year Plan. will be
taken care of by the implementation of rationalization measures above all
in industry with the help of the state plan; thus, large measures are to

31
P03 OFTICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

be pursued in the annual iapleaentatueul plane. neoidee thie. it contains
directives and eeaaures both in productive and nonproductive areaa which
represent potential eourcee of aavinge and orient efforts on their fornu-
lation and implementation in the plane of the Bcononic Production Units.
enterprisea. and plante. It includes not only the rationalizatuulof exiet-
ing productive capacities but aleo aeaeuraa regarding the new conatruction
of production capacitiee and the introduction of new technologiee with a
lower coneunption of energy which would ensure the lowering of energy
deaanda of the national economy aa a whole.

In comparison with the conceptualization in the Fifth Five-Year Plan. the
program ia aubstantielly expanded in a number of directiona; for inetance.
it attempta to formulate long-tern lieite of the consumption of fuele and
energy for industry. conatruction. traneportation. and agriculture; it
graapa the lowering of energy denanda of newly modernized productive end
nonproductive projecte already in the etaga of preparatory documentation;
it linke up with the preparation of rationalization eeasuree and with con-
trol of their fulfillment by industrial production directed by the national
coemittees; it makes new aeaeuree for ineuring a unified long-term energy
policy in the sector of construction and operation of inetallatione for
supplying induatry and the population with heat; it ineures the working
out of the propoaal for the optimal supplying of houaing aettleaents with
individual energy carriers for the Seventh rive-Year Plan and the longer
run; it increasee the utilization of the taeka of the etete plan for the
development of ecience and technology with a goal of lowering the conauap-
tion of fuele and energy in induatry and in the nonproductive ephere.

0n the basis of the etete program. annual plans of rationalization measures
are being drawn up for lowering the consumption of fuele and energy with
a goal of reaching and eurpassing the teak set by the crcz 15th Congress.
In the peat 2 yeara of the Sixth Five-Year Plan. we have all in all auc-
ceeded in aurpaeaing the planned aavings of fuele and energy; but the
goale eat were not attained everywhere nor wee a thorough implementation
of the eeaaurea eet down in the etete program aafeguarded. Thus. in the
period to come it is eeaential that rationalization of the conemption of
fuele and energy becoee one of the baeic elementa of management activity
on all levels in induatry.'tranaportation. conatruction. agriculture and
the housing and comaunity'erea. The tasks connected with eafeguerding

the rational conservation of fuels and energy are not small and eaay. but
they have a key significance for lowering the pressure between reeource
and coneu-ption on a atatewide level; thue their realization gone beyond
the intereeta of planta and enterprisea because a sufficiency of fuele

and energy ie one of the basic conditione of the further well-proportioned
growth of our economy.

In connection with the preparatory work for the period of the Seventh Five-
Year Plan. principlea of activity were worked out aieing at the further
aystenatic lowering of the energy deeande of all key branchee and menu-
factures. we anticipate that individual production departaenta will

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY

verify. in the course of this year. the average consumption of all energy-
demanding production and on the basis of detailed analysis and with the
utilization of comparisons and experiences from abroad will propose for
individual years of the S venth Five-Year Plan sets of technical and organ-
izational actions for suc essive realization. especially on an investment
character. leading to a systematic lowering of the average consumption of
fuels and energy. In drawing up the proposals for measures. the depart-
ments will proceed from the chief directives of rationalization. oriented
on tho inplamentation of new technology. the utilization of secondary
energy sources. the raising of the efficiency of machines and equipsent,
the lowering of losses of energy. technological innovations in the produc-
tion processes and the liquidation of outmoded operations. the implementa-
tion of measuring and regulating technology. the optimalization of the
regime of fuel and energy consumption of fuels and energy in selected
energy-demanding production processes will become binding tasks of the
state plan and an effective economic incentive for the leading workers
will be introduced for their lowering according to plan.

In the period of the Seventh five-Year Plan we tesporarily anticipate a
new state program of the rationalisation of the consumption of fuels and
energy which will proceed from the fact that individual rationalization
measures will be firmly anchored in the corresponding parts of the state
plan of growth of the national economy and there will be above all a view
toward large breakthrough measures, in the implementation of which a
greater number of departments. national committees. or other organs and
organizations will take part.

Service Industries
Bratislava TECHNICKA PRAGA in Czech Aus 78 pp 13-16

[Article by Engr Bohumir Tejnicky: "Rationalization of the Consumption of
Fuels and Energy in the Nonproductive Sphere"]

[Text] The nonproductive sphere is a significant element of the national
economy not only from the viewpoint of its significance for the growth

and regeneration of work potential but also on the side of the consumption
of fuel and energy resources.

The consumption of fuels and energy in the nonproductive sphere is deter-
mined by the needs for the fund of housing mainly for the purposes of
heating and the heating of water and for other goals such as cooking.
inessentisl electricity. and individual motoring. but also by the need

for housing settlement and supersettlement facilities. including community
transportation. public lighting. the consumption of offices. stores.
services and crafts. health services. schools. cultural. recreational,

and bodybuilding installations and other nonproductive consumption.

The share of the nonproductive sphere in the final consumption of the
entire national economy is constantly rising and in comparison with 1960.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when it amounted only to 26 percent. it is today about 32 percent. As a
result of the rise in living standards. we can expect a further growth
for the future. By 1980. it is expected that the area of the nonproduc-
tive sphere will attain the level of consumption of 20.6 million tap/r.
of which the incremenet during the Sixth Five-Year Plan will be 3.5 nil-
lion tmp. which signifies exceeding the guideline by 66 percent in this
period. Because the safeguarding of the needed fuel and energy resources
for the development of the nonproductive sphere under consideration is
ever more difficult for the national economy. it is necessary in a funda-
mental way to lower energy demands in this area.

State Program for the Period of the Fifth Five-Year Plan

The problems of the rationalization of the consumption of fuels and energy
in the national economy of our republic has come to the fore of the inter-
est of a wide public since the cpcz 16th Congress. With a view to the

fact that the solution of all the connected problems is a basic precondi-
tion for the successful development of the economy of the CSSR. the

federal government accepted, by its resolution No 51/72, the State Program
for Rationalization in the Conservation of Fuels and Electric Energy. which
became the basic instrument for the development of organizational. managing
and creative work for safeguarding the rational utilization of fuels and
electric energy.

This state program for the Fifth Five-Year Plan also contained specific
material measures for the rationalization of the consumption of fuels and
energy in the nonproductive sphere. measures which were to create the
conditions for the further efficient development of this area and safe-
guard the preconditions for comprehensive solution in the sector of tech-
nical policy to heating and heating water. the rationalization of heating
systems. the insuring of optimal regulation and measuring of the consump-
tion of hot water and hot nonpotable water and the improvement of heat
insulation qualities of outer surfaces of buildings for the minimalization
of losses of heat in their heating.

In the sector of technical policy, the FHTIR [expansion unknown] drew up

a working schedule in 1972 of tasks safeguarding the rational utilization
of fuels and electric energy for heating in the nonproductive sphere in-
cluding the preparation of hot nonpotable water. The working schedule
became an inseparable component of the material measures of the state
program and provided a solution of these problems:

-the setting of the fundamental criteria for the optimal utilization of
individual forms of energy for heating and the preparation of hot nonpotable
water and for their implementation in the proposal of the regional concepts
of energy supply for the nonproductive sphere;

--the carrying out of the classification of the territory of the CSSR
according to degree of pollution of the atmosphere with harmful substances
from combustion processes;

34
FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY
30! 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

--the formulation of a comprehensive concept of the production of boilerr
of the output series 0.016 to 3.5 HH (9.01 to 3 keel/h):

--the comprehensive solution of heating systems of central heating for
the aodernization of existing buildings and new housing end civil construc-
tion;

-the execution of the analysis of the technical end economic level of
selected individual consuacrsof donestic production and imports for heating

and the preparation of hot nonpotable water including the proposal of mea-
sures for raising their level;

--the elaboration oi a comprehensive program of improving the heat-
insulating qualities of the outer surfaces of buildings;

--the evaluation of existing methods and the elaboration of proposals for
the protection of chimneys in housing and civil construction against cor-
rossive effects of condensates arising during the combustion of liquid and
gas fuels.

In the course of the Fifth Five-Year Plan we did not succeed in finishing
a program for the production of measuring and regulatory technology for
heating systems consonant with the needs of new construction and the
modernization of existing construction. including insuring servicing serv-
ices and the production of replacement parts. For this reason this set of
problems was shifted forward into the new state program of rationalization
of the consumption of fuels and energy for the period of the Sixth Five-
Year Plan and the longer run.

As an implementational measure of the state program for the Fifth Five-
Year Plan. in CKD Dukla ICeskomorsvska-Kolben-Danek, National Enterprise
(Heavy Hschinery Plants)] National Enterprise the leading workplace for
scientific-technical development for the area of heating systems of central
heating was created with statewide competence which, despite initial diffi-
culties. is fulfilling the tasks set and is successfully seeing to the
solution of problems of the consumption of fuels and energy in heating
systems. Domestic and foreign cooperation of this sort is ever developing
and the results obtained testify to the fact that in this'sector the

tasks are well taken care of.

A basic measure aiming atlthe problem of implementing the measuring of the
consumption of heet‘and hot nonpotable water and the regulation of the
temperature of heating and nonpotable water in apartment houses and in
projects of civil amenities was the publication of FHTIR Guideline Ho 3/76
"Several Measures in Capital Construction for Economy in the Use of Heat
in the Housing and Community Economy. with Effectiveness from 1 January
1975." The insufficient implementation of this guideline in new construc-
tion is connected with the failure to insure the production of measuring
and regulatory technology in the needed amount on the part of FHHTS and
FHVS [expansion unknown]. as will be explained further on.

35
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 significant contribution for improving the heat-insulation qualities of
outer surfaces of buildings was the comprehensive economic evaluation of
construction expenditures on projects with optimally insulated outer sur-
face against savings in investment and operational expenditures for heating.
drawn up by the CSR and 888 construction ministries in 1972. The conclu-
sions of this evaluation aimed at a further development of building struc-
tures for the mass implementation of types of buildings and gradually are
penetrating into the innovating programs of the material production base

of construction. but innovation is a long-term affair and is not taking
place at such state that we can be content.

For the protection of chimneys against corrosive effects of condensates
arising during the combustion of liquid and gas fuels, the licensed pro-
duction of special fireclay segments has been introduced which will be
employed in new construction and in the reconstruction of existing chimneys.

State Program for the Period of the Sixth Five-Year Plan

The deteriorating situation in regard to insuring an increase in fuel and
energy resources and the growing disproportion between resource and con-
sumption have led the 15th CPCZ Congress to establish the guideline for
the Sixth Five-Year Plan, among other things, the necessity of more
efficiently conserving and evaluating all kinds of fuels and energy. of
pushing through the holding to norms in the consumption of fuels and
energy. and of orienting ourselves on making the energy economy more effi-
cient. In harmony with this guideline. the CSSR government ordered the
formulation of a new state program of rationalization of the consumption
of fuels and energy. which was approved by enactment No 287 of 9 Decczber
1976.

For the nonproductive sphere this state program contains binding measures
in the sectors of:

-modernization of energy consumers for heating and the preparation of
hot nonpotable water;

--regulation and measuring of the consumption of heat and hot nonpotable
water in housing and civil construction;

--protection of standing chimneys and new chimney construction:
-cutting the losses of heat by the outer surfaces of buildings;

--rstionalization of the consumption of electric energy in lighting
technology;

--supplyiug of industry and population with heat;
-op¢nnalization ofthe energy supply of housing and settlements;

u-rationalization of the consumption of fuels and energy in transportation.
36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

Modernization of energy consumers for heating and the preparation of hot
nonpotable water is taken care of in harmony wiuuthesegmented rationa-
lization programs elaborated by the FHTIR. The evaluting commissions of
the state testing laboratories in Prague and Brno employ in the execution
of state testing. in keeping with law No 30/68 8b.. elaborate classifica-
tion criteria with progressive parameters especially from the viewpoint
of the efficiency of consumers and thus contribute to raising their level.

For implementing regulation and measurement of the consumption of heating
and hot nonpotable water. the FHHTS and FHVS were directed to put forward
a program for theproduccion of the necessary inatrumentationsl technology
for the extent of planned new construction and sodernization of construc-
tion in the Sixth Five—Year Plan. In view of the fact that neither de-
partment presented the programs in the time allocated, it was necessary

to include the annual volume of production of the main instruments and
installations into the guideline for the preparation of the plan for 1979.
which was approved by cssa government decree No 3lA/77. The FHTIP is
discussing the handling of production in the volumes for 1979 and the
longer run at the present tine directly with the two engineering departments.

For insuring the protection of chimneys. the Czechoslovak ceramics plants
are expanding the variety and content of the production of chimney lining
and molded bricks from special fire clay. To take care of repairs after
accidents of chimneys in old construction, the possibility of importing

flexible steel chimney lining from the Hungarian People's Republic is
being examined at the present time.

Cutting the losses of heat by the outer surfaces of buildings is a very
complex problem, connected partly with insuring building construction cor-
responding to heat-technological qualities and partly with maintaining
technological discipline in the actual construction of buildings. The
following were established as the state program: the elaboration of plans
for the production of mineral. ceramic. and glass fibers. and of products
from them for heat-insulation purposes. expansion of the production and
application of layered surfaces with heat insulating fibers. eventually

of furtherznewly dexfloped structures with heat resistance of a minimum
of R-0.9Sm . '0. RH ) and limiting the production of construction pieces
not attaining this value. testing the efficiency of the application of
triple glass windows. the proposing of methods of random checks of the
heat-technical qualities of construction pieces at production and utilize-
tion places and the steady application of thermovisual tests for mass-
produced types of buildings of comprehensive housing construction in
various material varieties and basil cases of experimental construction.

A steady transition in the production ofconstruction pieces while main-

taining established heat resistance is being carried out. The analysis

carried out of the efficiency of triple glass for presently manufactured
windows has indbeddemonstrated the possibility of obtaining heat savings
in the amount of about 810 huh (0.7 Goal) per housing unit per year.

37
FOR O!?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

although before final decision about its inpleeentation it is necessary
to work out a sore advantageous construction result and test the possi-
bility of including its increased price into expenses for the apartment.
The method of carrying out randon controls of the heat-technical quali-
ties of outer construction pieces at the producerd is nornally carried
out; at the utilizers' it is prepared from 1979 on. Theraovisual tests
in the suggested extent of contruction have already provided a number of
positive results which contribute to improving the technology of produc-
tion and the actual construction of buildings.

Rationalization of the consumption of electric energy in lighting tech-
nology strikes, among other places in the sector of the sodarnization of
public lighting. up against the insufficient production of progressive
light sources and luminares. which must be taken care of in Tesla holes-
ovice Rational Enterprise and Elektrosvit Nove Zsmky National Enterprise.

The probless of supplying industry and population with heat. which is to
do away with the present lack of coordination in the construction and
operation of energy sources and provide a unified plan for the management
of this inportant part of the energy economy of the state. is the subject
of a special report which the FHPE and FHTIR will present this year to
the CSSR government.

For the optinalization of the energy supply of housing settlements, the
FHTIR and FHPE worked out on the basis of a task set by CSSR government
decree No 123/76 in the past year an extensive study in which an anlysis
was carried out of the previous methods of energy supply, the chief causes
for heat losses and their extent were ascertained. and the possibilities
for a rational solution for newly built residential groupings were pro-
posed including necessary aessures for iaplesentation in the Seventh
Five-Year Plan and the longer run. They are at present working the re-
sults of the study into the proposal for the CSSR government decree on
the optiaal\technical and,econonic solution of the supply of fuels and
energy to housing settle-eats built.

in the sector of the rationalization of the consulption of fuels and
energy in transportation.'the thyristorization of T3 tranways in urban
aaaa transit and the replacement of rotating convertors in converting
stations of transportation enterprises with silicon ones have been lag-
ging behind the schedule set in the state program. The causes of the
lag in realization of the aessures ordered are complex and do not lie
only in the insufficient capacity of the producers. In cooperation with
the CSR Urban Council and the SSR Urban Council. regional national com-
eittees, and production departeenta, the FHTIR is handling the situation
that has developed. Meanwhile the problem of the develop-cut of trolley-
bus transport in urban agglonerstions. which serges into the problem of
insuring the production of trolleybuses with thyristor regulation. re-
eains unresolved.

38
FOR OPPICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OPVICIAL USB ONLY

\

That in the nonproduction sphere there exist significant reserves.
especially in heating and the preparation of hot nonpotsble water is a
known fact. Through the-measures of the state progran of the rationali-
zation of the consumption of fuels and energy. the fulfillment of which
the cssn government ordered by its decree. conditions are formed for
reaching a decisive turnaround and the gradual removal of the dispropor-
tion between demand and need of energy resources. In order that an
insufficiency of energy may not become a brake on the further develop-
ment of the nonproductive sphere. it is necessary to mobilise all forces
for fulfilling the established measures.

Reasons for High Use in CSSR
Bratislava TECHNICKA PRACA in Slovak Aug 78 p 36

[Article by Dr Engr Eugen Zunko: “Reasons for High Use of Energy in the
CSSR"]

[Text] In comparison with some industrially developed countries. the CSSR
is marked by a substantially higher demand for energy per individual
inhabitant. In comparison with the 6888 with 100 percent average fuel-
energy demand for a single inhabitant. the can has 95 percent. the PRO

82 percent. the USSR 71 percent. the PPR 68 percent. France 60 percent

and Austria only 55 percent.

The high demand for energy in the CSSR derives mainly from the composition
of the primary sources of energy and from the structure of Czechoslovak
industry. The analysis of the demand for energy shows its causes and
simultaneously provides a stimulus for proposals for reducing it.

In the composition of fossil fueis. solid fuels predominant in the CSSR
with a larger share of brown coal and lignite. i.e., fuels with lower
heat output. for instance. b'. 1990 the heat output of brown coal from the
Sverma Basin will decline to .o.eoo U.kg"1.

The combustion of brown coal and lignites with a lower heat output repre-
sents. compared with liquid and gas fuels. on the average 20 percent
higher consumption.

Through the modernization of boilers. the construction of new central
economic sources of heat, the use of fluid combustion of less valuable
fuels. the curtailing of losses in combustion. especially in small boilers.
the automatisstion of combustion processes. and the improvement of serv-
ice and upkeep of combustion installations. we are insuring savings of
fuel.

The composition of industrial production in the 6853 is based on branches
that are energy-demanding. These are metallurgy, engineering, electro-
technicsl industry. chemicals. the production of cellulose and paper, the
production of construction materials. glass. ceramics. and so on. The

39
FOB OPPICIAL US! OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

share of energy in expenditures on engineering products is insignificant.
although in the metals used. energy forms a basic share of expenditures.
We are obtaining savings of energy through innovative progress in the pro-
duction of metals. rolling material. in chemicals in the production of
sulphuric and nitric acid. a-onie. construction materials. plastics and
fibers.

Lower technological and energy efficiency is connected with the existing
technological production processes and with energy consumers in the pro-
ductive and nonproductive spheres.

He must insure energy savings through the modernization of technological
equipment. for instance of industrial furnaces. rolling mills. drying

kilns. galvanizing and other installations. Energy users in the produc-
tive and nonproductive spheres should nest the strictest requirements in
their efficiency and meet the top standards of production in the world.

Insufficient utilization of waste heat in Czechoslovak industry. This
involves the utilization of waste heat from technological processes. waste
oils and gases. bio-gases. reactor heat. and combustible wastes of every
kind. Increasing the savings of fuels and energy will arise from the

application of heat pusps in the utilization of low-potential heat. and
also of waste heat from compressor statumsand fro- cooling towers.

especially in condensation power plants.
Unjustified high consumption of heat in central heating is connected:

-with incorrect dimensions of heating systems without their correct
servicing and upkeep;

--with insufficient automatic equithermal regulation of heat;

--with unsuitable measurement of the consumption of heat in heating. with
the measurement of hot nonpotabh meta and the regulation of its heat.

--with insufficient insulating qualities of buildings.

Through the reeoval of the mentioned shortcomings. savings will be obtained
in the consumption of fuels.

lnedequacy of sources of light for illumination in industry. transport
in the community sphere and in households. New rational sources 0.
light. the development of which is already complete. should be rapidly
brought into production.

insufficient applicedonof semiconductor technology. Savings of energy
will arise through the introduction of thyristor pulse regulation of
directed drive phases. rolling and paper machines. in railroad traction.
in urban mass transit, in the transistorization of signaling technology.
and in other equipment.

60
I I |
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ion orncm. use ONLY '

The size of some Czechoslovak engineering and ele trotechnical products
is high and does not attain the worldwide stander . A larger site means
a greater share of energy in products. It is necessary to insure the
technical and quality parameters of Czechoslovak products during the
simultaneous curtailing of their size.

The need to raise the technical, technological. organisation. and manage-
aent level of Czechoslovak production and apply measuring and regulating
technology to a greater extent. He must utilise basic stocks better. in-
crease the productivity of labor. and exploit existing reserves to
increase the volume of production.

The high demand for energy and thcpasaive energy balance of primary
resources of energy and fuels in the cssn. together with an annual in-
crease of the need for these resources of around 3 percent. demands the
realisation of proposals mentioned here and elsewhere for the saving of
fuels and energy. The relative annual saving of fuels and energy in the
Czechoslovak economy ought to hover around 2 percent. The State Program
for the Rationalization of Consumption of Puels and Energy. approved by
the CSSR government for the Sixth Five-Year Plan. also calls for insuring
savings of fuels and energy. For the attainment of savings of fuels and
energy, it is necessary to utilize in industry. transportation. agricul-
ture. and in the community sphere an improvement campaign and the activ-
ity of brigades of socialist labor.

COPYRIGHT: TECHNICKA PRACA. 1978

9105
C80: 2600

61
’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EAST GERMANY

ECONOMIC PROBLEMS SEEN LEADING TO REFORM
Hsaburg CAPITAL in Ger-an No 12. Dec 78 p 315

[Unattributed article: "But it Is Hoving--The COR ls Tinkering with s
New Econonic Refore")

i ' .
[Text] Life as a debtor of the Heat cannot go on for the
GOR. After the to'e and fro's of their dictated econoay

the ruling party is now trying with a guarded liberalisa.
to achieve higher production.

Elli Knickelbein of the state cable works in Schwerin is the naae of the
latest heroine of the SEO. The COR-lady insulates cable. not only in
large quantity--60 kilometers per ahift--but also so well that she has
for the third tiae been awarded the honorary title "distinguished quality
worker."

As usual. whenever the econoay of the COR begins to flounder. the SEO
lets pioneering heroes of labor eaerge fro- the aasses of its proletarian
erny. And as usual} this bresages iaainent radical changes--and this is
the case in this instance as well. it is now necessary to achieve "a
change of the national econouy (run a predominantly extensive type of
production to a predolinantly intensive type of production." as Prof Otto
Reinhold. rector of the Acadeay of Social Sciences oftheCentrel Connittee
of the SEO. expressed in classical globbledegook. "To express it even
more clearly." his party chief Erich Ronecier added, "the question in-
volves not a regard for quality and effectiveness, but how to sake these
factors the decisive criteria of action."

The necessity of all of this was in the final analysis also nade clear at
the Eighth Congress of the Central Committee of the reigning party. held
shortly before the current 5-Year Plan's half-tine. There Erich Ronecker,
Prise Minister Hilli Stoph. labor union boss Harry Tisch. and top econonic
functionary Guenther Hittag let fly such conplaints about the COR the likes
of which are usually relegated by theparty to the reels of "anticonaunist
agitation."

42
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

For instance:
--"In many sectors our production is still too expensive";

-"8hoddinesa. waste of effort and absenteeism are irreconcilable with
work ethic and socialist morality".

--”The amount of extensive investment projects is still too high; incon-
plete investments continue to be too high."

This official acknowledgement has much in common with the criticism voiced
by the con dissident Rudolf Behro. who has been sentenced to 8 years in
prieon--nsmely. that just about everything that has been undertaken has
been characterized by a "characteristically poor relationship between
investment and'reaults." Hell-known economists of the party see the cause
for this in the current system of economic management and planning.

Indeed. even the "balance of 7 successful years.” recently conpiled by
honecker. points to difficulties--when it is supplemented with suppressed
data. These data show that in the first 7 years of the rule of Ulbricht's
successor. from 1971 to 1977. the ON? climbed by some ‘2 percent. The
rate of growth was thus not greater than during the last 7 years of
Ulbricht. from'l96‘ to 1970, in spite of a more favorable initial position.

However. under Ulbricht the favorable balance of trade amounted to almost
6 billion valute narks. Under Ronecker trade deficits have grown to the
tune of some 19 billion valute marks. This debt-path. along which the
SED leads its people into a better life. cannot be trod indefinitely.
Thus. Hauxkerconcluded perceptively. "the develop-ant of imports as well
as exports concerns vital questions of our national economy." ”0f vital
interest to our nation." would be the task he assigned. a "rationalization
in large measure.“

Similar things have been heard from East Berlin on many occasions. but
basically nothing has changed. For example. the Council of National
Economy declared in the sum-er of 1963 that the state economic management
would lead "to wastegee and violations of economic laws. and would thus
slow our econonic and social development." Aid would be forthcoeing from
the "new economic system." an economic reform. which. however. had to be
prematurely abandoned as unfeasible. Indeed. in 1965 the party expert
for economic questions. Dr Erich Apel, committed suicide.

Thus the GDR workers trundle on in the manner that the party has crammed
into them for years-plans had to be fulfilled according to quantity;
quality was unimportant. And when suddenly quality was demanded. the
ton-ideology in production could not be liquidated. Prof Harry Nick.
director of research of the Academy of Social Sciences. recited a list
of effects that would result if "the planning of the GDR is directed too
single-mindedly toward quantitative growth in production.“ For example:

(.3
‘ rot orncm. use our
’08 OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

--"Divergence between supply and demand":
--"ﬂoarding of resources";

--"£xceasive operative sanagesent expenses";
-"0vertiee coupled with downtime."

Of course. the workers cake a hefty profit within the socialist reality.
Next to their pay they receive a bonus for the quantity produced. but
not for quality; therefore. they produce in loads. It is thus obvious
that in this vexed econoeic situation planning nathods that only yester-
day were considered sacred, even though they linited progress. nust be
considered particularly irritating. Changes have thus been initiated.

To bring the problem to a col-on denoelnator it is dee-ed necessary to
decentralite econolic decision-asking that has nestled high up in the
pinnacles of the state. Profits. which have to be turned over to the
state.will in the future play a more important role in the evaluation of
a plant's achievesent. This leans less for the state and sore for the
plant. Of course. this presupposes that the inflexible price formation
unuld no longer be a taboo of the party. Such suggestions leave the in-
pression that the party is after all loving toward reforla. or at least
is bringing rekuasunder discussion. Por. as Honecker stated. the ques-
tion involves probably "the lost far-reaching inprovenent of the organise
of our national econoey."

"lsprovenent" has thus becoee the new slogan for refer-s. In the summer
of 1953 there was talk of a "new course" and a decade later of a "new
econoeic systes.” Even then. under Ulbricht. slogans of "decentraliza-
tion." "profit." and "price for-ation" enjoyed wide popularity. but hardly
anything has changed. how these good old acquaintances are experiencing
resurrection under “another.

Thus. within the GDR there are plans against plans. Hhat was the song of
Bert Brecht. who venerated the con systee? "Yes. sake ee a plan. and be
it but a great show. and make no a second plan. neither of then will go."

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Gruner 6 Jahr AG 6 Co

2‘0

‘6
'0! OIPICIAL US! ONLY