FOR OFFICIAL USl-l ONLY

JPRS L/10304
4 February 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIORS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LABOR

Uzbek Labor Problems and Prospects
(G. A. Shilter; ISTORIYA 888R, Nov-Dec 81) .......

DBHOGRAPHY
Development of Cities in Oil, Gas Regions in West

Siberian Plein
(COROD V SIBIRI, 1980) ...........................
UZBEK LABOR PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
Moscow ISTORIYA SSSR in Russian No 6, Nov-Dec 81 pp 26-40

[Article by c. A. Shiater: "Sources for the Replenishment of Uzbekistan's Working
Class During the Stage of Developed Socialism")

[Text] Among the basic directions in the development of social sciences during the
present stage. the 26th CPSU Congress placed research on the processes, which are
taking place in the social structure of Soviet society. in one of the first places.
The scientific analysis of replenishment sources for the working class occupies an
important place in the study of this problem.

A number of works, devoted to labor resource problems and the reproduction of man-
power in which this subject is touched upon, were published in Uzbekistan during the
Sixties and Seventies. However, questions on ways to more rationally use the

sources for replenishing the working class in the republic have still not received
the necessary treatment.

The goal of analyzing the activity of the republic's party, soviet and economic
organs in solving this problem has been assigned in the article. This will permit
more attention to be attracted to it and contribute to the dissemination of the

experience which has been accumulated in regions having an analogous demographic
situation.

t t t

The ratio of working class replenishment sources is determined primarily by the
social structure of Soviet society and by those changes which are taking place in it.
During the stage of mature socialism. the tendency toward the rapid coming together
of classes and social groups and progressive eradication of the differences between
them is the leading one. L. I. Brezhnev declared in the report of the CPSU Central
Committee to the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union: "Our
goal is the creation of a society in which there will not be a division of people
into classes. And it is possible to say definitely: He are gradually but confi-
dently moving toward this great goal."

The movement of the Soviet people towards social uniformity, which is determined by
the consistent policy of the party and state concerning the internationalization of

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lllc CUUIILIY S l'L‘UlIUlnlc. auctdl dllu puaLLluul like. as alluvul caau Au tut: 5Lut~au5
rapprochement of the nations and nationalities in their social structure. This is
reflected primarily in the increase in the propo tior of republic working class
detachments. In 1959. workers were 39.2 percent of the employed population in
Uzbekistan;, in 1970 -- 65.7 percent; and in 1979 (based on Central Statistical
Directorate data) -- 52.9 percent.

working class replenishment sources are identical for all the country, but their
ratio and use are conditioned a great deal by a republic's specialization within
the all-union division of labor. This specialization is planned by the union
government depending on natural conditions and material and labor resources. They
are determined by the settlement conditions which took shape historically, by the
unturu of migration processes. by national traditions. etc. The fact that the
development of industry took place and is taking place where there is a significant
predominance in the population of rural area inhabitants who are oriented on
working in the agrarian sector of the economy and in the branches associated with
it, is a peculiarity of the Central Asian region, including Uzbekistan. Large
natural increases and an extremely low outflow of representatives of the indigenous
nationalities beyond the limits of their republic, which is conditioned by ethnic
features and national traditions. are typical of this region.

The working class itself is the main source for replenishing it. K. Marx wroue

that "the most progressive workers are fully aware that the future of their class
and consequently of mankind entirely depends on the upbringing of the rising
generation" . The Communist Party is displaying tireless concern for the replenish-
ment of the leading class in socialist society with its sons and daughters.

As the works of Soviet sociologists show. the children of worker families provided
a large part of the working class replacements during the Sixties and Seventies.
Thus. in the Len ngrad machine building industry, the reached 56 percent of all
those questioned ; in the Moscox .egion -- 77 percent ; in Bashkiriya -- 58.1 ;
and hiUzbekistan , 51.3 percent (1971) in the Chirchikskiy Electrochemical Combine,
[the Tashkent Electronic Equipment Plant, and in the "Tashtekstil'mash" Plant.

The mentioned conformity to law has an objective nature. However. a subjective
factor plays a large role in it. A great deal of work is being done in Uzbekistan
under the leadership of the party organization to increase the portion of hereditary
workers in the overall number of industria1 personnel. Party, trade union and
Komsomol organizations are indoctrinating the rising generation in revolutionary

nnd work traditions. Museums and rooms of fame, in which rich material on worker
houses is presented, are being established in enterprises. Documents on workers,
whose fathers took part in carrying out the socialist revolution in Uzbekistan,

are on exhibit in the Museum of Military and Work Glory in the Plant imeni
Oktyabr'skaya revolyutsiya. ‘

Among the famous worker houses of the republic, one cannot fail to mention the Os'kin
family (Tashkentskoye Aviation Production Association) whose ancestors,- Mikhail
Nikolnyevich, and his wife. Klagdiys Vasil'yevna gave 60 years to their native plant
and brought five children to it ; the Nuritdinov family of mettalurgists who are

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
working in the rolling workstp of the Uzbek HettallurgicalPlsnt imeni V. I. Lenin
for the third decade, -- the senior member of the family -- Said, a Hero of
Socialist Labor —— for more than 30 years; the Val'kov family who have worked in
one of th machine building plants of Uzbekistan's capital in toto for more than
100 years ; and the ikramovs from the Namanganskiy [avrov] Cloth Combine

imeni 25th CPSU Congress, the "oldest" worker dynas in the republic -- the total
length of its work activity is more than 250 years.

investigations which have been conducted by us in a number of Uzbekistan's
enterprises, testify that many of their workers are second and even third gen-
erations of worker dynasties. In the Chirchikskiy Electrochemical Combine, the
parents or close relatives of 18 percent of those questioned in 1961 and of 23
percent in 1971 had worked there. In the "Tashtekstil'mash" Plant, the parents of
23 percent of the workers had worked in the plant according to a 1971 investigation
(some had worked there frOm the day of its founding or had been evacuated with

the plant during the Great Patriotic War).

it is necessary to point cut that statistics do not give exhaustive information
on working class replenishment sources; however, information from specifi:
sociological research in the republic's industrial enterprises confirms the
conclusion that the role of the working class as a source for forming its own
replacements is growing in Uzbekistan just as throughout the entire country, and,
consequentlyl the absolute number and prOportion of hereditary workers are
increasing.

The kolkhoz peasantry continued to be one of the major sources for replenishing
the working class during the Sixties and Seventies. However, as is pointed out
in the likerature, its share gradually decreased on the whole throughout the
country. By the Seventies, the opportunities for drawing kolkhoz workers

into the ranks of the working class had practically been exhausted in many areas
of the country in connection with the rapid urbanization rates. whereas the
USSR rural population decreased by 3.1 million individuals during the period
between the 1959 and 1970 All-Union Population Census, it decreased by 6.9
million individuals between 1970 and 1979. In nine years, the overall number of
rural peOple decreased by 6.5 poigts at a time when the urban pOpulation share
increased from 56 to 62 percent.

The nontioned tendency does not operate with equal force in all regions of the
reunlry. Based on the degree of decrease criterion, the most urbanized republics
of the Soviet Union now are: The Estonian SSR (70 percent), the RSFSR (69 percent),
the latvinn SSR (68 percent), the Armenian SSR (66 percent), The Ukrainian $58

(61 percent), the Lithuanian SSR (61 percent), the Belorussian SSR (55 percent)

and 'hu Kazakh SSR (56 percent).

However, in the republics of the Central Asian region where -— with the exception
of Tajikistan -- the preportion of the rural papulaticn also had a tendency to
decrease, the absolute number of the rurual population grew in Kirghizia by 18
percent, in thekistan by 21 percent, andéin Turkmenia by 28 percent during the
period between the 1970 and 1979 census. The highest groygh in rural papulation
was observed in Tajikistan (36 percent) during this period.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thus, in contrast to a number of the country's central rayons, the rural pepulation,
including the kolkhoz peasantry, has large potential opportunities available in
Uzbekistan. just as in the other Central Asian republics, not only for its own
reprodanion but also for replenishing the working class.

When evaluating the labor resources of Uzbekistan and the opportunities for re-
distributing a portion of the able-bodied population from agricultural production

to industry. planning organs proceed from the fact that the population is distribut-
ed extremely unevenly over the republic's territory. In this connection, some
rayons and oblasts have experienced a shortage in manpower; others w- a surplus

in it. 0n 1 January 1980. the population density in Uzbekistan reached 35.2
individuals per one square kilometer. However. whereas it was equal only to 5.6
individuals in the Karakalpaksksys ASSR, 9.0 in Bukharskaya Oblast. 25.7 in
Dzhizakskaya Oblast, and 40.7 in Kashkadar'inskaya Oblast; it was 328.5 individuals
in Andizhanskaya 0blast,_2h6.l in {grganskaya Oblast. 233.6 in Khorezmskaya Oblast.
and 143.0 in Namanganskaya Oblast. The population density continues to grow in

a number of overpopulated oblasts. From 1970 to 1980 alone. it increased by 76.5
individuals in Andizhanskaya Oblast. by 56.5 in Perganskaya Oblast. and by 35.8 in
Namanganskaya Oblast.

In these oblasts, the size of sown areas for each worker employed in agriculture
is decreasing more and more sharply. This is having a negative effect on the
Opportunities for using existing labor resources on the kolkhozes. and consequent-
ly, on increasing labor productivity.

Estimates of the UzSSR State Committee for Labor show that scientific and technical
progress and the growth of labor productivity, which has been achieved based on it,
are leading -- especially in agriculture -- to the freeing of workers and making
the redistribution of a portion of the labor resources in branch and territorial
sections possible and at the same time necessary. In 1970, 29 percent of the
total number of Uzbekistan's able-bodied kolkhoz workers could have been freed.
During subsequent years, the percent of workerskeptabove the required number
became even higher on the republic's cotton growing kolkhozes.

The study of the nature of migration processes and the distribution and use of
labor resources in Uzbekistan leads many researchers to conclu’t that the needs

of industry for working cadres cannot be satisfied by the move of the republic's
surplus rural pOpulation to the cities. In carrying out the CPSU's policy tc
equalize the economic levels of the republics and in considering the specifics of
migration, the low mobility of the rural -- especially the indigenous -- population
and the high prosperity of a number of rural regions in labor resources, the
Communist Party of Uzbekistan is carrying out a broad system of measures to indust-
rialize the republic's small and medium cities and rural rayons. In doing this.
the party proceeds from the fact that the siting of industrial installations in
agrarian type rayons and the drawing of the rural population into the ranks of

the working class will contribute to changing the people's way of life and their
social and psychological constitution.

The creation of industrial installations in small and medium cities and in rural
areas does not always mean the construction there of new independent enterprises;

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
as a rule, they are branches of plants, factories and large industrial associations
or their shops which produce parts. The economic effectiveness of the creation of
these installations does not evoke any doubts. Their opening does not require
large capital investments. The plants themselves, when they have transferred

the output of individual units and components to the branches, receive an opport-
unity to concentrate their efforts on the more important tasks. In addition, the
creation of these small enterprises is not connected with the move of workers,

large scale housing construction, etc. F. Engels wrote: in order that “... people,
who have been ousted from agriculture, not be left without work or forced to

crowd iaiﬂ cities. it is necessary to employ them in industrial work in the village
itselfﬂ

The policy of improving the planning of siting productive forces and the construct-
ion of industrial installations in small cities and urban settlements was reflected
in thc decisions of the 16th (1961), 17th (1966) and lath (1971) Congresses of

the Uzbek Communist Party.

Speaking at the 19th Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan (1976). Sh. R.
Rashidov pointed out that. within the system of measures which have been carried
out by the Uzbek Communist Party for the development of productive forces. the
equalizing of the economic development level of the oblasts and the industrializa—
tion of rural rayons and small cities have had large social significance. It is
necessary to follow this line in the future. The erection of enterprises in

the village will permit a working class to be formed thgre and productive forces
to be developed in a more planned and rational manner.

It is necessary to point out that the work performed in Uzbekistan to industrialize
agrarian rayons and small cities contributes to the policy of limiting the growth
of large cities and to the development of the economic structure of prospective
small and medium cities.

Akhangsran is one of the new industrial centers which arose during the years of the
8th and 9th Five-Year Plans in Uzbekistan. A cement combine, a ferro»concrete

item plant, the "Santekhlit" Plant, and the "Stroyplastmass" Combine were built
here. The urban settlement grew with new housing and social and personal services
enterprises. Akhangaran became a rayga center in 1971, and was converted to a

city of ohlnst subordination in 1976.

The deveIOpment path of another city in Tashkentskaya Oblaat, Narimanov -- the
former Bektemir, is similar. Its industrial appearance took shape during the

years of the 9th Five-Year Plan. A total of 50 industrial enterprises and con-
strurtion. motor transport and other organizations and establishments were Operating
here in i9)6. The numhvr of enterprises doubled in comparison with 1970; and

the volume of products produced, which number more than 20 types of different
industrial items (metal slrucrurn. reinforced concrete, etc.) tripled. Housing
assets (Jess individual humans) exceeded 100,000 square meters; and sghools, pre-
suhnui establishments, HUinlnlS, dispensaries. etc. are being built.

In accordance with ”T?w in-i: Directions for the Development of the USSR National
Economy for J97e-i980” which was adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress, even more

5

HIV. ()i-FlCI/U. USE ONLY
substantial changes [or the better in the siting of productive forces in Uzbekistan
took place during the 10th Five-Year Plan. As was pointed out during the 20th
Congress of the Coummnist Party of Uzbekistan (1981), the Central Committee of

the Communist Party and the government of the republic did not disregard a single
valuable initiative aimed at giving a new and vital impulse to small cities,
settlements and rayon centers. During the 10th Five-Year Plan, 290 branches and
workshops, in which almost 30,000 people were employed. were created in Uzbekistan.

Significant successes have been achieved in Andizhanskaya Oblast. During the
years of the 10th Five-Year Plan, 60 enterprises, branches and workshops were put
into operation in various rayons of the oblast. The cemmissioning of the first
section of the Andizhanskiy Cotton Combine a year ahead of schedule was a great
victory for the oblast's working class' party organization. Five of its branches,

two of which were put into operahion by the opening day of the 26th CPSU Congress,
are being erected in the oblast.

There were, all told. three industrial enterprises on the territory of unploughed
Dzhizakskaya Oblast in the early 1960’s. They became more than 60 during the 10th Five-
Year Plan. Alkaline battery plants; a carpet combine; a lead-cement mine; a factory for
obtaining wollastonite concentrate; and food industry, cotton processing, construct

ion industry. transpgzt, and communications enterprises were built at the new
technological level. Similar examples can be cited for other oblasts.

Positive changes for the better in the distribution of industrial production
personnel ocCurredas a result of the carrying out of the party's policy on improv-
ing the siting of productive forces in the republic.

Before the beginning of the Seventies, the main mass of industrial workers was
concentrated in the larger industrial centers. Thus, in 1970, 562 of all its
industrial production personnel were concentrated in Tashkentskaya Oblast
(including Tashkent). where 21 percent of the UzSSR population lived. At the time,
industrial production personnel were only 7.5 percent of the total number in
Syrdar'inskaya, Kashkadar'inskaya, Surkhandar'inakaya, andzghorezmskaya Oblasts
which had a 22.6 percent share of Uzbekistan's population.

0n 1 January 1978. 23.5 percent of the republic's entire population (i [sic] 2.5
points in comparison with 1970) lived in Tashkentaskaya Oblast (including the city
of Tashkent); however, the proportion of industri production personnel had
decreased by 6.2 points and stood at 67.8 percent. During this same time,

in the four compared oblasts (although the number of people here decreased from
22.6 to 20.4 percent), the proportig, of industrial production personnel grew by
2.1 points and reached 9.6 percent.

During the Sixties and Seventies, the proportion of workers and employees in
industry located in rural areas almost doubled thanks to the successful work of

Uzhekistan's party organization in industrializing agrarian rayons and in drawing
rural inhabitants into industry:

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1. Dynamics of the Proportion of Uzbekistan's Workers
and Employees During the Period 1960 - 1970

_.___..__._—____________________——————————————

_____________;2s1___ﬂL_—————197519’l-—
In urban settlements 92.6 87.8 87.5 86.7
In rural areas 7.4 12.2 12.5 13.3

Despite the fact that the number of industrial workers is growing from year to
year due to the flow of rural inhabitants, this manpower reserve is not only not
decreasing but, on the contrary, is increasing in connection with the high natural
increase. Based on forecasts for 1990. the number of people in the republic will
reach 22 million individuals. This will require even greater efforts tozéncrease
the number of work sites and eXpand the training of qualified personnel.

A resolution of the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan points out
the special 5 portance of creating branches of enterprises in small cities and
rural areas. It is planned to open 450-500 36 them, including on kolkhozes
and sovkhozes. during the 11th Five-Year Plan.

However. it would be a mistake to think that the striving for a more rational
siting of industrial enterprises is not running into serious problems. One cannot
fail to note that the textile combines which have been constructed in Andizhan and
Namangnn have not worked at full capacity for a long time because of a shortage of
manpower -- at a time when there are considerable reserves of able-bodied people

in these Cities. The Opening of even small installations and workshOp branches
requires the creation of an infrastructure servicing production -- the construct-
ion of schools, children's institutions and medical facilities, the organization of
transport and communications. etc. The solution of these tag a does not always
keep step with the erection of the industrial installations.

The training of qualified personnel is also an important and complicated problem.
In contrast eo many of the country's central rsyons where kolkhozes are eXperienc-
ing a critical shortage of manpower in connection with the flow of rural youth to
the cities, the redistribution of kolkhoz youth to industry and other branches of
the national economy has taken place at slow tempos in Uzbekistan. For example.
in 1968. 36 percent of the total number of able—bodied youth and juveniles stayed
to work on the kolkhozes and in 1970 -- 43 percent. This exceeded the number of
young people who went to factories and plants 1.9-fold. It is necessary to point
out that 68 percent of the juveniles up to 18 years of age who arrived on the
kolkhozes had a secondary education Complete or incomplete).

The situation changed during subsequent years. In 1974-1975. of those who finished
the eighth and tenth grades in general educational schools. 60.2 percent of those
sent to the national economy were employed in agriculture. Graduates of rural
school eighth and tenth grades formed the main mass (97 percent).

The replenishment of the republic's kolkhozes and sovkhozes with youth having a
secondary education undoubtedly increases the cultural and technical level of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
agricultural workers; however, agricultural production is not in a condition at
the present time to provide all this mass of young men and girls with work which
corresponds to the level of their training. This is n0t always taken into
consideration by public organizations. Cases are not infrequent where in places
with a large surplus in the rural population and a low migratory mobility, they
call upon the pupils to advance with an initiative of the type "as an entire

class -- to the native kolkhoz", 3although there is not enough work for the
existing workers on that kolkhoz. These tendencies are also found in Uzbekistan.
Thus, as a positive example of the pupils' purposeful professional orientation.

the press told about the initiative of the Komsomol graduates in one of the
schools of PastdargOmskiy Rayon of Sans kandskaya Oblast who stayed as an entire
class to work on their native kolkhoz, although 125,000 people (93 pszcent)
nved in rural areas and only 9,000 (7 percent) in cities in this rayon. In 1977.
more than 12,000 young men and women of Samarkandskaya Oblast in answer to an
initiative of their peers -- graduates of hoools in Koatromskaya Oblast --
stayed to work in agricultural production. Meanwhile, in Kostronskaya Oblast
with a population density of 13.3 people, the proportion of the rural population
was only 37 percent on 1 January 1977 -- at a time when the papulation density in
Samarkandskaya Oblast was five-fold gregger (67.5 people) and 70 percent of the
entire pepulation lived in rural areas.

The present conditions of the ecuntry's social and economic development require
that the indoctrinational work among youth,who live in the thickly populated
rural rayons of Uzbekistan, stir up the migratory mobility of the young men and
women and contribute to their professional and cultural growth and to an increase
in the proportion of industrial workers.

The new policy for developing professional and technical education in the village,
which contributes to strengthening migratory processes and social shifts, must
play an important role in the solution of this task. The Communist Party of
Uzbekistan is orienting party organizations toward the creation of professional
training establishments in rural areas for the training not only of agricultural
personnel but also of construction and industrial cadres. The following fact
testifies to the effectiveness of this way of solving the problem. In 1972, a
branch of the Namanganskiy [avrov] Cloth Combine imeni the 25th CPSU Congress
with a capacity of more than £00,000 linear meters of [khantalaa] and [bekaaab]

a year was put into operation in Uchkurgan. Long before the opening of the enter-
prise, the party organization and board of directors were concerned about personnel.
Experienced workers were sent to the branch for their training; at the same time,
the graduation of a special professional technical institute levy was arranged on
a branch basis. A total of 180 young men and girl§7from the Uchkurganskiy Rayon
underwent training and received work certificates. These measures ensured the
normal and uninterrupted work of the shop from the very beginning.

A complete network of professional technical hatitutea servicing the rural area

has already been created in the republic. The "Naveiazot" Production Association
has opened a GPTU [city professional technical institute] on the Kolkhoz imeni

P. Engels in Gizhduvanskiy Rayon of Bukharakaya Oblast; and the oil workers --

in the settlement of Kakaydy in Dzharknrganskiy Rayon of Surkhandar'inskaya Oblast.
?ersonnel are being trained in Leninakiy Rayon of Andizhanskaya Oblast for a branch
of the tractor plant. These professionaltechnical institutes are contributing to

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the solution of an important social task -- the training of rural youth in urban
professions and the shift of surplus manpower from rural areas toaghe cities
where the need for qualified specialists is continuously growing.

However, these measures are insufficient to solve the problem completely. Accord-
ing to estimates of the Uzbek SSR Gesplan and the UzSSR Academy of Sciences. only
61.6 percent of all the workers trained in the republic (as opposed to 26.5 per-
cent in 1975) will have a professional technical education. In this connection,
The USSR Gosplan has pointed out that "along with the priority development of a
network of professional technical institutes in the republics of Central Asia and
the Transcaucasus. it is also necessary to send the youth of these republics for
training in osger regions of the country with the agreement of the interested
departments". One must send a larger number of youth (especially rural) to

the country's all-union leading construction projects where they can acquire a
work profession and improve their qualifications.

Of course, the reorientation of a portion of the rural population, especially youth,
to industrial types of work must be built on a scientific foundation which is

based on the optimum age structure of those employed in agriculture. 1: is necess-
ary to correlate the solution of this important social problem with the opening

up of new lands which is taking place in the republic and with the planned transfer

of a portion of the flow of Siberian rivers to the Aral Sea basin.

The training of industrial workers in the village has an important political
aspect -- it is actively contributing to a growth in the preparation of workers of
local nationality in the republic's working class.

Statistics testify that in Uzbekistan, just as throughout all at Central Asia, the
indigenOus population forms the larger part of the inhabitants in the rural areas
where significant reserves of manpower are concentrated. According to data from
the 1970 All—Union Pepulation Census, Uzbeks were 95.5 percent -- in Samarkandskaya;
85.1 percent -- in Kashkadar'inskayai0 81.0 percent —- in Namanganskaya; and 80.2
percent -- in Andizhansksya Ohlasts.

The construction of industrial installationsin oblasts with surplus labor resources
contributes not only to an equalization of the level of industrial development but
also to a more intensive drawing of persons of local nationality from predominantly
single nationality rural collectives into industry and international worker collect-
ives. This process requires a great deal of attention from perty, state and public
organizations. Questions, connected with it, have been repeatedly discussed during
congresses of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan and plenums of the republic's
Communist Party Central Committee. Appropriate decisions have been strictly
implemented by oblast, city and rayon party organizations and by the collectives

of industrial enterprises. All this has contributed to raising the number and
proportion of workers of local nationality.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hum-d on data from the 1959 and 1970 all—union censuses and from one-time registra-
tions, in Uzbekistan people of the main nationality (Uzbeks)* were 26.7 percent

in industry in 1959, 31.2 percent in 1967 and 35.5 percent in 1973. It is import-
ant to emphasize that a growth in the number of Uzbeks was also observed during
these years in other detachments of industrial workers. The proportion of Uzbeks
in construction grew from 30.1 percent to 36.8 percent from 1967 to 1973; in

trans )ort — from 35.8 percent to 61.2 percent, and in communications -- from 35.9
per: ut to 100.7 percent.

During 1967 - 1973. the proportion of representatives of the main nationality grew
at more rapid rates in light industry —- from 106.5 percent to 53.9 percent, in the
food industry —- from 310.2 percentdo 105 percent, and in the oil industry --

from 34.1 percent to 42.8 percent. This is explained to a considerable degree
by the fact that many of the enterprises in these branches are located in rayons
where the Uzbek nationality predominates.

However, in a number of branches of heavy industry which are connected with more
modern equipment and production technology, the proportion of the indigenous
population was significantly lower than the general republic level.

The Central Comittee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan is directing the activ-
ity of the State Comittee for Labor, ministries, departments, and party organ-
izations to the formation of national cadres for industry considering an import-
ant demographic factor -- the high rates of natural increase among the local
nationalities. The 1979 population census showed that the E oportion of Uzbek: in
the overall republic population increased from 62.1 percent to 68.7 percent
during the period 1959 - 1979.

The problem of attracting the representatives of local nationalities to industry
was 3 subject of review at the 6th (1972) Plenum of the Uzbek Communist Party
Central Committee which discussed the question "On Further “proving Work With
Cadres in Light of the Decisions of the 210th CPSU Contreaa"

The training of national cadres in the republic received a new and broader scope
after the 25th CPSU Congress which pointed out that "the improvement of the train-
ing of local qualified cadresagontinues to be one of the urgent problems of
primary party organizations."

Improving the work to implementthe decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress and the 19th
Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan could not fail to affect the further
growth of the proportion of persons of local nationalities in the industrial
detachments of the workers. Whereas the proportion of Uzbeks was 35.5percert in ind-
ust‘ry in 1973, it was 38.2 percent in 1977; in constructiop7.--3lo.8 and 35.6 percent
respectively; and in transport -- 61.2 and 44.1. percent. As in previous

years, the highest preportion of persons of the main nationality (Uzbeks) was

 

*Kazakhs, Tajiks. Karakalpaks, Kirghiz and Turkmens are also regarded as
local nationalities. Counting them, the percent of industrial workers of local
nationality is significantly higher. However, the Central Statistical Directorate
singles out from all the workers only persons of the main nationality Uzbeks) in
the one-time registrations.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the textile (57.5 percent), light (56.0 percent). food (45.4 percent). and oil
(43.0 percent) industries. In machine building, it reached 18.3 percent (+ 2-3
points) in comparison with 1973. and in the chemical industry -- 20 percent

(+1.7 points). As can be seen, the tendency, noted in the Sixties, also developed
steadily during the 9th and 10th Five-Year Plans.

The growth in the number of national cadres by attracting rural inhabitants to
production was also a direct result of the new work forms which the collectives
of a number of industrial enterprises are using.

1n the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine, the proportion of local cadres as part of

the workers had not reached 20 percent by the beginning of the Sixties. The
situation became worse after the 1966 earthquake and due to the opening of textile
combines in the republic's oblast centers. It managed to improve after special

bus service between the enterprises and near-by rural rayons with surplus labor
resources —- the Kommunisticheski» Kalininskiy. Ordahonikidzevskiy, Srednechirchik-
skiy, and Tashkentskiy rural rayons-- was organized on the party committee's
initiative. This permitted Uzbek girls to be enlisted in the work. Each day.
about 500 young girls -- representatives of the local nationalities and yesterday's
kolkhoz workers -- took their work positions at weaving. spinning, carding and
other textile machines. It is possible to judge the growth of national cadres in
the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine from the data in Table 2 which testifies that
their proportion in the number of workers in the combine grew more than twofold

and the number of Uzbek women -- almost fourfold.

Table 2. Proportion of Persons of Local Nationality in the
Number of Workers at the Tashkentakiy Textile Combine*

________________—————————————-~——————

1966 1970 1973 1975 1975 1979
Total of persons of . [sit]

local nationality 17.1 20.4 29.9 31.9 36.4 40.3
including Uzbeks 14.1 13.4 23.2 24.7 37.2 31.6
Males of local nationality 10.1 11.5 12.5 13.0 14.9 14.4
including Uzbeks 9.4 10.6 11.0 11.5 11.9 12.7
Females of local nationality 7.0 8.4 7.4 18.9 21.5 25.9
including Uzbeks 4.7 6.8 12.2 13.1 15.2 17.9

i
The table was compiled based on data from the work and wages section of
the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine for 1 January of each year.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
True, the personnel problem at the combine has still not been completely solved;
a shortage remains. Not all workers have high indicators in labor productivity
and good discipline at first. The percent of flucuation in the enterprises is
great. However, the positive prospects for a pendulum migration to draw female
kolkhoz workers into the ranks of the working class are undoubted. It is import-
ant to point out that the parents of the Uzbek girls regard these social changes
positively.

An analysis of the republic's social and economic life shows that the migration

of labor resources from the village to the city is in the formation stage. Never—
theless, with each year it exerts a transforming effect on an ever greater number
of people. Many rural inhabitants. when they are included in industrial production.
rapidly adapt to the new conditions and achieve high indicators in work.

The name of Dil'bar Kul'matova is known today not only in Uzbekistan. She arrived
in Tashkent from Akkurgan in 1970 after finishing a secondary school. A year of
studies in a professional technical institute -- and Dil'bar became a worker in
the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine. The young weaver very soon became one of the
combine's best production workers and the initiator of and participant in work
initiatives. She began to service 48 weaving machines when the typical norm was
25. Today. Dil'bar is a deputy to the USSR Supreme Soviet, a Leniniat Komsomol
prize winner, and a Vinogradov sister; she has been awarded the order "Badge of
Honor." She combines her work with studies in the Tashkentskiy institute for the
Light and Textile Industries without giving up work. Her three sisters are also
working in the combine.

The Havliyev family of airplane Builders, whose parents were agronomiats, enjoys
widespread fame in the republic. Rural inhabitants -- the three Yuldsshev
brothers -- have also founded a dynasty of miners The oldest one - Babanazsr --
has been awardeggthe orders of Lenin and the Labor Red Banner for his many years
of heroic work.

The need to expand the training of qualified worker personnel from the local
population. especially from the rural youth in the republicssaf Central Asia, was
emphasized again in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

Along with the steady growth trend in national cadres within the composition

of Uzbekistan's workers, the speeding up of scientific and technical progress

and the industrialization and urbanization of the country are accompanied by

the internationalization of all public life. The composition of the working class'
republic detachments is becoming more and more multinational.

For example, workers of 45 nationalities are working in the Almalykskiy Mining and
Metallurgical Combine; of 61 -- in the Tashkentskiy Textile Combine; of 32--

in the Chirchikskiy Electrochemical Combine; of 30 -- in the Bekabadskiy Cgment
Plant; and of 27 -- in the Tashkentskiy Plant imeni the October Revolution.
Qualified specialists who have arrived from the RSFSR, the Ukraine and Belorussia,
are actively contributing to the accelerated development of productive forces and
to the formation and improvement of the training of worker cadres.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Some authors justifiably think that it is illegal to call the republic's worker
detachments national detachments because this socialist class was formed in the
republics from the beginning on an international basis, being an integral comp-
onent of the USSR working class -- the leading social force of the indestructible
unity of the Soviet people. It seems that it is more correct to classify them

as reggblic detachments of the working class (RSFSR workers, Ukrainian SSR workers,
etc.) It is necessary to emphasize that it is the working class which embodies
the international unity of the Soviet Union's worker detachments and which is

exerting a growing influence on improving the social uniformity of the nations
and nationalities which form a single Soviet people.

The able-bodied population, not employed in public production, is an important
source and reserve for replenishing the USSR working class, including that of the
UzSSR. However, this reserve had basically been exhausted in the country as a
whole by the end of the Sixties. Whereas, more than half of the increase in
workers in public production (53 percent) had been obtained frOm 1961 to 1965

by including in it persons engaged in housekeeping or in the private auxiliary
economy, there were twice as many fewer in the next five year period (1966-1970).
0f the 130.5 million working age individuals, those employed in the national
economy and students were 120.6 million individuals or 92.4 percent in 1970 as
opposed to 82 percent in 1959. The number of persons engaged in housekeeping

and the privags economy decreased from 17.9 million in 1959 to 5.9 million individ-
uals in 1970.

53

When defining the prospects for drawing the able-bodies population into production,
the 25th CPSU congress pointed cut that the problem of using labor resources

during the Eighti g would become even more acute because of the decrease in their
natural increase. This proposition was again emphasized during the 26th CPSU
Congress. It is sufficient to say that, during the period 1981-1990, the total
growth of the working age population will decline to 3.8 percent as opposed to

18 percent in 1971-1980. However, the unfavorable demographic situation, which

is taking shape, does not affect a number of republics with high natural increases
and the presence of a significant portion of able-bodied people not employed in

the national economy. Speaking on 22 September 1978 in Baku on the occasion of

the presentation of the Order of Lenin to the city, L. I. Brezhnev pointed out

that in Azerbaijan and the other republics of the Caucasus, as well as in Central
Asia, a considerable po ion of the able—bodied population had still not been drawn
into public production. Basically, this consisted of women who had never

worked in the national economy or who had left an enterprise after marriage and
who were engaged in raising children and housekeeping or in the private economy.

In the UzSSR, the inadequate drawing of the unemployed able-bodied population

into public production is typical not only of rural areas but also of cities.

At the end of the Sixties, the proportion of this category of the population was
30 percent in the urban population centers of Tashkentskaya, Andizhans ya and
Bukharskaya oblasts and more than 60 percent in Syrdar'inskaya Oblast. At the
same time, 92 percent of the non—working people of working age in Tashkent were
women; of them, 80 percent had children. A similar situation was also observed
in other cities. This is one of the reasons why Uzbekistan, just as other Central
Asian republics, considerably lags behind several union republics based on the

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
preportion of women in the total number of workers and employees. Thus, whereas
for the USSR on the whole and for the Latvian SSR, the Estonian SSR, and the
Belorussian SSR this indicator in 1970 was equal to 51-53 percent; forsﬁhe Uzbek
SSR. the Turkmen SSR and the Tsjik SSR it ranged from 38 to 41 percent.

The question of drawing women into production is a complicated social problem. It
requires the development of scientifically based recommendations for the country's
different rayons with a consideration of their specific natures. This problem is
especially stute for the Central Asian region where the percent of families with
many children is high. This is mainly typical of the indigenous nationalities.

In the Seventies, guided by the decisions of party and soviet organs, the work
collectives of individual enterprises began to use new ways and methods to draw
women to production. The Kokandskiy Stocking Knitting Combine has experienced

a shortage of personnel for a long time. In accordance with a decision of the
party and trade union organizations, the shop chiefs and other section and service
leaders were sent to the Makhallinskiye committees to attract the housewives to
work. Considering that the majority of those not working were mothers with many
children, the enterprise made arrangements for their children in pre-school
establishments and organized the women's training in work professions. As a
result, it turned out that there were rather a lot who desired to work in the
combine. Additional city bus routes, especially to remote rayons, were set up
with help of the party's gorkom and the gorispolkom, and eating was arranged in
the enterggise's dining hall. All this permitted the combine to end the personnel
shortage.

when performing the great deal of work to draw women into public production, the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan strengthened control over
the performance of political and indoctrinational work among them on the spot.

In May 1970. the tasks of Uzbekistan's party organization in further improving the
activity of women in the construction of communism were iscussed during the
lSthPlenum of the Communist Party's Central Committee. Considering that a
significant part of them were not being drawn into public production because of
the shortage of pre-school establishments. the Central Committee of the Uzbek
Communist Party and the UzSSR Council of Ministers adopted on 2 October 1970 the
resolution "0n the Condition and Further Development of Public Pre-School Education
in the Republic" which planned for the number of places in kindgigartens and day
nurseries to be brought to 607,800 in 1970 and 735,000 in 1975.

The 18th congresgzagg the 6th Plenum of the Central Committee of the republic's
Communist Party. ’ the 25th CPSU Congress. and the 19th Congress of the
Communist Party of Uzbekistan played an important role in solving the problem.

As a result of the large organizational work. definite positive changes for the
better in attracting women to production activity in the various branches of the
republic's national economy occurred during the Seventies. Whereas the proportion
of women in the total number of workers and employees in Uzbekistan was equal to
40 percent in 1965, it was equal to 53 percent in 1976; when compared to the
all-union indicators. the deviation decreased from ten to eight points.

14
FOR(NHHCJAL.USE(MNLY
However, this indicator continued to remain relatively low for indigenous nation-
alties even in branches where female labor is widely used. The providing of
industrial enterprises and construction organizations with worker personnel is
linked to a definite degree with the drawing of women into the service area. In
Uzbekistan the proportion of female workers in such branches of the service area
as state trade and public catering was much lower than in the majority of the
other republics and the Soviet Union as a whole. In 1970, female workers in the
country's trade and public catering system reache 91 percent of the total

number employed. but in Uzbekistan -- 57 percent. This indicator was especially
insignificant in such oblasts as Namanganskaya (25.6 percent), Kashksdar'inskayg5
(33.h percent). Andizhanskaya (38.9 percent) and Samarkandskaya (40.9 percent).

It is quite evident that the drawing of women into the trade and public catering
organization would permit the freeing of a significant number of men who could

fill up the ranks of industrial workers. New tasks in this area have been assigned
to the republic by the 26th CPSU Congress and the 20th Congress of the COmnunist
Party of Uzbekistan.

As was pointed out in the report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Congress
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. "a number of measures to improve
working conditions for working women, family relaxation and personal and cultural
services were adopted in the 103% Five-Year Plan ...; however. ... a noticeable
change has still not OCCurred." In connection with this, the congress outlined
ways to improve this work further during the 11th Five-Year Plan. pointing out

the need to consider carefully the distinctive features of the situation in the
different republics and rayons.

The decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Councig7of Ministers, "0n
Measures To Improve State Aid to Families who Have Children" will play an
important role in the further attraction of women to public production.

An analysis of the basic directions of the activity of party Soviet and economic
organs in Uzbekistan permits the conclusion to be drawn that definite positive
experience in the rational use of labor resources was acquired in the republic
during the Sixties and Seventies. Industrial enterprises were established in the
thickly populated rayons of the republic and in rural rayons, the prospects for
using a pendulum migration to replenish the ranks of industrial workers with
rural area inhabitants were outlined. and efforts were made to attract unemployed
able-bodied people, especially women, to industry.

All this contributed to intensifying the integration processes. improving the
republic's social structure, and increasing the work activity of all classes and
social groups.

At the same time, the available experience requires further development and
improvement since Uzbekistan, just as the other Central Asian republics and a
number of rayons in the Caucasus, is one of the regions where a considerable
preportion of the country's labor resources is concentrated at the present time.
The drawing of these reserves into public production, including all-union industry,
is one of the most important social and economic tasks assigned by the 26th party
congress.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"Regional'nyye Problemy Vosproizvodstva Rabochey Sily v Uzbekistane” [Regional
Manpower Replacement Problems in Uzbekistan], Tashkent, 1965; G. A. Shister,
"Promyshlennyye Rabochiye Uzbekistana (Izmeneniya v Chislennosti i Sostsv)-
1959 - 1970" [Uzbekistan'a Industrial Workers (Changes in Number and Composi-
tion), 1959 - 1970], Tashkent, 1975; K. Bedrintsev, N. Nishanov, and A.
Trubnikov, "Small Cities in the Replenishment of Uzbekisten's Productive
Forces“, VOMMUNIST UZBEKISTANA, no 8, 1977; V. V. Mikheyeva, "Trudovyye
Resursy Malykh i Srednikh Corodov Uzbekistana i Perspektivny Ikh Ispol'zovaniya"
[The !abor Resources of Uzbekistan‘s Small and Medium Cities and the Prospects
for Their Use], author's essay dissertation for candidate of economic sciences,
Tashkent, 1975; 0. B. Ata—Mirzsyev. "Regional'noye Prognozirovaniya
Rasscleniya i Upravleniya Protcssom Urbanizatsii" [Regional Forecasting for
Settlement and Control of the Urbanization Process]. Tashkent, 1979;
"Sotsial'nyyc Problemy Razvitiya Proizvoditel'nykh Sil Uzbekistsna" [Social

Problems in the Development of lhbekistsn's Productive Forces], Tashkent.
1980.

"Materialy XXVI S'yezda Rommunisticheskaya Partii Sovetskogo Soyuza [Materials
on the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union], Moscow,
1981, p 52.

"ltogi Vsesoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniys 1970 Coda" [Results of the 1970 AllrUnion
Population Census], Vol 5. Moscow, 1973, p 29. ‘

K. Marks and F. Engels, "Sochineniya" [Works], Vol 16, p 198.

"Sotsial'noye Razvitiyc Rabochego Klsssa SSSR“ [Social Develop-ent of the
USSR Working Class], Moscow. 1977, p 27.

M. N. Rutkevich. "Tendentsii Razvitiya Sotaial'noy Struktury Sovetakogo
Obshchestva" [The Tendencies in the Development of the Social Structure of
Soviet Society]. Moscow, 1975, p 38.

A. Sh. Tashbulatov, "Social Problems of Unqualified Horkers" in the collection
"Filosofiya, Istoriya KPSS, Politekonomiya“ [PhiloaOphy, the History of the
CPSU, Political Economy}. Issue 23, Ufa, 1971, p 133.

UDARNlK (organ of the party comnittee. trade union committee, Komsomol
committee, and board of directors of the Tashkentskiy Aviation Production
Association imeni V. P. Chkalon 15 January 1969.

ANDIZHANSKAYA PRAVDA, 4 September-1979

NAMANGANSKAYA PRAVDA, 1 May 1979

"Sotsial'noye Razvitiye ... Op. cit., p 26

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

13.

16.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Ibid.. p 21

"Naseleniye SSSR Po Dannym Perepisi 1979 c." [The Population of the USSR
Based on 1979 Census Data]. Moscow, 1980, p 3 .

Ibid., p 5.

Ibid.

"Narodnoye Khozyayatvo Uzbekskoy SSR v 1979 c. Statist. Yzhegodnik TSSU
Uzbekakoy $88" [The National Economy of the Uzbek SSR in 1979. Statistical

yearbook of the Uzbek SSR Central Statistical Directorate], Tashkent, 1980,
p 6.

0. Apostolov, "Urgent Problems in the Professional Orientation of Youth",
KOMMUNIST UZBEKISTANA, No 2, 1979, p 43.

Cf. Marx and Engels, op. cit.. Vol 19. p 345.

"XIX S"yezd Kommunisticheskoy Partii Uzbekistana. Stenogr. Otchet"

[The 19th Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan. Stenographic Report},
Tashkent, 1978, p 40.

PRAVDA VOSTOKA, 11 June 1977.

Ibid., 14 March 1976.

"Report of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan to the
20th Congress of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan. Report of Sh. R. Rashidov,
candidate member of the CPSU Central Committee Politburo and first secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan", PRAVDA

VOSTOKA, a February 1981.

PRAVDA VOSTOKA, 6 February 1981.

Ibid.

Calculated based on “Trudovyye Reaursy Uzbekistana" [Uzbekistan's Labor
Resources), Tashkent, 1970, p 63.

Calculated based on "Chialennoat' Naaeleniya Uzbekakoy SSR na 1 Yanvarya

1978 c." [Number of People in the Uzbek SSR on 1 January 1978], Population
and Public Health Statistical Section, UzSSR Central Statistical Directorate.

Ibld.
PRAVDA VOSTOKA, a February 1980.

Ibid., 7 February 1981.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.

31.

32.

33.

3b.

35.

36.

37.
'38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

£6.

45.

lbid., 5 February 1981.

Cf., for example, the material on Akhangaran and Shirin in PRAVDA VOSTOKA,
11 June 1977 and 28 September 1978.

LITERATURNAYA GAZETA, 3 October 1979

S. Akhmedov, "0n the Forward Edge of the Five-Year Plan". PA£TIYNAYA
ZHIZN' (Tashkent), No 3, 1978, p 60.

Calculated based on "Administrativno - Territorial'noye Deleneye Uzbekskoy

SSR [The Administrative Territorial Division of the Uzbek SSR[, Tashkent,
1975 p 260.

Akhmedov. op. cit., p 60.

"Narndnoye Khozyayatvo $588 as 60 Let. Yubileynyy Statist. Yezhegodnik"
[60 Years of the USSR National Economy. Jubilee Statistical Yearbook],
Moscow. 1977, pp 50 and 53.

PRAVDA vosroxa. 2 May 1979.
Ibid., 9 August 1978 (Editorial)
PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO, No 11. 1976, p 22.

Calculated based on "Itogi Vsesoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniya 1970 Coda"
[Results of the 1970 All-Union Population Census] Part lo. Moscow, 1973.
pp 211 - 221.

c. A. Shister. "On Some Tendencies in the Development of Uzbekistan's Work-
ing Class Under the Conditions of Developed Socialism." NAUCHNYY KOHHUNIZH,
No 3, 1977. p 30.

Ibid.

"Narodnoye Khozyaystvo Uzbekakoy SSR v 1971 G. Statist. Yezhegodnik"
[The National Economy of the Uzbek SSR in 1971. Statistical Yearbook].
Tashkent, 1972. p 11.

"Itogi Vsesoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniya 1979 Coda" [The Results of the All-
Union 1979 Population Census], Part 1, Tashkent. 1980.

"On Further Improving the Work With Cadres in Light of the Decisions of
the 24th CPSU Congress. Report of Comrade Sh. R. Rashidov. first secretary
of the Uzbek Communist Party Central Committee to the Plenum of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan on 15 February 1972",
KOMMUNIST UZBEKISTANA, No 3, 1972. p 27.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
46.

47.

48.
69.

50.
51.
52.
S3.
54.
55.
S6.
S7.

58.

S9.

60.

"XXV S"yezd Konnunisticheskoy Partii Sovetakogo Soyuza. Stenogr. Otchet“
[The 25th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Stenogrophic
Report], Vol 2, Moscow, 1976, p 292.

TSSU UzSSR [UzSSR Central Statistical Directorate]. Department of Statistica.
Labor and Wages.

TASHKBNTSKAYA PRAVDA, 7 September 1978.
Ibid., 26 August 1978.

"Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials on the 26th CPSU Congress]. Moscow,
1981, p 185.

Sh. R. Rashidov, "Znamya Druzhby" [The Banner of Friendship], Moscow, 1977,
p 138.

Cf. V. A. Yezhov, A. Z. Bakser and I. P. Trufanov, "Rabochiy Klass SSSR v
Cody Devyatoy Pyatiletki (1971-1975 06.)" [The USSR Working Class During
the Years of the 9th Five-Year Plan (1971-1975)], Leningrad, 1978.

"Sotsialnoye Razvitiye... op. cit. p 29.

"Vsesoyuznaya Perepia' Naseleniya 1970 3" [1970 All-Union Population Census],
Moscow, 1976, pp 217 - 218.

XXV S"yezd Kommunisticheskoy Partii Sovetakogo Soyuza" [The 25th Congress
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union], Moscow, 1976, Vol 1, p 67;
Vol 2, p 20.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin Kurson.Rechi 1 St ati " [Leninist Course. Speeches
and Articles], Vol 7, Moscow 1979. p 672.

"Trudovyye resursy... op. cit., p 6b.

Cf. "Narodnoye khozyayatvo SSSR..." op. cit., p 670.

A. p. Myskina. "v Novykh Usloviyakh Khozyaystvovaniya" [Under New Management
(bnditionsl. Tashkent, 1978, pp 15 - 17.

PRAVDA VOSTOKA, 22 May 1970.

61.Ibid., 11 October 1970 and 17 February 1972.

62.
63.

66.

Ibid., 3 Mar 71.
Ibid.

"Itogi Vsesoyuznoy Perepisi Naseleniya 1970 Coda" ... op. cit. Vol 6,
Moscow, 1973. pp 166-236.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65. Shister, op. cit.. p 123.

66. L I. Brezhnev'Txchetnnyoklad Tsentral'nogo Koniteta KPSS XXVI s"yezdu
Kommunisticheskoy Partii v Oblasti Vnutrenney i Vnezhney'Politiki" [Report
of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Congress of the Con-unist Party of
the Soviet Union in the Area of Domestic and Foreign Policy], Moscow,
Politizdat, 1981, p 74.

67. PRAVDA, 31 March 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", "Istoriyn SSSR", 1981

8802
C80: 1830/186

20
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
DEVELOPMENT OF CITIES IN OIL. GAS REGIONS IN NEST SIBERIAN PLAIN

Moscow GOROD V SIBIRI in Russian 1980 pp 176-184
[Excerpt from book "Cities in Siberia“, Izdatel'atvo "Hysl'"!

[Excerpt] The resolutions of the 25th CPSU Congress in western Siberia.
provided for "continuing formation of the largest territorial production
complex: the country's main base for oil and gas production...; continuing
construction of the Tomsk petrochemical combine; expanding construction of
the Tobol'sk petrochemical complex; building gas processing plants, a
pipeline system for transporting oil and gas and a Surgut-Nizhnevartovsk
railroad; initiating construction of the Surgut-Urengoy railroad“.

0f the large group of problems involved in developing cities in the oil and
gas regions of the West Siberian plain, we shall consider the key one below:
optimal organization of the system of settling under conditions of an
unfavorable (and in many regions extreme) natural environment and extremely
low level of territorial development. The search for methods of resolving
this problem comprised the basic content of scientific and planning work to
form a system of cities in the oil and gas regions of the Heat Siberian plain
over the past few years.

The main singularities of the city formation base which determine the formation
of settlement systems in these regions are the following: widely scattered
working locations within deposits, along pipeline mains. at compressor station
locations, industrial bases and other facilities and equipment; the small
population associated with each of these working locations; transience of a
significant portion of the personnel —- drilling and construction organization
workers, whose work locations move around as various deposits are built up and
others are undertaken; rapid obsolescence of forecasts and plans for deployment
of the city formation base, which is associated with sufficient geological
study and systematic updating of all plans for mastering deposits as

geological exploration data are refined and deposits are discovered which are
more promising or effective in terms of technical-economic indicators.

The transience of city-building personnel presents the main difficulty in
forecasting the prospects of development of populated areas in oil and gas

regions. The mastery and exploitation of deposits includes several stages
which differ in duration: the exploration of a gas deposit usually lasts from

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Vﬂ Us a as and. snu- sis-ass

l to 3 years, and 2 or 3 years for oil deposits; construction takes between

5 and 8 years. and exploitation lasts no more than 20-50 years. According to
the analysis of Lenniipgradostroitel'stvo, the long-term structure of personnel
in oil worker cities changes in the following manner as deposits are mastered
and exploited (cf. Table 14).

Table la. Personnel Structure in Oil Worker Cities, Percent (According to
V.V. Kadnikov et. al., 1973)

City Development Periods Starting with
Mastery of Deposits

Preparatory Bx loitation End of Exploitation
City Formation Branches (8-10 Years) (30-50 Years)

Oil production 35-40 loo-(.5 .
Transport 10-15 20 15
Construction 50 30 20
Replacement branches - 3-5 55
Other 2-3 5 10

By the time a deposit has been completely or partially worked out, replacement
branches must be developed within a city (which is improbable in areas with
extreme or unfavorable environmental conditions); otherwise deterioration of
its city-formation base is unavoidable. An even greater element of ambiguity
is introduced into forecasts by insufficient geological study and frequent
changes in the technical-economic evaluation of deposits. Technological branch
institutes have accepted the practice of listing the main portion of long-term
production to "other deposits", which are presumed to be discovered during
subsequent explorations and planning, which sidetracks the choice of optimal
schemes for the placement of populated locations. Furthermore, the schemes
for mastery of deposits are continually refined.

According to the original long-term forecasts for the development of oil
production in Sredniy Priob', the main production of oil was planned for the
Surgut and Ust'-Balyksk industrial centers, where there were provisions for the
main city formation and transportation, respectively; however, after the
Samotlorsk deposit was discovered, the oil production center moved 250 kilometers
east of Surgut to the Niahnevartovsk region. In this connection, the calculated
size of the population was cut in half in the general plan for Surgut, which was
executed in 1969; the choice of areas for city development was reexamined, and
the transportation and engineering communications were clarified. However, as
a result of the subsequent discovery of the Fedorovsk and other deposits it
became necessary to reexamine the general plan for Surgut, increasing the cal-
culated size of the population.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Development of the Igrim-Berezovak industrial region in the original regional
planning scheme drawn up in 1968 was foreseen on the basis of the Punginskoye
gas deposit, with the mastery of which the construction of the Nizhneobsk
timber complex was associated. With the discovery of the Hedvezhyeye,
Urengoyskoye and Other deposits, mastery of the Punginskoye deposit was
deferred, which made it unrealistic to construct the timbering complex in view
of the low level of development of the territory.

Cases of instability of branch forecasts and plans prompted city-building planning
and scientific-research organizations (Ciprogor, Lenniipgradostroitel'stvo) to
come out with special propositions consisting essentially of developing a
settlement system which is dynamic in both time and space and which is brought
about as the region is developed and which includes a combination of stable and
mobile elements. This system must function effectively when the city formation
base is unstable.

Provision for functional zoning is required for the entire territory of the
Nest Siberian plain (cf. Figure 6), isolating the following:

-- kcv settlement zones in regions with comfortable climatic conditions, where
integrated development of industry is possible (including raw material pro-
cessing, rear construction bases, production of equipment for oil and gas
industry, transportation facilities suitable for conditions in the northern
portion of the Heat Siberian plain, etc.), as well as the creation of major
urban settlements;

-- stable (permanent) settlement zones along the communications corridors,
which have the greatest and stablest city formation potential. It is essential
to note that while the main communications directions used to follow navigable
rivers, they are now associated to a greater extent with major transportation
routes (railroads, highways, pipelines), where optimal conditions exist at
waterway intersections for the occurrence of stable urban settlements;

-- mobile settlement zones within oil and gas deposit regions with uncomfortable
climatic and other environmental conditions where the city formation base is
unstable.

within these zones, it is good practice to plan for the following basic types
of populated areas:

-- key cities -- the largest urban formations in regions with relatively
favorable PnVironmrntaI conditions to the south of the extreme zone (Tyumen',
Tnbol'sk; possibly Surgut, Nizhnevartovsk);

-- base cities -- larger populated points in the North, where industrial,
construction and transportation-distribution enterprises are concentrated which
service derendent oil and gas regions;

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-- watch settlements -- stationary, well organized populated points at deposits
and near line and other structures for shift personnel (watches);

-- mobile settlements -- temporary populated points consisting of standard
factory-built structures (movable, contuinerized, fully transportable, and
knock-down modular structures with increased comfort level) for settlements

of builders and drillers; these can be put together separately, or as component
parts of stationary-type populated areas.

The most important item in finding an optimal settlement system for the regions
of the Heat Siberian plain is to find the most efficient degree of centralization
of this system, and to determine the efficiency of using the expeditionary and
watch methods of mastery in order to reduce capital investments, to increase the
social-cultural support level and to settle the smallest possible number of
people under uncomfortable conditions.

Different plans (Feygina, 1972) contain settlement versions for northern regions
which differ in principle (cf. Figure 5).

Version 1 (external settlement) provides for locating a base city in a
southern support zone under comfortable conditions, carrying shift personnel
by air to a central watch village, then using local air and ground transport
from the watch villages to the deposits (expeditionary method).

Version 2 (centralized internal settlement) includes:
-- sub-version "a", with a base city in northern regions;
-- sub-version "b", with two base cities in northern regions (watch method).

Version 3 (internal, relatively dispersed settlement) provides for creating
a large number of smaller base cities in the northern zone.

The following are the advantages and disadvantages of these versions:

-- version 1 (external settlement) provides good living comfort for most of
the population, sharply reduced expenditures for housing and servicc con-
struction, which compensate for the cost of shift transportation;

the shortcomings include the long time spent by shift personnel avay from
their families, difficulties of personal acclimation and re-accliaation, and
insufficient reliability of regular air transport under the conditions of the
North;

-- version 2 ("a" and "b")(centralized internal settlement in one or two base
cities in the north) provides for relative concentration of the population
and a relatively high service level; the aforementioned shortcomings of the
external settlement version are overcome, but the entire population must live
under extreme environmental conditions, and the construction cost is high;

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Key:
1. Salekhard 7 Surgut
2. Nov. Port 8 Hezhdurechenskiy
3. chytn. 9. Nizhnevartosk
4 . Urengoy 10. Tobol '31:
5. Sergino ll Tyumen'
6. Khanty-Manaiysk
adical

-geographic zones: I -- extreme; 2 --
Ivorable; lo ~- favorable.
FOR OFFICIAL IlSI-Z ONLY

industrial regions. Comunications: 7 -- railroads; 8 -- pipelines.
Settlement: 9 -- planned axes-—support (south)andstable (north) settlement

strips (settlement primarily mobile in remaining territories in extreme
and uncomfortable zones)

-- version 3 (internal, relatively dispersed settlement) is least
successful. It combines all of the shortcomings of version 2 ("a" and "b")
with the low cultural service level which is unavoidable in creating small
city formations. Table 15 compares these versions in terms of technical and

economic indicators.

Cb gas deposits sir comuting route
for workers with out-

©@ urban
SuIIICMUDIB of-region settlement
0 watch villages

 

Figure J. Versions of settlement in northern regions

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

Table 15. Comparison of Northern-Region Settlement Versions, Hillions
of Rubles (According to E.Ya. Peygina, 1972)

Settlement Versions

Objects of Expenditure l 33 32 3
Additional capital expenditures
Cities - 571.0 555.0 585.0
Hatch villages 6.5 4.5 4.5 -
Transport 1.8 - 11.1 18.9
Total 8.3 575.5 570.6 603.9
Additional operating expenses
Cities - 43.0 44.0 52.0
Watch villages 0.5 0.3 0.3 -
Transport 10.9 8.9 7.1 -
Additional expenses
associated with personnel
transience - 25.0 25.0 25.0
Total 11.4 77.2 76.4 77.0
Reduced expenditures
(normative factor 0.12) 12.4 146.2 144.9 150.0
Increased cost over version 1 - 133.8 132.5 137.6

Analogous conclusions are reached from analyzing other possible versions of
settlement in the oil and gas regions of Siberia: concentrating the pop-
ulation of the northern zone in two, three or four cities, etc. In all
analyses, it is least effective to decentralize the construction of small
villages at deposits in oil and gas producing zones using the field-village
principle; it is significantly more efficient to construct large base cities,
sending watches to the deposits.

To give an idea of the possible expenditures, a special comparison was made
of the expenditures involved in the decentralized construction of small
villages (without watches) and a base city with watch villages using the
example of development of a group of gas deposits in a northern tone.

in the non-watch method, the creation of 20 small populated points numbering
between 700 and 30,000 individuals each was provided for settling 100,000

people involved in producing and transporting gas. It was assumed that these
populated points can be located at the workload centers and are connected by

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY

ground transport to nearby working points (fields, compressor stations, etc.)
within a 70-80 km radius (1.5 hour travel time).

In the watch method, there were provisions for constructing a single 100,000-
resident city within a 90-600 km radius (2- or 3-hour travel time or longer)
plus 30 watch villages near the deposits.

The increased cost of domestic and service construction in the decentralized
construction of small villages (without watches) is associated with the
increased cost of construction due to being scattered over many populated
points, and especially because of the money which is unavoidably wasted when
it is impossible to use the domestic and service funds of small single-type
villages once the deposits have been worked out.

The increased cost of domestic and service construction in the centralized
version results from the construction of additional watch villages; however,
this increase is relatively small because only about [82 of the population has
to commute to the deposits (the others are employees working at base
enterprises and in the service area, as well as families); in addition, the
watch crews work two shifts, so the amount of living space set aside for them
in dormitory-type facilities at the watch villages can be half that required
in the base city, and the dormitories themselves can be built to less

exacting standards.

Analysis of transportation costs, assuming use of helicopters to the watch
villages and ground transport (buses) in the non-watch system, shows that in
the watch system these expenses are higher (due to helicopter operation);
however, this increase amounts to only a small portion of the total expenses
for the version (cf. Table 16).

On the whole, if throw-away expenses upon exhaustion of deposits are disregarded,
the watch system is slightly more expensive (due to helicopter operation and

watch village expenditure); however, this increase amounts to only 52 of the
total. Allowing for throw-away expenditures (which are unavoidable, which is
confirmed by all development experience), the increased cost for dispersed
construction of small villages without watches amounts to as much as 361, or
over one-third of the total expenses, which allows us to consider this con-
struction as extremely inefficient.

Experience from planning and developing oil and gas regions in the Heat Siberian
plain provides convincing evidence that without purposeful formation in these
regions of a system of populated locations, along with the production and

social infrastructure, increasing national economic and social losses are
unavoidable which are exacerbated by the complexity of the environmental and
planning situations.

Planning and analysis whichhave been done indicate the requirement for forming
a settlement structure which flexibly combines stable, mobile, key, base and

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table [6. Comparison of expenditures using watch and non-watch settlement

systems in northern regions (in percent of expenditures for
non-watch settlement system, disregarding throw-away expenditures)

Settlement System

Types of Expenditures Non-Hatch Hatch

 

City construction, watch

construction, transportation

expenses (capital expenditures

and operating costs over 15 Years) 100 105

Throw-auay expenses in villages

with unstable city-formation

base 36 -
Total, allowing for
throw-away expenditures 136 105

watch villages. The technical-economic and social effectiveness of centralizing
the settlement system and concentrating construction as much as possible in a
few properly located, relatively large and completely well arranged base cities,
is fully confirmed.

In addition to its major advantages, external (expeditionary) settlement also
has Jhurfromings. Ext;usivc use of this method requi.es appropriate aric:.2fir-
planning preparation and experimental verification. This settlement version can
be implemented gradually, so that the residential base which is built up in
northern base locations can subsequently be used to house shift personnel.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Mysl'", [980

6900
CSO: Blah/0526 END

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY