FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS l./10396
16 Match 1982

USSR Report

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY
MB

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by scurce.

me contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS All) REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSHIP 0P
MTBRIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBMINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS
(FOUO 2/82)

CONTENTS
USSR-"GRID TRADE

UK Correspondent Diocuuen Soviet Gold Sale-
(David Mirth; FINANCIAL TIMES. 15 Jan 82) ...............

USSR-cm TRADE

cam Fuel, Energy Probleu
(Anatoliy Ivanovich Zubkcv: VOPROSY mum, Oct 81) ...

Bandbook on Soviet. cm Agriculture
(rm: so'rsmmu v Tsmum I mum, 1980)

- a - [III - USSR - 38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR-HORLD TRADE

UK CORRESPONDENT DISCUSSES SOVIET GOLD SALES
9M151223 London FINANCIAL TIMES in English 15 Jan 82 p 2
[Report by David Harsh: "Low Gold Price Could Prove Costly for Russia"]

[Text] "The Russians are disappointed that the gold price is not higher with
all these problems in the world."

That was the doleful comment of a leading Swiss bullion dealer back in August
when. in spite of the South African invasion of Angola and the shooting down

of Libyan jets by U.S. fighters, the gold price persistently refused to budge
above $630 per ounce.

Five months later. the men responsible for the Kremlin's gold sales in
Vneshtorgbank, the Soviet foreign trade bank, are wearing even longer faces.

Sliding Soviet foreign exchange reserves are forcing the Russians to sell more
gold to the Heat. But. in an exact-turn-round of the events after the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan two years ago, rising Bast-West tension this tine is
failing to give the customary boost to the bullion price.

The military claap-down in Poland gave gold only a temporary pre-Christnas
sparkle. Yesterday, dogged by high interest rates and world recession, the
price in London slid to $376 the lowest for well over two years against n
short—lived peak of $850 in January, 1980.

After making large-scale gold sales in December-uhich boosted overall deliveries
in 1981 to an estinated 200-220 tonnes-—the Russians seem to have been absent
from the London and Zurich markets during the past few days in a bid to keep
prices from falling further.

South Africa, the world's biggest producer, has not been keen to sell at under
$400 per ounce either. But dealers believe that the Soviet Union this year will
he forced to continue selling at around the 1981 rate. The Russians need foreign
exchange to cover continued grain i-porta and the cost of supporting hard-pressed
economies in Eastern Europe.

According to one London bullion analyst: "The Russians will need to sell a
similar quantity of gold this year as in 1981. Gold is the thing that they sell
as a last resort. They ant be desperate."

I
FOI,0I1ﬂ(1Al.UBE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moscow uses its Zurich-based trading bank. the Hoachod Bandelahenk. as its Iain

sales agent. Last year, marketing was diversified to include New York, and the
Middle and Far East, as well as the two prime European centres.

Heavy sales during the second half of 1981 surprised sone dealers. “cruelly.

the soviet Union chooses only periods of rising prices to offload large anounts_._
But lz'est Bank of England figures show that Moscow ran down its foreign

exchange reserves to a dangerous level in London in August. This might have
partly reflected switching of reserves to other centres. But currency shortage

certainly forced the Russians to sell gold that nonth, in spite of the fragile
price.

COPYRIGHT: The Financial Tinea Ltd, 1982

080: 1812/46

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cm FUEL, ENERGY PROBLEMS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 93-99

fxrticle by Doctor of Economic Sciences Professor Anatoliy Ivanovich Zubkov, chief
of a department of the Institute of Economics of the World Socialist System of the
USSR Academy of Sciences: ”The Fuel and Energy Problem in the CEHA Countries"7

lText/ One of the central places in the documents of the past congresses of the
Communist and Workers Parties of the socialist countries and in the plans of social
and economic development for 1981-1985 and the distant future is assigned to the
solution of the fuel and energy problem. Much attention is devoted to the questions
of the energy supply of the CEHA countries in the fuel and raw material long-range
goal program of cooperation, which is intended to continue until 1990, as well as

in the process of coordinating the national economic plans for 1981-1985. At the
35th meeting of the session of CEHA (1981) it was emphasised that the integration
ties of the CEHA countries are playing an important role in supplying the national
economy with fuel and raw materials.

The supply of the CEHA countries with fuel and energy is taking place under domes-
tic and foreign economic conditions which are becoming more complicated. In prac-
tically all these countries the increase of fuel production and the development of
power engineering require increasing investments, which are connected with the
worsening of the conditions of the working of deposits, the increasing use of low-
calorie fuel, the increase of the expenditures on environmental protection and so
on. For the countries, which import fuel and power, the expenditures on their pur-
chase have risen considerably as a result of the increase of the foreign trade
prices and the need to participate in investment construction projects on the ter-
ritory of the states which are suppliers of fuel and energy resources. The impor-
tance of the economical and efficient use of energy resources and the assurance of
further economic development with the systematic decrease .Of the power-output ratio
of production is increasing in this situation.

National programs or decrees of directorial organs, which orient the natioral econ-
omy toward the highly efficient use of fuel, energy and other material resources,
have been adopted in the CEHA countries.1 The set of measures on the saving of
energy is a component of the national economic plans of these countries for
l981n1985. The measures in this area are aimed at the elimination of the unproduc-
tive and wasteful consumption of energy resources within the framework of the pro-
duction technology already being used in the national economy. Along with this

the retooling of a number of sectors and the introduction in them of an energy- and
fuel-saving technology are planned. A considerable set of measures is also being

3
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR‘OFFﬂﬂAl.USEZONLY

planned in the area of structural rearrangements and the updating of the products
list in the directions of the limitation of the growth of some power- and 'uel-
consuming works and the preferential development of less power-consuming sectors.

Considerable allocations are being earmarked for the assurance of the economical
and efficient consumption of fuel and power. The effectiveness of such investments
is much greater as compared with the expenditures on the increase of the amount of
additional energy resources. For example, in the GDR the assets being allocated
for the efficient use of energy are from one-third to one-half of the expenditures
connected with the increase of the consumption of energy resources.

The economical consumption of fuel and energy in the CEHA countries is being en-
sured by the introduction of revised standards, the limitation of the consumption
of resources, the increase of economic sanctions, the raising of wholesale prices
and the use of other levers. Thus, in Hungary the motor transport managements are
obligated to pay from the profit a large fine for the deadhead run of heavy-duty
trucks. In case of the evasion of this the fine is collected in 10 times the
amount. In the GDR hundreds of new norms of the consumption of energy have been
drawn up, which have gone into force as new standards. A decrease of the consump-
tion of energy by evaporators by 16-35 percent, by equipment in ceramics production
and baking by 15-17 percent and so on, for example, is called for by them. State
limits of the consumption of energy and penalties, in conformity with which the

users pay 10 times the amount for its excessive consumption, have been introduced
here.

Measures of an organizational order, which ensure the efficient use of energy re-
sources, have acquired primary importance. They include the setting of a differen-
tiated temperature in buildings, regulate the consumption of electric power in the
lighting of streets, roads and buildings, stimulate the consumption of power at the
works and in housing and municipal services during the periods of the minimum load
of the power supply network and so on. In transport the operation of worn out
trucks is being reduced and the multishift operation of economical vehicles is be-
ing introduced, the fleet of official passenger cars is being reduced, norms of
their total kilometers logged and operating time are being established, the maximum
traffic speed on roads is being restricted. The retail prices for gasoline and the
charge of fuel and power have been increased in a number of countries. The revi-
sion of the wholesale prices for fuel and energy is stimulating econonic organiza-
tions to use them efficiently, and since .i this case the prices for imported ener-
gy carriers are increasing more rapidly than the prices for domestic fuel, the
stimuli for its preferential use are being increased.

Such a direction of the increase of the efficiency of the use of fuel and energy
began to be used extensively in the late 1970's and is continuing in the 1980's.
It does not require large investment outlays and yields significant results. At
the same time the redistribution of energy resources among the sectors of the na-
tional economy yields the greatest results at the initial stage. Then these re-
serves can be reduced and their importance can be decreased, since the technical
and technological bases are little affected when implementing these measures.

The introduction of new technology and equipment, which ensure the economical and
efficient use of fuel and energy, is more capital-intensive than the above-
examined measures. The development and introduction of energy-saving technology
also require a long time. In the OSHA countries this direction has been developed

lo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
on a limited scale, but may become one of the basic directions in the 1980's and
the more distant future.

During 1981-1985 the CEMA countries plan to continue the retooling of sectors on an
increased scale, which will promote the further increase of the efficiency of ener-
gy consumption. The renovation of obsolete thermal electric power stations and the
reequipmcnt of industrial furnaces, boiler houses and other installations for the

purpose of the most complete utilization of domestic solid fuel are envisaged here.
A policy of decreasinguthe power-output ratio of products'on the basis of the im-

provement of the design of items, the introduction of new materials and their sub-

stitutes and new technology, the use of secondary energy resources and so on has
been adopted.

Technological modernization will become one of the factors of the saving of fuel

and energy. In Hungary the annual saving of all types of energy resources by the

end of 1981-1985 will be equivalent to the cost of 1.5-1.7 million tons of petro-
leum.2 In the GDR during the current five-year plan it is planned to save 65-70 mil-
lion Lons of lignite.3 In the CSSR by the end of this five-year plan the saving of
energy resources in the national economy should come to not less than 12 million

tons of conventional fuel.4 In Romania the task is being set to save annually by

the end of the current five-year plan more than 3 million tons of conventional fuel
just by the increase of the cogeneration of thermal energy and electric power and

the development of the central heating network.

Whereas the organizational measures on the efficient use of fuel and energy to a
considerable extent can be implemented by means of national efforts, in the case of
the retooling of production, the development and introduction of energy—saving tech-
nology the greatest impact is achieved in the direction of the mututal cooperation
of the CEMA countries. In this area definite achievements exist in a number of di-
rections. For exauple, the use of the results of joint research on the development
of highly efficient means of using gas and the creation of gas-using equipment, ac-
cording to a preliminary estimate, is providing a saving of natural gas in all the
CEHA countries, on the basis of the level of its consumption in 1980, in the amount
of up to 10 billion m3, while up to 15.5 billion m3 of gas are fed annually through
the Soyuz gas pipeline from the USSR to the European CEHA countries.

Various forms of joint activity, which are oriented toward the elimination of
losses of fuel and energy both during their production and during their consumption,
can be mutually advantageous in a number of instances. For example, as a result of
the operation of the joint society of Hungary and Poland, Haldex, it was possible
to eliminate the coal-containing dumps in Silesia, which had accumulated over a
century, and to obtain many millions of tons of high quality coal, as well as con-
struction materials from the accompanying rock.6

An extensive set of measures on the development and production of the latest mining
machinery and energy-saving equipment is outlined in the fuel and raw material long-
range goal program of cooperation. Their implementation is opening new prospects of
the intensification of socialist production by means of the further rationalization
of the use of fuel and energy resources. At the same time the gradual and thorough
retooling of sectors is a constant process. Having undergone considerable develop—
ment, it will also be continued in the distant future. This process can be devel-
oped most successrully on the basis of a comprehensively coordinated technical
strategy of the socialist countries.

5
- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the future the structural rearrangement of the economy of the CEMA countries,
first of all of the importers of fuel and energy, will act as one of the more and
more significant factors of the efficient use of energy resources. The national
economic complexes of these countries during the decades of their formation were
built up as multisectorial complexes, having also included power-consuming works
(chemical, metallurgical and others). During the period when fuel and raw mate-
rials were inexpensive, in most instances this justified itself. Now such a means
of development burdens the economy, decreases its efficiency and leads to an in-
crease of foreign indebtedness. A number of countries are faced with the objective
need to set limits to the development of fuel- and energy-consuming works and to
begin structural rearrangements in the economy, taking into account the new world
situation in energy supply. This rearrangement can be accomplished during the fur-
ther intensification of the international socialist division of labor and the de-
velopment of the joint planning activity of the CEHA countries. Such an approach
guarantees the supply of the markets of the socialist countries with the necessary
products, including fuel- and power-intensive products.

The socialist countries have gained considerable experience in the coordinated and
interconnected development of the structures of production, which can also be used
successfully in the changed economic situation. For example, the cooperation of the
USSR and Hungary in the development of the aluminum industry, which was expanded
extensively in the 1970's, made it possible to increase the mining of bauxites and
the production of alumina in Hungary and to increase in the USSR on the basis of
Hungarian deliveries of alumina the production of aluminum and its export to Hun-
gary. As a result in Hungary, which is experiencing a shortage of domestic energy
resources, by means of such cooperation up to 2.4 billion th of electric power are
being saved annually, which corresponds approximately to its expenditures for
household needs.7 The measures of the fuel and raw material long-range goal pro-
gram of cooperation, which provide for the location of the production of high power-
intensive products in the USSR and low power-intensive products in other socialist
countries for their mutual exchange and the meeting of increasing needs, are prom-
ising.

The structural rearrangements in the national economy and first of all in industry
are connected mainly with the change of the intrasectorial proportions, but subse-
quently they may also affect the intersectorial proportions. In 1981-1985 a number
of OSHA countries in conformity with the new energy situation will begin to adapt
their economic structures to the changing conditions of the supply of fuel and
energy.

In Bulgaria the progressive structural changes in the economy are recognized as one
of the primary economic problems of the current five-year plan, and in this connec-
tion the output of small-tonnage chemical products, electronic equipment and other
relatively nonpower-intensive types of goods is undergoing leading development.
Intraworks structural changes, which ensure the saving of fuel and energy, are en—
visaged in Hungary. In the GDR the investments to a considerable extent are being
concentrated in a highly efficient industrial structure (microelectronics, the pro-
duction of robots, electronic machine building and so on). In Romania the growth
rate of fuel- and power-consuming works in metallurgy, the chemical industry and
other sectors is being limited. A long-range orientation toward the decrease of
the growth rate or even the volumes of the output of power-consuming products is
planned in the C883.

6
FOR OFFHJAI.USE(MHLY
The process of improving economic structures, particularly by the limitation of the
development of power-consuming works, of course, does not eliminate the increase of
the needs for the corresponding products. For example, the need for high quality
Steel, including electric steel, as well as for light-weight nonferroua metals,
especially aluminum, will increase. Therefore the restriction of the development
of such works in some countries, apparently, should be accompanied by tneir in-
crease in others, owing to which the importance of the coordination of the national
economic plans of the CEHA countries is increasing.

In the socialist countries economic growth depends to a greater and greater extent
on the efficiency of the use of fuel and energy, and not only on the amounts of the
commitment of their natural resources to the economic turnover. In the European
CEMA countries (excluding the USSR) during the 1970's the average annual rate of
decrease of the specific power-output ratio of the national income, according to our
rough estimates, was 1.2-1.3 percent, while the average annual rate of increase of
energy consumption was about 4 percent. Approximately 25 percent of the economic
growth was provided by the decrease of the power-output ratio of the national income
and 75 percent was provided by the increase of the consumption of fuel and energy.

Nevertheless during this period the reserves in the area of the efficient use of
energy resources remained very significant. According to rough estimates, in the
late 1970's the power-output ratio of a unit of national income of the European
CEHA countries on the average exceeded by 30-40 percent the corresponding indicator
of the leading EEC countries (the FRO, England, France and Italy taken together).
Thus, in the CSSR 20-50 percent more energy resources were consuaed per unit of na-
tional income than in other developed cauntries.8 In comparison with the indicated
four West European countries the specific power-output ratio of the national income
was substantially higher in Bulgaria, the GDR and Poland, at approximately the level
of these countries in Romania and slightly lower than this level in Hungary.

The analysis of the basic indicators of the development of the national economy of
the European CEHA countries for 1981-1985 attests that approximately 30-60 percent
of the increase of the national income will be provided by the decrease of the
power-output ratio of a unit of national income and 60-70 percent will be accompa-
nied by an increase of the consumption of energy resources. During the current
decade the average annual rate of the decrease of the specific power-output ratio
of the national income will be, apparently, not less than 1.5 percent, while in the
GDR and the CSSR this decrease will be even more significant.

The economic development of the socialist countries, which is being ensured to an
increasing extent by the economical and efficient use of energy resources, also pre-
sumes the further increase of the consumption of fuel and energy. However, whereas
in the 1970's the average annual increase of the national income by 1 percent was
due to the average annual increase of the consumption of primary energy resources

by about 0.8 percent, during the 1980's the latter indicator may decrease to approx-
imately 0.7 percent. According to the most reliable estimates, the consumption of
primary energy resources in the European group of CEMA countries in 1978 came to
560-580 million tons of conventional fuel.

During 1981-1985 the average annual increase of the national income in Bulgaria is
planned at the level of approximately 4-6.5 percent, in the GDR--S-5.b percent, in
the CSSR--2.7-3 percent, in Hungary--2.7-3.2 percent and in Romania--6.7-7.6 per-
cent. As a whole for the European CEHA countries during the 5-year period this

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicator will thus be approximately 4 percent. If in the listed countries in the
future to 1990 the 4-percent average annual growth rate of the national income is
taken into account, an average annual increase of the consumption of energy re-
sources by 2.8 percent should correspond to it. In this case their total consump-
tion in 1990 may increase to approximately 800 million tons of conventional fuel.

A higher rate of economic growth will cause a further increase of the consumption
of fuel and energy and, on the contrary, a slowing of the rate of economic grow may
decrease the need for energy resources. Other things being equal, economic growth
will depend on the amount of energy resources which the countries have available.

The interrelationship of economic growth and energy consumption in Cuba, Vietnam
and Mongolia is distinguished by a special featur . In this group of socialist
countries in the 1980's the proportion of industry and especially of its base sec-
tors--the mining, fuel and power sectors, some metallurgical works, the construc-
tion materials industry--will increase, modern types of transport will undergo de-
velopment, the mechanization of agriculture will be intensified. During such de-
velopment the increase of energy consumption usually leads the increase of the na-
tional income. The trends being revealed for the 1980's in the development of the
national economy of Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam make it possible to expect that in
them for every l-percent increase of the national income the increase of the con-
sunption of primary energy resources may be not less than l.2-l.5 percent, that is.
the average growth rate of the consumption of fuel and energy here may be several
fold greater than in tlm European CEMA countries.

The further increase of the use of fuel and energy at a faster rate in Vietnam,
Cuba and Mongolia and at a slower rate in the European group of CEMA countries is
causing the need for the involvement in the economic turnover of large additional
energy resources.

In the future nuclear power engineering will become the most important direction of
the development of the fuel and power management of the CEMA countries. By 1990
nuclear electric power stations with a total installed capacity of up to 37 mil-
lion kw, which is equivalent to the consumption of up to 70 million tons of conven-
tional fuel a year, will be built on the territory of the European CEMA countries.
The production of the equipment for them and the building of these projects are be-
ing carried out on the basis of mutual cooperation. As a result, the role of nu-
clear electric power stations in the total generation of electric power is increas-
ing considerably. Thus. in 1985 in the CSSR nuclear electric power stations will
account for approximately 20 percent of the generation of electric power in this
country and in Bulgaria-«about 26 percent of the generation of electric power in
this country.

The CEMA countries are cooperating in development in the case of the building of
thermal reactors with a unit capacity of 1 million k”, which should replace the
440,000-kw reactors now being produced. However, as Academician A. Aleksandrov
notes, thermal reactors cannot ensure the development of nuclear power engineering
for the distant future, and science proposes a radical means-~the development of
fast breeder reactors, since only in this case is it possible to approach nuclear
power engineering which is self-sufficient in fuel for an unlimited time.10 The
first reactors of this type have been built in the USSR. The pooling of the ef-
forts of the CEMA countries is making it possible to expedite the work on the as-
similation of those reactors and to turn to the development of nuclear power engi-
neering in the new direction.

8
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
l!)R¢0F1W(JAl.lﬂ5EC(MULY

The construction of the Khmel'nitskaya and Konstantinovskaya AES's with a total
capacity of 8 million k" is planned by joint efforts on the territory of the USSR.
The amount of deliveries of electric power from them to the European CEHA countries
by 1990 may be increased to 20-22 billion kWh a year, which is equivalent to the
annual use at thermal power stations of 7-8 million tons of conventional fuel. The
idea of creating large nuclear power complexes, which was advanced by Soviet scien-
tists, is of interest for the more distant future.

During the present decade the generation of electric power in the CEHA countries
along with the development of nuclear power engineering will be based to a signifi-
cant extent on thermal electric power stations. Here at the electric power stations
liquid fuel is being replaced by domestic solid fuel (brown coals. lignites, shale).
Thus, in Romania the proportion of coal-powered electric power stations will be in-
creased in the generation of electric power from 35 percent in 1980 to 55 percent

in 1985. The mining of brown coals in the CDR and the CSSR and of lignites in
Bulgaria is increasing.

The increase of the production of raw materials in the majority of CEMA countries
is being accomplished under mine working and economic conditions which are becoming
more complicated. Thus, in the GDR the specific capital outlays per unit of in-
crease of the production of raw materials in the 1970's increased by 50 percent,
while in the 1980's they will increase by more than twofold as compared with the
1960's.12 With the development of the mining of coals and lignites their ash and
moisture content increase, the calorific value decreases. This leads to a substan-
tial decrease of the service life of power boilers, unplanned shutdowns and repairs
of equipment and a considerable excessive consumption of fuel. The purification of
fuel at the site of its production provides a large economic impact in transporta~
tion and power engineering, which exceeds the expenditures on cleaning. Coopera-
tion in the development and production of equipment for the preparation of solid
types of fuel for use in power management makes it possible to decrease the effect
of this unfavorable natural factor on the indicators of the development of power
engineering of the CEHA countries.

In the 1980's it is planned to expand the use of water resources, including by
joint efforts. Thus, several powerful hydroelectric and pumped-storage power sta-
tions will be built by mutual cooperation on the territory of the European CEHA
countries. Along with this the use in some countries of the water power potential
of small rivers, especially in mountainous regions, is possible.

The rising costs in obtaining petroleum and its increasing value as a chemical raw
material and motor fuel are leading to the more and more limited consumption as
boiler fuel of the residues of petroleum refining (fuel oil). The degree of the
refining of petroleum in many CEHA countries is 45-50 percent. As estimates show,
an increase of the degree of refining to 65-70 percent makes it possible to addi-
tionally obtain in these countries up to 15 million tons of light petroleum prod-
ucts and lubricating oils and to decrease accordingly the yield of fuel oil. 3 In
conformity with the agreement on the specialization and cooperation of the produc-
tion of advanced types of sets of equipment for the heavy refining of petroleum in
the CEHA countries, including tLe USSR, in 1981-1990 it is planned to produce vari-
ous units with a total refining capacity of about 190 million tons of petroleum a
year. Cooperation in the production of units which ensure the refining of petro-
leum according to the most advanced technologies (catalytic cracking, hydrocrsck-
ing and others) is of particular importance.

9
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLV
FORioFFKJAl.USE(MVLY

In the 1980's the CBHA countries intend to expand the geological prospecting opera-
tions and cooperation in this area. Thus. the joint Petrobaltic organization, which
was created by the GDR, Poland and the USSR, is carrying out exploratory drilling
for petroleum and gas on the shelf of the Baltic Sea within the territorial waters
of these states. Cooperation in the performance of geological prospecting and the
recovery of petroleum and gas on the continental shelf of Vietnam is envisaged in
accordance with the 1980 agreement between the USSR and Vietnam.

The use of new methods of recovering petroleum may be of great importance for the
CEHA countries. Thus, in Romania the treatment of petroleum in the beds with bac-
teria was successfully tested, which made it possible to increase substantially its
extraction in a number of depleted fields. here it is planned to increase the co-
efficient of the petroleum yield of the beds £20m 31.5 percent in the late 1970's
to 37 percent in 1985 and 40 percent in 1990.1 In the USSR the experimental and
pilot industrial use of polymers and other reagents, intrabed burning and high-
pressure steam in recovering petroleum has begun. Experience attests that the new
methods will make it possible to increase the coefficient of the petroleum yield

to 55-60 percent.

The cooperation of the CENA countries in the intensification of the use of petro-
leum resources can be developed in several directions. For example, the coordi-

nated development of the production of the chemical reagents necessary for this,

their reciprocal deliveries, the sharing of experience in the working of reserves
and so on will be of mutual interest.

The large reserves of coals, lignites and shale in the European CEHA countries make
it possible to direct attention to their versatile use, including as raw materials
for obtaining liquid fuel. This problem is especially urgent for the USSR and
Poland, on the territory of which the largest coal fields are located. These two
countries have concluded an agreement on cooperation in the development of methods
of obtaining liquid fuel from coal.

The production of natural gas in the USSR will be developed in the future. As was
reported in the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Coaudttce to the 26th
party congress, for the socialist countries their participation in the increase of
the recovery and transportation of western Siberian natural gas may be of substan-
tial importance. The large reserves of gas in this region of the USSR and the ex-
perience of the construction by the socialist states of the Soyuz gas pipeline are
making it possible to aim at the joint working of these reserves and the increase
of the deliveries of Soviet gas to the European CEHA countries.

In the CEMA countries the losses of accompanying liquids, which are a valuable raw
material for the chemical industry and a high calorie fuel, are considerable in the
recovery of natural gas. The losses mainly at small- and intermediate-capacity
fields, as world experience attests, can be reduced by several times by the means
of modern technology. Equipment of the umitized type, which is tailored for moving
from some relatively small fields to others as the production of gas increases or
decreases, is required for this. The production of such equipment, which is based
on international specialization and cooperation, and its efficient use are making
it possible to commit additional reserves of raw materials to the economic turnover
of the CEHA countries.

10
FOR 0FFK]A1.USE(NVLY
The further development of the domestic energy base of the CEMA countries, includ-
ing Mongolia, Vietnam and Cuba, will be combined withthe importing of fuel and
energy, including from developing countries. The USSR remains the main exporter of
these products to the CEMA countries. However, the increase of deliveries of fuel
and energy from the USSR is undergoing substantial change. Whereas in 1976-1980

the exports of energy from the USSR to the CEMA countries increased as compared with
the preceding 5-year period by 43 percent, in 1981-1985 it will increase as com-
pared with 1976-1980 by 20 percent. Thus, the energy resources, which the CEMA
countries have during the current 5-year period, are limited and require their very
efficient use for the assurance of the necessary rate of economic growth.

Thus, in the 1980's an overall strategy of the solution of the fuel and energy prob-
lem by the CEHA countries is being formed. It is based on the economical and effi-
cient consumption of energy resources, the adoption of energy-saving technology and
structural changes in the economy, which ensure the systematic decrease of the
power-output ratio of production; the structural rearrangement of the balance of
primary energy resources, in which the proportion of atomic energy and solid types
of fuel is increasing; the slower increase of production and the consumption of
primary energy resources as compared with the preceding decade; mutual cooperation,
which is oriented toward the decrease of the power-output ratio of production and
the efficient consumption of energy resources, which encompasses the field of the
study of new resources and sources of energy, and also includes the continuation of
deliveries of energy resources from the USSR to the other CEMA countries.

The rate of economic growth of the CEMA countries in the 1980's along with other
conditions will be determined by the progress of the implementation of this strate-
gy and its individual components and by the intensity of cooperation in the main
directions of the solution of the fuel and energy problem.

FOOTNOTES

1. See, for example, "Decree No 28 of the Council of Ministers of the People's Re-
public of Bulgaria of 28 June 1979" (D"RZHAVEN VESTNIK, 13 July 1979); "Decree
of the CDR Council of Ministers on the Efficient and Economical Use of Electric
Power, Thermal Energy, as Well as Solid and Liquid Fuel" (NEUES DEUTSCHLAND,

21 September 1979): "Decree of the State Council of the Socialist Republic of
Romania on the Taking of Steps on the Proper Management and the Reduction of the
Consumption of Electric Power, Thermal Energy and Natural Gas" (SCIENTBIA,

31 July 1979); "Decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of
Ministers 'Oh the lntensification of the "ark on the Economy and Efficient Use
of Raw Material, Fuel, Energy and Other Material Resources'" (PRAVDA,

a July 1981).

2. NEPSZABADSAC, 20 January 1981.
3. NEUES DEUTSCHLAND, 15 April 1981.
a. RUDE PRAVO, 7 April 1981.

5. "Romania. Documents--Events," Bucharest, ACERPRES, No 37, 1979, pp l6, 19.

11
FOR 0F1TCJAI.USE(NNLY
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.
ll.
12.
13.

11..

won OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RUDE PRAVO, 23 January 1980.

See "Toplivno-syr'yeva a problem v ualoviyakh sotaialiaticheskoy ekcnoni—
cheskoy integratsii" __‘1'he Fuel and Rav Material Problen Under the Conditions
of Socialist Economic Integration-7, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1979, pp 37-38.
RUDE PRAVO, 8 April 1981.

SPRAHY MIEDZYNARODOWE, No 9, 1980, p 24; "Energy Problems and Cooperation in
the ECB Region." Statistical annex. Economic Coulieaion for Europe. Energy
(R 10), add. 1, 16 December 1980.

See KCMMUN‘IST, No lo, 1981, pp 89-90.

See EKONOHICHESKOYB SOTRUDNICHBSTVO SIM-WV SEV, No l, 1977, p 72.
HIRTSCHAFTSHISSENSCHAFT, No 10, 1980, p 1176.

See VNESHNYAYA IORGOVLYA, No 10, 1980, p 17.

See PRAVDA, 12 January 1981.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voproay ekononiki", 1981

7807
(:80: 1825/28

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR-CW TRADE

HANDBOOK ON SOVIET, CEHA AGRICULTURE

Moscow MIR SOTSIALIZHA V TSIFRAIH I PAKTAKH in Russian 1980 (signed to press
25 Sep 81) Pp 2, 63-68, 128

[Annotation. table of contents and chapter entitled 'Agriculture' in book "Mir
Sotsializma v Tsifrshh i Faktakh" [The Horld of Socialism in Figures and Pacts]]

[Excerpts] Under the general editorship of R. N. Fedorov

Authors:-
I. A. Kapranov, V. I. Kartsev, N. N. Pusenkov, R. R. Ultanbayev, and R. P. Fedorov
Compiler: v. S. Glagolev

The World of Socialism in Figures and Facts. 1980: Reference Book. I. A. Kapranov,
V. I. Kartsev, N. N. Pusenkov, and others. Moscow: Politizdat, 1981.

Annual reference publication. In it are reflected the achievements of the socialist
countries in 1980 in the most important spheres of political and economic coopera-
tion. The extensive statistical and factual material shows the development of the
basic sectors of the national economy. the growth of the material welfare and cul-
tural level of the workers, the intensification and development of multilateral
foreign economic relations.

The reference work is prepared on the basis of official statistical data and
materials of the the periodical press of the socialist countries.

CONTENTS
socialist cooperation-Jule "81!) support of world kneesaasasassssasaassssoosooss 3

Industry. Capital Construction and Transport.................................... 12

Agriculture-osaaosaasoaooseooessassessoosssoosossoesooossoosossosssssossslooaaos ‘3

Increased Material Hall-Being and Cultural Level of the Ubrkers................. 69

kteml BCOﬂOIiC Tie‘ossosasssassooossossossassosesooassoalsssssasssooesaoaesoo 9‘

l3
FOI<OFFKJAI.USE(XVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AGRICULTURE

The development of agriculture, the increase of its efficiency and the consistent
intensification of agriculture and livestock production are constantly at the center
of attention of the coamunist and working-class parties of the socialist countries.
During the past five-year-plsn (1976-1980), a broad complex of measures has been
implemented in the states of the socialist commonwealth with regard to the further
steady raising of the production of the basic types of agricultural production, the
growth in the yield of agriCultural crops, and the increase in the productivity of
livestock-raising. A great deal of attention was devoted to the organizational
strengthening of agricultural production cooperatives and state farms, the expan-
sion and intensification of the specialization and concentration of production on
the basis of inter-farm cooperation and agro-industrial integration.

The unfavorable weather conditons that developed for the agriculture of the major-
ity of the socialist countries in 1980 were responsible for a certain reduction in
the volume of gross agricultural production as a whole in the countries of the
socialist commonwealth. This aifected above all the volume of the gross harvest
of potatoes, which declined in all European CEHA member countries, as well as
sugar beets and vegetables. The harvest of bread grains and leguminous plants,
first of all wheat and rye, collected in 1980 was greater than in the preceding
year. For example, in 1980 127.3 million tons of wheat were harvested in the
European CBHA member countries (12.5 percent more than 1979) and 19.4 million tons
of rye (22.8 percent more). The livestock production of the socialist-countries
continued to become stronger: In the majority of countries there was an increase
in large cattle livestock and especially in poultry.

In the agriculture of the Soviet Union important changes took place during the
years following the March (1965) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee, which set
forth the basic directions of agricultural policy of the CPSU. As a result of
enormous efforts by the party and the people, the productive forces of the country
increased to a new level, there was an increase in the production scales of kol-
khozes and sovkhozes, there was further intensification of its specialization and
concentration on the basis of inter-farm cooperation, and the economic links within
the framework of the agro-industrial complex expanded and became more complicated.
As was noted in the materials of the 26th CPSU Congress, the material-technical
base of agriculture, which is acquiring an increasingly industrial appearance, was
significantly strengthened. There was an increase in the power availability per
worker and large-scale work was carried out in the area of irrigation and reclama-
tion construction. The realization of these measures required a significant in-
crease in capital investments in agriculture. The increase in the production
efficiency of agriculture in the USSR was accomplished primarily on the basis of
the acceleration of scientific-technical progress and the amplification of the
role of intensive factors of development. The intensification of agriculture

made it possible to steadily increase the output volume of production while re-
ducing the number of workers in this sector of the national economy. The volume
of production output calculated per hectare rose in 1976-1980 by a factor of 1.3
compared to 1971-1975.

lb
ETHICNWHCIAL US£()NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1980 unfavorable weather conditions for agriculture developed in many regions
of the Soviet Union. However, the strenuous labor of the workers in agriculture
and measures adopted by state and party organs made it possible to weaken their
negative influence on the results of the agricultural year. The gross production
of agriculture in 1980 amounted to 121.2 billion rubles (in comparable 1973 prices)
--which is 6.6 percent higher than the average annual production in the 9th Five-
Year-Plan. The average annual volume of gross agricultural production for 1976-
1980 reached 123.7 billion rubles (compared to 113.7 billion rubles of average
annual volume in 1971-1975). Compared to 1965 the gross production of agricul-
ture increased by 35 percent, including the production of plant growing by

32 percent, and the production of livestock production--by 39 percent.

As a result of the continuing process of specialization and concentration in agri-
culture, the number of inter-farm enterprises and organizations increased to 9,661
by the end of 1980 (in l965--3,354; in 197S--6,330); 154,400 (in 1965--48,500, in
l975--94,100) kolkhozes, sovkhozes and other enterprises and organizations took

part in them. At the end of 1980 there were more than 500 agro-industrial production
and agricultural organizations.

The number of sovkhozes increased to 21,000 by the end of 1980 (compared to 11,700
in 1965 and 18,100 in 1975). The average annual number of workers employed in
sovkhozes amounted to 11,500,000 people. The total sowing area of the sovkhozes
reached 111.8 million hectares (1965--89.l million hectares). A sovkhoz in 1980
averaged 17,300 hectares of agricultural lands, including 5,600 hectares .

of arable land, 1,906 head of large cattle, 1,124 hogs, and 59 tractors. By the
end of 1980 equipment in all the sovkhozes numbered 1,228,000 tractors, 380,000
grain combines, and 592,000 heavy trucks.

The number of kolkhozes declined from 26,500 at the end of 1979 to 25,800 at the
end of 1980 as the result of their enlargement and the transformation of a certain
part of the kolkhozes into sovkhozes (by the decision of the general meetings of
the kolkhoz workers. The average annual number of kolkhor workers working in the
public economy of the kolkhozes came to 13,300,000 (1965--l8,600,000; 1975--
15,200,000). The total of all public areas under grain crops of the kolkhozes in
1980 came to 95.2 million hectares and 54.8 million hectares of grain crops per
1,000 people (in 1975--98.2 million hectares and 56.6 million hectares respective-
ly). The livestock of public productive cattle in the kolkhozes by the end of
1980 increased to 47.9 million head (1965--38.3 million; l975--47.6 million

head ). At the end of 1980 the kolkhozes had 1,110,000 tractors, 306,000 grain
combines, and 537,000 heavy trucks. The gross income of the kolkhozes in 1980
amounted to 19.6 billion rubles (in 1975--21.5 billion rubles for a comparable
range of kolkhozes). Calculated per completed man-day, kolkhoz workers in 1980
were paid 5.51 rubles in cash and products (in l965--2.68 rubles; in l975--4.54
rubles). At the end of 1980, one kolkhoz averaged 494 kolkhoz households, 6,600
hectares of agricultural land (including 3,800 hectares of arable land), 1,845
head of large cattle (in 1965--1,056; in l975--l,664), and 43 traCtors.

As the result of unfavorable weather conditions in BULGARIA, the gross production
of agriculture in 1980 diminished by 4.8 percent compared to the preceding year.
There was a reduction in the yield of such crops as rye, corn, leguminous plants,
sugar beets, potatoes, and fodder root-crops.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The agriculture of HUNGARY, whose average annual growth rate during the past few
years has amounted to 2.9 percent, is developing at a stable rate. The level of
development attained by this sector of the national economy is evidenced by the

fact that in 1980 1,300 kilograms of grain and 140 kilograms of meat were produced
per capita in the country. At the present time, the population is continuously supr
plied with agricultural products and the necessary commodity funds are being created
for their growing export.

The production of agricultural output in ﬂungary increased during l976~l980 by 15
percent compared to the level of the preceding five-year-plan, including in state
farms and agricultural production cooperatives-by 20 percent and in private plots
and subsidiary farns--by 8 percent. The production volume of plant-growing for

the five years increased by 11 percent and the production of livestockr-by 20 per-
cent. The increase in agricultural production volume was secured in conditions of
a general reduction in area under agricultural crops (the allotting of land for in-
dustrial and transport construction).

During the past 5 years the area of arable land has diminished by 261,000 hectares
and there has also been a reduction in area set aside for fruit orchards and vine-
yards. At the same time there has been an increase in areas allotted to vegetable
crops, meadows and pastures. The reduction in the number of people employed in
agriculture, being noticed in Hungary as well as in practically all of the CEHA
member countries, was more moderate during the years of the past five-year-plan
than during the preceding years, but the number of people employed in the large
agricultural enterprises during the past two years has grown somewhat.

In VIETNAM the growth production of agriculture increased by 16.6 percent during
1976-1980. Moreover, the production of plant-growing, which accounts for more

than 80 percent of the gross production of total agricultural production, increased
by 20.6 percent, the production of livestock-by 2.5 percent.

In the agriculture of the GDR [German Democratic Republic] the highest production
indicators attained during any of the preceding five-year-plans were noted in
1976-1980. In spite of unfavorable weather conditions, a good harfest of grain

and other crops was gathered and the state plan targets were overfulfilled by 2
percent. The plan of state purchases was overfulfilled for all products of
livestock-raising. The existing cattle livestock corresponds to the plan targets
for 1980 and guarantees the prerequisites for the plan fulfillment of the following
year.

Successful development took place in regard to the concentration and specialization
of production. Modern plant-growing and livestock-producing agricultural produc-
tion cooperatives and national estates have developed. The agricultural production
cooperativescultivate87.6percentof the agricultural land and the national
estates-6.9 percent. In the interest of the further expansion of agricultural
production, special attention is being given not only to agricultural production
cooperatives and national estates, but also to the private subsidiary farms.
Private farms and the union of gardeners and amateur cattle-raisers account for a

large quantity of marketed vegetables, fruit. honey, meat from large cattle, hogs,
chicken and other products--which significantly helps improve the supply of the

16
FOR‘0FTWC1A1.USEIDNLY
FCHRCNHHCJAL USEZCMﬁLY

population with food products. The number of members of the union of gardeners and
amateur livestock-producers increased from 800,000 in 1970 to 1 million in 1980.

The average annual growth of agricultural production in CUBA during 1976-1980
amounted to 3.5 percent. During the past five-year-plsn, the development of agri-
cultural production was adversely affected by unfavorable weather conditions, as
well as by the spread of dangerous diseases of the basic agricultural crop--sugar-
cane. and also tobacco. For the purpose of stimulating the growth of agricultural
production, a new and more progressive system of procurement prices has been intro

duced effective 1 January 1981.

The first successes on the road of the comprehensive development of agricultural
production have been noted in the LAO PEOPIﬁ'S DEMOCRATIC RTPUBLIC. In spite of the
difficulties caused by a destructive war, the difficulties inherited from the old
regime, the natural calamities which have struck the Lao People's Democratic Repub-
lic in the course of a number of years, as well as the subvera.7e operations of the
enemies of the Lao people, the sown areas of the country have been restored and
eXpanded by 24 percent and the areas under non-grain and technical crops have
doubled .

The development of agriculture in POLAND in 1980 took place under exceedingly un-
favorable weather conditions. Excessive precipitation rendered the performance of
agricultural operations very difficult and were the reason for the flooding and in-
undation of approximately 1.7 million hectares of agricultural land. This caused

a significant decrease in the harvest, especially of cultivated crops and hay--
which to a decisive extent affected the results of the agricultural year. The
volume of gross production of agriculture in 1980 decreased by 9.6 percent in com-
parison with 1979, including in the production of plant-growing-by 15.2 percent,
and livestock production°-by 3.3 percent.

In RUHANIA the average annual volume of gross production in agriculture during
1976-1980 increased by 26.4 percent compared to the average annual volume of the
preceding five-year-plan. The average annual growth rates of agricultural produc-
tion during 1976-1980 came to 4.8 percent. In the state farms the realization of
measures to expand and modernise their material-technical base continued. The
production output in state farms during 1976-1980 increased by 27 percent compared
to the preceding five-year-plan. In 1980 state farms accounted for 22.5 percent
of wheat production, so percent of fruit, 58.3 percent of pork, 68.7 percent of
poultry meat, 30.2 percent of cow milk, and 63.5 percent of eggs. Th: realization
of measures regarding the economic and organisational strengthening of agricul-
tural production cooperatives continued. Agricultural production cooperatives and
inter-cooperative economic associations received credits from the state and
allotted significant capital investments from their own resources for the expansion
and modernization of the material-technical base. Advanced technology was intro-
duced in plant-growing and livestock production. An important role in increasing
the efficiency of agricultural production was played by the united state and agro-
industrial councils,which guaranteed a more rational distribution of agricultural
crops, a more efficient use of land resources and the material-technical base, and
the broad application of progressive agro-technical measures.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In spite of two unfavorable years with respect to weather conditions, the agricul-
cure of CZECNOSLOVAKIA achieved certain successes during 1976-1980. The volume of
agricultural production for the five years grew by 9 percent, including the produc-
tion of plant-groving--by 6.7 percent, and livestock production--by 11 percent.

The last year of the five-year-plan--l980--was one of the unfavorable ones for the
agriculture of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. Regardless of this fact, the
volume of gross agricultural production increased by 6 percent compared to 1979.

In 1980 the country had 1,767 agricultural production cooperatives. the average
size of agricultural land of which amounted to 2,474 hectares. The state farms
(including subsidiary enterprises of industrial enterprises) numbered 203, and the
average size of their agricultural land reached 6,784 hectares. In agriculture
there were 352 joint agricultural enterprises and 591 cooperative interfarm associ-
ations.

The Strengthening of the Material-Technical Base of Agriculture

The progressive development of agricultural production in the socialist countries
is secured primarily by virtue of the further strengthening of the material-
technical base of this important sector of the national economy, its technical re-
equipment, and the systematic growth of the level of [mechanization] of all types
of agricultural operations.

In the SOVIET UNION capital investments in the development of agriculture for the
entire complex of operations increased (in comparable prices): In the 7th Five-
Year-Plsn they amounted to 68.2 billion rubles, in the 8th--81.5 billion, in the
9th-~130.S billion, and in the 10th--17l.l billion rubles. In 1980 alone, 36
billion rubles were spent for the development of agriculture--l6.9 percent more
than in 1975 and 2.6 percent more than in 1979. A total of 30.7 billion rubles
was directed towards the construction of production projects. 0f the total sum
of capital investments in the development of agriculture during 1976-1980, 113.4
billion rubles represented state capital investments, 57.7 billion rubles-capital
investments of kolkhozes. The increase of the volume of capital investments ear-
marked for agriculture is accompanied by the growth of their relative weight in
the total volume of capital investments in the entire national economy: In the
7th Five-Year-Flan their relative weight amounted to 20 percent, in the 8th Five-
Year-Plan--23 percent, in the 9th Five-Year-Plan--26 percent, and in the 10th
Five-Year-Plan--more than 27 percent. For all the years of Soviet power capital
investments in the development of agriculture for the whole complex of operations
came to 491 billion rubles.

By virtue of the construction of new and also the expansion of existing enter-
prises, the years of the 10th Pive-Year-Plan saw the introduction of elevators
for 18.6 million tons (including in l980--3 million tons), grain depots and
storage facilities for 31.7 million tons (6 million tons), 3.8 million hectares
(0.7 million hectares) of irrigated 1and,3.6 million hectares (0.6 million hec-
tares) of drained land, and 36 million hectares (in 1980-4.7 million hectares)
of irrigated pastures. During 1976-1980 the following were constructed:

Poultry plantsfor egg production with a capacity of 61.6 million laying hens (in-
cluding in l980--for 7.4 million); poultry plants for meat production with a

capacity of 362.2 million units of poultry per year (100.5 million units); live-
stock housing, including mechanized farms and complexes for 21.3 million cattle

18
FOR OFIWC1A1.USE!MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

places for large horned cattle (3.9 million); 13.6 million for hogs (3 million) and
23.3 million for sheep (in l980--3.7 million).

In BUIOARIA measures were taken in 1980 to prevent soil erosion in an area of ap-
proximately 150,000 hectares. About 1,200 hectares of damaged areas were restored
to production and approximately 2,100 hectares were drained. Chemical land impuwe-
ment was undertaken and fertility was restored in 98,000 hectares of salty soils
and soils with increased acidity. Plant protection by biological means and inte-
grated methods was carried out on more than 290,000 hectares.

During 1976-1980 124 billion forints were allotted to the development of agricul-
tural production in HUNGARY, more than 50 billion forints to the food industry,
and 9 billion forints to forestry and the timber-processing industry. Livestock
production farms were created for several hundred thousand cattle places, the
traction force of the machinery park increased by 30 percent and its capacities
exceeded 7 million kilowatts. Grain storage facilities with a total capacity of
2 million tons were built.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC 25.4 billion marks were spent in 1976-1980 for
strengthening of the production base of agriculture-which amounted to one tenth
of all means allotted to the national economy of the GDR. The fixed capital of
agriculture during this period increased by 29 percent.

In IADS more than 100,000 hectares were irrigated during the past five-year-plan,
and there was an increase in the number of mechanical devices and machines used in
agriculture.

The volume of capital investments in the agriculture of MONGOLIA in 1980 increased
by 14 percent. A number of complex farms were constructed and 3,387 livestock
housing units were put into operation for 1.7 million head of cattle. The plan for
putting them into operation was overfulfilled by 20.9 percent, for watering points
--by 4.7 percent.

In RUMANIA land improvement work during 1976-1980 was carried out in an area totaﬁng
891,000 hectares--which is almost 12 percent more than during 1971-1975. The total
area of irrigated land reached 2,300,000 hectares.

During 1976-1980 capital investments in agriculture in CZECHOSIDVAKIA came to 76
billion crowns, including 34 billion crowns spent for the expansion of the machinery
park and the acquisition of different types of harvesting equipment. In 1980 57,000
hectares of crop land were drained, and 16,000 hectares were irrigated.

The growth of state appropriations for the expansion and strengthening of the
material-technical base of agriculture in the socialist countries makes it possible
to increase the security of this sector with modern and highly-productive machines.

During 1976—1980 agriculture in the SOVIET UNION was supplied with 1,805,300 trac-
tors with a total engine capacity of 144.1 million horse power; 1,343,800 heavy

trucks (including specialized trucks and chassis); 973,400 tractor ploughs; 1,147,100
tractor drills; 539,000 grain combines; 62,400 beat combines; 57,200 potato com-
bines; 475,600 mowing machines for tractors; and 120,500 irrigation machines and

19

FOR1)FFKJA1.USELONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

installations. In 1980 agriculture received 346,700 tractors with a total engine
capacity of 28.9 million horse power; 270,000 heavy trucks; 196,600 tractor
ploughs; 226,700 tractor drills; 200,100 tractor cultivators; 117,500 grain com—
bines; 10,500 potato combines; 46,400 silage combines; 8,900 cotton pickers;
85,500 tractor mowers; 48,600 spreaders for mineral fertilizers and lime; 32,000
balers; 58,400 milking installations; 18,800 irrigation machines and installations;
and a significant number of other machines and installations. The tractor park in
agriculture grew from 1,613,000 in 1965 and 2,334,000 in 1975 to 2,562,000 in 1980;
the combined capacity of their engines came to 78 million horse power in 1965, 152
million horse power in 1975, and 191 million horse power in 1980. The grain com-
bines in the agriculture of the country numbered: 520,000 in 1965; 680,000 in 1975;
and 713,000 at the end of 1980. The truck park in agriculture grew from 945,000 in
1965 and 1,396,000 in 1975 to 1,607,000 in 1980; their combined carrying capacity
amounted to 2,580,000 tons in 1965, 4,446,000 tons in 1975, and 5,895,000 tons in
1980.

The power availability per worker is consistently growing in agriculture. Power
capacities in the agriculture of the USSR increased from 231,7 million horse power
in 1965 and 457.2 million horse power in 1975 to 605 million horse power in 1980.
Power capacities per worker'in kolkhozes, inter-farm agricultural enterprises and
sovkhozes increased from 7.7 horse power in 1965 and 16.8 horse power inl975 to 24.2
horse power in 1980. For every 100 hectares of sown area in 1980 there were 260
horse power of power capacities (in 1965--100 horse power; in 197S--190 horse power).
The total consumption of electric power in agriculture (including that received from
state power stations) increased from 21.1 billion kilowatt hours in 1965 and 73.8
billion kilowatt hours in 1975 to 109 billion kilowatt hours in 1980.

The agriculture of BULGARIA in 1980 was supplied with 4,352 tractors (21 percent
more than in 1979), 1,383 heavy trucks (12 percent), 3,213 tractor ploughs (8 per-
cent), and 2,035 tractor drills (11 percent more).

The technical equipment of the agriculture of HUNGARY increased. In 1980 4,524
tractors, 2,066 tractor drills, and 1,105 grain combines were sent here. The capac-
ity of machines and power units available to the agriculture of the country in-
creased by approximately 30 percent during 1975-1980.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC machine and equipment deliveries to agriculture
were realized according to plan; in 1980 5,692 tractors and 400 grain combines were
delivered. A total of 147,900 tractors, 54,600 heavy trucks, and 13,600 grain com-
bines were working in agricultural enterprises.

Deliveries of machines and mechanical devices are increasing in LAOS-which, along
with the growth of the use of mineral fertilizer, makes it possible to make wide
use of intensive methods of conducting agricultural production.

20
lﬂ)l.(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.lEHE(MQLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE1ONLY

Table l. Tractor Park in Agriculture
(In Physical Units, at the End of the Year, in thousands)

 

 

Countries 1950 1960 1212 1975 1979* 1980*
USSR 595 1,122 1,977 2,334 2,540 2,562
Bulgaria 6.6 25.8 53.6 64.7 _ 64.4 63.4
Hungary 13.4 41.0 68.4 62.1 58 57.1
GDR 36.4 71 149 140 140 143
Cuba ... ... 51.6 54.8 66.3 70.4
Mongolia 0.1 1.7 5.5 8.1 9.6 9.6
Poland 28.4** 62.8** 231 411 525 599
Rumanis 13.7 44.2 107 120 139 140
Czechoslovakia 25.8*** 74.9 136 142 140 138
Yugoslavia 30.7 68.2 226 . . . . . .

*)At the beginning of the year, except USSR.

**)Not including gardening and truck-farming tractors.
***)l951.

The agriculture of MONGOLIA was supplied with more than 700 tractors, 170 grain
combines and a significant quantity of other technical equipment in 1980.

Difficulties arose in POLAND in 1980 in the supply of agriculture with the means of
production. The cost of-deliveries of tractors, trailers, engines and agricultural
machines amounted to 32.7 billion zlotys, which is 2.6 percent less than in 1979.
Deliveries included 60,000 tractors, 37,000 tractor ploughs, 12,000 tractor drills,
4,100 grain combines. 0f the total number of tractors--618,000 units--at the dis-
posal of the agriculture of the country at the end of 1980, approximately 115,000
were found in agricultural groups and cooperatives (a reduction of 5.8 percent for
the year) and approximately 378,000 tractors (an increase of 14.5 percent for the
year) in the non-socialized sector of agriculture. The total cost of credits

granted to the rural population in 1980 amounted to 44.7 billion zlotys--uhich is
13.6 percent less than in 1979.

During the past five-year-plan (1976-1980) the number of tractors in the agricul-
ture of RUHANIA increased by 27,000. The number of self-propelled combines grew
by 17,900 to 39,100. By 1980 the ploughing, sowing and harvesting of cereals,
sunflowers and soy-bean were almost completely mechanized. An important direction
of the intensification of agricultural production in the socialist countries is its
Ichemicalizationl. The quantity of mineral fertilizers and chemical plant protec-
tion agents being supplied to this sector is growing.

In the SOVIET UNION the production of mineral fertilizers grew (in conventional
units) from 31.3 million tons in 1965 and 90.2 million tons in 1975 to 104 million
tons in 1980 (recalculated per 100 percent of nutritious substancsa--to 24.8
million tons). In the 100 percent calculation according to operating principle,
103,000 tons of chemical plant protection agents were produced in 1965, 264,000
tons in 1975, and 283,000 tons in 1980. In the production of mineral fertilisers
the Soviet Union occupies first place in the world. By virtue of the construction
of new, as well as the expansion and reconstruction of operating enterprises, the

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following capacities for the production of mineral fertilizers were put into opera-
tion (average per year): During 1966-1970-6.6 million tons; during 197l-1975--7.6
million tons; during 1976-1980--7.9 million tons, including in 1980--9.9 million
tons. In 1980 agriculture received 81.8 million tons of mineral fertilizers in
conventional units (recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient substances-18.8
million tons) and 2.7 million tons of chemical feed additives (recalculated per

100 percent of nutrient substances--0.5 million tons). During the years of the
10th Five-Year-Plan a total of approximately 390 million tons of mineral fertili-
zers were supplied to agriculture.

In BULGARIA the production of mineral fertilizers in 1980 amounted to 3.3 million
tons and, recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient substances--0.6 million tons.

The production of mineral fertilizers in HUNGARY in 1980 reached 4.9 million tons
(recalculated pe. 100 percent nutrient substances--l million tons). The consump-
tion of mineral fertilizers in the agriculture of the Hungarian People's Republic
in 1980 (1.4 million tons), although somewhat lover than in 1975. increased in
effectiveness of their use-Hhich is evidenced by the improvement in the indicators
achieved in plant-growing.

In the agriculture of the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC RBPUBLIC [we find] one of the highest
levels of consumption of mineral fertilizers per hectare of arable land and peren-
nial plantations. In 1980 a total of 15.1 million tons of mineral fertilizers was
produced and, recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient substances, 4.8 million
tons.

Table 2. Deliveries of Mineral Fertilizers to Agriculture
(In Thousands of Tons of Nutrient Substances)

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979 1980*
USSR 1,261 2,624 10,317 17,251 17,365 18,763
Bulgaria 6.2 157 639 679 820 830
Hungary 35.2 168 837 1,535 1,502 1,400
GDR 678 951 1,535 1,826 1,713 1,637
Cuba ... ... 396 331 ... ...
Mongolia ... ... 1.9 25.6 42.3 44
Poland 363 745 2,416 3,460 3,567 3,635
Romania 6 82 702 1,197 1,431 1,185
Czechoslovakia 262 510 1,227 1,604 1,745 1,730
Yugoslavia ... 284 632 720 ..

*) Preliminary data, except USSR.
The deliveries of mineral fertilizers to the agriculture of MONGOLIA in 1980
amounted to 44,000 tons.

In RUHANIA the production of mineral fertilizers in 1980 reached 12.1 million tons
(recalculated per 100 percent of nutrient subatances-2.5 million tons). During

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1976-1980 agriculture was supplied with 6.4 million tons of mineral fertilizers (re-
calculated per nutrient substances)--which is 1.9 million tons more than during

1971-1975. The average annual consumption of mineral fertilizers per hectare of
arable land during 1976-1980 amounted to 112 kilograms compared to 77 kilograms
during the preceding five-year-plan.

In CZECHOSLOVAKIA 5.7 million tons of fertilizers were produced in 1980 (1.2 million
tons recalculated per nutrient substances). The deliveries of mineral fertilizers
to agriculture reached 1,730,000 tons in 1980 (in nutrient substance)--which made it
possible to increase the consupmtion of mineral fertilizers per hectare of agricul-
tural lands.

Table 3. Application of Mineral Fertilizer per Hectare of Arable Land and Perennial
Plantations (In Kilogram of Nutrient Substance)

 

Egyntries 1950 1960 1970 1215 1978 1212
USSR 7.3 12.2 46.8 77.5 82.5 77.7
Bulgaria 1.5 36.1 159 166 180 201
Hungary 6 29.4 150 276 286 280
GDR 129 188 319 370 331 340
Cuba ... ... 125 96.4 ... ...
Mongolia ... ... 2.3 34.2 35.7 41.7.
Poland 24.1 48.6 162 236 241 239
Rumania 0.6 7.9 66.7 114 141 137
Czechoslovakia 49.7 94.6 230 305 334 335
Yugoslavia . 34 77 90 107 .

The Production of the Output of Agriculture

Unfavorable weather conditions that developed in 1980 for a number of socialist
countries were reflected in the results achieved in agriculture. For the agricul-
ture of the SOVIET UNION the year 1980 was one of the unfavorable ones in terms of
weather conditions. Regardless of this fact, the average annual harvest of grain
during the years of the 10th Five-Year-Plan exceeded 200 million tons for the first
time. If during 1961-1965 it amounted to 130.3 million tons, during 1966-1970 to
167.6 million tons, during 1971-1975 to 181.6 million tons, it reached 205 million
tons during 1976-1980. In 1980 189.1 million tons of grain were produced--10 mil-
lion tons more than in 1979; 98.2 million tons of wheat were harvested; 10.2 million
tons of rye; 9.5 million tons of corn; 6.4 million tons of leguminoua plant crops;
and 2.8 million tons of rice.

The largest harvest of raw cotton was brought in--9.96 million tons. The plan for
selling it to the state was overfulfilled by all cotton-growing republics. The
procurement points received 6.24 million tons from the farms of the Uzbek SSR, 1.26

million tons from the Turkmen 888, 1.01 million tons fro. the Tajik 88R. The har-
vest of sugar beets (for factories) amounted to 79.6 million tons; sunflower-~4.65

million tons; potatoes--67 million tons; and vegetablea--25.9 million tons.

23
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These results were achieved in the presence of a certain decrease of the sowing
area under bread grains and potatoes during the years of the 10th Pive-Year-Plan,
as well as the partial expansion of sowing areas under industrial crops and fodder
crops.

The average annual state procurements of grain during 1976-1980 came to 77.7 million
tons (in 1980--69.4 million tons) by comparison with 67.6 million tons during the
years of the 9th Pive-Year-Plsn. State purchases of cotton grew from 7.67 million
tons on the average during 1971-1975 to 8.93 million tons during 1976-1980 (in
1980--9.96 million tons). In 1980 64.4 million tons of sugar beets were procured;
3.36 million tons of sunflower; 11.1 million tons of potatoes; and 17.7 million tons
of vegetables.

Table 4. Output of the Products of Agriculture in All Categories of Farms of the
USSR (Millions of Tons)

Average per Year

 

 

Products 1971-1975 1976-1980 1_73 1980
Grain 181.6 205.0 179.2 189.1
Raw cotton 7.67 8.93 9.16 9.96
Sugar beets (for
factories) 76.0 88.4 76.2 79.6
Sunflower 5.97 5.32 5.41 4.65
Potatoes 89.8 82.6 91.0 67.0
—-¥egeeabaes- 23.0 ____25.n. 27.2 25.9

The average annual production of grain in HUNGARY during 1976-1980 was 11 percent
more than the average annual production during 1971-1975. The average annual
harvest of wheat during the past five-year-plan came to 5.2 million tons, that of
corn--6.3 million tons--which signifies a growth of 20 percent and 7 percent re-
spectively by comparison with the preceding five-year-plan. The increased harvests
of cereals were attained thanks to an increase in their yield (in the presence of
a reduction of sown areas). Sown area under sugar beet cultivation increased by
26 percent during the five-year-plan, but the harvest of sugar beets increased by
28 percent. The production of sunflower seeds was increased at accelerated rates.
In 1980 the sown areas under sunflower cultivation almost doubled by comparison
with 1975, and the harvest tripled. Hhile there were significant annual fluctua-
tions, on the whole the harvest of fruits and grapes increased during the five-
year-plan.

In the GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC a good harvest of grain and several other agri-
cultural crops was brought in. In 1980 the harvest of cereals was the third
highest for all the years of the existence of the GDR. Plan targets for some
other crops were also fulfilled or overfulfilled. However, there was a decrease
in the harvest of potatoes, sugar beets, oil-producing_ crops, and a number of

vegetables and fruits. The plan for the state procurements of plant-growing
production was fulfilled with respect to cereals. edible leguminous plants.

24
FOM.0FFKJA1.USE10NLY
Average per Year

Countries 1951-1955 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1212 1980*
USSR' 88,500 130,335 181,554 209,012 179,176 189,090
Bulgaria 4,200 4,863 7,465 8,043 8,360 7,708
Hungary 6,100 6,905 11,527 12,408 12,191 ...
CDR 6,400 5,969 8,760 8,970 8,952 9,737
Cuba ... ... 397 464 447 511
Mongolia 35 289 366 369 331 259
Poland 12,300 15,427 21,241 20,014 17,570 18,541
Ruaania 8,40n 11,101 14,974 19,272 19,424 20,304
Czechoslovakia 500 5,658 9,436 10,030 9,300 10,992
Yugoslavia 4,700** 11,200*** ll,800**** 15,700***** 15,779 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **)1950. ***) 1960. ****) 1970. *****) 1976-78.

food potatoes, and fruit. At the same time, the plan was not fulfilled with respect
to the procurement of oil-producing crops, sugar beets, and vegetables.

Table 6. Gross Harvest of Potatoes
(In Thousands of Tons)

Average 3:; :33; "
Countries 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1979 1980*
USSR 81,628 89,782 86,458 90,956 67,023
Bulgaria 400 355 387 424 315
Hungary 1,998 1,602 1,596 1,512 1,366
GDR 12,066 10,806 10,038 12,243 9,297
Cuba ... 81 176 201 243
Mongolia 21.3 25.5 50.4 72.4 39
Poland 43,682 47,083 46,830 49,572 26,394
Runania 2,600 3,387 4,506 4,562 4,135
Czechoslovakia 5,635 4,571 3,928 3,725 2,713
Yugoslavia 2,711 2,930 2,787** 2,670 ...

*7 Preliminary data, except USSR. **) 1976-1978.

In LAOS the production of rice and other agricultural crops increased by 31 percent
during the past five years.

Extremely unfavorable weather conditions developed in 1980 for the agriculture of
MONGOLIA. There was a reduction in the gross harvest of cereals, potatoes and
other agricultural crops. The harvest of vegetables came to 26,000 tons and of
fodder crops--103,000 tons.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In POLAND the harvest of the basic four grain crops (wheat, rye, barley and oats)
amounted to 16.4 million tons, 2.9 percent less than the average annual harvest of
these crops during 1975-1979. In 1980 the wheat harvest came to 4.2 million tons;
rye--6.6 million tons; barley--3.4 million tons; and oats-2.2 million tons. The
harvest of potatoes and sugar beets was considerably smaller than in 1979.

Table 7. Gross Harvest of Sugar Beets
(For Factories, in Thousands of Tons)

Average per Year

Countries 1951-1955 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1979 1980*
USSR 2b,000 59.170 75,983 90,668 76,214 79,559
Bulgaria 600 1,440 1,711 1,931 2,045 1,445
Hungary 2,100 3,093 3,097 3,988 3,928 3,673
can 5,200 5,373** 5,496 6,624 6,502 6,668
Cuha*** ... 67,500**** 50,670* 51-,100++ ... ...
Poland 6,500 11,436 13,741 15,152 14,156 10,370
Rumania 1,300 2,637 4,756 6,278 6,109 5,561
Czechoslovakia 5,500 6,277 6,867 7,073 7,613 7,223
Yugoslavia ... 2,366 3,629 5,070** 5,920 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) Including sugar beets for cattle feeding.
***) Sugar-cane. ****) 1960. 7) Average for 1971-1973. **)1976-1976.

In RUNANIA the average annual production of grain during 1976-1980 increased by 30.8_"
percent compared to the average annual production during the preceding five-year-
plan. In 1980 they obtained: 11.2 million tons of corn (compared to 8.4 million
tons on the average per year during 1971-1975); 1.4 million tons of fruit (compared

to 1.1 million tons; 1.3 million tons of grapes (compared to 1.2 million tons).

During 1976-1980 the production of cereals in CZECHOSLOVAKIA increased by 7.6 per-
cent. In 1980 a good harvest of cereals and rape was brought in. In 1980 1.5
million tons of cereals more than in 1979 were obtained. The harvest of rape--
213,000 tons--waa significantly larger than in 1979 (and larger than planned)-
which made it possible to limit the import of seeds of oil-producing crops. A good
harvest of perennial green forage was obtained--5.6 million tons, 1.5 million tons
more than in 1979. But there was a significant reduction in the potato and sugar
beet harvest. State procurements came to 3.5 million tons of grain, 209,000 tons
of rape, and 988,000 tons of potatoes for sale to the population. The procurement
plan was fulfilled with respect to grain and rape; with respect to potatoes the
plan was underfulfilled to the extent of 33.3 percent.

The intensification of agricultural production in the socialist countries finds
reflection in the gradual growth of the yield of the basic agricultural crops,
regardless of the fluctuations that occur during individual years as a result of
weather conditions.

26
FOI.0F11C1AL.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 8. Yield of Cereals and Leguninous Plants
(Quintals per Hectare)

Average pgr Year

 

 

Countries 1951-1955 1961-1965 1971-1975 1976-1979 1979 1980*
USSR 8.0 10.2 14.7 16.3 - 14.2 14.9
Bulgaria 13.9 19.0 33.1 35.3 37.0 35.9
Hungary 16.1 20.3 35.0 1.0.2 1.0.3
60R 22.9 25.3 35.7 34.8 35.3 37.8
Democratic People's

Republic of Korea ... 19.1** ... ... ... ...
People's Republic

of China ... 15.5** .. .. ... ...
Cuba ... ... 20.7*** 23.1 ' 21.4 22.6
Mongolia 6.2 7.4 8.6 7.1 5.6 4.6
Poland 12.4 17.0 25.1 24.8 21.8 23.1
Rumania 11.7 15.9 24.1 29.9 30.0 30.8
Czechoslovakia 18.3 21.8 33.9 36.1 33.5 40.5
Yugoslavia ... 19.8+ 31.8‘M 34.2‘”+ ... ..

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) 1965. ***) 1973-1975.
*7 1960. 7*) 1975. ‘7‘) 1976.

In the SOVIET UNIOﬂ the average annual yield of food grains rose from 10.2 quintals
per hectare during 1961-1965 to 16 quintals per hectare in 1976-1980. There is
continued growth in the yield of the cotton plant: In 1965 it amounted to 23.2
quintals per hectare; in 1970-25.1 quintals; in 1975--26.9 quintals; in 1980--31.7
quintals per hectare. In 1980 214 quintals of sugar beets (for factories) were
harvested per hectare, 10.7 quintals of sunflower, 96 quintals of potatoes, and 147
quintals of vegetables per hectare.

A stable and high yield of cereals was attained in the agriculture of HUNGARY: The
average annual yield of wheat during 1976-1980 came to 40.6 quintals per hectare;
corn--48.6 quintals per hectare-which in both cases is approaimater 7 quintals
per hectare higher than during the preceding five-year-plan.

In VIETNAM the yield of the basic food crop-rice--which occupies more than 5.5
million hectares, in 1980 amounted to 20.8 quintals per hectare (according to pre-
liminary data); sugar-cane--410 quintals; jute--20.5 quintals; and peanuts--9.6
quintals per hectare.

In 1980 the yield of practically all basic agricultural crops in the GERMAN DEMO-
CRATIC REPUBLIC exceeded their average annual yield during 1976-1979. Thus, 38.1
quintals of grain per hectare were obtained in 1980 as compared to 35.2 quintals
per hectare on the average during 1976-1979; oil-producing crops--23.6 quintals
(compared to 22.5 quintals); potatoes--180 quintals (174 quintals); sugar beets--
278 quintals (266); Cultivated fodder crops--404 quintals (341); and corn for

green fodder and silage--312 quintals per hectare (288 quintals per hectare).

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n RUHANLA the yield of wheat during 1976-1980 increased by 4.7 quintals per hectare,
corn--by 6.6 quintals per hectare, sunflower--by 1.6 quintals per hectare, sugar
beets--by 27 quintals per hectare, and tomatoes--by 10.7 quintals per hectare. A
higher yield was also achieved in the basic fodder crops being cultivated: Alfalfa
for hay-by 14.7 quintals per hectare, fodder root crops-by.5.3 qnintals per hot'I
tare, and silage crops--by 16.3 quintals per hectare, although the low production

of fodder crops was noted, especially in an area of 4.5 million hectares of meadows
and pastures.

The Output of Livestock Production

In all socialist countries the necessary conditions are being secured for the fur-
ther development of livestock production, the increase of its productivity, and the
expansion of production of the most important types of production.

In the USSR the gross production of livestock-in 1980 increased by 4 percent com-
pared to 1975 and surpassed the level of 1965 by 39 percent and the level of 1970

by 17 percent. Large cattle livestock increased by 4 million head during 1976-
1980; while in the kolkhozes, interfarm organizations, sovkhoses and other state
organizations it increased from 87.6 million to 92.1 million, it decreased somewhat
in the private subsidiary farms of the population (from 23.4 million to 23 million
head). At the end of the past five-year-plsn the livestock of cows reached 43.4
million, of which 30.2 million were in kolkhoses, interfarm organizations, sovkhoses
and other state farms, and 13.2 million head--in private subsidiary farms of the
population. The livestock of swine increased by 15.6 million during the 10th Five-
Year-Plan, that of sheep and goats practically remained at the same level. The
average yield of milk from one cow in_a11_cgggggzjgg_gj_jg5gg_in_lﬁ§9_ggggn§sg_£2_____
2,143 kilograms, including in sovkhoses-2,246 kilograms; in interfarm agricu -
tural enterprises--2,952 kilograms. The average annual production of meat during
the years of the 10th Pive-Year-Plan increased by comparison with the average

annual level of its production during the 8th Five-Year-Plan by 27.6 percent;
milk--by 14.9 percent; eggs-by 76.3 percent; and wool--by 15.6 percent.

Table 9. The Output of Livestock Products in the USSR
(In All Categories of Farms)

Average per Year

 

Products [966-1970 1971-1975 1976-1980 1979 1980
Heat (in dead weight,

millions of tons) 11.6 14.0 14.8 15.4 15.0
Milk (millions of tons) 80.6 37.4 92.6 93.2 90.7
Eggs (in billions) 35.8 51.4 63.1 65.8 67.7
"001 (thousands of tons) 398 442 460 478 462

State procurements of cattle and poultry (in live weight) in 1980 ambunted to 15.9
million tons (recalculated as dead weight: 9.9 million tons); milk and milk
products (recalculated as milk)--57.3 million tons; eggs--43.1 billion. The

28
FOR OPT-1C1“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

established volume of egg purchases was averfulfilled; that for cattle and poultry,
as well as eggs was underfulfilled. The relative weight of kolkhozes, sovkhozes and
other state farms in the total volume of procurements in 1980 amounted to: Cattle
and poultry--96 percent (in l975-87 percent); milk--96 percent (95 percent); eggs-
97 percent (96 percent); and wool--83 percent (in l975--86 percent).

During the years of the past five-year-plan (1976-1980) a gradual increase in cattle
livestock was noted in BULGARIA. Domestic poultry livestock increased from 38.1
million in 1975 to 61.6 million in 1980. The output of the basic types of livestock
production in 1980 exceeded the level of the preceding year: Heat--by 0.7 percent,
amounting to 692,000 tons (in dead weight); milk-by 0.3 percent (2,166 liters);
eggs--by 8.6 percent (2,680 million units).

Table 10. Large Cattle Livestock
(In Thousands of Heads, at the End of the Year)

 

Countries 1229 1960 1970 1975 1212 1980*
USSR 57,089 75,780 99,225 111,036 115,100 115,057
Bulgaria 1,967 1,662 1,353 1,725 1,839 1,863
Hungary 2,022 1,965 1,912 1,906 1,950 1,911
008 3,615 6,675 5,190 5,532 5,596 5,722
Cuba ... 5,000 5,738 5,500 5,212 ...
Mongolia 1,988 1,906 2,108 2,627 2,677 2,397
Poland 7,200 8,695 10,220 12,766 12,166 11,335
Rumania 6,502 6,530 5,216 6,126 6,513 6,685
Czechoslovakia 6,303 6,387 6,288 6,555 6,915 5,002
Yugos‘l‘avh——' 5,297 5,202 5,938 5,566

"Ann

*) Preliminary data, except VOJA.

Large cattle livestock in HUNGARY amOunted to 1.9 million at the end of 1980. The
livestock of swine during 1976-1980 continued to increase; in 1980 they numbered
almost 20 percent more than in 1975. Sheep livestock grew by approximately 1 mil-
lion head during the five-year-plan; there was an increase in domestic poultry
livestock. Approximately 56 percent of the total number of slaughter animals during
the past few years were swine, and the proportion of the production of beef de-
creased, having amounted to 17 percent in 1980. In the production of meat the

share of dressed poultry increased: In 1980 it reached 20 percent. The production
of milk increased by approximately 60 percent thanks to the increase in milk yield.

In VIETNAM the buffalo livestock increased during 1976-1980 by 5.7 percent; cows--
by 11 percent; and swine--by 16.7 percent.

In the CERHAH DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC livestock of all types of farm animals increased.
Large cattle livestock increased by 126,000 during the year; moreover the livestock

of cows--from 2,126,000 to 2,138,000. The livestock of swine increased by 739,000
during the year, including sows-~by 10,000 and sheep--by 59,000. Laying hens
numbered 26,500,000 in 1979 and 26,866,000 in 1980. The average annual milk yield

29
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
from one cow continued to increase: During the year it increased by 50 kilograms
and reached 3,923 kilograns in 1980. The plan for state purchases of all livestock
products was overfulfilled. The procurements of cattle ready for slaughter in-
creased by 2.7 percent during the year and reached 2,334,000 tons; milks-by 1.7 per-
cent (to 7,919,000 tons); and egga--by 5.7 percent (to 4,709 million units).

Table 11. Swine Livestock
(Thousands of Heads, at the End of the Year)

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979 1980*
USSR 24,372 58,674 67,483 57,899 73,898 73,382
Bulgaria 818 2,553 2,369 3,889 3,830 3,806
Hungary 4,782 6,388 7,311 6,953 8,355 8,265
GDR 5,705 8,316 9,684 11,501 12,132 12,871
Mongolia 2.5** 3.9 10.7 12.5 34.5 33.9
Poland 9,350 12,615 13,863 21,647 20,983 18,728
Rumania 2,197 4,300 6,359 8,813 10,899 11,542
Yugoslavia ... 6,210 5,544 7,683 7,747 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) 1952.

Table 12. Sheep Livestock
(ThOusands of Heads, at the End of the Year)

Countries 1950 1960 1970 1975 1979 “1§§§?""
ussa 82,595 133,014 138,059 141,436 143,599 l47,487**
Bulgaria 7,820 9.333 9,678 10,014 10,536 10,433
Hungary 990 2,250 2,316 2.039 2,927 3,000
con 1,085 2,015 1,595 1,303 1,979 2,038
Cuba*** ... ... 76.2 101 165 ...
Mongolia 12,575 12,102 13,312 14,456 14,410 1s,797**
Poland 2,199 3,662 2,661 3,178 3,633 4,200****
Rumania 10,222 11,500 13,818 13,865 15,820 16,212**
Czechoslovakia 596 646 981 305 875 967**
Yugoslavia ... 11,449 8,974 8,175 7,339 ...

*) Preliminary data, except USSR. **) Sheep and goats. ***) State sector
****) In mid-year.

Certain successes were achieved in the livestock production of LAOS, where the
number of large cattle in 1980 exceeded 1.2 million.

In MONGOLIA 8.5 million head of young animals were raised in 1980. The plan for
purchases of cattle for the country as a whole was fulfilled to the extent of 93
percent.

30
FOIIQFFKJA1.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The insufficient provision of livestock feeds in POLAND in 1980 led to the reduc-
tion in large cattle livestock compared with 1979; sheep livestock also decreased
by 0.4 percent. The production of meat amounted to 3.2 million tons (in dead
weight)--2.6 percent less than in 1979; milk--l6.2 billion liters (1.4 percent
less); eggs--8.9 billion units (2.1 percent more). State purchases of livestock
products in agricultural enterprises of the socialized sector increased by 5 percent
compared to 1979; in the non-socialized sector they decreased by 0.6 percent, re-
gardless of a significant increase of prices for agricultural products.

In RUNANIA large cattle livestock during 1980 increased by 5.9 percent; swine--by
31 percent; sheep and goats--by 13.3 percent; domestic poultry-~by 24.4 percent.
The growth of cattle livestock took place primarily in the socialist agricultural
organizations, in which the breeding and fattening of cattle in modern livestock
complexes on an industrial basis expanded. The average annual production of meat
during the five-year-plan (in dead weight) amOunted to 2,333,000 tons; cow milk--
48.9 million hectoliters; wool-~35,400 tons; and eggs--6,566 million units. The
production of livestock during 1976-1980 exceeded the average annual level of the
preceding five-year plan: with respect to meat-~by approximately 560,000 tons; cow
milk--by 10.3 million hectoliters;wool--by 4.800 tons; and egg production--by
approximately 1,920 million units. However, state plan targets with respect to
the growth of cattle livestock, meat.milk and wool production were not fulfilled.

Livestock production in CZECHOSLOVAKIA is developing at steady rates. During
1976-1980 the production of meat and milk increased by 13 percent. Cattle live-
stock is growing gradually. and its productivity is increasing. At the end of
1980 large cattle numbered more than 5 million head (including 1.9 million cows),
swine--7.9 million. The average annual yield of milk per cow increased to 3,089
liters--ghigh is 133 liters more than at the end of 1979. The total increase in
milk production amounted to 237 million liters. The average annual egg output of
hens reached 228 eggs (in l979-u224 eggs). In the socialist sector of agriCulture
the average daily gain in weight of cattle being fattened came to 0.72 kilograms,
of swine-0.516 kilograms. For every 100 cows an average of 98.5 calves was
raised, for one sow--l6.7 suckling pigs. By comparison with 1979, 27,000 more
calves and 488,000 more suckling pigs were raised in 1980.

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAT, 1981

8970
cs0: 1825/36 3ND

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY