FOR OFFK’IAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10230
31 December 1981

USSR Report

CONSUMER GOODS AND DOMESTIC TRADE'
(FOUO 7/81)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NIB

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
antion was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGi'I LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

Cousunsa Goons AND DOMESTIC TRADE
(2000 7/31)

Courams

WSW 600m PROWCTIGI All) DISTRIEJTIG'

Public Catering Reorientation Urged
(V. mtynov; VOW EKONGIKI, 36p 8].) 00.000000000000000

CONSUMPTION mums AND POLICIES

Cost, Structure of Retail Goods Turnover
(R. mkshin; vm mwmn’ wt 81) OOOIIOOOOOOOCCOIOI.

- a - [III - USSR - 38b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSUMER GOODS PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION '

[Article by V. Hartynov: "Planning and Managing Public Catering"]

[Text] In modern society. an ever-increasing number of people each day need the serb
vices which organize their eating where they work. study. travel. VIC8t1;‘. and so
forth. Since the first days of Soviet power. rendering this kind of service has been
viewed as one of the important tasks of the socialist state. In 1918. V. I. Lenin
wrote in drafts of the Russian Communist Party (Bol'shevik) program that strengthen-
ing and developing Soviet power would require the implementation (along with other
measures) of "unswerving. systematic steps towrrds..replacing individual housekeep-
ing for individual families with common feeding of large groups of families."1

At all stages of its development. the socialist state has been concerned about creat-
ing the material-technical base and training personnel for public catering. with sup-
plying dining halls with food on a priority basis. ﬂow. state public catering enter-
prises, at which more than 2.6 million people are employed. are in operation at al-
most all production enterprises. institutions. academic institutions. recreation and
treatment facilities. and on board ships and trains. The far-flung network of public
catering enterprises and the skilled personnel employed at then comprise the state
public catering system. Along with this. public catering pri-arily among the rural
population is organized by the consumers' cooperatives system.

achievement of our society. At the same tine. the level of services to the popula-
tion in dining halls. cafeterias and restaurants does not fully meet the growing de-
mands of the workers or present opportunities. Shortcomings in the operation of pub-
lic catering enterprises. research has shown. are largely associated with the exist-
ing system for managing those enterprises. and foremost with the planning. recording
and evaluation of their activity. with poor development of overall questions of pub-
lic catering economy and organization as a branch of the socialist economy and of

its intended purpose in the social division of labor system.

‘V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete Collected works], Vol 36, p 75.

1 .
FOR OFFHJAI.USE4MNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

this. the primary plan indicator is trade turnover. singling out the share of output
produced themselves. This concept of the role of public catering cannot be recognized
as adequately substantiated.

It is known that the production of food products. both ready for consumption and in
the form of all manner of convenience foods. is the basic function of branches of
food industry. and their marketing is the basic purpose of trade. It turns out that
public catering is a mechanical conbining. within the framework of certain enter-
prises and organizations, of the two types of activity: food industry and trade.
Hhereas particular types of finished products or senifinished products are manufac-
tured and sold by enterprises subordinate to the dining halls trust (food-service
combine. public catering office and others). the aggregate of these types of activity
is taken into account as public catering at all levels of management.

Under the existing procedure for planning and evaluating activity. dining halls (res-
taurants. cafeterias) carry out plan assignments in terms of basic indicators. allot-
ting and organizing the consumption of prepared dishes. as well as selling foodstuffs
and convenience foods at retail (through their own stores. booths and stalls) without
rendering services in organizing their consumption. The revenues received are taken
into account on a one-to—one basis. The main thing required of a dining hall is

that it sell output (goods) primarily produced by itself. The methods of sale. like
the types of output. do not play any substantial role.

Inasmuch as the first way is considerably more labor-intensive. public catering en-
terprises naturally go the second way more and more. that is. the path of increasing
sales of output at retail. Their own production is correspondingly oriented towards
convenience foods and nonportioned prepared items (cakes. pastries. biscuits. and so
forth). Own output is considered to be not just what is actually produced in the
dining halls. cafeterias and restaurants. but also bread. sausage cheese. preserves,
juice and even fruit. as well as convenience foods which are in practice often sold
without any processing at all: uncooked hens. neat. fish. and so forth.

Thus. the leaders and collectives of dining halls. cafeterias and restaurants are
paying less attention to organizing food service outside the home. to services these
enterprises were specifically created to offer. Dining halls. restaurants and cafe-
terias often deal in the best varieties of meat. but prepare dishes from the worst.
They sell tons of sausages. polony. fish fillets. pel'meni. by-products and canned
goods. but none of these products or dishes prepared from then are on the menu.

At the same time. public catering enterprises' use of individual types of manufactured
food products is artificially held back. Only a couple of all the products produced
by bread-baking enterprises. for example. are used in public catering: black bread.
long loaves, SO—gram flat-tasting buns.... but pastries. rich buns. ring-shaped rolls
and other items are rejected. inasmuch as these products would compete with similar
products of their own production. Recently. restaurants and cafeterias have often
refused for this reason to accept nonalcoholic beverages from industrial enterprises.

Shortcomings in the indicated system of planning and recording are manifested in the
fact that public catering enterprises and organisations create their own small pro-

duction shops and enterprises. even in large cities with developed food industry. to
produce a similar assortment of products and open their own small trade facilities.
The bulk of the operations in such shops. enterprises and stores are done by hand.
working conditions are hard. so output is several times lower than for corresponding
industrial enterprises and food stores.

2
FOR OPINCLAL lEﬂE(NVLY
Party and government resolutions have repeatedly pointed out the necessity of pro-
viding public catering enterprises with commercial ssmifinished and finished food
products. Food industry branches have been set the task of increasing the release
of this output and broadening its assortment. These directions reflect the objective
necessity of industrializing public catering. that is, changing the branch over to an
industrial basis. foreaost through the planned transfer of food output production
functions from public catering enterprises to specialized food industry enterprises,
which is an important reserve for growth in the productivity of social labor end for
improving services to the population.

One would think that. after such a precise orientation towards the better use of the
opportunities of industrial processing of food products. which means a corresponding
reduction in own production. the obsolete concept of the branch's basic function
would have been re-exaained and new plan indicators. a new procedure for recording

them. a new system of moral and material incentives. new socialist competition terms,
and so on. would have been worked out.

However. that has not occurred, unfortunately. This is to be explained by the fact
that many economists and branch supervisory workers. sticking to the previous view of
public catering as a branch whose basic purpose is to produce output, and not ser-
vices, think food industry is not ready to produce convenience foods for public ca-
tering. They claim that would not be profitable for it. that the geography of its
enterprises does not coincide with the distribution of the population. and so "the

objective necessity of forming a specialized culinary industry directly in public ca-
tering is obvious."1

The resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress state the necessity of "elevating the role
of public catering in meeting the needs of the population. anticipating outstripping
rates of its development and raising the level of branch industrialisation. Improve
the hot food service at places where workers. employees, kolkhos members and pupils

at all types of institutions work and study. Significantly expand the network of pub-
lic catering enterprises and raise the standards of service to the population. Deve-
lop the network of dietetic food-service enterprises."

Additional material. financial and labor resources will naturally be required to fur-

ther develop public catering. At the same time, improving the branch management
mechanism is even more urgent.

At present, accepted practice is to judge the level of development of public catering
in terms of volume of food products sold through enterprises of this branch in con-
parison with sales through enterprises of the retail trade network. In our view. if
the task set by the 26th CPSU Congress concerning outstripping rates of public cater-
ing development is carried out given the management mechanisn in effect in the branch.
then this can in the final analysis lead only to increasing expenditures of social
labor. In this regard. the quality of services to the population in dining halls.
cafeterias and restaurants will at best not inprove. inasmuch as the work will be re-
duced to sharply increasing what is already the large role of the trade function in
public catering enterprise activity. Retail store and booth sales by public catering
_15ee, for example. V. c. Bychkov. "Obshchsstvennoye pitsniye i aktual'nyye voprosy
ego razvitiya" [Public Catering and Pressing Problems of Its Development]. Isd-vo
“Ekononika,” 1978. p 123.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.US£(MULY

enterprises require considerably higher labor expenditures than sales through the
retail trade network.

which is orienting then towards producing and selling output they produce themselves
with practically no consideration of labor expenditures, it will be impossible to

raise the level of branch industrialization as anticipated by the resolutions of the
26th CPSU Congress.

to centralize food production within the framework of particular enterprises or or-
ganizations in public catering. from the creation of cooking factories to equipping

the most primitive specialized production shops. This cannot be considered correct,
in our view.

The necessity of industrializing public catering stems from CPSU general economic po-
licy. which is oriented towards improving production efficiency and work quality in
every way possible. The rise in its level must first cf all ensure a direct and sub-
stantial savings in social labor. At the same time, the operating experience of culi-
nary factories. food-preparation dining-hall centers and other facilities demonstrates
that they are not. in view of their multipurpose nature and relatively aaall size. in
a position to ensure labor productivity growth at the level required to cover the ex-
penses associated with organizing the centralized preparation of senifinished and
finished products and supplying then to public catering enterprises. The level of

labor productivity at such factories is several—fold lower than at corresponding
specialized food industry enterprises.

And there are other problems in the operation of culinary factories. Practice has
shown that, in delivering products to dining halls and stores. they generally prefer
stores. since the latter order products in larger lots and are less exacting as to
assortment. At the same time, dining halls. which are interested in producing output
they sake themselves, use various pretexts to reject the output of culinary factories.
just as they reject the convenience foods and many types of ready output produced by
commercial enterprises. we are aware of instances in which culinary factories. even
though they were part of plant food-service combines. have changed the direction of
their activity to adapt more to the needs of the retail trade network, rather than

to those of the dining halls. However. it should be said that the culinary factor-

ies really cannot adapt to the needs of the retail trade network either. because
their capacities are generally used poorly.

The "Basic Directions of USSR Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and Up To

1990" anticipate: "Increasing production 23-26 percent in branches of food industry.
Develop at high rates the production of products ready for consumption. convenience

foods. culinary items. and products made from potatoes. fresh-frozen fruit and vege-
tables."

14
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The most important task of public catering management agencies is to orient subordi-
nate enterprises towards maximum use of this output. to influence more energetically

work by industrial enterprises to improve its quality, expand the assortment and
meat delivery schedules.

The CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers Decree "0n Improving Plan-
ning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism on Improving Produc-
tion Efficiency and Hark Quality." which orients all planning activity towards at-
taining high national economic end results in the name of meeting more fully the
growing social and personal requirements of the population. is of important signi-
icance to improving the management of public catering enterprises and this branch.

As was already noted, the role of the public catering system is to ensure that the
requirements of the population are met in organising food services where they work.
btudy. and so on. Carrying out this complex task. which is linked to people's health
and ability to work. demands that branch enterprise and organization collectives put
forth a maximum effort. skillfully and purposefully using the products and all the
material and financial resources being allocated them. The primary indicator in
planning and evaluating the operation of dining halls. cafeterias and restaurants
must be the cost of the foodstuffs consumed in public dining halls. both of products
produced themselves and of those obtained from production enterprises. It would be
appropriate to crll this indicator "public catering volume."

As distinct from the indicator now being used. that of gross trade turnover in public
catering. the indicator of public catering volume must include. first of all. only
food ready for consumption and second. only that prepared food sold at the same time
services are rendered to organize its consumption. It cannot take into account pro-
ceeds from the sale of raw material and semifinished products or prepared food if it
is sold without rendering services in organizing its consumption. that is. if it is
sold for consumption at home. Planning assignments for this indicator can be met
only by organizing food services for the population and attracting a certain number
of visitors to public dining halls. Therefore. plan fulfillment for this particular
indicator will be accompanied by a struggle for prestige and popularity for public
dining halls. increasing the effectiveness of their use as intended. which is to
fully meet the interests of both the population and the national economy.

The achieved level of public catering development in our country. the concentration
of considerable labor and material resources in this particular branch. and the pros-
bects for further developing it -- all this objectively demands greater centralism in
management and foremost in planning. In this connection, it is necessary that public
catering volume assignments be set in current and long-range state socioeconomic de-
velopment plans similarly to the way in which assignments are currently set for re-
tail trade turnover volume and personal services to the population. This would sig-
hify recognition of public catering as an independent branch with a precisely desig-
nated national economic function.

Inasmuch as the production of food products at specialized industrial enterprises
'requires lower expenditures of labor, other conditions being equal. public catering
enterprises must be oriented towards their maximum use. In this connection. we
should first of all reject the idea of priority to self-produced output when evaluat-
ing the operation of dining halls. cafeterias and restaurants and work out new in-
structions which would not allow artificial overstate-eat of the amounts of such

5
. son omcut use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

products. and second, evaluate the operation of public catering enterprises not on
the basis of increasing profit. but in terms of level of outlays (first of all. le-
vel of wage expenditures) as compared with planned indicators or normatives. It
would also be appropriate to work out indicators for evaluating the level of indus-
trialization of public catering enterprises. In our view. one such indicator might
be a use factor for consumption of food products and semifinished products calmer-
cially produced, that is. a ratio of the amount of food ready for consumption which
is received at public catering enterprises. or semifinished food (multiplied. in
turn. by a readiness for consumption factor). to the total amount of products used
to prepare the food.

The manufacture of convenience foods and production of products ready for sale to the
population without rendering services in organizing consumption must be entrusted
only to those public catering enterprises which, on the one hand. have surplus pro-
duction capacities and can carry out these functions with no detriment at all to
their basic activity and. on the other. are capable of producing particular products
without exceeding the set maximum labor expenditures established for producing analo-
gous output at corresponding food industry enterprises. This activity must be viewed
only as temporary. supplemental activity and be run under a special plan and consi-
dered separately from their basic activity. (In order to evaluate the work of col-
lectives carrying out such supplemental activity. its results must be added to public
catering volume in a ratio corresponding to labor expenditures.)

At the same time. we need to improve the indicators describing the quality of ser-
vices to the population in dining halls, cafeterias and restaurants. Implementation
of the following proposals would, in our view, be a substantial contribution to the
quality control system.

In accordance with the CPSU Central Comittee and USSR Council of Ministers Decree
"0n Steps to Further Develop and Improve Public Catering" (1967). food-sanitation or
technological laboratories with the task of monitoring the quality of incoming raw
material. semifinished products and finished products. as well as the completeness
with which these products are used in own-produced items. have been or are being
created at all large public catering enterprises. Observations have shown that the
results of laboratory tests on food samples are currently being taken into account
inadequately when evaluating the operation of public catering enterprises. At the
same time. an objective evaluation of the quality of the food being produced and of
its nutritional value is practically impossible without laboratory verification. In
our opinion. we should increase the role of the quality evaluation of products being
produced by public catering enterprises. necessitating the introduction of state sta-
tistical reporting on the results of laboratory studies of food products and use of
the data from those reports both in summing up the results of socialist competition
among enterprises. trusts and administrations. and in setting the total amount of
bonuses for successes achieved in carrying out plans in terms of basic volume indi-
cators.

The most important indicator of public catering enterprise services quality is the
variety of dishes offered. however. this is not recorded. so it cannot be considered
when evaluating the operation of enterprises and organisations. How can the variety

of food offered by dining halls be determined? In our view, it can be judged suffi-
ciently accurately by the structure of the products actually used (in physical terms)
as compared with the structure which is appropriate under specific enterprise operating

6
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
conditions. with consideration of enterprise type. consumption norms in effect. actual
supply opportunities and composition of the group being served. Oblast. kray and re-
public (autonomous republic) public catering administrations could be entrusted with
determining an appropriate structure of products which should be kept at maximum in

s given period.

It is known that public catering enterprise workers are interested first of all in
selling meat and meat-product dishes. This is to be explained by the higher prices
for meat as compared with prices for a majority of other types of foodstuffs. The
sale of one kilogram of processed meat enables them to obtain proceeds several-fold
higher than sales of items made from one kilogram of potatoes. vegetables. flour.
fish or other products. with the same or even lower labor expenditures. In view of
this. the structure of basic products should be set up in the form of a ratio of
those products to expenditures of meat and meat products.

A comparison of the structure of basic products used by public catering enterprises
must be at the level of oblasts. krays. union and autonomous republics. or even in
a dynamic for the country as a whole.

The system of material and moral incentives and terms of socialist competition must
be reviewed correspondingly. In connection with refinement of the functions of pub-
lic catering enterprises. we must not only review the indicators for planning and
evaluating their activity. but also change the work methods which have evolved.

At present. dining halls. in becoming enterprises selling goods they produce them-
selves. that is, trade enterprises. are obligated to produCe output in as broad an
assortment as possible. This fact is the cause of a number of shortcomings. First.
preparing a broad assortment of dishes. beverages. rolls and confectionery does not
permit an efficient division of labor or ensuring the necessary level of labor pro-
ductivity. Second. the demand for production space. equipment and utensils increases.
Third (and most important). it is impossible to achieve an economically effective
changeover of dining halls to supply convenience foods. since it is expensive to

have a broad assortment of convenience foods delivered each day from production en-
terprises.

The tasks of improving public catering. foremost where people work and study. given

a simultaneous reduction in expenditures on its organization and the necessity of
raising the level of branch industrialization. demand that dining halls set up all
their work on the basis of planned menus which anticipate the daily demand by visi-
tors for a comparatively narrow assortment of dishes, but with sufficient variety not
to be repeated over a week or 10 days. Only given this work method can we ensure a
variety of food. At the same time. the effectiveness of supplies of commercially
produced convenience foods to dining halls will be improved. since the daily demand
for particular convenience foods will be considerably higher, making delivery cheaper.

Moreover. the appropriateness of having dining halls use this method is confirmed by
the fact that service is speeded up significantly and the need for seats is reduced.
As is known. the USSR Gosstroy-approved norm currently in effect for production en-
terprise dining halls is 250 seats per 1,000 workers on a full shift. or four per-
sons per seat. It is calculated based on all workers needing to be fed within a
two-hour period. Half an hour is thus set aside for getting one's food and eating.
This time was established by observing dining hall service using the old method,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCJAI.USEGDNLY

that is. service based on a broad menu and free choice of dishes. If we adopt the
method of service based on a reduced menu and services in choosing dishes. that is.
if dishes are offered in certain combinations in the form of complete meals. then
two-fold less time would be required for dinner. If this method of service were in-
troduced on a broad scale. the demand for dining halls and cafeterias at production
enterprises would be reduced significantly. to approximately 170 seats.

It should be said that the effectiveness of this method of service is not disputed
by anyone. Nonetheless. the successes in disseminating it have been less than mod-
est. The basic reason. in our opinion. is that this method does not correspond to
the overall orientation which has evolved in public catering enterprise activity.
The existing procedure for evaluating the operation of dining halls orients them
towards increasing the production and sale of output they produce themselves. In
resolving this task. an ever-increasing role is played not by food-service organiza-
tion. but by retail and even wholesale trade in output produced themselves. which as-
sumes the mandatory daily preparation of products in as broad an assortment as pos-
sible. In trying to use this method. dining halls discover very quickly that they
cannot trade only in those convenience-food dishes on the planned menu for a given
day. since their assortment is too narrow. They are forced to prepare them in a
broader assortment. meaning that practically no changes whatever occur in organizing
the operation of the kitchen (production), the impact is not achieved, and the din-
ing hell gradually moves back to its former method of service.

Thus. broad dissemination of this progressive method of public catering enterprise
operation is being hampered by the procedure which has evolved for planning and
evaluating their operation.

There is also one other problem on whose solution success in further developing the
branch largely depends, the level of service to the population. In the early 1960's.
we began the organized isolation of public catering from trade on an autonomous re-
public. krsy and oblast scale. separating it fro; the trade organizations. Not all
economists unanimously agreed that this isolation was appropriate. Doubts arose
first of all among those who thought public catering was a branch of trade: why
separate one branch of trade from another and split a unified. economically strong
oblast (kray. republic) trade organization into two. much less so. since administra-
tive and managerial expenses increase?

It must be said that, in light of the incorrect understanding of public catering as
a branch whose basic function is the production and sale of output it produces it-
self which has arisen, these doubts are fully justified. This is confirmed by prac-
tice: separated from trade. public catering administrations. in accord with the in-
dicators used to evaluate their activity. have directed the resources of subordinate
enterprises and organizations primarily into developing trade. The primary function
of the branch. to render people services in organizing their meals outside the home.
remains. as before. of secondary importance.

Nonetheless. the isolation of public catering from trade at the oblast. tray and au-
tonomous republic level has played a positive role. The growing need for public ce-
tering and the necessity of further broadening and strengthening the material~techni-
cal base of the branch and training personnel - all this requires centralized leader-
ship. It is appropriate to orient public catering management agencies towards carry-
ing out that function which is the basic purpose of this branch in the social divi-
sion of labor system.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki". 1981

11052 8
680- 1827/25 ma omcm. use ONLY
COST, STRUCTURE OF RETAIL 600w TURNOVER

Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 81-92

[Article by n. Lokshin)

by significant changes in the cost and physical structure of sold goods. These
changes are determined by a large nuﬂaer of factors, the chief of which are: pro-
duction volume of consumer goods and their group and intragroup structure; poten-
tial means and readiness of production to take into account new developments in
demand; movement of consumer income and retail prices for goods; export and iaport
volume of finished products as well as of raw and other materials used in the pro-

mo volume and structure of proffered goods depend on a correlation between vnrket
and so—called outside-themarket portions of merchandise resources. Thus, the vol-
ume of production of confectionery and nonalcoholic drinks, margarine and soap, the

sugar and vegetable oil used to satisfy the needs of cos-ercial processing and pre-
determine the production of many varieties of footwear, furniture, oilcloth, um-
brellas, baby carriages and folding beds. The extent of sales to the population of
packaged and urapped products depends not only on the amount of tape Interials,
paper, cardboard and tin plate issued for the packaging of confectionery products
and the packing of canned and other goods, and so do profits from the sale of these
goods. The satisfaction of the demand of individual builders, amateur gardeners
and workers who own houses depends on the volume of Inter and roofing materials,

cement, sanitary-engineering equipment produced by group-A sector. and reaching
the market.

Systematicslly developing comedity-nonetary relationships encomass the prepond-
erant part of direct individual consuuption (over 90 percent) as well as that of
production consumption seeming a coundity form. In this connection, in our view,
we cannot consider as theoretically valid the division of comedity resources into
market and outside-the-market. Economically invalid proportions in determination
of the share of goods destined for sale to the population (for example, the still
permitted restriction of lumber and construction materials, many household and
other goods of productive use allocated for these purposes) and also the occasion-
ally unjustifiable restriction of so-called outside-the-market consumers in the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

final analysis cause a deficit of other consumer toads and thus bring about 8

disruption of the correlation between supply md demd and the search for ways of
going around this and motoring the disrupted proportions.

In connection with the multitude of factors which at times are of an opposite di-
rectional effect and which determine the supply of goods and the denand for then
with specific conditions characteristic of the production and sale of individual
goods, the changes in the cost and physical structure of retail goods turnover are
distinguished by much unevenness. This applies first and foremost to differences
in sales growth rates of food and nonfood products. Tho retail goods turnover of
state and cooperative trade in 1970, 1975 and 1980 for these groups of products was
as follows (in billions of rubles; in prices of the respective years):

 

 

 

 

 

Tab 1e 1
1970 1975 1980
sun relative sun relative sun relative
share share share
Goods turnover, total 155.2 100.0 210.‘ 100.0 270.55 100.0
including:

Food products 86.2 55.5 112.7 53.6 137.34 50.8
Nonfood products 69.0 46.5 97.7 46.6 133.21 49.2

In 1980, the retail goods turnover in cosparison to 1970 had increased 76 percent,
including 59 percent for food products and 93 percent for nonfood products. An ad-
vancing growth of sales of nonfood products caused an increase in their share of
goods turnover in the past 10 years froa 104.5 to 69.2 percent.

The progressive character of this tendency reflects an inproveaent in the naterial
and cultural living standard of the population and a new character of requirements.
An analysis of the indicated proportions in goods turnover at the seas tins shows
that they were the result of limited resources of neat, dairy and certain other
food products.

Price factors also affect the proportions of food and nonfood products.

The index of state retail prices computed by the USSR Central Statistical Adminis-
tration in 1980 was 103 percent compared to 1970 and 103.3 percent towered to 1975.
For food products. the figures were 103 and 102.1 percent and for nmfood products-
103 and 105 percent respectively. At the sane tin, the price index of cooperative
trade relating to the sale of agricultural products for price in accordance with an
agreement in 1980 with respect to 1970 was roughly 126 percent and with respect to
1975 was 121 percent. The share of food products in the goods turnover of state
and cooperative trade in comparable prices was 57.!» percent in 1970, 53.6 percent

in 1975 and 51.3 percent in 1980; the respective figures for nonfood products are
b2.6 percent, 46.1. percent and 1.8.7 percent.

But the dynanics of goods turnover in coupsrable prices does not fully reflect the
dynamics of the real composition of sold goods. In distinction to indexes of

10
FOR OI-TICIAL USE ONLY
retail prices showing a change in the level of price-list prices, average retail
prices per product unit reflect both the change in price level and also changes in
sssorteent. In this connection, the index of retail prices nay rennin according to
the adopted nethod unchanged with stable prices for each variety of a given mercha-
dise, although structural changes have taken place in the composition of produced
goods. With an unchanged index, the average retail price may rise (if there is a
growth of quality and relatively more expensive goods) or nay go down (when there is
a growth in the relative share of cheaper articles). Moreover, the inﬂuence of

retail prices on imported goods is not fully "caught," where they are sold accord-
ing to other price lists.

A characteristic feature of the dynamics of the cost and real composition of retail
goods turnover is the advancing growth of the sale of goods in monetary terns com-
pared to their sale in kind. This progressive process is chiefly caused by inprove-
nent of the quality of goods, assortment renwal with account being taken of buyers'
demand, increasingly requiring goods with improved consuner qualities. But in a
nunber of cases, this tendency is the consequence of reduction of the share of
cheaper goods or an absolute reduction of their output, despite the fact that there
is a demo for them. 01 some goods the influence is exerted of purely price fac-
tors—reduction or rise of price-list retail prices.

‘me tendencies developed in the past decade in the dynamics of the natural and cost
sake-up of sale of individual food products to the population through state and co-
operative trade are characterized by the following data:

Table 2

 

1980 in Z of
1970 1975 1980 1970 1975
——_—___
naked products (expressed in terns
of flour)
billions of rubles 10.52 11.96 13.56 129 113
millions of tons 32.20 35.1".) 37.90 118 107
Sugar
millions of rubles 5,522 6,129 6,773 123 110.5
millions of tons 6.60 7.60 8.15 126 110
Confectionery products (excluding
jam, preserves, honey)
aillions of rubles 5,516 7,167 8,668 153 118
aillions of tons 2.80 3.27 3.88 139 118
Butter
sillions of rubles 3,065 3,808 6,390 163 115
thousands of tons 913 1,116 1,298 162 116
Heat and neat products
billions of rubles 12.20 17.66 19.65 161 113
sillions of tons 7.23 10.06 10.20 162 101
Eggs
millions of rubles 1,600 2,855 3,918 265 137
billions each 16.60 31.20 39.10 236 125

The more rapid growth of the sale of baked products (bread, buns and rolls, flour,
cereals and Iacaroni products) in monetary terns with no change in price-list

11
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

retail prices is due to iaprovenent of assert-ant. The total outlay of flour used
in baking and public dining and sold through the retail network consists of rye
flour, both high-quality and hulled. and hulled wheat flour: 23.6 percent in1970
and 16.4 percent in 1980, second-grade wheat flour, respectively—35.4 and 27.7
percent. At the same tine the share of wheat flour. both top-grade and first-

grade, increased from 36.3 percent to 49.6 percent, while that of high-quality
flour sold through the stores increased from 4.7 to 6.3 percent.

 

More buns and rolls, albeit still not enough, are being made from top-grade flour.
Thus the relative share of breed baked products made from top-grade flour in-
creased from 3.5 percent in 1970 to 6.3 percent in 1980, accoaupanied by an absolute

decrease in the production of rolls and buns from first-grade flour and a reduction
in their share iron 6.2 percent to 4.4 percent.

in cereals sales, the share of rice grew from 25.4 percent in 1970 to 32.6 percent
in 1980. At the same tile, sales of all ferns of cereals and legunes increased 47
percent. The price of rice is 1.7-fold higher than the average price of all varie-
ties of cereals. The share of oat groats rose from 4.4 to 5.9 percent, while t_he._
relative share of millet greats slid from 24.9 to-OJ'parcent, of buckwheat groats
from 10.7 to 4.3 percent, of senolina fron 6.7 to 6.3 percent and of legunes fron
5.1 to 2.2 percent. These cereals have been replaced by rice and oat greats and to
a lesser degree by wheat, corn and barley groats. Their relative share was 39.9
percent in 1980 compared to 22.8 percent in 1970. This occurred because purchases
of millet and buckwheat were reduced. Average annual purchases of eillet amounted
to 1,520,000 tons during 1971-1974 and 1,148,000 tons during 1976-1979; the figures
for buckwheat are 505,000 and 407,000 tons, respectively.

Many farms have reduced sowings of millet and buckwheat because they are low-yield
crops. As a result, the demand for these widely prevalent cereals reasins unsatis-
fied. It is clear that there is a need for a carefully thought out selection of
regions with land and conditions that are nor». favorable for the growing of nillet
and buckwheat. Specialists who are nost familiar with the agrotechnology of these
crops should be offered more substantial incentives, and special rsmaration should
be established for final yield of the products. A need also exists for a special

system of "counting" in the evaluation of plan fulfillments that would stimulate ex-
panded sowings of these crops.

The population buys a considerable anomt of bread and cereals for the feeding of
livestock and poultry maintained on private farns. Such purchases are econonically
advantageous to the population due to the low prices of baked goods and the rela-
tively high state purchase prices of livestock and poultry. Excessive baking of
breed used in feeding livestock brings about additional expenditures not only of
flour but also of fuel and pay of workers of the bread-baking industry: it therefore
would be advisable to increase the sale of grainforage to the population.

With identical growth rates of sale of sugar in physical and monetary terns and with
full satisfaction of demand, there is observed a shortage of lunp sugar, especially
in packaged form. A significant place is occupied in the sale of sugar by its sale
at special prices as incentives for workers engaged in the growing, cultivation and
harvesting of sugar beet. Each year, about 500,000 tons of granulated sugar are
sold at special conditions (at 38 kopecks per kg) while the state retail price is
76 kopecks per kilogram (in the first sons). In this connection, the output of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sugar per capita in the Ukraine (whose share of sugar sold at special prices anounts
to about 60 percent) in 1979 was 47.7 kg versus an average level of consusption in
the USSR of 42.8 kg. The existence of two sets of retail prices for one and the
seas product is without adequate econoaic basis. Incentives of persons engaged in

laborbintenaive work connected with the cultivation of sowings of sugar beet could
be in the fora of noney.

of farinaceous products (cookies and spice cakes) and sugar products (car-els, lar-

wrapped or packaged. Since March 1978, retail prices of chocolate products have
increased on the average by 30 percent as partial cowensation for the sharp rise
of cocoa-bean prices on the world narket. For this reason the growth rate of sale
of confectionery products in terns of cost in 1980 coapared to 1970 was higher than
the growth of sales in physical term. Coqared to 1975, growth rates in physical
tame and in cost were equal, which is connected with due decreased use of cocoa

ducts (froa 9.9 to 15.2 percent) and a certain increase in the production of seni-
finished and packaged meat products.

with an agreement and the sale of neat and sausage products and cmned goods made
tron it at higher prices also had an effect. In 1980, these conditions went into
the purchase of 798,000 tons of neat compared to 666,000 tons in 1970, a 1.8-fold

increase. During this period, state purchase of livestock (in dressed weight) in-
creased 26 percent.

The average retail price of one kilogran of neat sold in cooperative trade was 3
rubles and 23 kopecks and of sausage products—e rubles 66 kopecks, while the aver-
age price of these products sold at state retail prices was respectively 1 ruble

7O kopecks and 2 rubles 50 kopecks. more should also be taken into account the
inconpsrability of the existing average prices for nest in state and cooperative
trade and differing: proportions in the sale of beef, pork and poultry and also in
the assortunt of sausage products. In addition to state and cooperative trade,
there were sold in 1980 on the kolkhoz market in excess of 480,000 tons of meat at
prices exceeding state retail prices on the order of 2.3-fold. In 1970, this gap
in prices amounted to 1.8-fold.

The leg in the supply of neat and dairy products behind the population's demd
occurs in the presence of significant state grants for their production. Livestock

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and poultry purchased at kolkhozes. sovkhozes and ferns of the population are paid
for by the state at prices significantly higher than state retail prices. The state
pays out annually 25 billion rubles to make up the difference between paynents by
the state and profits from the final sale of neat and dairy products.

The decree of the CI’SU Central Connittee and the USSR Council of Ministers "(h Ad-
ditional Measures for Increasing the Production of Agricultural Products on Private
Subsidiary Farms of Citizens" spells out measures for increasing the production of
neat, nilk and other products on these ferns. It was determined in particular that
it would be posalLle to maintain above established noras livestock grown on these
terms in accordance with contracts with kolkhoses, sovkhozes and consuner-coopera-
tive organizations, while neat surplus could be sold at the discretion of the on-
ere at prices in accordance with agreenent.

Consumer-cooperative organizations purchase under contractual conditions and accept
meat surpluses directly at citizens' farms and sell them feed, construction nateri-
als and other goods, which makes it possible to bring into goods turnover addition-
al resources and to influence reduction of prices at the kolkhos market (neat

prices in cooperative trade are roughly 15-20 percent lower). In the future, it
would be advisable to concentrate purchases at consuner cooperatives. of all surpluses
of neat (and other agricultural products) prepared at farm of the population and

to count the livestock and poultry purchased under these conditions in fulfillment
of state purchase plans.

Among nonfood goods, a very high role is played by products of light industry.
These include clothing, footwear, fabrics, rugs and carpeting itass, furs, heed-
dresses, haberdashery and threads. The retail goods turnover for this group of
products in 1980 assumed to 70.76 billion rubles; it was 76 percent higher than in
1970 and 32 percent higher than in 1975. The share of this nerchandise in all con-
nodity turnover in 1980 was 26.2 percent and 53.1 percent anong nonfood products
(in 1970 the figures. respectively, were 26.3 percent and 59 percent). The reduced
share of products of light industry in connodity turnover for nonfood goods is
quite logical inasmuch as the production and sale of products of cultural and
everyday use and household employ-ant are growing nuch faster and reflecting there-
by the effect of scientifirtechnical progress.

But the degree of reduction of the share of products of lidlt industry nade fron
cotton and flax fiber is in our opinion high in the turnover of nonfood products.
This is connected with shortages of production capacities in spinning, difficulties
in providing quality raw naterials supplied by agriculture and deficiencies in the
organization of their production. For these reasons. a nunber of sectors of light
industry have consistently failed to fulfill production plans. ‘lhus, plane for
productim of cotton fabrics during 1976-1980 were underfulfilled (in terns of the
total of these years) by nore than one billion square asters, which reduced the
per-capita level of their consumtion.

Under the conditions of a rapidly growing nonetary incone of the population, this
has resulted in difficulties in satisfaction of the denand for cotton fabrics and
products made tron then, for knitwear and hosiery fron cotton yarn, thread and
certain other goods produced from natural fibers. Stocks of these goods in retail
trade have gone down sharply in the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan.

 

1. See mm—mmsr, No a, 1980, p 58.

1h
son omcm. use ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010028oﬁ

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘me production and sale of fabrics, clothing, knitwear and c
footwear to the population are described in physical terns a:
for the corresponding years by the follaving data (Table 3).

 

Table 3
1970 1975 198
Production of cotton, wool, silk
and linen fabrics (in millions
of square asters) 8,668 9,661 10,286
Ditto (in millions of linear
asters) 9,966 10,667 10,913

Ditto, with exclusion of heavy
industrial fibers and products
of local industry (in nillions
of linear meters) 9,286 9,918 10,202
Ditto (in millions of rubles) 16.655 20,650 23,839
Clothing and underwear (in
nillions of rubles):
production 12 ,315 15 .120 19 , 362
sales 16,353 18,256 26,199
Production of knitwear articles:
knitted underwear (in millions

each) 816 955 1,161

knitted outweer (in aillions

each) 615 666 67!

all knitwear articles (in

millions of rubles) 5,668 7,056 8,66(
Sales of all knitwear articles

(in millions of rubles) 6,871 9,086 11,081
Production of leather footwear

millions of pairs 679 698 764

millions of rubles 5,363 6,686 7,88!

sales (in millions of rubles) 6,600 8,859 10,811
Russ and carpeting:
production (in millions of

square meters) 30.3 67.5 9:
sales:
millions of rubles in retail
prices 557 1,061 3,92'
ditto, in oonparable prices 557 1,061 2,06.

with an overall increase of production of fabrics in 1980 c
square meters) of 19 percent, the output of cotton fabrics
that of linen fabrics dropped 3 percent. In 1980 conpared

of fabric production dropped, anomting to only 6 percent,
17 percent, cotton fabrics--6.S percent and with an absolut

in production of linen fabrics.

15
non omcm use own

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00860R000600010028-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Advancing growth of fabric production is primarily due in regard to cost by changes
in the structure of production. Thus, the share of cotton fabrics, eonprising 71
percent in 1970 dropped to 69 percent in 1980; that of silk fabrics rose from 13 to
17 percent: this was accospanied by a reductim in the share of linen fabrics and
retention of the stable share of wool fabrics. The average retail price of cottm
fabrics per linear meter in 1980 was 1 rtble ll kopecks, that of silk fabrics—4 ru-
bles S3 kopecks and of wool fabrics—lb rubles '6 kopecks.

The dynamics of fabric production in monetary terns is influenced by changes also in
intragroup assortment. Thus, with a total increase in the output of wool fabrics in
linear meters in 1979 cospared to 1970 of 11.5 percent, pure wool fabrics were pro-
duced with an l.7-fold increase and coarse wool fabrics with an ll-percent decrease.
The average retail price per linear meter of die fabrics increased due to changes in

assortment and also because of the transition to the output of broader fabrics
(from 130 to 135 cm).

There occurred an absolute reduction in the production of calico and satin song
cotton fabrics during this period; this is due to the inconplete satisfaction of
demmd for articles of mass consuqation of these fabrics.

An increasingly outside-able part of all the varieties of fabrics goes into the saw-
ing of clothing and underwear, as a result of which their share sold through the
stores is growing smaller. Such a use of fabrics is sore rational and frees the
population of sewing their clothes at home. But due to a lag in production, espe-
cially of cotton and linen fabrics. deland by the population both for individual
fabrics and also for items lads fro- then is outstripping supply.

The production of sewn articles in 1979 increased in cost coupared to 1970 by 67
percent. The output of individual articles in physical fern grew during this peri-
od: men's and boys' shirts-39 percent (including those node of cotton fabrics—29
percent and of silk fabrics-75 percent); dresses, sarafsns and robes-37 percent
(including those made free silk fabrics—almost twofold); skirts—73 percent (in-
cluding those node from silk febrics-eightfold). The production of trousers grew
13 percent. including those node from wool products—17 percent and those made fro-
silk fabrics—fivefold, while those made from cotton fabrics dropped 4 percent.
with a relatively small increase in the production of suits-8 percenﬁ-their manu-
facture from synthetic and silk fabrics increased almost Ins-fold.

Selective consideration of the suit sales structure shows that in their sale (in-
cluding; that of imports) the share of suits priced up to 70 rubles, which in 1970
asounted to 22 percent, in 1979 dropped to 6 percent and that of suits priced over
100 rubles increased accordingly from 25 to 41 percent. It is characteristic that
during this period the sale of both cheap suits and the more expensive picked up
while the sale of suits belong to the nediun price range slowed down. The share of
the latter in stocks increased from 68 to 57 percent, but remained stable in sales
-53 percent. This reflects to a certain extent growth of demand for more expen-
sive suits and also for cheaper ones.

When estimating; the growth rate of production of sewn articles, there should be
taken into consideration expansion of output of knitwear replacing then. The high
growth rate of production of sewn articles in value terns was influenced by the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
increase in the output of fabrics (and of clothing rude fron then) fron nixed yarn,
artificial fur, duplicated jeans fabrics.

Over the 10 years, production of leather footwear grew alnost 10 percent, including
fashionable —-l.S-fold and insulated—non than one-third. Taking this and other

changes into consideration, the average price for a pair of shoes rose fron 7 re-
bles 90 kopecks to 10 rubles 39 kopecks. In this connection.and also due to the

availability for sale of more expensive imported iteas, the "sale of footwear in
value terns increased more than 1.6 fold.

The data presented in Table 3 on grovth of the sale of clothing, knitwear, footvear

and rugs reflect not only the development of donestic production but also the ad-

vent of these goods through ilports, to a significant degree fron socialist
countries.

The tendency of advancing growth of production of consumer goods in value terms
comared to the sane indicator in physical terns has been nsrked in recent years
when the production of nonfood goods to a large degree began to be stimulated: this
was in response to changes in demand, particularly in regard to new item ("N").

At the sane tine, retail-price indexes in 1980 co-pared to 1970 remained stable only
with respect to cotton and wool fabrics but dropped for clothing and underwear—99.
knitwear-92, hosiery-96, leather footwear—99.5 and increased for silk fabrics—
101 (in connection with higher prices for fabrics fron natural silk), rugs and car-
peting—l90.

The increased demand for cotton fabrics and goods aade of then, as well u lmitwaar
and hosiery from cotton yarn is due not only to their use qualities but also to
their relatively low prices conpared toprices for sinilar item from synthetic raw
materials. It should be noted that abroad prices for fabrics from natural rat na-

terisls (and goods fron then) are significantly higher than for cowardﬂe items
from synthetic raw materials.

The change in the relationship of prices for fabrics, sewn, knitted and hosiery
itens produced from natural and synthetic raw materials in addition to an increase
in their production has contributed to equalization of the proportions between sup-
ply and deaand for these goods.

A constantly growing role in the satisfaction of the population's denand belongs to
goods of cultural, everyday and household designation, especially those of long-
tern use. The sales voluse of goods, included statistically in this couple: (ex-
cluding rugs, included by us in the group of itens of light industry, and excluding
the cosmission sales of passenger autonobiles) is given (in nillions of rubles and
in prices of the corresponding years) in Table 6.

The sale of individual goods of long-tern use in physical terse ad in monetary
term is shown in Table 5.

The advancing growth of sales of these goods in regard to value is due to reneval
of assortment, improved consumer qualities md also the external appearance of the
items.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Radio receivers and radiophononraphs

millions of rubles 605 716 705 176 99

thousands each 5,870 7,591 6,569 112 86
Television sets

millions of rubles 1,818 1,993 2,372 131 119

thousands each 5,580 6,002 6,623 115 107
Clocks and watches

millions of rubles 688 768 1,213 269 158

millions each 28,269 5,536 39,809 161 112
lwfrigcrators

millions of rubles 781 1,172 1,207 155 103

thousands each 3,756 6,823 6,810 128 99.7
Cameras

millions of rubles 67 67 160 360 239

thousands each 1,337 1,773 2,266 169 128
Sewing machines

millions of ruhlux: 92 109 156 168 162

thousands unch 1,275 1,237 1,181 93 95

Passenger automobiles
(less sales commission)

millions of rubles 520 6,202 5,930 in 11.6 161
rubles -

thousands each 123.3 723.5 858 in 7.0 119
rubles

Changes in assortment encompass a broad range of merchandise. They include radio-
receivers and radiophonographs, color television sets. clocks and watches with
special features, large-capacity refrige;.tors. cameras with automatic and elec-
trical features. multioperation sewing machines, neu~mode1 passenger automobiles.
cassette tape recorders. new types of electric irons, electric vacuum cleaners and

the like.

For example, the share of color television sets of total sales of both black-and-
white and color varietites in 1980 amounted to 27 percent, of refrigerators with
capacities in excess of 200 liters--about 27 percent. The number of sold sewing
machines fell. but profits increased because more multioperation machines of the
"zig-zag" type were produced (from 310,000 each in 1975 to $78,000 each in 1980).

18
FOR'OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
‘ihe expansion of capacity of a nost prodsing nerhet of items of long-tern use is
closely connected with the developaent of new nodels with better technical charac-
teristics and use properties as well as of essentially new products.

“the conducted analysis of changes in the physical and value nakeup of consuer

goods does not disclose the detailed structure of goods offered to the population

in terse of their aultiplicity of for- and varieties. The generally natural pro-
c'_sss of renewal of assortaent, inprovenant of quality and use properties of produced
goods is acconpanied by a natural rise in value. But negative develop-ants in the
disortnsnt of the produced goods should not be cmcealcd behind this positive
FWD.

Thus enterprises of the Ministry of iced Industry in 1980 cornered to 1975 in-
creasd the production of perfunsry ad cos-tics 1.6-fo1d in mnetary terns. Out-
put of coepect powder increased thirtsenfold, lipstick—3.940“. shanpoos—l.7-
fhld. At the eas- tin, the production of such nsss products as tooth powder in-
creased only 12 percent, toothpaste-13 percent, while 1‘-10 percent less of esu-de-
cblogne were produced. although they were in the original rendering.

Sons associations of the furniture industry (Sevsapnsbel', Soyurnebel' and Yugne-
bel') and ministries of the tisber industry of the Ukraine, Belorussia and Kazakh-
stan fulfilled weir plans innonetary terns but failed to produce lower-price
products needed by the population. Enterprises of the light industry in January-
Jme 1971 overfulfilled plans for the production of cotton fabrics in aonstary
tam, but were short of a significant quantity of these fabrics in physical terse
versus the plan.

Under conditions in which there is a shortage of a mint of goods, sons industrial
enterprises are trying to produce sore relatively expensive goods at the expense of
reduction of the share and on occasion of reduction of the production of low-price _
goods; this soeetiaes does not east at tines with due opposition on the part of
trade. A deciding neans of overcosing such negative developments is nomlisstion
of the relationship between supply and demand. a significant increase in production
outstripping the growth of the population's current income. with such ”prerequis-
ites crested on a planned basis.” trade orders hecone to a large degree the basis of
production plans of enterprises not only in term of total volume but also in terns
of intragroup co-position.

"Basic Directions of USSR Econoeic and Social Develop-Int for 1981-1985 and for the
Period to 1990" provided for advanced growth of production of consuur goods, fur
ther inprovenent of assortnsnt and higher quality of goods in accordance with

the growing needs of the Soviet people.

An expression of the practical realisation of the decisions of the 26th party con-
grass ainsd at a further rise of the asterial and cultural living standard of the
people is to be found in the decrees adopted by the CPSU Central Committee and the
USSR Council of Ministers on increasing during 1981-1985 the production of goods of
primary necessity and consumer gosh, upgrading the quality and inroving their as-
eortnsnt. These decisions provide in particular for increasing the production in

1985 versus 1980 of knitted underwear from cotton and nixed yarn (by 37 percent).
color television sets (LEI-fold), refrigerators with capacities of sore than 200

19
roe omcul. use ONLY
FDR (WHOM. USE ONLY

liters (1.7-fold), spare parts for motorcycles and motor scooters (1.5-fold), sat-
isfaction of trade orders for underwear for the newborn and children of nursery-
school age and a nunher of other goods. There is to be a significant growth in the
production and sale to the population of toilet soap, notebooks, various kinds of
dishware, gardening tools, reflex cameras and many other goods that have a high
buyer demand. In addition to renewal of assortment and increase of production of
new and stylish goods, the output of low-priced good-quality goods must be assured.

the dasic Directions emphasize the need of improving cost-accounting relationships
and increasing reciprocal economic accountability for adherence to plan targets
and contractual obligations of suppliers and users and strengthening the effective-
ness of economic sanctions.

The influence exerted by trade on industry in coordination of orders on the basis of
assortment and on the basis of price group. rigid control over the fulfillment of
accepted orders for all positions, the use of all economic and other means of in-
fluence in relation to enterprises producing more expensive goods to the detriment
of low-priced ones-all this must be aimed at the satisfaction of the demsnd of
different groups of buyers.

An active assortment policy is needed. Five-year agreements concluded between
trade enterprises and industry should specify proportions for price groups, which
could be differentiated by regions and organisations in the conclusion of annual
economic contracts.

a policy that is aimed at maintaininr the population's real income at the requi-
site level must take into account the possibilities of using the price instrument
as one of the means of maintaining proportions between supply and demand without
impinging in this connection on vitally needed goods efeveryday use. A most impor-
tant basis of observance of these proportions is constant growth of production with
strict conformity on the scale of the country of growth of production of goods with
the population‘s monetary income and with that part which is used for the purchase
of goods and payment for services.

The changes that were made during the 10th Five-Year Plan in retail prices for in-
dividual goods did not always nor fully take into consideration relations between
supply and demand. The one of the price instrument should he of a long-term char-
acter, aimed at the elimination of disproportions between demand and supply for in-
d1V1dunl goods on the basis of growing production. Such a planned combination of
the growing supply of goods in interaction with improvement of the practice of price
setting will make it possible to eliminate shortages of individual goods.

in our view, it is necessary to expand the range of goods which would he simultane-
ously subject to accounting and periodic reporting on their production and sale to
the population in physical and monetary terms. :entral trade organisations and
their local organs should keep systematic track of all goods provided for sale to
the population both in quantitative and in monetary terms and of their sale; they
should adopt tinmiy decisions together with industrial enterprises on the voluns
and makeup of produced goods in terms of physical and value proportions.

20
IN)R¢0FFIC1AI.IISE2(NVLV
Until recently, a tendency was in operation of excessive expamion of the range of
goods whose production plans were determined centrally as part of national-econonie
plans or separate decisions. At first glance, the setting of such tarzets would be
expected to promote better satisfaction: of demand. Actually, by reporting only on
the fulfillment of "feasible targets" for the production of individual varieties of
goods, ministries free themselves of responsibility and concern in regard to the
satisfaction of the needs of the national economy (and, of course, of denand of the
population as a most important constituent part of requiresents) on the basis of the
product mix fixed for each ministry. At the sane tine, such a responsibility is pro-

vided by existing situations concerning the ministries. In the connection head
ministries determined which are responsible for delivery of goods produced at the
enterprises of several ministries.

In the light of this, it would appear to be timely to proceed not along the path of
excessive expansion of the sump of targets centrally established for the production of
individual goods but rather along the path of reel increase of responsibility of nin-
istries (including head ministries) for the very inoortant duties iQoaed on them.

At the sane time, it is contemplated that planning organs, in showing preference for
the production of goods for the population, especially those of mass demand, provide
for the allocation of raw and other materials, conponents, resources for the crea-

tion of production capacities for the corresponding ministries with the intention

of satisfying justified trade requisitions (within the Ironwork of annual or five-
ysar plans) for the delivery of the corresponding, goods. The aseortunt in detail

should be deter-ined in annual economic contracts and in five-year agreements be-
tween trade and industry.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

7697
(50: 1827/31 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY