APPROVID FOR NIL-ACI: RWY/0810.: CIA-RDPOI-OOOGOROOO“000.0001 -.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040061-9

FOR OFI-ICJ AL USE WLY

JPRS L/8425
27 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRAIE AND SERVICES
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00040061-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from nrws agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views on attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCEO ﬂEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED ”OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
H)R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8425

27 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRADL AND SERVICES
(POUO 5/79)

CONTENTS

INPbRM’l‘IONAL ECWC RELATIONS

Securing Intonation on mutating Quality of Foreign
Products
(0. s. Verblovakiy, 2. M. Gurevlch; mnemo-
TEIGINICIESKAIA INFORMATSIYA, 5mm 1,
WWI“ I mum INFORMSIONNOY mm,

Jan 79) ooosooooooooooo-usec-0000...0000000000000...

Cooperation in Light Industry Among CM Nations
Stresses Advanced Technology
(6. E. Zaytsev; 8mm mmsmmos'r', No 1, i979)

DOME‘SI'IC TRADE AND CONSIIM GOODS

ﬂew Type 01‘ Fantasies Contract With Individuals
(3. D. Basbeyev; mm mm I awo,

J“ 79 to.coo-neocon-euooooooooooneoooenacoo-0.0.90

WWI-3: m, EDWIN, WRAP!!!

Book Describes Powiation Migration
(L. L. Rybnkovskiy, v. m. chunxov; sorsm'm
“my I 060mm: menu-5n mm 8383,

1978) Ossoccocoso...OsCos...-notes-cocoossooosooooss

TRANSPOM‘ATIM

New Soviet Airliner YAK-h? Described
(men 7mm, 6 Feb 79)

Methods To Reduce Track, Wheel Flange Hear Proposed
(A. S. Linev, M. s. Roam; mmm I
ramm TIAGA, No 6, 1978)

Brie i‘s
Rail. Deficiencies Noted

PAGE

19

23

27

31

- a - [III - USSR - 38 POUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

SECURING INFORMATION ON EVALUATIN QUALITY OF FOREIGN moouc'rs

Moscow NAIEIDD~TEKIINICIESKAYA INPORHATSIYA, SBRIYA I, ORGANIZATSIYA I 51001“
IWORHATSIONIDY RAM! in Russian No 1, Jan 79 pp 19-20

[Article by c. S. Verblovskiy and 2. h. Gurevich, subaitted 25 Oct 1977]

[Text] One of the most inportant goals of the Tenth five-Year Plan is to
improve the quality of production in all sectors of industry through constant
quality control. Objective evaluation of the quality of each new product is
impossible without comparing it thoroughly with analogous foreign products.
The letter determines a masher of important tasks of information agencies.

Information needs caused by the problems of the evaluation of production
quality are quite varied. According to Gila“! 154067-70, the quality of a pro-
duct is understood to be "the aggregate of the properties of the product
determining its suitability to satisfy particular needs in accordance with its
purpose“. This definition is concretised in two generalised indexes: the
technical level and technical-economic level of the product's quality. The
former is understood to be "the level of production quality determined by

the aggregate of basic? indexes which does not include economic indexes";

the second index is “the level of producticn quality determined by the aggre-
gate of basic indexes which include economic indexes" (GOS‘f 16631-70).

0n the whole, the solution of the problen of evaluating the quality of a pro-
duct presupposes the availability of intonation on the designs of the pro-
ducts being compared, the technology of their manufacturing, materials and
elements being used, economic characteristics, etc.

The main document which, according to YeSKD [Unified Design Documentation
System] (0081' 2.116-7l), mst reflect the quality parameters of the product.
at all'stages of its life cycle is the technical level and quality chart.
The nomenclature of the indenes used in the chart includes the indexes of
purpose, reliability and longevity, technological effectiveness, standardisa-
tion and unification, as well as the ergonomic, aesthetic, patent-right and
economic indexes.

Since the available sources of information about analogous foreign products,
as a rule, do not contain data on most of these indexes, the securing of

1
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

information about the quality of foreign products must be viewed as an im-
portant independent problem, particularly because such information is also
required for preparing technical and economic substantiations for new re-
search projects, engineering assignments, analytical scientific and techni-
cal surveys, reports, for evaluation of foreign matket conditions, etc.

The most complete information about foreign products is given hiadvertisements
on the pages of scientific and technical journals and in a firm's literature
many kinds of which are still not used sufficiently3. Catalogues and prospec-
tuses are used more actively than other kinds of firm publications. when
using firm information, it is necessary to evaluate thoroughly its reliabil-
ity and completeness. Foreign firms use their publications as a means of
competition and often resort to various devices in order to represent their
products meet advantageously. Such devices include withholding information
on disadvantageous parameters and intentional detailed description of secon-
dary details which are not ersential for the characteristics of the product

at the expense of the shortening or even total exclusion of more important
information. Giving the highest values of technical characteristics, the
manufacturing firms, as a rule, do not mention the conditions in which these
values were obtained, as well as the method used in determining these values.
Vague terminology and description of methods are used uidely for advertising
purposes. Since the rules for the standardization of technical character-
istics used abroad differ from our rules, in comparing analogous products,

it is necessary to recalculate the characteristics mentioned in foreign pub-
lications in accordance with COST and other normative documents“.

The evaluation of the reliability of foreign information must be done with
participation of information workers, metrologists, and designers of new
equipment. The most reliable information is that obtained by analytical com-
parison of the data from various sources.

Unfortunately, there are no available methods or recommendations for the
verification of the reliability of foreign information.

Experience shows that the most important and reliable information for evaluat-
ing the actual quality of imported products is obtained as a result of their
thorough testing and use. In the machine-building industries, a unified
procedure has been established for obtaining, study, and use of specimens of
foreign equipment. Provisions are made for submitting technical reports about
testing to sectorial information centers, publication of current awareness
information, etc. however, this work is not carried out satisfactorily and

is narrowly sectorial in nature; as a result, extremely necessary information
is not included. It would be desirable to create an intersectorial system

for studying specimens of imported equipment similar to the existing regis-
trations system for Rik [scientific research work] and OKR [experimental
design work].

Considering the intersectorial nature of the processes of the creation and
use of instruments, measuring systems, etc, it is possible to propose, as an

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experiment, to obligate all organizations and enterprises of all ministries
and departments receiving new specimens of imported instruments, automation
devices, etc, to submit information about the recoi t of specimens to a se-
lected information center (for example, VNTlTsentr All-Union Scientific and
Technical Information Center]) and, after testing and appropriate studies,
to report the results of the tests. This information should be submitted on
standard carriers. Such information sysluu (let us call it arbitrarily
"Foreign Specimens") would contribute to the improvement of securing in-
fonmition for the quality control of the instruments and systems being cre-
ated.

Evidently, the content of the studies on the technical and economic level

and the quality of products created by the domestic industry does not remain
invariable. there exist various points of view on the nomenclature of in-
dexes, on the very approach to this work, and on the goals set in comparing
new domestic products with foreign analogues having the highest character-
istics. however, the problems of improving the information base and master-
ing the art of collection, analysis, and evaluation of the reliability of the
needed information about foreign products remain urgent.

FOOTNOTES

1. Gurevich, Z. M. "Firm Journals and Their Place in the Information Refer-
ence Services," author's dissertation for the degree of the Candidate of
Pedagogical Sciences, Leningrad, 1976, 26 pages.

2. The basic quality index of a product is understood to be "the index of
quality of a product taken as the initial product in comparative evalu-
ations of quality." Quality indexes of certain advanced specimens of pro-
ducts produced in the country or abroad can be taken as basic indexes:
quality indexes achieved in a certain preceding period of time, or indexes
of promising specimens established experimentally or calculated theoreti-
cally.

3. Verblovskiy, c. 5., and Gurevich, 2. H. "Information on the Use of Pro-
ducts in Firm Literature," NTI [Scientific and Technical Information],
Series I, 1975, No 12, pages 23-24.

h. For example, the Japanese firm Takeda Riken, in advertising its electro-
meter TR-Bbu, states that the error in voltage measurements constitutes
0.32. However, they are not taking into consideration the error of the
indicating instrument (ill) and the error occurring due to the internal
noise of the circuit (21 on a scale of l mv) which characterize the actual
measurement error and are taken into consideration in accordance with the
current USSR standards.

Even with an adequate understanding of the metrological term, it is often
completely unclear what method is used by the firm for determining the
value. For example, in the propectus of the measuring device Automatic
Pipette at the firm Hicromedic Systems, Inc. (U.S.A.), a relative error of
32% is given for the measuring range of 0-5 ml. However, it is not known

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in relation to what point of the range thie error is calculated. In

Soviet literature, it is recommended to normalise it in relation to one-
half of the laximuu measuring limit, i.e.. in this case, in relation to the
value of 2.5 el. Then the absolute value of error would constitute the
value of 0.05 ml. however, the Automatic Pipette Operating Hanual‘contain-
ins methods for the verification of the characteristics recommende to de-
termine the relative error on doses above 601 of the highest measuring
limit. Moreover, studies on methods indicate that it is not the relative
error of an individual dose that is in question, but a relative error of
the arithmetic mean of ten doses (2). Thus, the characteristic in the
prospectus is overstated by a minimum of one and a half times.

COPYRIGHT: "vaesoyurnyy institut nauchnoy i tekhnicheekoy informatsii", 1979

10,233
650: 1823

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (\FFICIM. USE “NLY

INTERNATIONAL toommc REMTIONS

MMTION Ill LIGHT 1005111! ”DID M NATIONS 85153838 ANNIE!) rsomum

Moscow sumam WWW? in Russian ho l. 1979 PP 3‘26

ticls by 0. b“. Zayteev, advisor on light industry to the Pernenent USSR
legation to M, "the Basic Directions of Scientit c-‘l'echnioel Cooperation
of the can Moder-Nations for the Period up to 1990'

ﬂex? the nations of the socialist countries have achieved outstanding sno-
ceases in the sphere of developing science and technology. The oomniet end
workere' parties of all the Internal etetos look upon scientific and techno-
logicel progress as the nost important prerequisite to the complete inplenenta-
tion or the advantages of sooialisn.

The can aster-nations. notive force for developing nutual scientific-technical
cooperation is their desire to elevste the national eoonoly or each nation and
to assure rapid eoononio growth or the worldwide socialist omelth. This
cooperation per-its the cm nedm- nations to pot nodern indush'isl objectives
into operation, to utilize res neteriel and energy resources in a nore efficient
nenner, end to increase the tenpo or scientific and technioel progress, uith
lees expenditure or strength and resources, and in a shorter period. '

it the 25th crsu congress, it was stressed that woolereting scientific and
technical propose reneine the i‘orenoet task for developing the Soviet econoq
at a nodern stage. We Oct-mists) noted General Secretery of the CPS" antral
Connittee, Chairnen or the Presidiun of the USSR Suprue Soviet, Conrado 1.. I.
Brezhnev, "proceed free the fact that only under the conditions o! aooiaLi.
does the scientiﬁc and technical revolution acquire its true direction. one
which responds to the interests of honenity and society. In turn, only on the
basis of accelersted develop-eat of science and technology cen tLa ultinsts
niesion or the socialist revolution be conpleted, and a cmist society he
built.“

Scientific and technicel progress in the cm notion is senifeeted first of
ell in creating new and up-to-dste engineering end advenoed processing nethods,
end pertectim and optinising the industrial stnntore tor eooiel production;
this neans accelerating the development or advanced production, raising the
technical-econonio indicators end the mality of production, and conshuting
huge enterprises equipped with the latest technology.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Guided by decieione or the oongreeeee of the oonmniet end vorkere' pertiee

on further increeeing the etenderd of living or the populetion, ecientiete,
epeoielicte end eeononic edninietretore of the cm neuter netione ere focus-
ing their ettention on the noet i-portent teeke or eooioecononic end ecientiric-
technologieel progreee, upon uhoee eolution depends to the greeuet degree the
numeeeful develop-ent of induetry, ecience end technology. A hroed front of
reee-irch in being deployed end ie discovering principlee of new nethode for
eugngting the productive foroee end creetin the engineering end technology of
tho Me

In recent your the cm nether netione heve been euoceeetully developing light
industry, echieving new victor-ice in the production of unutectured ooneuner
goode, inproving their quelity end chenging the eeeorhent or good” increeeing
the productivity of lehor on the heeie of renovating the engineering, neoheniee-
tion end eutonetion of the production proceeeee) inproring the utiliution of
production cepecitiee and introduction or e couple: mm of quelity control

of production.

The growth of green production in the different brenchee or light induetry o:
the OSHA newer netione for 1977, Ihen coopered with 1976, ie ehovn in Tehle

1 (in percentegee).

Teble 1

Industry
Country

Bulgaria
ﬂungnry
GDR
Mongolia
Poland
Romania
USSR
CSSR

Note: Data on the Poland includes sales of goods and
services.

 

Scientific end technicel cooperetion elong the Glimmer netione, echieved
within the Ire-work or the Ber-neat can (ﬁe-ineion on Light Induetry, hen
increeeed output end improved the quelity of production.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFFlCiAL USN ON!N

or groat significance to the earnest industry or the can Indoor nations

is the research conducted on the those of “The Couple: Develop-at of High-
Produrtlvity Ksnui‘aoturinu Methods for hung Men's Goats, Suits, Trousers end
Shirts, end Heath's Suns:- coate, Cotton Dresses and Work Clothes“.

Each of the participating countrius,. in developing the these, hes established

a graduation line for a certain type of n 'lcls. The results achieved are pre-
sented in Thole 2.

Table 2

Results Achieved "

Country
Growth rate in productivity

of labor in the countries -
USSR upon introduction of pro-

Decrease in time spent in the
duction lines - 1

Average actual time spent in

1
Best actual tine spent in
the USSR, minutes

the USSR. minutes

I

o
u.
o.»
o
Ina-d
on
U
u:
”£3
:0
no
as
u:
c...

o
a:
no
all
an
0
~43
P1:

minutes

Bulgnrln Men's Trousers
Hungary Work clothes

GDR Hen's Suits
Poland Women's Summer Coats
(Rainconts)

Romania Shirts, Men's
USSR Coats, Men's

CSSR Dresses. Women's
cotton

Note: Tine spent in columns 5 a 6 based on 1977 data.
* Decreased by a factor of 2.a

 

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the were 1966-1967, 23 such production lines were introduced in the U85“,
end edditionel output in the sun of 69.7 nillion rubles wee produced.

The prectice of introducing production lines showed thet the sherp decreese
in tins spent on nenui'ecturing clothing is possible only under conditions
Ihere the production lines ere euppliod e full couple-eat o! nemfecturing
equip-out, utilising ecceeeory resomces end eutosetic control.

In order to nore widely introduce the totel eschenieetion or gernent unu-
i‘eoturing lines in the country, the USSR gouncil of Ministers omissioned
Oosplen ussa, the USSR “inlegpisheh-eh [Minis d Mechine Building for

Li t end Food Industry end Household Applienceg end the USSR Minlegprcn

stry or Light Indus , end enlisted other ministries es well, to

orgenise nese production equipnent for these production lines, teking ed-
ventege of the oooperetion end prodmtion epscielisetion of different coupon-
ents end nechinery within the (renown; of cm.

In 1979, they continued to develop e unitied cyst. or designing clothing for
the stenderd eises estehliehed for the can neuter notions; highly productive
nethods for putting together perte oi’ genents without using threed; end nodern
nethode of pechging, wrepping, etoregc end shipnent of reedy-to-weer gen-nuts.

Proposele were drefted in 1977 for the yeer 1979 on the generel trends or styles
for the can netions, telling into eccomt the type of neteriele used; on the
renge oi‘ teshionehle colors for clothing rehries end knitted neteriels; end on
ﬁling up textile end knitted neteriels stylishly, considering their texture
end the oc-position of the rew neteriels.

Attributing greet inportenoe to scientific end technicel cooperetion, the
Per-snout can Omission on Light Industry drefted end epproved et the end 0:
1917 the Beeio Trends of Scientific end technicel Coopereticn or the can lie--
her Neticns in the Textile, Knitted Beer, Genent-eenutecturing, Shoe end
Leether Goods, end the woodworking Industry for the Period up to 1900. Teen-
work will nerk the pursuit or inoreesim productivity of labor, inprcving the

quelity of production end working conditions, end solving pressing prchl-e
of preserving the endnmt.

‘l'he genent-eemi’ecturing industry envieeges developing en eutcneted process
for leying out petterns for textile nteriele utilising new nethods end electron-
ic eonputer technology; developing progressive technology for nenui‘ecturirg
different kinds of clothing, end on this heeie prepering the requireeente tor
estehlishing e full ccnplenent of equipment; reeeerch, develop-eat end putting
into production nethods for eheping pettern pieces end the sinpleet kinds of
clothing, hypeseing the eteges of weeving end sewing, with the ein or decrees-
ing the snout of lehor cn the erticles end increesing productivity of lehor;
developing new nethods {or pechgiog end wrepping, shipping end werehouse
storege of different kinds of reedy-to-ueer clothes in the gernsnt-nenutecturing
industry; developing end eeeinileting new tons of orgenieing end directing
production in the gexIent-nenurecturing shops on the hesis or nnﬂonity cf
pettern perts, end ccnplete nechenieeticn end eutuetion of the processes for
unufecturing erticles of clothing.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OPHCIM. USE (WIN

The 32nd cum conference, which was convened in 1978, epproved The Sonic
Directions for Mther Perfecting the Organisation of mltiletsral Cooperation
of the cm Its-her Netiono and the Activities of the council, in order to
incrnane the effectiveneee of ccoperetinn enong the cm ester notions.

It wee noted in the decree of this session that scientific and technical
cooperation and developing standards for mm are not sufficiently coordinated
with the specialisation and cooperation in production which exists, that contrac-
tual forne of scientific end technical cooperation are rarely used, and that

the proper interaction in the work of the can organs is still not being pm-
vidsd; all of which has a negative effect on working out the problem, espec-
ially those of e couple: character which involve several industries.

The session of the council obligated the coenittees and the per-neat oc-is-
sions of the cm newer nations:

to define nore precisely the priority directions of its activities, proceeding
first of all with the task of coapletely i-plesenting the Couple: Program, of
developing end inple- nting tho aeasures of the Long-tern Special-purpose Pro-
gram for Cooperation (Mel’s), and concentrating forces for crgenination of coop-
eration in the sphere of physical production, and especially towerd preparation
of projects for agreements and contrects on solving the concrete problens of
econcnic end scientific-technical cooperation;

to focus the work of the per-enent industrial couissions on organizing direct
multilateral production and scientific-technical cooperation within the industry,
with the goal of energetic-21y solving the problem of the can nether nations
connected with the effective utilization of capacities, exchange of the range

of goods produced, developaent end inW-ctian of new engineering and technol-
ogy, etc.;

to concentrate scientificotechnicei cooperation in the industrial organs of

cm on the orgaieetion of applied develcpnent (first of all that. which sne-
netes free D'l‘ei‘s), capable of having e1 economic effect on the countries; and
moment on asaeuru for introduction by the interested countries of the results
received from production, chiefly on the basis of specialization and cooperation;

to focus ettenticn of the one Gc-nittee on Scientific and Technical Cocperetion
first of all on working out exploretory questions which eaenate fro: D‘l‘ePS, con-
cerning large inter-industry problcas;

to expand the use of the contractual for- of scientific end technical cooperation
for draft agreeaents orgsnieed within the freuework of a couittse and the branch
organs of are, bearing in aind in particuler the development of direct contrac-
tuel rel-tions between the cooperating org-z izeticne, end guaranteeing fulfill-
nent of the obligations accepted by the perties to it;

and to concentrate efforts on developing advanced cm stewards (et the world-
wide level) for production which represents an iten of specialisetion and coop-
eretion in production, in accordance with the long-range special-purpose coop.
erative programs and multilateral agreenents.

9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In onder to inprove intereotion elecng can orgene end elec with the inter-
netionnl eoononio crgenieetione erected by the can newer netione, the Oouoil
eeeeicn co-ieeioned the Council Seoreteriet, beginning with 1979, to develop,
end the Executive emittee to opp-owe, e ooneolidnted plen tor leying the
groundwork or the beoio intereeotoo-iel problene with the can orgene.

Reeolutione edopted et the 29th. 30th end ‘hd cm Seeeione on developing
long-tern special-purpose plans for cooperation of CEMA nation: on satisfying
the retionel requir-ente or the can nedaer netdone for indultriel ooneuner
goode, ere very eignii‘ioent, end eepeoielly thoee of the 32nd Seeeion. Thin
prognn prooeede fun the neoeeeity for pnoviding the neede or the populetion
or the oo-onweeltb or the cm and»: neticne for the beeio twee o: coneuner
goods, by virtue of expending their production end reciprooel mop):- Hith
thie ein, the Horidng Onoup of the an Omittee on Coopereticn in the tree of
Fleming Aotivitioe hee worked out e dreft {or arses, to include the etruoture
of the progren end the beeio neeeuree for reeliting the progren. Ineerted into
the drext were the following neeeuree for ecientuio end toohnioel cooperetion
or the cm ne‘er netione in the ephere or the geneat-nenuteoturing indnetry,
{or the developrnt end eeei-iletion or:

highly-efficient induetriel proceeeee for nenuteoturing nee-produced clothing,
ueing production linee, which include oonplexee of eenieuto-etic equip-eat with

progrenned control;

e nenufecturing nethod for neldng different Irinde or clothing perte end the
noet beeio ertiolee directly tron e roll of neteriel ueing epeciel equip-cot;

inductriel prooeeeee tor leying out pettem of textile neteriele beeed on uee
or progreeued control or pettern-neking, ueing verioue nethode or cutting;

techniques ueing epeciel equipent {or nnidng one-piece clothing petterne end
the oo-pcnente;

oonpletely-nechmited linee with prone-ed oonttcl for mufeoturing high-
qunlity genente (nen‘e troueere, Jeckete, ooete, ehirte end work clothe"
lediee' dreeeee end reinooete).

Work by epecieliete in the gen-lent. induetry end nechine-building industry on

developing the new nenui‘eoturiu nethode end engineering recur-ente or the

new equip-ent will be curled on within the ("network of the Pen-cent cm

Couleeion on nut Industry, end on the pert of developing new neohinery end

eguipent—the Pement can Couleeion on home-building end the mo
eeiblq, Internetionel hecnuio Depert-eny ct lnterteketilneeh [interaction-l
tile itchinery any.

Inplonenting the neeeuree o! Mel’s on eetiefying the retionel requimnte or
can enter netione for nenurectnred coon-ex- goode hee greet eignitioence for
the developent or the get-lent. induetry, en! the writ connected with their inple-
nentetion will be of highest priority in the you-e 1979-1985.

10
FOR OFFIC!AI. USE ONLY
FOR 0?!" lClM. ”SH ONLY

In October 1978. the Perl-snout cm Con-ission on Light Industry sdopted e
resolution for the purpose or perfecting the methods tor designing clothing,

on the hesis of e ccneon syste- i‘or designing clothing in ell the Gilli nether
netiono. Uork is to he oerrted out in tho yeers 1981-1905 on the Who, "The
Principles for Plenning end Designing Clothing: resting, Coordinetion end
Introduction of e Cannon System for Designing Clothing encng the CBHi homer
hetions". nee-duck; the results oi‘ the mrk on this theme uill pereit reieing
the technicel level of propereticn for production 5 necheniseticn oi‘ the proces-
see for designing clothing; end it will edvmce the nenui’ecture or clothing end
eeeuie thet the ertioles will fit e person uell.

Currently verious edhesive netsriels ere in use eroumi the world, designed for
duplicating ports or clothing. Experimts in nenutecturing using epplied ed-
heeive notoriels dononstrstss thst in order to produce high-quelity clothing,

e wide escort-out of woven end nonuoven, tightly-outerentisted strips is re-
quired, depending on the property or the neterisl on top; which donnds perfect-
ing the nethods tor siting end dupliceting clothim petterns, evolution or the
properties of edhesive notoriels end control or the sizing pereneters. In

order to solve thee prohlees, work will he cerried out in the yeers 1901-1905
on the thene “the Developent end Fortestion ct liethods i‘or Sieing end Duplicet-
ing Ports of Clothing end Bvelustion of the Properties of Adhesive Meteriels,

so well so Control Over Sizing hunters."

Scientific end technicnl cooperetion occupies en ever nore inportsnt position
in the dovelopent or the netionel eccnosv end in the syston or integretsd
econonic ties oi‘ the can note:- notions.

Reelieetion or the contoepleted nesuros for sciontii'ic-teehniosl ooopereticn
will secure the further develop-out oi‘ the ger-ent industry of the CM nstions.

COPYRIGHT: 21W "ammo momma", 1979

9006
ca) 1 1823

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWIOIAL USE ONLY

WHO TRADE AND CONSUME‘ GOODS

NEH TYPE OF PURCHASING COMET HIT}! INDIVIDUALS
Moscov SOVETSKOYB OOSUDARS‘WO I PRAVO in Russian No 1, Jan 79 PP 90-9,!

[Article by B. D. Basheysv, candidate of Juridical sciences and doesnt of
Keaerovo State University: "NI-chasing Agricultural Products Pro- Individ-
uals Under Contract"]

[Text] 'me state obtains a large portion of agricultural products fron so-
cialist organisations--kolkhoses. sovkhozes and other state agricultural en-
terprises. Yet private ferns are an important source of supply of food-
stuffs and rsv asterials. In recent years nore than 10 percent of state
purchases of farm products have cone from holkhos nesbers and vorkers and
elsployeee.1 At the 16th Trade Union Congress and at the July (1918) Plenun
of the cc CPSU L. I. Brezhnev especially emphasised the need to take greater
advantage oi‘ the capabilities of private farms to increase the country's
sources of food supply.

The legal basis for organising purchases of fan products froa individuals
is Paragraph 20 of the decree of the USSR Council of Ministers entitled ”0n
Unification of the Decisions of the USSR Govern-eat on the mestion of 0r-
gsnizing State Purchases of Agricultural Froducts," vhich is dated 23 April
l970.2 It states that the farm of holkhoz nesbers. workers and employees.
professional hunters. hsndicrsftsaen and cther individuals say if they wish
sell to the state surpluses they have of agricultural products the state is
interested in buying. The traditional legal for- for purchases of agricul-
tural products on private fans is the purchase-sales contract. But vith
the passage of tine these pmursaents have undergone substantial changes;
along with the custonsry purchase-sales transactions there is now a variant
vith its own inherent features and peculiarities which can best be called a
purchasing contract.

1 see 80V?” 0:1!!!me MYASHCRIWYA, No 12. 1975. P 92.
2 See 8? 8883 [collection of 0888 govern-ant regulations and decrees].
so 8. 1910. p 63.

J2
FOR 0916“]. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Si: ONLY

'i'he Conception of the Purchasing Contract

The parties to the contract are the supplier of the product and the procurer.
The role of the supplier is played by the individual who has a plot of land
-:l. the homestead and his own livestock. poultry and rabbits. Sometimes the
suppliers are hunters and other individualr if they furnish gene and wild
fruit and berries to procurora. The prouurers are consumer cooperative or-
ganizations. enterprises of the meat and dairy industry and certain others.
The aubJect matter of the co.:tract are agricultural pro-meta and raw anteri-
als purchased under contracts concluded in advance. whose delivery and ac-
ceptance are on a regular basis over a specified period of time (for exam-
ple. procure-eat of milk. rabbits. the meat of hooved gone. furs and pelts
are delivered to receiving stations during a year. quarter. or season). The
subJect matter of the purchasing contract w also be products reaching the
receiving station periodically. from time to time. according to a schedule.
Consumer cooperatives purchase live poultry and poultry meat from individu-
als under such agreements. Rarely have one-time purchases of products of
homestead plots and fruits of the forest been made under purchasing con-
tracts. but recently they have become more widespread. Such agreements are

now being drawn up to cover purchases of potatoes. vegetables. fruit and
livestock froa individuals.

Aside from the general norms of civil legislation. the purchasing contract
is regulated by special normative enactments: the Standard Contract for
Purchasing Fara Products from the Private Farms of Kolkhoz Meabers. Horkers.
Employees and Other Individuals. These relations are also regulated by the
Standard Contract for the Taking and Purchasing of Pelts and Other Products
of Hunting. the Standard Contract for the Purchasing of Rabbit Skins. Live
Rabbits and Other Products of Rabbit Raising. which were adopted by order of
the USSR Ministry of Procurements. and the Standard Contract for the Taking

and Delivery of Heat of Hild ﬂoored Animals. adopted by the board of the
RSFSR Union of Hunters' and Fisherman's Societies.

Conauser cooperative organizations make purchases of livestock and domestic
poultry from individuals on the basis of model contracts drafted by the
board of Tsentrosoyuz at various times. The purchasing contract serves as
the means whereby an individual's property becomes the property of the
state. the cooperative organization or the public organization. But it has
quite a few specific features inherent only in this type of sales transac-
tion. The principal peculiarity is that its validity is not limited to the
sales sphere--it calls for the supplier to be given certain aid in produc-
tion of his product. in its preparation and in the organization of its de-
livery. Other eisential features of the purchasing contract which distin-
guish it from the purchase-sales contract is that it must be in writing. it
must be concluded in advance. and the date of its execution and the date of
its pcrfornance do not coincide. The overwhelming majority of purchasing
contracts contain clauses concerning financial liability in which provision
is made for forfeits (fines. penalties) to be invoked for nonperfomnce or
improper discharge of obligations. 'ihe purchasing contract is an agreement

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between suppliers and procurers under which the supplier assumes the obliga-
tion to produce or obtain the products of agriculture or hunting or wild
fruits and berries specified. and the procurer agrees to issue an advance
and to provide essentiul aid to the other party in the production or obtain-
ing of the product. to accept it and to pay for it. It is evident from this
definition of the contract that it is always consensual. for compensation.
and bilateral. Gradually this legal form covering transactions involving
the procurement of agricultural products from individuals is being applied
more widely. In recent years cooperators in Krasnodarskiy Kray have been
concluding as many as 30.000 written contracts with individuals for the pur-
chase of potatoes from the future harvest. In Bryansksya Oblast prior con-
tracts for purchases of apples from individuals are concluded. 'ihe practice
of concluding written contracts providing for suppliers to discharge their
obligations subsequently is being carried our into the purchasing of vege-
tables and cultivated and wild fruits and berries.

Conclusion of the Contract

Usually the draft contract is drawn up by the procurer. who has a plan for
state purchases or an assignmmt from the superior organization, requiring
him to procure agricultural products and raw materials. Sometimes the sup-
plier will be the initiator of the contract's conclusion. In such cases
the officials of the procurement organization issue the individual a printed
form of the contract with the suggestion that he fill it out and fill in
the necessary numbers. The procedure for concluding contracts for the pur-
chasing of farm products from the private fans of kolhhoz members. workers.
esployees and other individuals provides that the procurer shall have sheets
on which the text of the contract is partially printed; these sheets corre-
spond in content to the Standard Contract for Porches". After negotiation.
when an agreement has been reached. the sheet is filled out, the types and
amounts of the products to be sold are specified. and other necessary infor-
mation is entered. The procedure calls for the supplier’s farm to be taken
as the place where the contract is concluded. 'lhis provision is altogether
Justified. since it makes it necessary to examine the supplier's farm, to
verify the existence of livestock. poultry and rabbits and the conditions
under which they are kept. and so on. before the contract is concluded.
Often contracts for the taking of pelts and their purchase are concluded
and signed at the place where the procurement organization is located. since
often the offerer is a hunter and there are a number of complicated ques-
tions specific the organisation of hunting which he must go there to agree
on with the other contracting party. '11:“ would seem to be proper practice.
It ought to be set forth normativelo'. and the appropriate amendments should
be made in the procedure for conclusion of contracts.

The contract forms corresponding to the standard and model contracts facili-
tate the process of conclu-Jing the contract, since there is no longer a need
to agree on certain clauses. for example. concerning financial liability.
but the reaching of an agreement is not reduced merely to filling in the
blank with the figures and other information. Disputes arise between the

13;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

contracthu; parties concerning the type. mount. and grade of products to
be dolivurcd. and the mode of delivery to the receiving station. Sometime
-mpp.l.ieru obJect to clauses concerning financial liability. proposing that
they be omitted. If those clauses are eminaged in the standard contract,
".au they must be included in the specific contract even though the inter-
eated party does not agree with them. The tan-Jnrd contracts are a species
of normative enactsents which have been adopted by the competent authori-
ties, and their clauses may not be amended at the discretion of the parties.
Any other arrangement would not be conducive to establishing orderly rela-
tions between the contracting parties. nor to the strengthening of contract
discipline. and would inflict hum on the stability and strengthening of
legal relations in this field.

No procedure has been established for resolving the differences that arise
in negotiating a purchasing contract, before it has been concluded. These
disagreements not uncomnly result in reJection of the contract, since the
supplier is not bound by any sort of planning or administrative enactments
which are binding on the procurer. He himself decides to sell the product
to the procurer or to sell it on the market, and so on. Only mulbers of
the hunters' society, in accordance with the standard contract for the tak-
ing and delivery of the meat of wild hooved animals must abide by the re-
quirements of a normative enactment approved by the supreme body of their
union and sell the meat taken to the procurer. It would be wise to estab-
lish the following procedure so as to safeguard the interests of individu-
als who want to sell surpluses of their products to the procurement organi-
zation: the rayon inspectorate for procurements and quality of agricultural
products should have its nonstaff inspector in every village, chosen from
among the competent local agricultural specialists capable of resolving
differences in negotiations. The inspector's decision would be binding on
the procurer. The result would be that unfounded demands and objections on
the part of the procurer would be eliminated. and individuals would be able
to sell their products. The contract is drawn up in triplicate and regis-
tered with the executive conittee of the rural soviet; two copies remain
with the procurer, and one goes to the supplier. *

'ihc legislation previously in effect did not provide for purchasing con-
tracts to be recorded with a government administrative agency. The purpose
of this measure is to enhance the legal strength and inortance of the
agreement between individuals and procurement organizations, to make the
parties more accountable for performance of the conditions of the contract.
and have a record of the proposed influx of agricultural products from indi-
viduals within the Jurisdiction of the given rural soviet.

The Contents of the Contract

The contract is considered to have been concluded when an agreement on all
essential points is reached between the parties and put in the required
form. in a purchasing contract the essential points are those envisaged in
standard contracts recognized by normative enactments. The contents or

15
son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

specific contracts must correspond to the standard contract and may not be
contrary to than. The model contracts also contain a list of clauses which
are the basis of the future agreement, since they were drafted to take into
account actual practice in the purchasing of the given product and conform
to the interests of the parties and envisage measures that ensure that the
obligations assumed will be discharged. The conditions contained in them
safeguard not only the interests of the procurer. but also those of the sup-
plier. they tend to strengthen contract discipline. they give the supplier
an opportunity to sell product surpluses without hindrance, and they impart
stability to the relations between the parties. That is why the content of
specific agreements mquently correspond to the clauses of the model con-
tract regulating product purchases.

A list of the conditions which are indispensable in contracts of this type
depends on the content of the specific contract. In some cases only the
conditions expressing the essence of the agreement may be indispensable.
Conditions concerning the subject matter, dates and prices will be indis-
pensable to a purchasing contract. If an agreement has not been reached
though on Just one of these points. a contract has not been concluded.

Also essential are those points on which an agreement must be reached by
declaration of one of the parties. For instance, in negotiating a purchas-
ing contract the supplier demanded inclusion of a clause to the effect that
if the potato harvest should be bad, he would be relieved from the obliga-
tion to sell products to the procurer. This demand was met. and the appro-
priate clause became an integral part of the agreement.

In addition to the clauses which are formulated during negotiations, the
contract presupposes provisions provided for by legal norms regulating the
given relations, i.e.. the customary conditions. They take effect without
being included in the contract and they are binding on the parties. The
customary conditions differ fro:- the essential conditions in that their
presence or absence does not affect the fact of the contract's conclusion.
Since they have been set forth in legal norms, there is no need for them to
be included in the text of the contract. It is assumed that parties agree-
ing to conclude a purchasing contract have thereby agreed to subJect them-
selves to the requirements contained in normative enactments regulating the
given relations. Regardless of whether these conditions are included in

the purchasing contract or not, no changes whatsoever ensue; suppliers of
products will not be reimbursed expenses of their delivery to receiving sta-
tions. since there is an explicit indication in the normative enactment con-
cerning this matter. The considerations taken into account in establishing
that settlement procedure was that potatoes, fruits and vegetables are pur-
chased from individuals at prices considerably higher than the purchase
prices paid kolkhoses and sovkhoscs for the same products.

In the legal literature it is also customary to distinguish in the contents
of the contract ad hoc conditions resolving issues which have not been en-
visaged at all by the legal norms or which regulate specific relations dif-
ferently than provided for in substantive norms. Once included in the

16
ron orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contract. the ad hoc conditions acquire the status of essential conditions.
If one examines the subJeet matter of a purchasing contract, the conclusion
can be drawn that the refusal to give a separate place in it to the ad hoc
conditions is altogether Justified. If during negotiations one of the par-
ties asks {or an additional provision to be included in the text. once it
has been accepted by the other contracting |arty it becomes an essential
condition in full compliance with Article 3': of the Bases of Civil Legisla-
tion of the USSR and the Union Republics and Article 160 or the RSPSR Civil
Code.

'lhe essential conditions of a purchasing contract can be divided into con-
ditions that regulate and define more specifically the subJect latter. the
price. the time and the procedure for performance of the obligations, fi-
nancial liability for nonperformance or improper performance. A special
place is taken by conditions that require the procurer to take steps to ex-
tend aid in the production. organization and preparation of the proauct's
delivery and to encourage suppliers. In contracts covering the taking and
purchase of furs the procurers comit themselves to sell to the hunter am-
munition. guns. hunting gear and food before the hunting season begins. to
inform the hunters ahead of time on matters concerning the hunting regula-
tions and open seasons. on the methods of taking hire and other products of
hunting, on its removal and curing, and also to familiarize the hunter with
COST [state standards] and technical specifications applicable to the prod-
ucts of hunting and with the current purchase prices for them. In organiz-
ing state milk purchases on the basis of a contract whereby individuals
help out enterprises of the dairy industry. kolkhozes and oovkhozes extend
aid to owners of dairy cows by furnishing them pastures. by allocating
feed. and by providing veterinary service. The procurer of the products of
rabbit raising assumes the obligations of providing the supplier advance
instruction. of providing him written instructions and visual aids on rab-
bit raising and primary processing of the products of rabbit raising, and
makes food and the necessary supplies available to him. It would be diffi-
cult for the hunter or rabbit raiser to discharge his obligations under the
contract until the procurer takes these actions. The procurer's duty to
provide the conditions necessary to performance of his c‘ligations by the
supplier is specific and differs from the set of steps incumbent upon the
seller. It is not possible in the text of the contract to foresee all the
actions which the procurer should perform to extend aid to the supplier.

An important place is occupied by countersales of mixed feeds to suppliers,
which are provided for in many contracts and which have become widespread.
This strengthens relations betveen procurement organisations and individuals
and encourages an increase in the volume of production and sale of products
to procurers.

1n the case of unplanned purchases of livestock, live poultry and poultry
meat from individuals by consumer cooperative organizations. the productive
character of the contracts is less pronounced. The model contract for the
purchase of poultry and poultry meat provides for countersale of mixed feeds
to suppliers. The model contract for the purchase of livestock from indi-
viduals does not contain clauses that require the procurer to extend aid to

17
ron orricm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the owner of the livestock in obtaining feed. though consumer cooperatives
have such capability. This defect ought to be corrected; it would help
rural Inhabitants Lu nulvu the- pmhimn of food“ aorc onnlly. it would glvq'
then more incentiw to mine animals for aubnequent sale to consuaer coop-
eratives. Cooperators of certain oblasts are attempting to do away with
this drawback. In Saratovskuya Oblant and In Uzbekistan contracts between
consumer cooperative organizations and individuals for raising and selling
livestock and young animals at negotiated prices are quite cannon. The
products supplied under the contracts are charged against the young animals
obtained fron the fare. me suppliers are sold concentrated feeds above
all. Potato purchasing contracts call for suppliers to be given assistance
in the form of transport and containers. In Keanrovaknya and a nuaber of
other oblasts the practice of extending advances to suppliers has begun in
recent years. When contracts are concluded for purchases of livestock.
poultry and rabbits the procurera advance the other contracting party as
much as 30 percent of the value of the products contracted for. In any
regions of the corntry rabbit raiscrs are sold concentrated feeds in ad-
vance when purchasing contracts are negotiated. When necessary individuals
with when contracts are concluded for the purchase of agricultural products
are advanced money (up to 50 percent of the value of the contract when the
products of aniaal husbandry are being purchased and up to 30 percent when
the products of plant cultivation are involved). 60st credits are used
for this purpose in the regular way.

Contract Perfornance

The purchasing contract is a bilateral bargain in which each of the parties
possesses rights and obligations and figures as both creditor and debtor
toward the other contracting party. lionstive enactments regulating these
relations have set forth the principle of specific performance of obliga-
tions; they point out that the pay-eat of a penalty. forfeit or fine does
not release the party fro- the discharge of obligations under the contract
(Paragraph 6 of the Standard Contract for the Taking and Purchase of Pelts
and Other Products of hunting, Paragraph 6 of the Standard Contract for the
Purchase of Rabbit Shins, Live Rabbits and Other Products of Rabbit Raising.
and the relevant paragraphs of the other standard contracts). The wording
of these paragraphs differs soaewhat froa the wording of Part 6. Article 36.
of the Bases. Hhile they provide that the pavnent of a penalty, forfeit or
fine does not release the contracting party from mlfillnenl. of hi! obliga-
tions under the contract, these nomtive enactments say nothing about
losses. 'ihe following question arises: Is the party still required to
mks specific performance after reimbursing losses? It would seen that
pay-eat of a forfeit and reiaburseaent of losses does not release a party
at fault froal specific perfornnce under Part 6. Article 36, of the Bases.
In our view this issue needs clarification. Sublegal enactaents mat not
to contain a different formulation of the principle of specific perfomnce
than that which the legislator has provided. For that reason their wording
oudlt to be brought into conformity with the wording of Part 6, Article 36.
of the Bases.

OOMIGH'I': Izdatel'stvo ﬂanks, sovm'sxors MO I PRAVO. 1919

101:5 l8
080: 1323 Iron onxcm. ass ONLY '
BOOK DBSCRIBES POPULATION MIGRATION

Moscow SOTSLAL’NYE FAKTORY l OSOBENNOSTI ulURATSlI NASBLENIYA SSSR (Social
Factors and Peculiarities of Higrntion of the Population of the USSR) in
Russian 1978 signed to press 25 May 78 pp 1-6. [Ll-1&2

IBrief description, Introduction and Table of Contents of book edited by

Prof. L. L. Rybskovskiy and Prof. V. Ya. Churakov. Academy of Sciences.
Institute of Sociological Research]

[Excerpts/ Titl. Page:
Title: SOTSIAL'NYE FAKTORY I OSOBENNOSTI MIGRATSKI NASELENIYA SSSR

(Social Factors and Peculiarities of Migration of the Population of the
USSR)

Signed to Press Date: 25 May 1978
Publisher: Nauka

Place of Publication: Moscow
Number of Copies Published: 3.200
Number of Pages: 162

Brief Description:

Theoretical questions of population migration. its essence. forms and tau-
aal factors are examined in the book: the laws and peculiarities of migra-
tion processes are analyzed. The correlation between intensity and re-
sults of migration on one hand and various socio-economic factors on the
other is traced in the work.

Introduction:

The beginning of the sixties was marked by notable revival of scientific
research in the field of population migration. This was aided to a sig-
nificant degree by the development of science in Siberia, primarily the
association within the frameuorh of the Siberian branch created at that
time of the Academy of Sciences USSR of economic. sociological and demo-
graphic research conducted in Siberia and the Far East. Precisely in
these regions the most urgent and complex problems of populatinn migration
arose.

Using the results of research carried out at this period. several mono-
graphs were published.

The Siberian Branch of the Academy of Sciences USSR later became an all-
union scientific research center on problems of the socio-demographic
development of the countryside. including migration of the rural popula-

19
ran orrtcuu. use ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

tion. The collective of scientists headed by T. I. ZealeVskaya published
a number of works interesting in a theoretical and practical respect.
devoted to elaboration of methological and systematic questions of study
of the social development of the countryside in general and research on
the development of the Siberian countryside in particular.2

The scientific workers of the Population Center of Moscow State University
have concentrated their attention on research on the correlations of mi-
gration processes with resettling of the population and urbanization and
on study of the specifics of migration of the urban population. The great
service of the Population Center and the department of the same name of
Moscow State university lies in training of demographic personnel 3f broad
profile and preparation of education textbooks for these purposes.

In 1976 study of population migration was begun by the Institute of Socio-
logical Research. Academy of Sciences USSR. Principal attention was con-
centrated on research in interrayon migrational processes. and also migra-
tion of the rural population to cities, which are most significant for the
antic-economic development of the country. The initial premise was the

idea that migration is a complex aocio-demographic process which must be
studied complexly.‘ Thereby the subject of research includes migration
itself. the factors causing it and the consequences of these processes.

The complexity of the subject also presupposes complexity of methods applied
(statistical analysis, sociological surveys. mathematical simulation, etc.).

looks on the theory and methods of research on migration processes in the
USSR which have been published in recent years present great scientific
interest. For example, the publishing house "Statistika" in the seventies
alone published more thsg lo monographs and collections of articles devoted
to population migration. Sevzral works have been is,ued by other publish-
ing houses. including ”Nauka." and also ”Bkonomika." nonetheless scien-
tific interest in this problem is not slackening. Books on population
migration do not lie long on counters: there is always demand for them.
The subject demand is also not met by central journals. on whose pages in

the Ninth Five-Year Plan alone 25 articles on problems of population migra-
tion were published.

The present monograph is the collective work of staff members of the sec-

tor of social problems of migration of the Institute of Sociological Re-
search. Academy of Sciences USSR. The book consists of two parts: in its
first part theoretical and methodological questions are examined: the
essence and forms of migration and its factors are ascertained and much

space is allotted to characterization of the methods with the aid of which
this social phenomenon is studied. In the second part of the book the mi-
grational processes which take place in the USSR and their interterritorial
and intersettlement trend are analyzed. the factors which cause these proces-

ses are ascertained and the correlation of migration with population struc-
ture is examined.

20
’0! OPIICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The chapters euro written by the following authora: L. L. Rybakovakiy--
chnplora l. 3. a. 6: A. G. Zubnnov--chaptor 2: L. V. Maknrova--rhaptora
3. a, and 8; K. D. Argunova-chnptcr b; S. M. thlezko and G. F. Moro-
zovn--chapter S; B. G. Serditykh--chaptera 6 and 7; E. 1. Rybakovakaya--
chapter 6: N. I. Kozhevnikovs and 6. G. Korolova--Chapter 9; M. V. Tara-
aavn and M. A. Uskova--chapter IO.

Table of Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section One: Migrational Proceaaea and Methods of Studying Then
Chapter 1. Esacnce and Forms of Migration of the Population of the
USSR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

Chapter 2. Concept and Competition of Factors of Migration . . . . . .26
Chapter 3. Indicators and Statistical Methods of Study of

Migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
Chapter 6. Regression Models of Population Migration . . . . . . . . .59

Chapter 5. Sociological Methods of Research on Population
Migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .60
Section Two: Peculiarities end Factors of Population Migration

Chapter 6. Basic Trends of Migrational Processes in the USSR . . . . .76
Chapter 7. Peculiaritiea of Migration of the Rural Population. . . . .87
Chapter 8. Migrational Moveaent of the Urban Population. . . . . . . .99
Chapter 9. Factors of Migration. Analysis of Empirical Data . . . . 115
Chapter 10. Correlation of Migration with Population Structure. . . . 125

 

FOOTNOTES

1. 2h. A. Zayonchkovskeya . V. I. Perevedentaev. "Sovrcnennaya nigratsiya
naseleniys Krasnoyarakogo kraya"/Modern Migration of the Population of
the Krasnoyarak Krayl. Novosibirsk. 1966; V. I. Perevedentsev. Sevre-
mennsya Iigrataiya naseleniya Zapsdnoy Sibirir/Hodgxn’Migrstion of the
Population of western Siberial. Novosibirsk. 1965; v. J HIerevedant-
aev. l'Migratsiya nsaeleniya i trudovyye probleay Sibiri / 5"“°” °f
the Population and Labor Probleas of Siberia]. Novosibirsk. 1966.

2. ”Sotaial'nyye probleay trudovykh reauraov sela"/$ocial Proble-a of
Labor Resources of the Village]. Novosibirsk, 1968; "Metodika vyboro-
chnogo obsledovaniya aigrataii sel'skogo naaeleniya"/Methods of Saaple
Survey of Migration of the Rural Population/. Novosibirsk, 1969;

T. I. Zaslavakaya. "0 tselyakh i natodakh planirovaniys aigrstsii
sel'akogo naaeleniya v goroda"/0n the Alas and Methods of Planning of
Migration of the Rural Population to Citieal. Novosibirsk, 1970.

3. "Probleay nigrstaii naseleniya i trudovykh rasursov"/Probleas of Popu-
‘ lation Migration and Labor Resources]. M.. 1970; "Osnovy teorii

narodonaseleniys"/Principles of the Theory of Population], M.. 1973;
"Migrataionnsys podvizhnoat' naaeleniya SSSR"/Migrstional Population

21
POKJOFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hovuent of the USSR], H.. 1975.

‘0

5'

6.

7O

"Sotaial'nye prohleny nigrataii"/Social Probleu of Migration]. H.,
1976; L. L. Rybakovakiy. "Structure and Factor: of Interrayon Hista-
tion Proceeaea." SOTSIOLOGICRBSKIYE ISSLBDOVANIYA. 1976. No l: V. N.
Varygin, K. D. Argunova. L. V. Hahrova. ‘Mesreeeion Analyeia of
Interrayon Migration Proceeaee," SWSIOLOGIcuESKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA.
1976. lb 2; S. N. Zhelezko. G. F. Horozova, B. 6. Serditykh. "An
Experilent of Sociological Research on Migration of the Population of
the Far Salt.“ SOTSIOLOGICRESKIYB ISSLBDOVANIYA, 1976, w 2.

"Statistika eisrataii nualeniya'VStatietica of Population Migration],

H.. 1973: 2h. A. Zayonchkovakaya. "Novoeely v sorodakh'VNew Settlera

in Citieel. it. 1972; L. L. Rybakevekiy. “legional'nyy anali: eigtat-
eiy"/Ragional Analyaia of Migrations]. H.. 1973: V. V. Oniltiyenko.

V. A. Popovltin. "Konplekanoye ieeledovaniye nigrataionnykh proteeeeov"

/Coeplex Research on nigration Proceaeeal. IL. 1973; etc.

V. I. Perevedentaev. "Hetody ieucheniya ligrataii naeeleniya"l Hethoda
of Studying Population Higrationl. 11.. 1975; V. I. Staroverov.
"Soteial'no-deeograficheakiye probleay derevni"/Socio-duographic
Problua of the Countryside], K” 1975.

A. V. Topilin. "Territorial'noye pereraepredeleniye trudovykh reeur-
aov v SSSR'VTerritorie] Redistribution of Labor Reaourcaa in the USSR].
m, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Iedatel'atvo "Naulta", 1978

9072
C50: ‘1823

2

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANS NEW? [ON

NEW SOVIET AIRLINER YAK-lo2 DESCRIBED
Prague TBCHNICKY TYDENNIK in Czech 6 Feb 79 p 22
[Article by (vkk)]

{Tex} A new airplane. the “16-62 for 120 passengers. with a flight range
of 1,850 kilonetars. and a cruising speed of 850 kilometers per hour has
originated in the design office of A.S. Yakovlev. For the time being, it is
operating on "Aeroflot“ routes. but in the very near future it will also
appear at Czechoslovak airports in the colors of CSA [Czechoslovak Airline}.
There is great interest in the new airplane all over the world, and that is
why the editorial board of the periodical "SOVIET EXPORTS" asked a few
questions of S.A. Yakovlev, deputy general design engineer of the aircraft.

[Question] What basis did you use in selecting the concept of the aircraft
and its design?

[Answer] In developing the Yak-42 airplane, we used the basic technical
ideas which proved to be so successful in the case of the Yak—40 airplane.
The reliability of all the systems of the Yak-60 airplane has been tested by
many long-distance flights in Europe. Asia. Africa, Australia, and America.
It is enough to recall the deaonstrntion flight through South America:
..l-15,000 'kiloaeters. 270 flight hours, 260 landings at all kinds of airports.
including airports in high mountains. For alnost half a year, the airplane
flew thousands of kiloaeters away from its main base. ‘lhere was no need

to replace a single part during the entire period. The Yak-60 airplane re-
turned froa South America to Moscow via the USA. Canada. Alaska, and Siberia.
and was able to continue flying inediately. He applied this operational
experience in designing the Yak-62.p1ane. The plane is designed for short
and media-distance routes. 'ihe type for short routeu carries a hundred
persons. The passengers put their luggage in coapartnenta located in a space
close to the entrance to the plane.

For longer flights, we install an additional 20 seats, and luggage is placed
in the space below the cabin floor.

23
ton orncm. use 02m
FOR OFFICIAL "St: ONLY

[Question] As a rule. there are only small airports on local routes. The
Yak-‘2 is a plane with backswept wings. As is known. these planes have a
relatively high landing speed. Can the Yak-42 land safely at airports of
local routes?

[Answer] Certainly. Even though the landing speed of the Yak-42 plane is
soaewhat higher than that of Yak-b0. roughly 200 kiloaeters per hour. the
overall distance needed for landing froa an altitude of 15 aeters is alaest
the ease. which leans 1.100 neters. Therefore. the Yak-42 can take off and
land safely on runways only 1.800 asters long.

[Question] how was it possible to achieve such resarkable paraseters in
the case of an airplane with backswept wings carrying 120 passengers?

[Answer] He used double-slotted flaps with a hinged surface. As soon as

the wheels of the undercarriage touch the ground. spoilers which increase
frontal drag and reduce uplift are brought out autonatically. That increases
the adherence of the tires to the surface of the runway. so that the pilot
can apply the brakes nore effectively. The Yak-42 plane also has a new set
of flight and navigational instruments. which provide for annual or auto-
antic flight control.

[Question] How did the new design help to increase the strength of the air-
plane and extend its operational capacity?

[Answer] The nest ispertant part of the plane. which as a rule detersines
its service life. is the wing. The service life of the wing depends on the
operational reliability of the part which is subjected to the greatest stress.
naaely the wing's root. The Yak-62 has a one-piece wing, and that is why
the stress is distributed throughout its entire structural shell evenly.

In addition. the profiles of the wing at various points of its span are
selected in such a way that the center of aerodynssic installation is
shifted closer to the fuselage. That reduces the banding aoasnts and the
stress in that part of the wing. whcih increases its service life and reli-
ability. All vitally iaportsnt assenblies and systeas are duplicated. sons
of then actually triplicated.

hydraulics are coapletely duplicated in the Yak-42 plane. in addition to

the basic distribution systea. there is also an eaergency with a separate
reservoir for operating fluid and independent reserve pumps. As regards the
distribution syste-s. we have a dual reserve. in the case of pumping stations
a triple reserve. and with regard to sources of current a quadruple reserve.

Each alternator that is installed in the plane. delivers electric current

to an independent feeder channel. The output of each channel is sufficient
to feed. all the equipnent in the aircraft. But even if two generators fail.
there is enough electric current for all the systeas. And if the third
generator also fails. then electric current is delivered by the energency

2“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

generator of the auxiliary uni: which is put into operation after two gen-
eratorn of the basic system fail. if the usergency generator were also to
fail to operate. something which practically cannot occur. all of the most
important systens using alternating current will be fed by electric current
r... batteries through converters and equipment using direct current. di-
rectly from batteries.

[Question] "hat is essential for duplicating or triplicn'ing a certain sys-
tem?

[Answer] Experience gained froo operations of analogical systeas and long-
term tests of supply sources. however. we kept in mind also the kind of
almost impossible incident such as. for exaaple. failure of all hydraulic
systeas used in the lowering the landing gear. In that case. the crow opens
the landing gear doors sanually and the landing gear is locked into position
by its own weight and airflow.

[Question] The Yak-60 is independent of the equip-sat used at an airport.
it does not need steps or a starting truck to start the engine. Does the
Yak-52 have also these advantages?

[Answer] Yes. As a matter of fact. the Yak-42 has two types of steps.
One set in the rear-the same as Yak-h0-and the second in the front. im-
nedistely behind the crew cabin.

To start the engines.an auxiliary unit is used in this airplane which de-
livers compressed air both on the ground and in flight. The Yak-40 started
its actors quite reliably even at La Pa: in Bolivia. the airport with the
highest altitude in the world (4.000 meters above sea level). There is no
doubt that Yak-62 will start its motors easily under the sass conditions.

[Question] To what extent is the servicing of Yak-62 laborious and stren-
uous?

[Answer] 0n local routes. the flight lasts as a rule one hour. 1he plane
stays on the ground 15 to 20 minutes and takes off again. The extent of

the required technical check at the airport is minimal. A routine check

is enough in view of the outstanding degree of reliability of the airplane.
A detailed inspection takes place once a day. when the flights have been
completed. Ihe system of technical checks of a Yak-42 plane is based on the
relationship of the operations. and the actual condition of the individual
systems. That reduces considerably the laboriousncss of servicing.

FIGURE APPENDIX

Yak-62. a new Soviet plane for short and medium-distance routes. has
three 0-36 engines. with a take-oft thrust of 637 xx. The service life of
the airplane is 30.000 hours and 30.000 landings. assimua utility load is

25
res orrzcm. use ONLY
16.500 kllosrm (Figure 1).
“sure 2 about the (matter of the pilot'o cabin.

COPYRIGHT! 1979 WMVATMIVI A WWI“ ROI! PRACS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANS I‘m‘l‘A'l' I 0"

METHODS TO REDUCE TRACK. WHEEL FLANGE HEAR PROPOSH)
Moscow ELEK'I'RICHESKAYA I TEPLOVOZIMYA TYAOA in Rucninn no 6. 1978 pp 103-55

[Article by Candidates of Technical Sciences A. S. Linev and H. 8. Kogan:
”How to Reduce Track and Hheel Flange wear on the Baykal-Amur Meinline"]

[Text] Over a great extent the DAM [Baykal-Amur Mainline] has a complex
track plan and profile. and in addition pasnec through regions with harsh
climatic conditiOns. while as an average for the railroad network the
share of curved track equals approximately 26 percent. on the DAM it is
about us percent. and even much greater on the pass or grade sections.

The minimum curve radius equals 300 meters. The grades have an incline of
up to 18 percent. Under such conditions. rather intensive lateral wear
on curved track and the wheel flanges can be expected. The use of rails
which have been hardened along their length only partially can reduce the
scuteness of the question of rail wear. since the hardened rails wear out
approximately 1.5-fold less than the unhardened ones. But the intensity of
the wear on the wheel flanges with hardened rails is not reduced. but
rather increases. since the “working in” of the rail profile to the wheel
occurs more slowly.

0n the Soviet railroads. the lubricating of the rails and wheel flanges

is done by track lubricators with a feeder plate 510 mm long and a lubri-
cant tank holding 12 kg of lubricant. The experience of using such devices
shows that by lubricating the intensity of side wear on the rails can be
reduced by several-fold. A rather high effectiveness from employing the
track devices is achieved in the instance that they are placed clone to

one another. not farther than 3 kn epart in single curves. and excrc'e con-
tinuously. 0n lines with a traffic load of around 50 million ton km per

km per year. the devices should be filled after 15-20 days.

Truck lubricators can be installed on the BAH. but their use on this line
involvcn numerous difficulties. Under the conditions of a sparsely popu-
lated locality. the maintenance personnel will live at station points which
are located every 80-50 km. Under these conditions the inspecting of the
instruments and their refilling will take a great deal of working time.

2?
roe 9,"qu use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

for the personnel can be brought out only by handcaro which would be sent
between trains. These expenditures can be reduced if the capacity of the
lubricant tank on the existing devices is increased by several-fold (the
track inbricators of the "Mess" firm have tanks of 86 and lhh kn).

The experience of forcinn railroads shows that the length of the feeder
plates on certain devices reaches 2.700 as. and this makes it possible to
apply lubricant to the entire circumference of the wheel. This increases
the effectiveness of rail lubrication by the track lubricatorn. ﬂocher.
under the conditions of the SAM. the most effective is to lubricate the
rails and wheel flanges using locomotive devices with the direct applica-
tion of the lubricant to the side edge of the rail. Such a lubricating
method is used on the lines of the Moscow Subway. on the experimental ring
of the Central Scientific Research Institute of the Ministry of the Rail-
roads, and as an experiaent was previously used on certain railroads of the
system. It has been most widely used on foreign railroads and in particu-
lar on the Japanese ones.

 

Design of the Automatic Lubricator
of the Kinki ﬂippon Railways System

Devices of different design (see the drawing) are used for lubricating the
rails and wheel rims in Japan. The operating principle of the Kinki Nippon
device consists in the following. The lubricant from the tank 2 is sup-
plied through a rubber tube to valve 9 to the lubricating device 7 which,
in being in direct contact with the side of the rail head at point 12. de-
livers the lubricant to the rail. The device is fastened to the locoaotive
rocker arm 3. by a rod 5 and a guide roller 6, the lubricant is constantly
delivered to the required place on the rail head.

"hen the roller is not in contact with the rail. valve 9 is closed by a
spring and the lubricant is not delivered to the roller. 0n track curves
the roller is continuously in contact with the outside rail. and this pro-
vides continuous lubricating of the side edge. In loving along straight
track the crew can put the roller into contact with the rails in certain
sections. and the rails are then lubricated.

28
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The lubricant material used in this device is a mineral oil mixed with a
fatty oil which has been treated with hot air. The addition of the fatty
component to the mineral oil. on the one hand, ensures lubricating at high
speed due to the good adhesion characteristics of the oil. and on the other.
nreVentn it from running beyond the point of application. The use of vari-
ous mixes makes it possible to employ thr lubricant mnterial with plus and
minus temperatures.

Lubricant consumption is approximately h liters per hoo-soo km.

Subsequently this railroad developed an improved type of lubricator with a
nozzle. This new lubricator combines both a guide roller which directly
regulates the area of lubricant distribution, and a nozzle system with a
minimum number of wearable parts. The lubricant is supplied to the nozzle
by air fed into the oil tank. There is a two-stage regulation of air pres-
sure. At speeds up to 30 km per hour. the air is delivered to the nozzles
through a high-pressure control valve. here the amount of lubricant de-
livered to the nozzles is increased. The rate is controlled by a counter
activated by a lug on the roller which turns on the inner surface of the
wheel. As the speed increases. the frequency of pulses recorded by the
counter also increases and this closes the circuit which controls the ad-
mission of air to the oil tank through electropneumatic vaIVes. For the
low pressure circuit, this valVe is activated at a speed of 5 km per hour.
and the high-pressure circuit upon reaching a speed of 30 km per hour.

At a speed below 5 km per hour and at a halt, delivery of the lubricant

is automatically stopped.

"hen the crew enters a curve of a certain radius, ordinarily 1,200 meters,
a sliding lug on the truck moves along a guide fastened to the lower frame.
Here by a tracking mechanism an electronic circuit is closed. and air is
admitted to the two electropneumatic valves leading to the oil tank.

With the activating of the valves, the air enters the oil tank and releases
oil on the inner face of the rail.

The experience of the Japanese railroads shows the high effectiveness of
such a rail lubricating method. here the intensity of rail wear has been
reduced by 5-fold. the wear on the flanges has been reduced by approxi-
mately 2-fold. and the consumption of electric power in pulling the trains
has been reduced by 12 percent. This is related to a reduction in resist-
ance in moving over the lubricated rails.

The maintenance of the devices mounted on locomotives is much easier than

the track devices. Considering all of this in the near future we must
work out thc design of a device for locomotives in order to introduce the

designated method for lubricating rails and wheel flanges on the RAM.

The BAN is being laid in regions with very harsh climatic conditions. The
absolute minimum temperature reaches -62° c. The number of days per year

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with a temperature below -50° c is 13. and a negative temperature lasts
190-23): days. In this regard. the question arises oi‘ selecting a lubricant
for the track lubricators on the BA". The presently used winter track
lubricant can be used in the devices to -30° c.

As a result or research carried out it has been established that the
industrial-comercial lubricant. the TsIATIM-aol (State Standard 6267-7“.
in tens of its low-temperature properties can be used on the track lubri-
cators of the BAH. This lubricant works in the devices down to -50° c.
and reduces track and wheel flange wear by several-fold. When it is nec-
essary to reduce the intensity of rail wear (on sections with a heavy
track plan and profile). the [1-318 antiscuff and antiwear additive can be
added to this lubricant.

me question of the need for year-round operation or track lubricators on
the SAM does not require additional study. The fact is that in wintertime,
a film of moisture forms on the rails and this helps. as research has shown,
to reduce the intensity of wear. In comparison with the owner period,
winter wear can be 2-3-fold less. It the same indicators are obtained

for reducing wear in the wintertime under the conditions or the BAH. then
in a number of instances there will be no need to lubricate the track and
wheel flanges with very low outside air temperatures.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Transport", "Elektricheskaya i teplovoznaya
trust". 1918

10272
080: 1823

\

. 30
m orncm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRARSPORTATION

BRIEFS

RAIL DEFICIENCIBS NOTED-40%“ traina are arriving chronically late. 0n
the main lines, on. in four traina arrivoa late in Moacov. From on avarage
33.4 kilowatera par hour in 1975, the average apecd of a froighr train haa
fallen to 32.3 baa pot hour by 1977. Rail can that covorad an avarago of
208 Ian 2 yoara ago now average only 23!. km. In nunroua Ural diatricta
half of the used aupply ia unfit for use [boosuao of late dolivory7].
[Text] [Paria VALBURS ACTUBLLES in French 26 Mar 79 p 36]

630: 3100 END

31
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY