FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10249
11 January 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTURE

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
i] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques~
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
AGRICULTURE
(rouo 1/82)

CONTENTS

RWIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Estonian Official Interviewed on Food Program Goals
(Gustav Tonspoeg Interview; SO'PSIALIS‘HJK POLLUHAJANWS,

001" 81) 000.0.00.0.0...nochub-agoneeeelolooooteoOIOOOIDOO

AGRO-ECONOMICS AND ORGANIZATIQ!

Conference on APK Problems 111 ghligts Priority Objectives
(V9 Balabmov; VOW Eme, Oct 61) ocooeoeooeooooo

TILLING AND CROPPING TECHNOImY

Problems of Hicrofertilizers in USSR Crop Far-nuns Discussed
(B. A. YagOdin; AGROKHMYA, wt 81) ooeeeoooooeoao-eooeo

- a - [III - USSR -

FOB ﬂmﬂll INF 0N] V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

ESTONIAN OFFICIAL INTERVIEWED ON FOOD PROGRAM GOALS
Tallinn SOTSIALISTLIK POLLUHAJANDUS in Estonian So 19, Oct 81 pp 722-724

[Interview with Gustav Tonspoeg, ESSR first deputy chairman of Council of
ﬂinisters, chairman of ESSR Gosplan; passages enclosed in slantlines printed
in boldface]

[Text] [Question] [Our national economy, including agriculture, has been
directed in a planned fashion. Why then do we now need a special food programT/

[Answer] There are several requirements for a food program. True, plans for
social and economic development assign tasks to agriculture by five year and
annual periods, they also determine resources to be invested in agriculture.
National economic plans also assign tasks for those branches of production

that are directly connected with agriculture /or influence its development/.
But the tasks of the various branches of the agrarian-industrial complex have
to date not been coordinated, they had to be accommodated to each Other later,
through special agreements, even though by far not all tasks were filled in a
timely fashion. It happens that a branch of the national economy supplying agri-
culture meets its goals by the end of the five-year period, but that a large
part of the production required by agriculture reaches the farmers only in the
last years of the five-year period. The supplier has met his goals, but the
farmer has not yet been able to use these resources. This has been the case
with machinery, mineral fertilizers, and other supplies. Also, the farmer will
get no production out of a facility received from the builders at the and of a

year.

Goal-oriented complex programs constitute a method for planning in which the
productive tasks of the various branches are coordinated in time and space. at
the same time the connections have been worked out in greater detail and [with

an eye on the longer perspective]. The need to establish a food program as a
perspective plan derives directly from the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.
The congress noted that the potential of the USSR national economy is sufficient
to completely satisfy the people's food needs if comprehensive measures are taken.
/The aim of the food program is precisely the meeting of the people's needs as
rapidly as possible./

The aims of agrarian production for 1985 and 1990 were more precisely outlined
at the 26th CPSU Congress; the goals fixed should be considered minimums. They

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

haVe to be considered a minimum program since their attainment does not yet
guarantee the complete satisfaction of the people's needs

The goal of the task is to guarantee meeting these goals and establishing ways

to exceed the plans. This is the base for the central idea of the Central Com-
mittee of the CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers directive regarding agra-
rian planning and perfecting of the economic mechanisma--etimulation and re-
wards are tied to lexceeding/ plans and previously achieved levels of production.

In other words, comprehensive plans are designed to secure a division of organi-
zational work and resources that will establish favorable outlooks.not only for
meeting goals but also for exceeding them.

For example, during the 11th Five-Year Plan we have to produce an average of
11-13 percent more agricultural products than during the previous period. At

the same time the tasks for supply and division of production have already been
determined.

Agrarian products of our republic, primarily dairy products, are also used in
the other federal republics. This is quite natural, since first, the immediate
surroundings of million-cities (such as Leningrad) cannot produce enough food,
and secondly the intensity of our dairy industry is greatly dependent on re-
sources imported from other federal republics. According to plans we receive
many resources from other areas--machines, mineral fertilizers, concentrated
feed, oil products, ete-—since we either do not have them or we produce them

in insufficient quantity. 0n the other hand, we export products that we pro-
duce in greater quantity. Both the imported productive resources as well as the
exported meat and dairy products have been fixed not in relative quantities,

but in specific amounts in the plans. These quantities must be met without
question. Only if we are able to mobilize all of our resources and meet each
year the [state procurement quotas/ will we be able to meet the tasks of deliv-
ery into the all-union fund and at the same time provide our own inhabitants
with animal products in a quantity approximating the physiological requirements.

[Question] [There is probably no need to comment on the main aim of the program,
a better food supply. But does each worker see his part in meeting that goal,
will that aim not be too remote for the enterprises?/

[Answer] After meeting the main aim it must be ascertained what factors influ-
ence reaching the programs. In the formulation of the first draft of the food

program we determined the relations and proportions between the various branches
of agriculture and between it and related branches of the national economy. For
example, dairy production depends primarily on feeds. [But feed production/ is
in itself a complex problem, including the structure. culture, growing areas and
their structure, all involved in meeting basic protein needs with local feeds.

In establishing the food program we took into account several alternatives, with
the most favorable one--i.e. one that permits us to produce more animal products
in various field distribution configurations--to be selected later. These alter-
natives must still be weighed. Of course, it was also determined how much feed
in both tons as well as feed units and feed components would be necessary to

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

produce the planned amounts of meat and milk. The proportions of various feed
items (protein) and the volumes of the various kinds of feed are determined by
the structure of animal products production.

All this coordination is no easy task. When our task is to supply a certain
number of tons of meat, then we can meet the plan with either beef or pork.

We need different kinds of feed to produce either kind of meat. Pork can be
produced with a relatively smaller number of feed units, but a push of pork
raising is dependent on imported concentrated feed, and, moreover, it makes
more acute the shortage of protein and vitamin additives. Feed production,
however, does not depend only on the proportion of various kinds of meat, but
also [on the requirements for a rational use of land/ and simply on opportuni-
ties--the suitability of soils to raise this or another crop, the need for crop
rotation, etc. A reckoning of all this within our republic is a momentous task
which we are attempting to solve with the food program. /The rational develop-
ment of feed production is. indeed, a subprogram of the food program./

/A second important subprogram includes grain production./ This involves those
grain products that are used for immediate human consumption. In issues 7, 8
and 13 of SOTSIALISTLIK POLLUHAJANDUS this same topic has been thoroughly dis-
cussed and I need nor restate what has been said there.

A third subprogram encompasses the /efficiency/ of agrarian production. This
is prima'ily concerned with the efficient use of capital investments. Let me
explain: We determined the structure of grain production on the basis of the
needs of animal husbandry, the needs of grain production in turn influence
greatly the need and structure of capital investments. We followed the same
path in developing the food program.

A change in the structure of capital investments is reflected in plans for the
next 5 years. For example, expenditures for melioration have been reduced.
These funds will be primarily used to build barns and storage facilities, so as
to reduce wastage, but especially for rural housing, so as to slow the migration
of the rural population to the towns.

Here we also surveyed measures to assure that the total volume of products from
lindividual landholding/ not diminish. Probably the production of some items
(such as milk) will decrease, but one must assure that the general volume of
small production remain at least on the current level, and increase, if at all
possible. Re have planned for many incentives, distributed among state capital
investments, individual resources. and the sale of tools and other necasary
items.

[Question] [In the drafting of the food program some disproportions that hinder
normal development of production have become apparent. The basic goals were
fixed before the food program. Are the toska included in them still realistic?/

[Answer] Although the current year was one of very intensive work I can assure
you that the /tempo of growth planned for the current five-year period is realis-
ticl. let us look at some facts-in 1976 we produced 1,140,000 tons of milk in
our republic, 1,040,000 in 1979. In 1980 it was 1,090,000 and this year's goal

3
F0!.0FTWC]AI.USE¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is 1,155,000 tons, or only 15,000 tons more than 5 years ago. Next year. howb
ever. the volume to be procured increases only by a few thousand tons. This
year the rains did not let us make sufficient hay and in places the soil did
not support machines and animals, so that one can fear that milk production
might be somewhat less than the plan for this year. But still, we cannot say
that the procurement tasks for this five-year period would be unrealistic, un-
achievable. The fact that milk production has decreased due to the conver-
gence of several factors out of the control of the farmer does not represent
a pattern, but only an exception to the rule.

Our main task then is to compile a program that would permit the meeting and
surpassing of goals in the near future. For this purpose we must direct our
efforts correctly and place resources so as to increase production. First off,
this meant that land. material resources, money, and labor be utilized consider-
ably better.

How much production should increase I cannot state in numbers, since that pro-
gram has not yet been finalized.

[Question] [Production in the Estonian village of today is ever more dependent
on social factors. Does this echo in the food program, and if so, how?/

[Answer] The most important component of the elements of production is the
human being. For this reason the food program includes means for social devel-
opment. Taking into account realities we attempt to find possible better solu-
tions for man's working and environmental conditions. [Neither medical, cul-
tural, or environmental services of the rural inhabitant should be worse than
in the towns./ The development of services in the countryside must take into
account the social structure, demographic peculiarities. etc of the rural popu-
lation.

The food program includes also the incorporation of [the resources of other
branches of the national economy] in the social development of the countryside.
Apparently the resources of the other branches of the national economy should

be included in strengthening the social and productive infrastructure in the
countryside. Also, it is high time to think how the town could better help the
country with qualified labor in seasonal work. For example, it would be good

if students in urban vocational schools would be taught how to drive tractors.
Agriculture and the entire food industry is [the most important branch of our
republic's economy/ and the food program ties the interests of the other branches
to the development of agriculture.

I cannot yet say what measures should be used to further increase the interest
of other branches of the national economy in furthering agriculture. But al-
ready initiatives in that direction have been taken by several ministries.
Several ministers have advanced the possibility thattheir enterprises in rural
areas be placed on an 8 or 10 month pay schedule. This would enable the work-
ers to work on the farm for some months. Such measures can be included in the
food program as well and would result in raising agrarian qualifications of
laborers in rural plants. This would also considerably reduce the shortage

of labor during peak seasons.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One must applaud the suggestion of the ESSR Truck Transport and Highway Ministry
that it incorporate the local road maintenance into the republic's road network

and include some roads within enterprises in the rayon road network. This would
mean that the roads would be maintained and repaired not by enterprise labor but
with state resources, and the enterprises could deal more with their basic tasks.

Agriculture receives assistance from elsewhere as well. For example, in 2-3
years we will fully meet the needs for peat by the kolkhoz and sovkhoz. This
in turn requires extensive revision of trucking enterprise's work schedules,
so that the peat would reach the consumer at the right time. All of this can
be coordinated within the food program.

Within the food program we also include the development of auxiliary labor in
the enterprises. There are many people who for health or other reasons cannot
work specifically in agriculture, but can do so in auxiliary branches.

The development of auxiliary labor would also contribute to increasing the labor
efficiency of the rural population and would offer suitable work for women.

There are areas where we have considerably more men than women. Auxiliary labor
would help to keep the women in the countryside and would thus solve an important
social problem. At that same time, auxiliaryproduction should in peak season be
the most important and most convenient source of additional labor for harvesting
or other pressing tasks. For this reason personnel in auxiliary production
should also be trained in agricultural skills.

Incorporating the development of auxiliary production into the food program also
has the aim /that the production of any kind of auxiliary enterprise should meet
the needs of this republic's rural and urban population/ and not be directed to
profiteering in other federal republics.

I don't suggest that auxiliary production in a kolkhoz should be limited only to
making maltose, starch or cabbage. Surely the people in the countryside will be
able to handle more complex production that is needed by the population. The
needs of the people are growing, where a simple hammer or screwdriver used to
suffice, now there is a demand for electrical hand tools. I think that the
enterprises would be able to produce them if they would have cooperative agree-
ments with industrial plants.

The food program is concerned with working conditions and improvements in medi-
cal services. Sick people must be well treated in the countryside also, but it
is more important that a person not become sick, that preventive medicine be
practiced, that working conditions be improved, that each rural inhabitant be
guaranteed a good lunch, opportunities for rest, etc, so as to reduce sick
leave which is currently excessive. Tractor operators are sick more than
others: their diseases are well known. Apparently sickness could be reduced

if the operators were offered invigorating activities that would improve their
physical fitness. As far as I know not a single enterprise has bothered with
that. There is also often a failure to see that the tractor operator's health
'8 threatened by a dilapidated driver's cabin, poor working clothes, the lack
of washup facilities, etc, etc People do not want to see that it is wiser to
abandon one maintenance bay and build a decent washroom than to save on account

5
FOR omcuz. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of an operator's working conditions. But later there are complaints about a
lack of Operators and their volatility.

But the entire fate of the food program depends most [directly and decisively]
on that very tractor driver, his remaining in the country or moving to town.

[Question] [Long-range programs include in addition to goals, means, and lini-
tations also management structures. Hhat would you say about that latter point?/

[Answer] Indeed, the food program includes organizational tasks, management.
especially on the rayon and enterprise level. The current management habits in
our rayons and enterprises are not satisfactory. Analysis shows, for example,
that a tremendous amount of time is expended in the enterprises in hauling work-
ers to the job and back. Also, much time is used to bring machinery to the
field. Since enterprises are large, more machines should be in the hands of
departments, so that the department would be much more mobile than now. The
chief agronomist should rule over special machinery, but the self-managing
department should be lord over other machinery. An increase in the importance
of departments would also decelerate urbanization and help to improve the popu-
lation dispersal in the country. But an immediate profit would accrue from the
vast reduction of shuttle runs. Currently, the main job of many people consists
of hauling other people. In addition, there is the depreciation of vehicles,
fuel costs, etc. All of these expenditures are by far not unavoidable.

Also, I would like to stress the need to improve stimulation, it being a most
important tool.

In an increasing measure such remuneration systems must be implemented that
would relate the end result of labor more to salary and bonus. Through his
remuneration each person must better realize his part in the accomplishments

of the enterprise. Currently, the bosses often receive the bonuses, while the
actual laborer might even go without one. A manager at any level should not
receive a bonus for individual work but rather for the final results. Such a
system must be developed. Currently we are too stuck in old habits and in mea-
suring quantity. Today the quality evident in the final product must be taken
into account in an increased fashion.

I would like to stress, the goal-oriented program helps to connect the interests
of agriculture and peripheral branches of the economy and to increase the inter-
est of all segments of the food complex in the final results. Of course, right
now we do not have a mechanism for coordinating these interests. I would hope
that it be developed soon.

[Question] [You have explained several aspects of the food program and also
what must still be solved with the help of that document. How far has the com-
pilation of the program proceeded7/

[Answer] At this time the first draft of the republic's food program is between
covers. It is an extensive, voluminous job, in which many experts participated.
Edgar Tonurist, director of the Estonian Agrarian Institute, chaired the commit-
tee in charge of producing the food program. Our well-known farmers, such as

6
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the chief agronomist of the "Edasi" kolkhoz of Parnu Rayon, Arnold Erm, the
director of the Laatre sovkhoz of Valga Rayon, Huno Toomiste, the director of
the Turi exhibit sovkhoz, Uudo Kalamann, Leonard Kallas of the "Vambola" kolk-
he: of Viljandi Rayon, etc, made their contribution to the development of the
food program. The committee included representatives of Gosplan, the Ministry
of Agriculture, the Ministry of Meat and Dairy Industry, the Ministry of Food
?roducts, the Ministry of Procurement, the labor committee and the EFT, as
well as scholars of the Institute of Economics of the ESSR Academy of Sciences,
the Estonian Herding Institute, Estonian Agrarian Institute, and the Estonian
Academy of Agriculture.

We collected very much material, containing interesting analyses and suggestions.
The extensive material was reduced and concentrated into the first draft of the
food progrem--consisting of two pamphlets with some 150 pages all told.

The food program of our republic will get its final shape after all the resources
we are to receive from the state have been ascertained.

Many questions cannot be solved within the borders of our republic. we do not
produce several products necessary to agriculture and it would not be efficient
to establish such means of production locally. We also made several suggestions
to the USSR Gosplan to improve the use of the enterprises' stimulation funds,

to increase bank credit, etc.

The food program of our republic will become an organic part of the food pro-
gram of the USSR and it will become the foundation for plans for social and
economic development of our state. It would not be efficient to compile a food
program for a level below the republic. The framework of an area or rayon is
too small, the resources come from elsewhere and it would make no sense to tie
all local questions in their detail to a grand program. The goals and programs
of the enterprises are contained in their five—year plan and in the measures
envisioned to meet that plan. The enterprises must compile their five-year
plans by November, benchmark figures for that task have been in their hands
since September. These benchmark figures reflect procurement tasks and re-
sources that will be available to the enterprises. The enterprises must them-
selves find the most rational means to meet their obligation to society (the
plans or sale to the state) in the best way.

1 repeat--the food program of our republic is the foundation for compiling a
food program for the USSR. The food program for the entire country should be
finished by the end of the year. and after that some revisions must apparently
he made in the food program of our republic. Then the food program will become
a directive document, a law whose fulfillment will be demanded and checked.

COPYRIGHT: Kurjastus "Perioodika," "Sotuialistlik Pollumajandus" 1981

9240
C80: 1815/10

7
FOR OFFICIJL USE ONLY
run urrlvinh uor. smut

AGRO-ECONOHICS AND ORGANIZATION

CONFERENCE 0" APR PROBISHS RIGHLICRI‘S PRIORITY OBJECTIVES
Hoocow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 155-157

[Article by V. Balsbanov: 'tonference of the Scientific Council for Economic,
Social and Legal Problems of the USSR APK"]

[Text] The first conference of the Scientific Conference for Sconcmic, Social and
Legal Problems of the USSR APK [Agroindustrial Complex], which convened from 25 to
27 Hay 1981, was devoted to discussing the methods to be employed for carrying out
the tasks of the food program.

The principal report, entitled "Development and Implementation of the Food Program
in Light of the Decisions Handed Down During the 26th CPSU Congress," was delivered
by the chairman of the scientific council, VASKthL [All-Union Academy of
Agricultural Sciences ineni v.1. Lenin] Academician V. Tikhonov. Having taken note
of the achievements realized in developing the country's agrarian economy, he
described the principal trends in the development of agriculture as a central
element in the development of the food complex.

At the present time, there are as million individuals working within the AP!
structure, the bulk of the annual net product being produced exceeds 167 billion
rubles (more than a1 percent of the annual national income) and the value of the
surplus product created in branches of the APK amounts to 95 billion rubles (47
percent of the annual mass of surplus product created in the country). In examining
the dynamics of production by five-year periods. it can be seen that agriculture is
developing in a rather dynamic manner. Nevertheless, irregularities in the

volumes of production occur from year to year and this brings about corresponding
phenomena in the processing industry of the APR. The level of development of the
logistical base for branches of the APK infrastructure and the processing industry
is clearly inadequate. As a result, losses in the production of agzicultural

raw materials are increasing and the consumption level for certain types of food
goods is increasing at a slower rate than their production volumes.

The principal trends for further development of the APK «are revealed in the
report and they are reflected in the food program as developed: scientific-
technical progress and improvements in the structure of agroindustriel production;
improvements in the economic mechanism and stable economic orientation of all
branches of the APK towards maximization of the final results. These trends are
considered to be of a priority nature with regard to capital investment policy

8
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

both during the current five-year period and in the future. 1n the opinion of

V. Tikhonov, greater importance is attached to the second trend under modern
conditions. Further improvements in the structure of agroindustrial production
assumes first of all the development of the production apparatus of those branches
engaged in the procurement, transporting, storage and processing of agricultural
products and also delivering the final products to the consumer. According to
computations cited in the report, the implementation of the program for the
accelerated development of the mentioned branches will make it possible to increase
considerably the yield of final product obtained from each unit of agricultural
output produced and particularly by reducing and preventing losses in such output
during the "post-agricultural stage."

The speaker singled out the following priority trends in the sphere of changes in
the structure of agricultural production:

1. Regulation of the logistical base for agriculture and the establishment of
optimum proportions among its component parts.

2. Improvements in the structure of the grain economy (absolute and relative
increase in new energy-saturated and high protein grain crops, with stabilization
and even a slight reduction in the production of bread grain).

3. Improvements in the structure of animal husbandry. based mainly upon the
development of such branches as meat poultry raising and swine raising and also
upon the accelerated development of beef cattle husbandry as a relatively
independent branch. In taking note of the need for developing feed production and
converting it over to an industrial basis, V. Tikhonov emphasized that the solving
of the feed problem is definitely dependant upon the structure of animal husbandry.

a. Improvements in the regional structure of agricultural production. This trend
is based upon the principle of forming specialized zones for the production of the
principal marketable products.

It is assumed that the program for distributing agricultural production by zones
should be coordinated with the tasks for bringing the production of the principal
marketable products closer to the areas where they are consumed and to those
regions possessing the most favorable objective natural-climatic and soil
conditions for the cultivation of the particular type of product. Such a
distribution program for agricultural production will require appropriate
development of the road-transport system, the storehouse economy, the processing
industry and installations of the social infrastructure in the specialised regions.
In this regard, special attention must be given to the erection of wholesale bases
for the storage of raw materials and to the development of the processing industry
in the regions of concentrated production for each type of product.

5. Improvements in the structure of capital investments in agriculture. In the
opinion of the speaker, the investment policies aimed at developing agriculture
must single out and substantiate trends which will bring about a real reduction in

the periods for the repayment of capital investments, by means of surplus product
created in agriculture.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
av“ V...\l.enﬂ uva— was...

A portion of the report was devoted to the problems concerned with improving the
economic mechanism. Here, in the opinion of the speaker, a great role is to be
played by more extensive use of contractual arrangements among branches,
associations, enterprises and regions. These contracts, which are organically
combined with the planned economy system, must prcvide for mutual economic
advantages for each of the partners and also for their mutual responsibility for
the accurate fulfillment of obligations.

In examining the problems concerned with price formation, V. 'rikhonov emphasized the
need for employing uniform principles in the formation of prices for all products of
AP! branches, which serve as objects for inter-branch exchange.

A considerable amount or attention was given in the report to organizing the system
of economic incentives for enterprises, subunits and economic workers at all levels.
This system, according to the speaker. must meet the following requirements: at
all levels the incentives work in a unidirectional manner; they are well defined and
operate automatically when a definite goal is achieved; the amount of incentive is
proportional to the result (goal) achieved and it has no limitation with the
exception of the degree to which the goal was achieved. Kolkhoz and sovkhor
practice over a period of many years has shown that these requirements are met by a
collective form of wages and material incentives known as the job contract plus
bonus system with periodic advances.

In conclusion, the speaker discussed the course of work on "Proposals by the USSR
Academy of Sciences on Developing the Country's Food Program."

Doctor of Laws H. Kozyr' (head of a section on legal problems associated with the
development of the APK), in his report, noted that legal influence on the
development of the APK is associated with further improvements in that legislation
which defines the legal status of agricultural and agroindustrial enterprises and
associations and the legal status of organs of control; with the regulation of
legally acceptable activity, the shortcomings of which are explained to a considerable
degree by the illegal imposition, upon agricultural enterprises and associations,

of tasks not called for in the state plans for the economic and social development
of the USSR and the union republics. In addition to planning, an important role in
the economic mechanism of the APK is played by an economic contract. A considerable
expansion has taken place in the number of contractual arrangements among
agricultural enterprises and it is expected that this trend will continue in the
future. For it is precisely an economic contract that establishes the equality of
the parties and their mutual property reaponsibility for failure to meet the
obligations and it can become an effective economic-legal instrument and an organic
component part of measures aimed at restoring the principle of equivalence in
comnodity-mOnetary exchange and in evaluating the level of services of various
echelons of the agroindustrial complex. An important condition for improving
contractual relationships between agricultural enterprises and associations with
other APK partners is that of establishing efficient legal control over them, as is
being done in industry based upon statutes approved by the USSR Council of Ministers.

Information on the operational plan of the scientific council was furnished by
scientist and secretary of the council, V. Balabanov.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Candidate of Economic Sciences L. Nikiforov (head of a section on social problems
associated with development of the APK), in his report, singled Out a number of
problems concerned with obtaining the rescurces required for the socio-economic
development of the rural areas (financing, materials and so forth). The speaker
discussed the role played by the rural areas in solving the food problem, it. the
production of consumer goods and in obtaining additional resources. In his opinion,
an improved attitude towards the regions, not only the administrative-territoriel
but also the economic-organizational units, will ensure the complete utilization and
deveIOpment of the potential existing in the regions. Among the conditions which
determine the complex development of a territory, 1.. Nikiforov singled out the
following: the solving of a number of national economic problems by local economic
organs; the development of all-round special purpose programs for the development of
a territory or branch; taking into account the peculiarities of regions from the
standpoint of the kolkhozes and aovkhozes located within them (in those areas where
sovkhozes predominate, state funds are invested for development of the social
infrastructure).

the speakers during the conference unanimously agreed that the agroindustrial
complex requires a single control, since it is of an interbranch nature; only a
special organization, one that has been given extensive rights, can provide this
single control.

Candidate of economic sciences and deputy head of a department at USSR Gosplan

N. Smetanin discussed the preparation of the food plan by USSR Goaplan. Information
on the work of the Food Goods Committee of the USSR Academy of Sciences was provided
to the conference by scientist and secretary of the committee, Candidate of

Economic Sciences H. Polyakov. The deputy chairman of the VASKthL council, Doctor
of Economic Sciences 1. Kurtsev, delivered a report on the work of the VASKhNIL
Council for Economic Relationships Between Agriculture and Other Branches of the
Agroindustrial Complex.

More than 20 individuals, representatives of the USSR Academy of Sciences,

scientific research organizations, VUZ's and planning and branch institutes,
participated in the debates over the reports rendered.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

7026
C50: 1826/075

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
you Url-lcuu. 05h UNLl

TILLING AND CROPPING ROUGH!!!

(DC 631.81.095.33?

PROBLEMS OF HICKOFIRTILIZIRS m USSR CROP PARKING DISCUSS”
lbscow AGROﬂlIMIYA in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 166453
{Article by LA. Yagodin: "Problem of Hierofertiliaers in USSR Iarning'ﬁ

[Text] The intensive use of chenical processes, through mineral fertiliser
applications. produces no less than one half of the increase in cropping power
obtained. In view of the increasing investnsnts in agricultural production. extras
importance is attached to achieving high agrononic and econonic effectiveness fro-
the use of nineral fertilizers and also to displaying concern for the quality of
the agricultural output. in solving the problsas associated with further raising
the cropping power of crops, while simltaneously raising the cropping power of the
crops, special importance is attach d to ensuring that the plants are provided with
ell of the required elenents of nineral nutrition end in the correct and scientifically
sound manner. In those instances when the plants are supplied with adequate aaounts
of N, P, K, Ca end Mg, growth in the yields obtained say be limited not only by the
potential of a particular variety. the intensity of illumination or the wt of
noiature. but also and quite often by a deficit of individual nicroelensnts.

A deficit of nicroelenents in the soil often ﬁrings about a reduction in yield and
a deterioration in the quality of the crop, a nuber of plant diseases and quite
often it can result in the destruction of the plants. The use of appropriate
nicrofertilirers not only elininatss the possibility of diseases, but in addition
it ensures higher and better quality yields for the plants.

The theoretical principles underlying the use of aicroel-ants, which are highly
developed at the present tine, becene universally recognized only when the presence
of nicroelenents in various fermentation conplexss was established.

The positive affect generated by nicroelsnents is conditioned by the fact that they
participate in the reduction-oxidation processes and in carbohydrate and nitrogen
exchanges and they raise the resistance of plants to diseases and unfavorable
environaental conditions. Under the influence of nicroelenents. the chlorophyll
content in leaves increases, the photosynthesis process is inproved and the
essinilating activity of a plant is intensified. A tremendous role is played by
the ability of many nicroelenents to create an infinite nu-ber of mounds having
organic substances. A najority of the nicroelsnsnts result in the appearance and
unfolding of a ounber of biological processes. Quite often they are active centers
for fernents and vitamins [1, 21. for example, nolybdsnua is a part of two

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fermenta: nitrate reductase and nitrogenaee, participating accordingly in a
transfer of electrons during the process of nitrate restoration and the fixation of
molecular oxygen of the atmosphere [3-5]. Copper, a part of my ferments
(citrochromoxidase, polyphenoloxidase, lanthineoxidsse and others), participates in
the transfer of electrons in reduction-oxidation reactions, during the oxidation of
an entire series of compounds, in the photosynthesis process and in nitrogen,

auxin and nuclein exchanges. The role played by copper in photosynthesis is obviously
not limited to its inclusion in the structure of plastocyanine or low-molecular
copper~containing protein, localized in chloroplasts. and which participates in the
transporting of electrons 1 and 11 by photochemical systems [6] . In all probability,
copper also participates in the reaction associated with the separation of oxygen.

The functions of zinc in the metabolism of plants are very diverse. Owing to its
inclusion in carbonic anhydrase, ealatdehydrogenase, alkali phosphatase and other
ferments. rinc participates in the reduction-oxidation reactions of respiration,

in nuc lein and auxin exchanges and in regulating the synthesis of A1! [adenosine
triphosphate] . Zinc influences the synthesis of auxins through its participation in
the synthesis of tryptophan [l].

manganese participates in a number of reduction-oxidation processes of photosynthesis
and respiration, in the biosynthasis of m [ribonucleasejmll [deoxyribonuclease]
and indolylecetic acid, in the reduction of hydroxylamine to amamnia and in the
hydrolysis and transfer of groups in a carbohydrate exchange and it is included in
the structure of some dehydrogenesas, Bydroxylamine reductases and
glutaminetransferases.

In addition to the importance attached to studying the role played by microelements
in various fermentation system, it should be noted that it uould be wrong to reduce
their role to merely participating in the fermentation processes. Successes
achieved in the field of molecular biology have underscored the one-sided and
limited nature of such an approach. Hicroelements are capable of forming complexes
containing nucleic acids and of influencing the physical properties, structure and
physiological functions of rihoea [1]. Some well known facts concerning the role
played by microelemente are not limited only to their fermentation activity. Por
example. boron is not included in the structure of any fermente and yet the
physiological role played by this microelement is considerable. As is known, it is
absolutely required for many plants and it participates in the exchange of auxins
and phenol compounds [1] . Observations are available attesting to the need for
boron during the initial stages of phosphorus absorption by pulse plants.

It is known that cobalt is not included in the structure of nitrogenase, a ferment
which carries out the reduction of molecular nitrogen. novever, the participation
of cobalt in the nitrogen fixation process has been borne out by numerous
observations. Cobalt also participates in protein, nucleic and energy exchanges

[2].

The use of microfertilirers, by inproving the balance in mineral nourishent for
the plants, serves to increase considerably the sire of the yields, it improves the
quality of the products and it raises the resistance of plants against diseases.
low and high temperatures and drought conditions [7-9].

13
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
(VA vrhabLM 00B va‘ua

Since the middle of our century. agrochemietry hae taken a new and grant atop
foreard coincidental with greater amphaaie being placed upon the practical
orientation of atudiae conducted in the field of microalamente.

however. many axe-plea can he found of ineufficient attention being given to the
uee of microelementa in agricultural practice. Thin includae the rotting of heat
hearte, roeetting of fruit. a number of grain crop dieeaeee and cobalt deficiency
in animals. In addition to causing ehortfalle and epoilage in agricultural
producte. failure to devote proper attention to microelemente cen aleo nerve to

lower the efficiency of people end ehorten their life open. an a result of poor
nutrition.

It baare mentioning that it will be impoeeible to further intensify agricultural
production in the future if one ie not made of microfertiliaare. Ihie ia beaed upon
the fact that: l) a further increeee in the uee of mineral macrofartiliaare leade
to an increaee in the raquiramenta for microelenente; 2) high yielde require the
availability of new end very efficient plant veriatiae; in turn end in order to
take advantage of the high potential end guaranteee for etable yielda, the new
variatiae ehould be provided with ell of the required nutrienta. including micro-
fertiliaare; 3) the uee of highly concentrated nitrogen. phoephorue end potaeeium
fertilizere, owing to the improved purification end abeanca of impuritiae in their
microelemente, increeeae the egricultural requiremente for microfertilirere; b)
extremely high doeegee of nitrogen, phoephorue end potaaeium produce an unfavorable
ion balance in the coil eolution for the microelemente end thue their aheorption
capability deteriorates.

It bears mentioning that during thie modern etage in the etudy of microelemente,

the reaeerchere are devoting greater attention to thoee microelenente which were
not etudied earlier from an agronomic or phyeiological etendpoint: iodine, lithium,
ammonia, vanadium. titanium. eelenium, eilicon, rubidium, bromine end fluorine. It
in hoped that in the near future the reeearchere will aetablihh the need for end the
a..cific role to be played by the new microelemente in the vital activitiee of
plants.

Moreover. we are of the opinion that epeciel attention ahould be given to revealing
the primary ection of a particular microelement. euch that we do not become
entangled in a multiplicity of eubeaquent raectione. We believe that a etege has
arrived in the study of microalamente wherein thorough theoretical atudiee that are
based upon a detailed knowledge of a particular physiological proceee are juetified.

together with egrochemical works concerned with optimizing the ayatem of mineral
nutrition.

An important problem eeeociated with the theory and practical uea of microelenente
ie that of determining the requirementa for them of varioue organieme. Por example.
pulee plente contain considerably more molybdenum and accumulate 2-10 times more
iron than do cereal grain crops [3, 10]. Pulee planta require cobalt fertilizere
to a greater degree than do other crops [2, 11]. The different requiremente for
microelementa among various plante. microorganieme and animale require thorough
etudy. Thin ie eepecially important in light of the one of microelement
aupplementery feedinga in poultry and animal husbandry and eubeequent uae of
organic fertilizere. with aolutione being found for the problema of a balance in
elemente and environmental protection.

1h
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One criterion for the degree to which plants should be supplied with microelements.
and hence the need for applying the appropriate microfertilieers, is their content
in the soil. In the process, the most important consideration here is not the
overall (gross) quantities of individual microelements in the soil, but rather their
availability in mobile forms. Indeed, these forms determine to a certain degree the
accessibility of the microelements for the plants. The quantity of microelements in
mobile form quite often amounts to 10-15 percent of their overall content in the
soil -- for Cu, Mo, to end 2n and 2-4 percent for B. In addition, in order to
evaluate correctly the degree to which the plants are supplied with microelements
from the soil, one must necessarily take into account such rather complicated
phenomena as their synergism end antagonism.

The important role played by microelaments in raising the productivity of crops and
the ever increasing requirements for them have raised the task of ensuring that
agricultural production is supplied with promising forms of microfartiliaers, forms
which will make it possible to utilize these nutrients required for the plants in
a more effective manner. An absolute deficiency of individual microelements, in
addition to a low content of their forms in the soils that are accessible to the
plants, say be if not the only one then at least one of the principal factors
restraining growth in the crop yields. It is sufficient to mention the copper
deficit in peat bogs, molybdenum -- in acid sod-podzolic and grey forest soils,
boron and molybdenum -- in krasnozem soils, manganese, iron and zinc -- in
carbonate-containing soils and an entire series of microelements in low-fertility
sandy and sandy loam soils. The use of micrefertilizers in these instances ensures
an improvement in plant growth and development. an increase in the crop yields (and
quality), especially crops which are sensitive to a deficit in the respective
microelementa. In accordance with the results obtained from a network of geographic
experiments, an application of copper fertilisers to peat hog and light sandy loam
soils results in an increase in grain crop yields of 2-5 quintels per hectare.
According to the data obtained from numerous field tests, the average increase in
yield for peas following the use of molybdenum on sod-podsolic and grey forest soils
and also leached chernozem soils is 2.6 quintela per hectare; hay and clover seed
on sod-podzolic soils -- l3 and 0.8 quintale per hectare respectively [12). The
use of boron on soils that are poor in terms of this microelement raises a yield of
flex straw by 2-3 quintals per hectare, sugar boots by an average of as quintals
per hectare, with a simultaneous increase in the sugar content in the roots of
0.3-2.1 percent and it increases the yields for other crops. 0n chernotem soils in
the Ukrainian SSR, the increase in sugar beet yields following the use of manganese
fertilizers is 10-15 quintals per hectare, with the sugar content in the roots
increasing by 0.2-0.6 percent; an increase of 1.5-3.0 quintels per hectare takes
place in the case of grain crop yields, including winter wheat [13].

in connection with the intensive use of chemical processes in agriculture,
systematic increases in the crop yields are accompanied by the withdrawal of all
mineral nutrients, including microelemente. This raises the need for employing
microfertilisers on soils having an insufficient content of microelements and it
raises their significance even in regions where the content is only moderate.

A deficit of individual elements in the soils precludes the possibility of
obtaining a full return from the use of nitrogen. phosphorus and potassium

15
FOR OFFICIAL us: 0qu
fertilizers and an application of microfertilirers ensures a considerable increase

in the effectiveness of mineral fertilisers which contain the principal plant
nutrients.

It should be noted that the chemical industry in our country is presently producing
only boron microfertilizers: boron-manganese fertilisers end boron superphosphate.
Our industry is not producing the copper, molybdenum, manganese, zinc and other
microfertilizers required for plants in a number of regions throughout the country.
Agriculture is forced to employ various industrial waste products in the capacity of
microfertilizers. These waste products either contain a low percentage of
aicroelements, or they contain the latter in a form that is difficult for the

plants to assimilate. Some of the waste products, with the exception of ballast,
also contain harmful impurities (strontium, lead, mercury) which tend to bring
about a deterioration in the quality of the plant products.

the principal regions for the effective use of boron, molybdenum and copper
fertilizers are the northwestern, central, Volgo-Vyatak and Urals regions of the
RSPSR, the Baltic region, BSSR and Ukssa; the principal regions for the effective
use of zinc and manganese fertilizers -- UkSSR and Central Asia, zinc fertilisers --
the north Caucasus.

Computations carried out at N101! (Scientific Research Institute of Pertilizers,
Insecticides and Fungicides imeni Ya.V. Samoylov] and VIUA [All-Union Scientific
Research Institute of Fertilizers and Soil Science] reveal that if microelements
are applied to a limited area during the 1981-1990 period, the overall requirements
of farming throughout the country will be as follows for this period: 3 3000-4800,
He 700-1500, Cu 2200-6000, Mn 7000-10000, Zn 600-650, Co 200-600 and I 200-400 tons
annually.

The satisfaction of these requirements cells for an increase in the production of
boron superphosphate end also the organization of the production of new forms of
microfertilizers, obtained on the basis of single and complex fertilisers.

It bears mentioning that the computation cited is extremely conditional; it does
not take into account the requirements of animal husbandry, forestry or the
fertilization of meadows and pastures with microelements. Considerable quantities
of microfertilisers are required for the raising of high-grade vegetables under
greenhouse conditions. An increase will take place in the microfertilizer
requirements owing to the carrying out of extensive land reclamation work. With
further growth in the culture of farming and increased productivity in agricultural
production, a requirement will arise for applying microfertilizers to the entire
area of arable land and also to employ them extensively on meadows and pastures. in
greenhouses, animal husbandry and in medicine.

A need has developed for substantially improving the supply of microfertilisers to
be used for agricultural purposes. In solving this problem, considerable importance
is attached to the production of mineral fertilizers containing microelement
additives. The use of such fertilisers will make it possible to ensure their high
agronomic effectiveness and also to reduce substantially the labor expenditures
required for separate applications of the microelements and the principal

16
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
fertilizers. In addition. agriculture must be supplied with microelements in the
form of technical salts for the carrying out of foliar top dressings and also for
the pro-sowing treatment of seed. Since the microelements 3, lb, Cu. lb and Zn are
of the most practical value to agriculture, priority importance should be attached
to the production of these microfertilisers. Agriculture also requires cobalt and
iodine microfertilisers.

The extensive introduction of scientifically sound recounendetions for the use of
microelements in agriculture, reconmendations which have been checked on the basis
of many years of experience and which ensure a considerable increase in the
productivity of field crop husbandry (and also animal husbandry), is being
restrained by the limited scale of production and by the absence of a proper
assortment of microfertilizers in our country.

The results of numerous scientific studies on promising microfertilizer types and
forms underscore the advisability of producing and employing base fertilizers that
have been enriched with microelements. including complex fertilizers. According to
available forecasts. the agricultural requirements for microelements in the future
must be satisfied 60-70 percent by microelements in the structure of complex
fertilizers and 30-60 percent —- by means of technical salts, employed for foliar
top dressings and pre-sowing treatment of seed. The use of various production
waste products in the form of microfertilisers must be of limited importance and
permissible only if the microelements contained in them have a high assimilability
and if no impurities are present that could be toxic to the plants. animals or man.

A requirement exists for organising the production of equipment which will make it
possible to distribute small quantities of microfertilisers over a considerable
area. This will make it possible, without having to expand the assortment of
complex fertilizers. to ensure differentiated applications of microfertilisers in
a number of regions throughout the country.

It is obvious that a high microelement effectiveness can be obtained only if the
crops under cultivation require them and thus importance is attached to ensuring

a correct distribution and intelligent use in agriculture of fertilizers containing
microelements.

Under the conditions imposed by the intensive use of chemical processes in
agricultural production, special importance is attached to the P.oblem of balanced
plant nutrition in terms of all of the required nutrients and to studying the
interrelationship between micro and mecroelements in nutrition and plant
metabolism. The requirement for balanced nutrition in terms of elements. for the
purpose of ensuring maximum yields of high quality agriculturaleroducts, not Only
does not eliminate but to the contrary it intensifies sharply the need for a
strictly differentiated approach for applying microfertilisers. while taking into
accOunt the need for supplying the soils with accessible forms of the microelements.
other soil-climatic factors and the biological peculiarities of crop nutrition.

The use of a broad selection of microelements, in combination with mecroelements,
in the structure of complex fertilisers or nutrient mixtures must be extremely
limited and permissible only in those instances where there is an absolute nutrient
deficit in the cultivation of plants on low-fertility sandy and sandy loam soils.

17
port OFFICIAL us: ONLY
svn veseveom vve- urns-e

in hydroponics or on sheltered ground involving the use of inert low-buffering
mediums, in floriculture end in ornsmentel gerdening.

Mention should be mede of the feet thet in the cese of systemetic use of high
orgenic fertilizer norms. en increese es s rule tekes plece in the content of gross
supplies end mobile forms of microelenente in the soil. however. the use of
orgsnic fertilizers obteined from ferns where individuel nicroelenents ere enployed
se sdditives to the livestock end poultry feed requires e cereful selection of the
possible norms in eech individuel instence. The use of liming end high minsrel
fertilizer nor-s exerts s substentiel effect on the eccessibility of microelements
for plents. It is known thet the increese which tekes plsce in the content of
mobile phosphetss in the soil. during the systemetic use of high phoephoroue
fertilizer norms, brings ebout e reduction in the ecceseibility of zinc to the
plents. In turn. when the plents ere supplied with sufficient emounts of such
microelements es copper. zinc end Iolybdenun. en improvement tskes plsce in the
eveilebility of phosphorous to the plents. A lsrge emount of dete is eveileble
ettesting to the feet thet molybdenum improves coneiderebly the use of nitrogen
conteined in fertilizers end slso the soil. Applicetions of high nitrogen norms
for verious crops bring ebout en increese in the requirements for molybdenum.
copper. boron end cohelt.

In connection with the implementetion of en extensive lend reclemetion progrem for
sold soils, en incresse will teke plece in the crop requirements for boron, copper.
zinc, cobelt end msngenese, vhils et the esme time the requirements for molybdenum
end venedium will decreess.

A chenge in the reection of the “edium ceused by physiologicel ecidity or
elkslinity of the minerel fertilisers cen exert e considereble effect on the
mobility in the soil end eccessibility to the plente of the microelements.

when use is mede. in the cepscity of locel fertilisers. of the vsete products of
industrial production. composte obtained from municipel gerbsge. ssuege sludge end
high norms for liquid fermysrd menure. e denger srises of individuel microelements
(including heevy netels) sccumnleting in the soil end being included in the
biologicsl cycle, in concentretions considered to be toxic for plents, enimels end
men. Under conditions involving constently increseing norms for the use of
nitrogen fertilisers. serious ettention should be given to the use of microelemsnts
which psrticipste in the reduction of nitretes end other processes essocisted with
the essimiletion of nitrogen by plents, for the purpose of rsising the
effectiveness of the nitrogen in fertilizers end lowering the denger of nitrstes
eccunulsting in egricultursl products end their conteminstion of veter resources.
including drinking weter.

The cxceptionsl role pleyed by microelements in nitrogen fixetion processes end

the tremendous importsnce of biologicel nitrogen for solving the problem of food
end feed protein production end in the nitrogen belence in'ferming require thet
priority ettention be given to studying the mechsnism of microelement perticipstion
in nitrogen fixetion end to developing methods for reieing the emounts of
eutotrophic nutrition for pulse crops end symbiotic fixstion of moleculer nitrogen
using microfertilisers [3].

18
FOR OFFICIAL US}: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The modern status of the problem of microfertilisers is characterized by persistent
attempts to understand the mechanism of microelement action and, on this basis, to
solve the problems associated with their practical use in a scientifically sound
manner.

Special attention should be given to those studies being undertaken in the field of
microelement agrochemistry, the solving of which is of priority importance with
regard to the practical use of microslemsnta in farming and also for ensuring their
high agronomic and economic effectiveness. this includes: 1) the development of
reliable methods for forecasting the effectiveness of microfertilizers, based upon
an agrochemical analysis of soils for the content of accessible forms of
microelements and plant diagnosis; 2) a study of the action of promising forms of
microfertilizers, with regard to the size and quality of yields for the more
important crops, in the network of geographic field tests carried out using a
common method and program, against a background of increasing dosages of the
principal mineral fertilizers; 3) a study of the balance in macro and microelements
during extended field tests with fertilisers. in crop rotation plans for various
soil-climatic zones throughout the country, including the use of the required
microfertilizers as a component part of the system of fertilization; A) a study of
the interaction of macro and microelements in the nutritional processes and in the
exchange of plant substances, the effect of microelements (microfertilirars) on the
extent of use and efficiency of assimilation of the principal nutrients frOm the
soil and fertilizers.

The studies concerned with the first of the mentioned trends include the
establishment of maximum values for the content of microelements in the soil and
plants, the development of more improved methods for determining the forms of the
microelements in the soils that are accessible to the plants, the establishment of
scientifically sound gradations for supplying soils with microelements for
individual soil-climatic zones and regions throughout the country, taking into
account the peculiarities of the crops. the type, mechanical composition and other
properties of the soils, the level of use of organic and mineral fertilizers and
water regulation.

In addition to studying the effectiveness of promising forms of complex fertilizers
containing microelements, considerable importance will continue to be attached for
an extended period of time to developing methods for achieving more rational
utilization of those waste products of industrial production which contain
microelements and also to searching for a suitable microelement raw material for
the production of microfertiliaers.

A study of the balance between macro and microelements during extended field
testing with crop rotation plans eust be accompanied by a study of the effect of
systematic use of high dosages of organic and mineral fertilizers, the methods
employed for chemical land reclamation. chemical agents for protecting plants and
the content in the soil and accessibility to plants of microelemente from the soil
and mic refer ti lizers .

Deserving of fixed attention are those microelements which were not studied
earlier from an agronomic point of view and also the determination of the possible
negative effect of individual microelements in connection with those problems
concerned with the technogenic contamination and protection of the environment.

19
you orncm. us: ONLY
I'VE vs's swans. we". vnua

beyond any doubt. the trends enumerated above in the develop-ant of studies on the
sgroeheuistry of nicroelements by no means encompass all of the problems associated
with the subject of uicroelalents in farming. However, they are of priority
importance to the system of coordinated studies being carried out in our country

for the purpose of achieving more rational use of nicrofertilizers, which met
occupy a worthy place in the couple: of measures associated with the use of chemical
processes in agriculture.

1.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

BIBLIMRAPHY

Shkol‘nik, H.Ye. 'Mikroeleuenty v shirni rasteniy" [Hicroelenents in the Life
of Plants], Leningrad. Nauka. 1974, 323 pages.

Yagodin, LA. ’Yobal't v rhisni rasteniy" [Cobalt in the Life of Plants].
Noscou, Nauka, 1970, 350 pages.

Yagodin. B.A. "theoretical Principles of Pixation of Holecular Nitrogen,”
WY ‘l'SKhA [Reports of the 'l'iniryarev Agricultural Acade-y] , 1978, Issue 2403.
p 5.

Peyve, Ya.V. and others. "Nitrogen Pixing Permutation Coupler Consisting of
Bacteroids of Alfalfs and Soybean ‘l‘ubers" m. AN 588! [Reports of the
Acade-y of Sciences USSR]. 1971, Vol. 197. No 3, p 721.

Ysgodin, LA. and others. "Content of Hicroeleoents in Fractions of 'l'ubers and
Some Characteristics of a Nitrogenase Complex of Alfalfa and Soybean
Bacteroids." In the book: “‘l'szisy VII Vsesoyur. soveshch. po eikroele-sntsn"
[‘l‘heses of the 7th All-Union Conference on Hicroeleoents], Riga, 1975, p 105.

zhiznevskaya, C.Ya. "Had', nolibden i rhelezo v asotnon obnene bobovykh
rastsniy" (Copper, Molybdenum and Iron in the Nitrogen txchange of Pulse
Plants]. Moscow, Nauka, 1972. 332 pages.

Burkin, LA. ”Piziologichsskaya rol’ i sel'skokhosyaystvennoye :nacheniye
molibdene," [Physiological Role and Agricultural Value of Molybdenum] , Moscow,
Hanks, 1968, 294 pages.

Toma, 3.1. "Hihroeleuenty v polevodstve Holdavii" [Hicroelements in Pield Crop
Husbandry in Moldavia]. Kishinev, Shtinitsa, 1973, 199 pages.

Hineyev, V.G.. Yegodin. B.A. "Use of Chemical Processes in Panning: Ninth and
Tenth Five-Year Plans" VESTNII SIL'SKOKIIOZYAYSMNNOY mun [Herald of
Agricultural Science]. 1976, No 3, p 21..

‘l‘serling, VJ]. "Agtokhiuicheskiye osnovy diagnostiki mineral'nogo pitaniya
sel'skokhozyaystvennyhh kul'tur." [Agrochemical Principles for Diagnosis
of Mineral Nutrition of Agricultural Crops], Moscow, Nauks, 1978, 215 pages.

Yagodin, B.A., Tishchenko, l.V. "Content of Hicroeleaents Zinc and Cobalt in
Soil and Plants Depending upon Fertilizers Employed." VBS‘l'le
SEL'SKOKIDZYAYSTVENNOY NAUKI, 1978, No 3, p 10.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Yegodtn, B.A., Sobechktne, L.N. "Use of Pertutzere 1n the Nonchemozen
Zone." In the book: "‘l‘eztey don. eaveebch. ucheemtkov geoeett opytov"
[Theses, Reports of the Conference of Participate in the Geographic Network of

Rxperiments], bums, 1975. p 3b.

13. Vleeyuk. P.A. ”Biologicheektye elementy v zhiznedeyetel'noeti reeteniy."
[Biologtcel Blemente in the Vital Acttvitiee of Pleate], nev, Neukove Date,

1969, 516 pesee.
COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Neuke". "Agrokhintye". 1981.

7026
680: 1824/107 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY