APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO‘I 0002001 6-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020016-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI'RS 1/8271

8 February 1979

TRANSIATIONS ON USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020016-1
NO'i‘B

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, perioditals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasirg and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes wiu11n the body of an
item originate with ‘he source. Times within itemm are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS WERNING WNERSIIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OI" TNIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIM. USE ONLY.
'. AI-Imni I

W. I’wnrt/InllIwk iinu .\.-.

ll. Column/Gnu No.
I). Tn: oi new: on Pond
Coveted

      
  

O. l'. alum-n. Inn-mum". Mun .nnJ AJJu-u
Joint Fuhiicationr Research Service
lOOO North Globe Rood

Arlington. Virginie 22201

     
 

  
     
    

l2. \Innu-oml (Manhattan New ml Mullen

   
 
   
 

As above

IS. ‘urrlu mt nun Nous

1‘. Mum-u

The report contains information on recent odninistrative plans, changes. and
policy trends. items on the state of the national economy. significant and
representative cements and statistics on principal industrial. sectors.

       
    
   
 
   

I). L. , l.u.l~ and Do. mm Mulnu.

USSR
Economics

7.. Descriptors

m. I-h-I'Ih. n-‘Ogun-i-ndni Ten“

m. i «run Inn/um. SC

 

ll. .h "hi-any \‘uum—m

For ofﬁcial Use Only. united
Number of Copies Available Fran JPRS

00-0 VIII a, Iu‘v. 9-!"

I). .\o. ul l'u- ~

 
 
     

ms roan um at nrnonuceo "“M” “”"m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/82

8 Pebmr

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(P000 2/79)

Coureurs

Program-Coal Plannlng on Sector Level
(E. chthD; VOPROSY “OWIKI. Dec 78)....oooouoooooooooo-o

Industrial Prudnctinn Structure
(R. Ltvshits; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Dec 78).....................

Methodology of Determining Impact of New Technology
(V. Fel‘zenboum: VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, Dec 78)..................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROGRAH-GOAL PLANNING 0N SECTOR LEVEL
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 12. Dec 78 pp 23-33

[Article by E. Yefimova: "Program-Goal Planning on _the Sector Level (Using
the Example of Scientific and Technical Programs)"l

[TGKEI The methodology of :he program-goal approach as one of the ways of
making a systems analysis in economics is still in the process of being
developed. The development of programs at the level of the sectors of the
national economy and industry remains the least studied field in the meth-
odology of the program-goal approach in planning, although the solution of
these problems is of exceptional importance owing to their decisive influ-
ence on the entire course of planning of the national economy.

Each program is a set of measures, which is complete in time and space.
with distinct results which yield to comparison with the demands for re-
sources. For all the diversity of programs there should be embodied in
them one of the dominant features of the program-goal methodology-~the co-
ordination of the goals with the resources. Meanwhile often the distribu-
tion of resources is outside the competence of the compilers of one pro-
gram or another. therefore it is possible to determine for far from each of
them the ways of providing resources of various types. in the assigned
amount and of the required quality. The failure to observe this condition
can threaten the achievement of the set goals.

in order to implement the programs, which do not depend on the compilers
and go beyond the sector. along with the development of the general math-
odology of program-goal planning the need has arisen to study its peculiar-
ities on the sector level. Until recently there predominated in economic
literature a one-sided approach to program-goal planning, in which the pro-
gram as such. and not the sector implementing the program, was taken as the
object of study. In connection with this many questions of the program-
goal planning of a sector and above all its provision with resources re-
mained outside the field of vision of investigators.

At present there is no generally recognized classification of programs.
in the available literature programs are classified depending on the level

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or the object (interunlt, national econumhu sectorial, of individual enter-
prises,associations); the nature of the problems being solved (aocio-eco-
nomic, scientific and technical, production technology, operational organ-
izational and so on); the territorial sphere of their effect (all-union,
regional): the period of their implementation (short-term, intermediate-
tcrm, long-term) and others.1 In our opinion, in addition to this, in
principle correct, but arbitrary grouping on the sector level there should
he added the division of programs into global programs, which embrace a set
of interconnected problems and ensure the completeness of the development
of a relatively closed object (a system, a subsystem, an element of a sys-
tem) at each level of its operation, and local programs, which are aimed

at the solving ofnnyone special problem which facilitates, but does not de-
termine the development of the given object.

The scale of the program has a substantial influence on the development of
the system and is one of the important features which govern the differ-
ences in the structurnlarrangement of the programs, the degree of their de-
tail and the means of distribution of the resources. The reduction of un-
finished construction, for example, is such a global problem for construc-
tion. As a local problem it is possible to formulate the following prob-
lem: the increase by 1990 of the proportion of efficient types of brick in
its total production volume to 80-90 percent.

The program-goal approach can be used with the greatest impact for solving
problems of a global scale, that is, problems determining the development of
the sector as a whole. In this case the conditions are created for embrac-
ing and viewing the entire system in question, in connection with which it
seems possible at least to determine precisely the demands for basic re-
sources and the demands on related sectors.

Scientific and technical programs constitute the majority of the "mass" of
existing programs, therefore we consider it feasible to examine the prob-
lems of program-goal planning on the sector level using the example of

st lentific and technical programs. All the more as the methodological prin-
ciplcs and "technology" of the drafting of scientific and technical pro-

grams have no substantial differences from the principles and "technology"
of the drafting of programs of other classes.

inc scientific and technical program is a set of measures which ﬁre inter-
connected according to the performers, resources, place and time and are
aimed at the solution of a scientific and technical problem. Some authors
consider as an obligatory feature of the scientific and technical program
its covarage of all the phases of the "life cycle“ of the object--from the
scientific idea to the mass dissemination of technology. In this defini-
tion those interconnected sets of measures, which are concluded by the
creation of a pilot model or ensure the increase of knowledge, cannot be
considered scientific and technical programs. Therefore, in our opinion,
it is impossible to agree with this point of view.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A scientific and technical program can be designed for tho solution of a
purely scientific problem which does not have at present the economic pre-
requisites for mass utilization (for example, the program of a controlled
thermonuclear reaction). Thus, among the scientific and technical prob-
lems which are approved at the national economic level and are subject to
program development there are also other. purely scientific problems: the
study of the world ocean. the study of the principle of superconductivity
in magnetohydrodynamic generators and others. Evidently, it is feasible
to divide scientific and technical programs into: a) strictly scientific
programs. which have as a goal the increase of scientific knowledge;

b) scientific and technical programs on the development of pilot Iodels of

new equipment and technology; c) scientific and technical production prob-
lems of the mass dissemination of new equipment and technology.

Of course. the need of the various types of scientific and technical pro-
grams for resources is different in principle. For the implementation of
programs of the first type skilled scientists and experimental facilities
are needed. for the implementation of programs of the second type design
and planning personnel and the capacities of pilot plants are also required.
in the third case all resources. including capital investments. are re-
quired in practice. The scientific and technical programs of the latter

type are the most effective ones. which are conducive to the acceleration
of scientific and technical progress.

All programs. no matter what class and type they are attributed to, should
be a directional planning document and should form an independent program-
gonl section of the plan, which is coordinated with its sectorial and ter-
ritorial sections. The practice exists of including the requirements of
programs in the corresponding sectorial and territorial parts of the five-
year plans without distinguishing in the plan an independent program-goal
section. If the program assignments could be ensured within the traditional
structure of the plan, there would be no need to draft programs. In this
case the resource-goal orientation of the plan and the possibility of en6
suring the priority of the programs disappear.

At present there are contradictions in the mechanism of coordinating the
resource-goal orientation of the plan with its sectorial breakdown. There-
fore it is necessary to limit the number of problems, for which programs
are formulated, to the most important ones which do not yield to solution
by the traditional method of planning. In this connection the existence on
the national economic level of more than 200 scientific and technical pro-
grams is hardly justified.

The point of view that goal programs should form a program breakdown of the
plan is now becoming generally recognized. However, in practice they are
still a prepianning or "extraplan" document. The majority of the ll goal
programs existing in the Latvian SSR were approved by the republic Council
of Ministers with the instruction to the republic planning organs to find
in the five-year plan resources for their implementation. But the resources

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were not found in the necesuary amount. so it was necessary to make substan-
tial changes in a number of programs after the approval of the 10th Pivo-
chr Plan. Thus. the Latvian SSR Cosplan was forced to subject to adjust-

ment the comprehensive program aimed at the increase of the efficiency and
quality of construction.

The lack of a special program breakdown of the plan had the result that a
number of scientific and technical programs included in the State Five-Year
Plan for 1976-1980 are not being fully implemented. A check made by the
State Committee for Science and Technology showed that at the lower "stages"
of planning. in the ministries and departments, a number of assignments
stemmigg from the indicated programs were not included in their five-year
plans.

As is known, the steps on providing the programs with products being de-
veloped by the sectors of the national economy and industry usually act as
nwasurus in the programs. in this very way the sectors are connected with
participation in programs of all classes. in additional to the drafting
of their own intersectorial and intrasectorial programs, they are suppliers

of products for programs of interstate. national economic and regional im-
portance and so on. The measures are at the meeting point of the programs
with the resources.

in the drafting of comprehensive goal programs at the national economic
level the stage of the measures of the indicated scheme by analogy with
the goal one can be represented also in the form of a tree of measures.
which is the logical continuation of the tree of goals and tasks and re-
prcSents a set of actions which are interconnected for the fulfillment of
the general task. The construction of the tree of measures and the draft-
ing of the program itself in this area entail particular difficulties. At
the stage of the elaboration of the measures an interweaving of the ties
is found both within the sectors owing to the servicing of different pro-

grams and between the associated sectors, which leads to the delay of the
introduction of program-goal planning on the sector level.

The coordination of the goals with the resources offers the greatest diffi-
cultlcs. Additional difficulties of distributing resources between the de-
mands of the programs and the requirements of extraprogram development of
the sectors, as well as of coordinating the resources among the individual
programs arise. For example, the program "The Timber Resources of the
Latvian SSR and Their Complete Use and Reproduction" provides for the pro—
duction instead of lumber of efficient large-sire building plywood. while
the program "The increase of the Efficiency and Quality of Capital Construc-
tion" is directed toward the receipt of traditional materials.

Many of the scientific and technical programs in effect during the current
five-year plan are of an intersectorial nature, but one (parent) sector is
their developer. It is hardly in a position to look into the question of
providing production resources even to that part of the program, which

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR JFFICIAL USE ONLY

contains the obligations of the parent sector itself. Precisely the diffi-
rnltlea of coordinating the goals with the resources on the sector level
nerve as the reason for the lack in the majority of scientific and techni-

cal programs of the stage of the mass introduction of scientific results
in production.

in order to overcome these contradictions when formulating the specific pro-
grams at the stage of the elaboration of the measures, that is, at the sec-
tor level. it is necessary to determine the place of the sector in the na-
tional economy, in the overall flows of resources and products, the nature

or the participation of the sector in the program and the role in its im-
plementntion.

From the point of view of program-goal planning it is possible to specify
the following functions of each sector: 1) the fulfillment of the orders
dlrertly for the implementation of programs of toe national economic level;
2) the fulfillment of orders of other sectors, which are connected with the
Implementation of national economic programs; 3) the fulfillment of its own
lurraaectoriai programs; 4) the production of products for meeting the

extraprogrom demands of the national economy (within the framework of the
traditional principles of planning).

The listed functions are governed by the nature of the interconnection be-
tween the sector and the scientific and technical programs. In fulfilling
the national economic programs. in which the given sector participates
directly or indirectly, the assignments of the sector can be expressed
either in an impersonal form or as separate subprograms. In the former
case the requirements of the program are formulated outside the given sec-
tor. The order is included in the general plan (without a detailed de-
scription of the characteristics), the evaluation of the fulfillment of
which is made according to traditional indicators. In order to fulfill the
entire plan. including the assignment "dissolved" in it, the appropriate
departments elaborate the necessary measures. In the latter case the as-
signments of the sector can be expressed in the form of an integral com—
plete subprogram, which has been elaborated at all stages, including the
stage of measures. when along with the order for products (with the as-
signed quantitative and qualitative characteristics) the ways and means of
ensuring their production are outlined and set down, or in the form of an

order for products (also of specific quantitative and qualitative character-

istics) outside the general program. In this case the elaboration of the
measures on ensuring the production of these products rests on the corre-
spnudlug department.

1he general assignment of USSR Gosstroy on participation in the drafting of
a program on the introduction of methods and technical means for the build-

ing and operation of_projects of the petroleum and gas industry under perma-
frost conditions can serve as an example of the first form of assignment.
In this program it is not indicated what specifically Gosstroy should do.

The relatively specific assignments of the USSR Ministry of Ferrous

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Metallurgy on the expansion of the variety of oil pipes, which are con-
tained in one of the scientific and technical programs of the petroleum in-
dustry, can serve as an example of the second form.

Given all the forms of the establishment of assignments for sectors the
complexity of their planning. which consists above all in the sectoriai
nature of planning, is maintained, while the program is an instrument of
lntersectorial importance. The dissociation of the sectors does not make
it possible to establish all the ties and to ensure the total coordination
of their activity. Therefore, it is more feasible to solve the problems of
program-goal planning on the sector level within the framework of intersec-
turini complexes. Here it is necessary to differentiate two types of com-
plexes: permanent ones and sporadic ones.

Complexes of the first type are consolidated, relatively isolated produc-
tions units of a number of sectors, which are interconnected by permanent
technological and functional attributes. They are stableprojects of plan-
ning. The composition of the complexes is determined by the similarity of
raw materials or the vicissitude of the manufacturing process, the purpose
of the products and so on. At the same time there are no strict criteria
of the evnltmlion of the intensity of the ties owing to their diversity.3
For some sectors it is comparatively easy to determine the closeness of the
tie. For example, the production of construction materials, parts and
structures is integrally firmly connected with construction, the timber in-
dustry--with the wood processing industry. At the same time in a number of
instances the ties do not appear that clearly, and the formation of com-
plexes creates difficulties. In spite of the inevitable conventionalitiea
in the formation of complexes of the first type, their creation yields great
advantages in the management of the economy and the introduction of the pro-
gram-goal method of planning and, what is the main thing, does not require
serious organizational rearrangement.

Complexes of the second type are aimed at the fulfillment of specific pro-
grams. In them any combination of sectors occurs, since the tie between
them is of a sporadic nature. Unlike complexes of the first type, the cre-
ation of less stable complexes involves some reorganization of planning and
management. The quality and degree of realization of the goals depend on
whether the creation of such complexes is of a purely analytical nature or
whether their formation will entail some organizational rearrangement.‘

in conformity with the concept of program-goal planning at the level of the
sectors of the national economy or industry the resources are transformed
into products. Here the nature of the resources at the sector level is
different than at the national economic level. At the national economic
level the resources appear in an aggregate form: natural, labor, financial
(capital investments are included here), information, as well as productive
and aoaproductive capital. However, at the sector level the disaggregation
of resources is necessary, for example, the discrimination from the overall
stocks of iron ore of the are with special qualitative characteristics or
from the total staff of workers of workers with specific specialties.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the indicated difference. there is another peculiarity in
the concept of a resource at the level of the sector. For a sector the
product (output) of another sector serves as a resource (input). The con-
sideration when drafting scientific and technical programs of the disaggre-
gated resources and those which are the product of other sectors is con-
nectsd with the intensification of the effect of the factor of uncertainty.
In evaluating the possibilities of providing such resources the uncertainty
to some extent can be eliminated only after the completion of the process
of planning in all sectors and links of the national economy. Therefore,
if for the sector the limits of the aggregated resources are even known

(at the first iterations of the work on the program), the coordination on
their basis of the goals and potentials is not guaranteed.

Unfortunately. the ways of distributing resources, which are presented in
the literature on program-goal planning, are oriented precisely on aggre-
gated resources (primarily financial resources). For example, the means of
solving this problem, which is proposed by a number of authors. pertains to
the goal stage of the drafting of national economic programs, is oriented
toward aggregated resources and therefore does not solve the indicated
problem. The model recommended by a group of other authors reflects to
some extent the coordination of the overall goals with their immediate per-
formers. It includes the elaboration of a network schedule of the time
lags for the participating sectors and the establishment of the sequence of
the stages of the processing of the objects of labor into the final pro-
duct, which conforma to the goal standards and goal indicators. The opti-
mum task for a minimum of expenditures of resources with the preset time of
performance of all the operations and its individual stages is solved on
the basis of the schedule. The coordination of the goal indicators with
the resources is accomplished through an intersectorial balance by means of
iterations.6 It seems that this approach is a step forward in the solution
of the problem of program-goal planning on the sector level, although it
does notentirely solve it. A network schedule is elaborated for those sec-
tors which sre direct participants in the implementation of the programs.
The disadvantage of this approach is that the products produced by the
participating sectors are only a part of the total output of these products.
while there is no mechanism in the indicate approach, which makes it pos-
sible to coordinate the demand for resources for the production of the
program and nonprogram products. In addition to this it must be noted that
because of its dimensions it is impossible to include in the network sched-
ule the entire chain of associated sectors and operations. Therefore, the
performers will be faced with the problem of establishing the bounds of
association, which can lead to the disappearance from the program of a por-
tion of the vitally important operations.

The implementation of the following interative plan, in our opinion, will

be one of the possible ways of solving the problem of providing sectors
with resources under the conditions of the introduction of the program-goal
method of planning. At the goal stage of the drafting of the programs their
demand for aggregated resources (resource-intensivenass) is determined on

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on integrated scale. In turn, the planning organs on the basis of the
available forecasts of the availability of resources establish the possibil-

ities of the development of all sectors and the nesting of the requirements
of the programs.

In the event of insufficient resources the need arises for their initial
redistribution among the different programs. The limitation of resources
at the initial stage of distribution faces planning organs with a choice:
either to put off to a later time the achievement of some goals or others,
to decrease the extent of achievement of the goal indicators in the out-
lined programs, or to slow proportionately the development of all sectors
(or a sector taken separately) which are connected with the given resource
for nonprogram needs. The procedure of making such decisions in principle
cannot be formalized, as is specified by the authors in the above-mentioned
schemes, since the decisions being made pertain to large systems with a set
of diverse conditions of national economic development in one segment of
time or another. Such a procedure is repeated many times until a tsnplete
balance for the specific resource is achieved. A similar scheme takes shape
when coordinating programs with other resources.

Evidently, the following iteration of the cycles of the distribution of re-
sources is expedient: initially the nonreproducible (natural) resources are
subject to distribution (in aggregated form). since they can be expressed
in physical and material form. Then it is possible to distribute the re-
producible resources-first the capital investments. and then the products
of the sectors of the national economy and industry. Of course, the re-
sults of each iterative cycle of the supply of resources might be uncoor-
dinated. therefore in the process of shifting from one cycle to another
coordination according to the same scheme as within the cycle is necessary.
0n the basis of the indicated process the central planning organ sets for
the sectors the limits on resources for the fulfillment of national economic
programs and for nonprogram needs. These limits should serve as the basis

for the elaboration of program measures.

As to the sectorial programs which solve both global and local problems of
the sector, their drafting should be carried out within the framework of the
limit for the nonprogrsm development of the sector. Here, taking into ac-
count the small scale of the system and the great degree of its circularity,
the use of formal methods of distributing resources, in particular with some
modification of the means proposed by I. Popov and A. Fonotov. is possible.

The essence of this modification consists in the fact that along with the
consideration of the coefficient of "relative importance," which makes it
possible to determine the sequence of saturation with resources of the in-
dividual goals| when finding the optimum of the "discrepancies" (the degree
of satisfaction of the goal standards of different goals) an additional in-
dicator is introduced. which characterizes the resource-intensiveness of the
programs. since the need of some programs for resources does not correlate
with the degree of their importance. For a specific goal the level of the

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

resource-intenniveneas for each type of resource will be different. in con-
nevilou with which It will he necesuary to make the calculations according
in the indicated methods repeatedly accordlng to the number of resources
being distributed. The results of the distribution of each resource are
also coordinated.

The advantage of the proposed scheme of the distribution of resources among
individual programs when introducing the programsgoal method of planning

consists in the fact that the imp‘ementation of the scheme provides for the
gradualness of the transition from its traditional methods to its program-
goal methods and does not require a "break-up" of planning. This will make

it possible right now to start the drafts of individual programs with an
orientation toward the supply oi resources.

The above-described procedure of distributing resources pertains to national

economic programs. that is. to the performance of the first two functions
of the sector according to the gradation we adopted (see above).

The elaboration of the criteria for the selection of alternate solutions at
each level of the realization of the goal is one of the complicated ques-
tions of the methodology of program-goal planning. For all scientific and
technical programs, including intrasectorisl programs, the choice of the
criteria is made from the viewpoint of the ultimate interests of the pro-
grams with allowancurfor the peculiarities of the sectors participating in
them.

The program-goal approach is aimed at the achievement of important national
economic goals. In connection with this there is incorporated in its very
content a mechanism for finding the most effective direction of national
economic development according to a large number of criteria. At the same
time the choice of some specific variants or others of the technical deci-
sions in the sector can be made according to one criterion. At present the
minimum adjusted expenditures serve as such a generalizing criterion of
evaluation from the point of view of national economic efficiency. but

from the viewpoint of the fulfillment of individual specific goals this is
not enough.

The choice of variants according to a given criterion will promote the ra-
tional distribution of only one resource-~capital investments. Meanwhile.
in distributing another resource. which is necessary to the same extent for

the realization of the given goal, the obtained act of variants might not
he the optimum set. Therefore the evaluation of the efficiency of scien-
tific and technical programs according to the amount of the annual economic
impact as the difference in the adjusted expenditures as compared with the

initial state of the problem in reality does not characterize their effi-
riency.

The examined questions of program-goal planning are especially urgent for
such a sector as construction. The production technology of construction

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

differs sharply from the technology of other sectors of physical production.
its "attachment" to the land with territorial dispersion. the great dura-
tion of the production cycle. the diversity of construction projects. the
lock of uniform physical measurers of the products and so on--all this gov-
erns the specific nature of construction as a participant in scientific and

technical programs. Moreover. the role of a generator of a universal re-
source for goal progress. which construction plays, on the one hand. and

the nature of the “81d reproducible resources for its own production. on
the other. determine the special place of construction in the realization
of programs.

The peculiarity of construction consists in the fact that the final product
of this sector coincides with the concept of one of the most important re-
sources necessary for the fulfillment of all scientific. technical. economic
and social programs. Construction has a ramified network of production

ties not only with numerous consumers of fixed capital. but also with sup-
pliers of resources for it. The immediate primary resources for this sec-
tor--nunmetnllic raw materials and labor resources. the bulk of the re-
sources ensuring the production activity of construction-~are the products
of other sectors of physical production.

Construction consumes material resources in an extensive l;st. and if we
add to this the material resources for the sectors of industry. which are
included in the construction complex. it becomes clear that the determina-
tion of the possibilities of supplying them in the full amount does not
seem possible. In conformity with this it is necessary to limit the re-
quired composition of the resources.

At the initial stages of the formation of both external and internal pro-
grams it is expedient to limit oneself to the determination of the possi-
bility of providing general-purpose aggregated resources, to which capital
investments and labor resources belong. Moreover. at this stage it is al-
ready necessary to include in the program the types of material resources
which are scarce in the national economy and which are consumed by construc-
tion in relatively large amounts. There should be assigned to them the
products of ferrous metallurgy, the timber and wood processing industry.

He conventionally call these resources especially limited ones. As to the
remaining types of resources which are used in the process of producing
construction materials, structures,parta and of construction itself. their
supply at the first stages can be established indirectly on the basis of
the determination of the mentioned aggregated resources. In order to dis-
tribute the resources among the individual works within the complex the
apparatus of the intersectoriel or interproduct balance should be used. It
can be used especially successfully for the balanced distribution of pro-
ducts. the consumption of which is limited to the construction block.

it is necessary to note another peculiarity of construction. which consider-
ably complicates the planning of its interrelations both within the con-
struction complex and with the economic environment outside it. The demands

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oi the sectors of tho national economy on construction are embodied in
physical indicators. production capacities or the physical amounts of con-
otructlou products (the cuhir volume of buildings, the floor space of hous-
ing. the length of roads and so on). At the same tiniescost indicator--
tho estimated cost of the construction and installation operations--aervas

as a measuror of the production volumes ol construction and the capacities
of construction organizations.

Owing to the d'vcruity or the physical and material form of the construction
product and its objects the cstisnated cost of construction and insta'lation
operations is the only possible general indicator of the planning and man-
agement of the sector. The planning of construction, the evaluation of the
activity or the latter and the supply of resources are accomplished on its
basis. Therefore in national economic programs. in which construction is

a dlroct or indirect partiripaut. there should be formulated precise rc-
qulrements in the form of the designation of the physical and material com-
position of the end result. which should also receive an adequate evaluation
in the general indicators adopted in construction. For example, when draft-
ing a program of the increase of the level of the provision of housing and
nmnlripal and eVervday structures the requirements can be expressed in the
tors of a set of quantitatIVe and qualitative parameters: the floor space
of hooslug. the types or apartments and so on with enumerations of the cor-
lvupvudiuu qualitativo characteristics dictated by social standards. The
requirements should be advanced with approximately the same degree of con-
centration when drafting other national economic programs in which the place
oi an indirect participant is assigned to construztion. It seems to us

that the lack in comprehensive scientific and technical programs of specif-
ic assignments in physical and material form has complicated their fulfill-
ment for construction as a participant.

In conformity with the content of the programs and the specific nature of
the sector it is necessary also to determine the criteria for evaluating

the choice of alternate solutions at different levels. Here the adjusted
oxpeuditores should he regarded as one of the possible criteria. Hith al-
lowance for the specific nature of construction for the choice of alterna-
tives w‘lnnelahornting a system of measures at the upper level of the sector
it Is possible to rcconmend the following criteria: I) the maximum satisfac-
lion of the goal Indicators (requirements) of the programs external with
respect to construction, or the goal indicators of the seetorial programs

in the case of set restrictions: the estimated cost of construction and in-

stallation operations. the periods of construction. the consumption of uni-
versal and especially limited resources: 2) the maximum amount of intro-
duction of fixed capital in value terms in the case of set restrictions:

the goal indicators (requirements) of programs external with respect to
construction. or goal indicators of the sectorial programs. the periods of
construttlon. the consumption of universal and especially limited resources,
the estimated cost of construction and installation operations; 3) the
minimum period of construction in the case of set restrictions of the goal
indicators (requirements) of the programs external with respect to construc-
tion. or the goal indicators of the sectorial programs. the consumption of

II
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nniVersol or especially limited resources, the estimated cost of construc-
tion and installation operations.

At lower levels of the tree of goals of the external or soctorial programs.
when choosing alternatives the following criteria can be used with allowance
for various restrictions: the maximum production volume of the products of
construction or of other sectors directly connected with it; the minimum
level of current production costs of the products of construction or of
other sectors directly connected with it; the minimum level of national
economic expenditures with allowance for the operation of ready projects;
the minimum consumption of various resources. The proposed list of cri-
teria does not claim to be complete. ihe diversity and complexity of the
program tasks in the process of drafting the programs can cause the adoption
of other criteria as well. however. it is obvious that. no matter at what
levels the criteria are applied. they should have a general direction. The
making of decisions in conformity with these criteria should not contradict
the content of the goals of the upper level and. consequently. complicate
the Implementation of the programs.

In connection with the fact that the program-goal approach is called upon
lu reflec' the indicators of the project. which characterize the various
aspects of development in the necessary and most effective direction, it

is expedient for solving global problems to single out several blocks which
cover individual sections of the problem: scientific and technical. design.
production. economic and social. Each specific block represents a separate
aspect of the overall tree of goals and includes several levels.

The main goals of the indicated blocks appear with respect to the entire
system as goals of a second order. but then the next levels of the goals.
tasks and measures are formulated. In the formation of any construction
program in the design block there can be set as one of the main goals the
$104] with the following content--"The Improvement of the Volume-Layout
Solutions of Buildings and Structures." in the production block--"The Im-
provement of the Technology of Construction. the Extension of Complete
Hechnnization and Automation." In turn. the latter can be broken down
into tasks of a smaller scale. such as "The Elaboration and Introduction
of Efficient tkthods of Performing Excavation and Earth Moving." "The In-
troduction of Efficient Methods of working Permafrost Soils" and so on.

One of the main goals of the economic block can be expressed in the follow-
ing manner-~"Aasurancs of the Fulfillment of the Set Tasks Without the Ad-
dlilnnnl involvement of Hanpower" or "The Reduction of the Materials-Output
Ratio of Construction and Installation Operations" and others. The setting
of the goals and tasks and the implementation of the measures of each block
shuuld he done in conformity with a single idea. The formation of the
oiocks nnd their division into basic and auxiliary blocks are determined

by the class and type of programs. The structure of each of the blocks
might nisuiun coincide with the structure of the overall tree of goals.
since each section constituting the content of the block has its own

12
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independent tasks. However. the goals of the blocks should be coordinated
and nohordinato to the main goal.

At the lowest level of the tree of goals of each block the measures making
it possible to formulate the resource programs are indicated. At the ini-
tial stages of the drafting of the program the demand of the entire system
[or resources will be specified in the form of an order to other sectors as
the sum of the demands of the individual blocks. This approach in the first

iterations is inevitable. although it does not always make it possible to
detect the synergistic ties and to take into account the economy caused by
them. Of course. the constructed model of the tree of goals in the context
of the separately taken block is not identical to economic processes--the
affiliation of the tasks being solved with certain blocks or others is arbi-
trary. in reality the goals of the blocks. the tasks and especially the
measures will intersect. For example. it is difficult to determine, to
which hiock (scientific and technical, design. production, social or eco-
nomic) the solution of such a problem as the improvement of the system of
the organization and management of a sector belongs.

(Mal programs. which are devoted to special problems of a smaller scale. at
the sector level can be implemented with less success. In this instance the
problem of resource supply is sharply aggravated. Additional complications
arise which are connected with the allocation of resources for the realisa-
tion of the given goal on the scale of the sector, since the orde: of the
program for resources. given the planning mechanism in effect. might be lost
in the overall plan of the sector.

Among the questions requiring further elaboration are: the forms of the
program assignments for sectors, the methods of transforming these assign-
ments into a sectorlal plan, the means of distributing resources between
program and nonprogram products. the determination of the groap of resources
being distributed in connection with the programs and the extent of their
disaggregation. the coordination of criteria, as well as of the indicators
of the evaluation of the activity of the sectors with the requirements of
program-goal planning.

Along with this the need has arisen to solve practical questions of the in-
lroductlon or the program-goal approach in the sectors of the national econ-
any and industry. Among these questions are the status of the program in
the sector. the procedure of coordinating the various processes of planning
and financing. the methods of monitoring and controlling the implementation
of programs. The solution of these questions will make it possible to use
the program-goal method more extensively in planning. as was stipulated by
the 25th CPSU Congress.

FOOTNOTES

I. See "Knmpleksn-ye narodnokhosyaystgonnoye planirovaniye. Postaaovka
prahlemy i podkhod k yeye resheniys" [Comprehensive National Economic

l3
FUR OFFlCth USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Planning. A Statement of the Problem and an Approach to Its Solution],
edited by N. P. Fedorenku. Izdatel' stvo "Ekonomiks", I97b; D. A. Rayzbcrg.
i’e. P. Culnbkov. L. S. Pekarskiy. "Sistemnyy podkhod_ v perspektivnom plani-
rovnnii" [The Systems Approach in long-Range Planning], Izdatol' stvo "Sko-
nomika". I975.

2. Sec V. Disson, "The Use of the Program-Coal Method in Solving Scientific
and Technical Problems" (PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO. No 7. I977, pp 79-80).

3. Recently an interesting attempt was made to develop u formal apparatus
for evaluating the closeness of the ties for the purpose of formiu l com-
piexes (see. for example, A. R. Leybkind, V. F. Prcsnyakov and B. L. Rudnik.
"0n the Question of Distinguishing Blocks of Comprehensive Intersectorial
Planning. " EKONOMIKA I HATEHAIICHESKIYE METODY. Vol XIII. No 5, 1977).

A. In our opinion. M. Lemeshev and A. Panehenko define the content of the
rumplex impreciseiy. 0n the one hand, the authors regard complexes as pro-
duciiun units which unite:1number of sectors which are interconnected tech-
nologically and functionally (uuch complexes are based on a unity of pro-
auction interests. which are relatively stable in time). on the other hand.
complexes. in their opinion, are a group of sectors. the activity of which
is aimed at the accomplishment of specific socio-economic goals of the na-
tional economy. In this interpretation a goal-setting principle is placed
at the basis, in connection with which the integral connection between the
sertnrs in not included in the obligatory conditions. The multiaspect na-
lure of the goals facing the national economy and the difference in time

or their accomplishment predetermine, therefore. the constant mobility of
such rompl-xes (see M. Ya. Lemeshev. A. l. Panghenko. "Konpleksnyye pro-
;ramny v planirovanii narognogo khozyaystva" [pomprehensive Programs in
National Economic Planning]. izdstel'stvo "Ekonomika". I973).

3. See i. G. Popnv. A. c. Fonotov. "0n the Coordination of the Resource
and (ha! Aspects in long-Range Planning," "Progrsanmo-tselevyye metody v
planirovanli. Tezisy dokiadov Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii 'Progrsmnno-tsele-
vyye melody v pianirovanii i upravlenii v 3Vete resheniy XXV s"yezda KPSS'"
[Program-00.11 Methods in Planning. heads of Reports of the All-Union Con-
tori-nt-u "Program-Coal Methods in Planning and Hanagement in Light of the
he.l ions of the 25th CPSU Congress"l.Central institute of Economic Mathe-
nittcs of the USSR at:.1demy of Sciences. Scientific Research Institute of
rrnnomirs of USSR Gosplan. VNIISI of the State Committee for Science and
Technology of the USSR Council of Ministers and the USSR Academy of Sciences,
197]. pp lbs-[77; V. i. Kagarlltskaya. "The Modeling of the Distribution
of Capltal investments in a Long-Range Program." "Programmno-tselevyye
netndy v planirovanii. Tezisy dokladov Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii 'Progrnmm-

na-tsel--vvve metody v planirovanii i upravlenii v svete rosheniy XXV s' 'yezda
KPSS‘. " pp i78- la}.

n. See Yr. i. Andreyeva. A. A. Bernshteyn, Ye. V. Levner, T. V. Ukhanova,
A Model of the Distribution of Resources in Comprehensive Goal Programs.
a Hethud and the Experience of Drafting National Economic Programs." "Tezisy

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dokladvv Vaeaoyuznoy konforontslt 'Programmno-taelovyyo locody v planiro-
vault l uprnvlonlt v avetc reohoniy XXV o"ycadn KPSS'," pp 20-28.

7. The problons of forming the conscru:tion conplox and the incorooccortcl
ties at construction were covered by D. Chudnovekiy. I. Shapiro and 8. Ba-

ranova (sec "Methodological Problems of Planning an Incorooctorial Construc-
tIon Couplox." PLANOVOYB IHOZYAYSTVO. No 2. 1976).

COPYRIGHT: Izdotel‘otvo "Pravda", "Voprouy ekononiki". 1978.

7807
C80: 1820

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION STRUCTURE
Hoscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 12. Dec 78 pp 34-é3

[Krticle by R. Livshits: "The Efficiency of the Production Structure of
lndustryﬂ/

LIext/ The structure of industry and of the entire national economy in-
cludes three elements: the correlation between subsectors and sectors with-
in the entire national economy (the sectorial structure); the territorial
proportions within individual sectors and eubsectors, economic regions, ter-
ritorial production complexes (the disposition of physical production and
the nonproductive sphere); the correlation between enterprises of different
compositions and production capacity, which is determined by the development
of concentration, specialisation. cooperation and combination.

when studying the efficiency of the structure of the national economy and
industry the question arises. to what extent are these elements intercon-
nected and is the effective development of each of them governed by factors
which are conmnn for all of them or are inherent only to it. The sectorial
and subsectorial structure of the national economy is the basis of its ter-
ritorial and production structure. since the importance of each of the fac-
tors of the increase of the productivity of national labor and production
efficiency differs depending on its sectorial structure.

For example, for the economy of agriculture. the mining industry and the
so-cslled raw material sectors of industry (that is. the sectors in which
the main place in the expenditures on production belongs to raw materials
and materials) the natural conditions of the production and extraction of

the raw materials and materials play an important role. for the sectors of
the processing industry. where the expendittrss on materials are relatively

small--the resources and skills of labor.

I. we call this correlation the production structure, which to a certain
extent is arbitrary, since the sectorial structure of industry and of the
entire national economy in the sphere of physical production could be grouped

with the production structure.

 

I6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the some time each sector. depending on its technological peculiarities,
is characterized by a different type of the most efficient territorial dis-
position and by the difference of the optimum compositions and sizes of the
production capacity of enterprises. Thus. the development of production
specialization is of enormous importance for the effective development of
the sectors, the finished product of which is the result of the assembly of
individual components and parts (machine building and others); for the see-
tors of the processing industry with the complete processing of raw mate-
rials and multistage production processes (the chemical industry, the petro-
lenm refining industry, nonferrous metallurgy and others) in a number of
cases the combination of individual works within one enterprise is effective.
Therefore the different sectorisl pattern of production is also connected
with the difference of its production structure. At the some time all the

processes of the social division of labor. which determine the production
structure. are closely interconnected.

Any change of the composition and capacity of one enterprise of the sector
affects the enterprises of both this and other sectors and the territorial
complex as a whole. A decrease of the public expenditures on the production
of s unit of a product does not always coincide with the decrease of the ex-
penditures at the individual enterprise. Therefore the optimum, from the
point of view of the entire national economy, compositions of the shops and
the sizes of the production capacities of individual enterprises are ascer-
tained most precisely during the optimization of the entire system, of which
they are components. The optimum compositions and size of industrial enter-
prises nre not simply a function of the long-range plans of development of
the sectors and territorial production complexes. Their scientifically
sound planning is necessary already when the long-range plans of the optimum
development of individual sectors of industry or territorial production com-
plexes are still lacking or are at the stage of drafting and when the com-
position and sizes of enterprises can be determined only approximately. In
these instances the knowledge of the approximate parameters of the enter-
prises of the optimum compositions and size makes it possible to draft
standard construction plans for their subsequent use during the immediate
period being planned. This measure is conducive to the decrease of the
duration and the reduction of the cost of the drafting of plans, as veil

as the duration of the construction.

The problem of determining the optimum production structure arises in the
construction of new and the modernization and expansion of operating enter-
prises. Therefore. we take as the indicator of its efficiency the formulas
of the adjusted expenditures. which are recommended by the Standard Method
of Determining the Effectiveness of Capital Investments,2 the calculation

2. K+T"C- min or C+E"K-min. where If is the capital investments according
to each variant. rubles: I" is the sectorial standard term of recovery,
years; C is the production cost of products for a year according to the same
variant.rubies; E" is the sectorial standard coefficient of efficiency.

17
FOR OFFICILV USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of which should be made more precise in conformity with the peculiarities
of the problem in question. In particular, in determining the optimum pro-
duction structure it is necessary to take into account: transportation
costs, which increase with the consolidation of enterprises; the losses
which occur in some sectors of industry with an increase of the periods of
the delivery of raw materials and finished products, as well as with their
storage; the additional expenditures which arise at times as a result of
the pollution of the atmosphere. the worsening of the conditions of water
supply, the complication of supply lines; the difference of the periods of
the construction and placement into operation of enterprises of different
compositions and sizes; the increase of the population density, especially
when concentrating at one point two or three major enterprises; the com-
piexity of production management at especially large enterprises.

with allowance for the indicated circumstances the formulas of the adjusted
expenditures when determining the optimum production structure change
slightly:

K+1‘.,c..+n1+n2-min,

where C" is the total expenditures on the payment for the delivery and pro-
cessing of raw materials, fuel, semimsnufactures, which ensure the output of
the finished product and its shipment to the regions (centers) of consump-
tion; "1 and n; are all the types of losses and additional expenses, which
arise with different variants of the production structure (particularly with
different levels of concentration). The minimum expenditures are determined
on the basis of the national economic efficiency. Here the consideration

of the lag (the gap in time) between the making of capital investments and
the received yield is important. The leg may differ in the construction

of enterprises of different compositions and capacity and it should be cal-
culated by the method of adjusting the capital expenditures to a single mo-
ment of time. -

The same thing pertains to the production cost of the product, if there are
substantial differences in the periods of the placement into operation and
achievement of the planned indicators with different variants of the produc-
tion structure. In all instances it is important to take into account the
associated capital investments of those sectors, the products of which take
up a significant proportion in the production cost of the products of the
enterprise in question, otherwise the calculation is unduly complicated.

in confnrmity with the specific peculiarities of the individual sectors the
expenditures on the delivery of finished products to consumers might not be
taken into account in the sectors, the finished products of which constitute
only a small part of the raw materials expended on their production; in

the sectors where the weight of the finished product exceeds the weight of
the raw materials expended on its production (the sulfuric acid, baking,
confectionery sectors of industry and others). the calculation of only the
expenditures on the delivery of the finished product to the consumers is
necessary. In industry there are sectors which produceproductswhich are

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

small in weight. but which have a great value. In such sectors the propor-

tion of the transportation expenses is relatively small and it is possible
to decline to calculate them.

The optimum production structure of individual sectors is determined not
only by general. but also by specific factors. A number of sectors are
characterized by a similarity of these specific factors. Mung these sec-
tors are: the mining industry, in which with the concentration of produc-
tion there take place a decrease of the term of service of enterprises, an
increase of the aunrtization deductions and expenditures on mine prepara-
tions, which [all to the annual output of products; electric power and the
so-cnlled one—product sectors of the processing industry. which produce
relatively uniform products (cast iron. steel. many products of the food
industry, products of the textile indtwtry and others); the processing in-
dustry. which produces complicated diverse products consisting of numerous
partial products-~intermediate products, parts, assemblies and others (the
so-cnllcd multiproduct sectors--machine building, some sectors of light in-
dustry--leather shoe. sewing sectors); the processing industry with the com-

plete processing of raw materials and multistage production processes (the
chemical Industry. nonferroua metallurgy and others).

The proposed method of calculating the efficiency of the production struc-
ture pertains only to products which are comparable directly or as a re-
sult of their reduction to a comparable type. in the extractive and one-
product sectors the optimum production structure is confined mainly to the
optimization or the capacities and sizes of the works at the enterprises
being designed or modernized. At the same time in the multiproduct sectors
and sectors with the complete processing of raw materials this problem is
combined also with the establishment of the optimum set of shops for each
enterprise. that is, with the calculation of the comparative economic ef-
ficiency of the combination of a number of works and services within one

enterprise or the making out of them of independent specialized enterprises
of the optimum sizes.

in the extractive and raw material sectors the concentration of production
is effective to the extent to which it corresponds to the available raw
material resources for their developaent. In all other sectors concentra-
tion according to the overall sizes of the works and the number of workers
at the enterprises is effective only when the composition of the latter is
properly determined or when there is an effective combination of production
and services. Such a combination always increases the concentration of
production. The situation is different with specialization, which, as a
rule. involves the increase of the sizes or the concentration of some uni-
form production. but might at times lead to the creation of enterprises

which are relatively small according to the production capacity and the num-
ber of workers. Such enterprises should be organized in all those in-

stances when their optimality frrh the national economic standpoint has
been established.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case the efficiency of the combination at an enterprise of succes-
sive stages of the processing of raw materials is determined by the economy
of the production cost and the capital expenditures. which is obtained for
each conversion included in a single technological cycle as compared with
panting it into specialized enterprises. The economy obtained as a result
of the complete use of raw materials is calculated by adding up the economy
for individual technological factors (the improvement of the level and de-
gree of the complete use of raw materials, the improvement of the technology
at associated enterprises and sectors and others). Without giving in fur-
ther detail the method of the calculations of the optimum production struc-
ture in different sectors. let us dwell on the examination of general ques-
tions which are of great importance for these calculations.

The minimum adjusted expenditures on the production of products at the
places of their consumption function as a criterion of the efficiency of
the production structure with new construction and the technical moderniza-
tion of operating enterprises. However. it is necessary to make substan-
tial changes in the calculation of the production cost and the capital ex-
penditures, so that the indicators of the efficiency of the production
structure would become more reliable. In the evaluation of the efficiency
of the work of operating enterprises and the existing production structure
the capital investments take the form of their already realized part-~the
functioning and used fixed and working capital and the achieved labor pro-
ductivity. Therefore, the indicators of the recovery of the capital in-
vestments and the adjusted expenditures can be replaced by the social pro-
duction costs or the production cost of the product, which embody all

the expenditures of living and embodied labor. The indicator of the social
production costs or the production cost of the product. being the monetary
eXpression of these expenditures, should be supplemented by an analysis of
the other (in a number of sectors physical) indicators determining it,
particularly the indicators of the amount (norms) of the expenditures of
raw materials, fuel. materials and semimanufsctures per unit of production,
the indicators of the productivity, organization and power-output ratio of
living labor, the data which characterize the extensive and intensive use
or the fixed production capital and others.

The comparison of the efficiency of the production structure at operating
enterprises can be made only by reducing the composition (set) of their
shops and the assortment of production to a comparable type. If an enter-
prise produces several different types of products, its production struc-
ture is defined as the sum of the production capacities which are calculated
separately for all types of products. The production cost is calculated

in precisely the same way both for all the products as a whole and sepa-
rately for the component works.

The comparison of the total production cost of products when calculating

the optimum production structure in all cases is limited to operating enter-
prises or enterprises being built, for which purchased materials, semimsnu-
factures and components have an identicslproportion in the production cost

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the products. When comparing enterprises with various shops the produc-
tion cost of the ploduetn run be calculated only on the basis of the inclu-
also in it also oi the production cost "I the products being produced by
the supplier shops. or course, the structure of the products being pro-

duced (their variety. the inhorminteusiVeness of production and the quality)
should be the same.

1he evaluation of the production efficiency and the existing production
structure of operating enterprises on the condition of the reduction of
their composition to a comparable form and with consideration of the dif-
ferences oi the technical level of production can be made according to the
formula C:P-Inlu. where C is the production cost of a unit of products.
which includes e or the expenditures of past labor (along with the amortiza-
tion deductions). v is all the types of expenditures on wages with the set
contributions to the state budget to finance social insurance benefits;

P is the size of the works. here both C and P should be taken on a specific
annual scale. This formula of the calculation of the efficiency of produc-
tion and the production structure has a very simple form. In reality its
use involves great changes and specifications of the existing methods of
determining thu production cost of products. such changes which would bring
this important indicator of production efficiency closer to the real expendi-
tures of national labor. These changes should also be made when calculat-
ing the adjusted expraditures under the conditions of new construction.

At present the dynamics of the production cost and the cost which expresses
the expenditures of socially necessary labor might not coincide. which is
connected with the used methods of the accounting and calculation of the
production cost. 'P‘ cost of the means of production, which are consumed
in the production .‘ocess and are a decisive part of all expenditures on
the production of products in the USSR. when calculating the production
cost is calculated for raw materials, fuel, materials and semimanufactures
on the basis of the wholesale factory prices and the transportation rates,
which may be higher. but sometimes also lower than the actual cost of these
materials and their shipment to the consumers. in the production cost the
consumed fixed capital is represented by the standard amortization deduc-
tions. These deductions in a number of sectors for many years did not re-
flect the actual depreciation of the fixed capital and thereby their value,
which was transferred to the newly created product. Finally, the wage re-
flected the social expenditures on payment for the necessary labor, but not
the value itself of the necessary product.

The dynamics of the production cost does not always reflect the changes in
the production process. The production cost is also influenced by nonpro-
duction factors (a change in prices. rates, the regulation of wages and
others), which are not connected with changes in the labor process. The
increase of labor productivity. which causes a decrease of the co so
might not he reflected in a decrease of rho production cost, if the increase
of wages outstrips the increase of labor productivity. At the sane time an
increase of wages. without changing the value of goods, under certain

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conditions involves an increase of the production cost. At the same time
there are also taken into account in the production cost various expendi-
turea on the management and maintenance of production. among which there
are also expenditures of a nonproductive nature (the payment of fines,
penalties and forfeits, shortages and flaws of products). The latter, in

essence, are only a deduction from the value created in the production
process.

In spite of the noted shortcomings, the production cost serves as the most
important indicator of the socially necessary expenditures of labor, the
efficiency of production and the production structure, since it is the only
Indicator of the expenditures not only of living, but also of embodied labor,
the value of which is great especially as the physical accounting of the
total labor expenditures on the production and transportation of products

at present is still at the stage of experimental operations and calculations.
Therefore the labor expenditures in practice can be calculated only in none-
tary form. It is a matter not of the replacement of this indicator of the
efficiency of production and capital expenditures, which truly exists and

ls used in USSR economic practice, by some other one, but of that improve-
ment of its calculation. in case of which it would be a reliable measure:

of the total labor expenditures on production, transportation and construc-
tion. -

The drawback of the production cost is that it is a price category and thr;
the bulk of the embodied labor (the expenditures on raw materials, fuel,
power, basic and auxiliary materials, which constitute in the production
cost of industrial products about 75 percent of all the expenditures on pro-
duclluu) in It is presented in wholesale factory prices, which at times
differ substantially from their actual (real) production cost. Here the

principles of pricing even in groups of related sectors are not always
the same.

with the planned management of the economy the distorting influence of
prices on the actual production cost of products can be eliminated. For
this there is needed the calculation of the real national economic produc-
tion cost of products in parallel with the price calculation, in which the
rat materials, fuel and materials used for the production of the products
would be calculated according to the actual (or planned, if it is a matter
oi tn capital construction) production cost. Such a calculation is quite
POﬁSlhlt, taking into account the high level of concentration in the na-
tional economy, as well as the fact that in the most important sectors and
sectnrlal complexes the production cost is formed successively. In this
case in the sectors of the mining industry and in agriculture, where the
expenditures on raw materials and basic materials are absent, the produc-
tiuu cost of products even in their price calculation is close to the real
national economic costs, for it is determined above all by the expenditures
0f the necessary labor and the amounts of the wages paid. Hesnwhile mineral
fuel, mineral and agricultural raw materials remain for the present the de-

cisive base, on which the national economic costs and the production cost
of products are formed.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ill-'FliIl-U. USE UNI Y

The planning uynion-ot ihe economy uahcu it punuihle to regard the entire
production piorcnu and the exrnndllutou oi labor at its diiierent etegee
an a single whole. With the different nliut‘lnrt‘ of the expenditures on
produriion in individual nubaeciorn the total expenditures for each of the
nertora oi the national economy nhould reflect the actual social expendi-
tures on the paymeni ior living or expended onhodied labor (capitaliet
coutn are measured only by the expenditures of labor at the given enter-
prlso or In the given annociation of enterpriooe-~the concern, the trout and
other»). This In poonihio. for the pindhcthh cont of product». as was
already noted. in formed nurceeeivc|\‘-nlonn "chains" of interconnected
works. Thuiefnro, in accordance with the expenditures of embodied labor
the production cost at each subsequent stage of processing should reflect
the real expondiiureo of the preceding production cyclee.

What hau horn mlhlcnn be illustrated hv the example of the metal industry
hnudune building. ferrous and nonferrouo metallurgy with their raw mate-
rial and iuei homes). The formation of the iinal product of the metal in-
duutry begins with the mining of cool for coking and ore. The expenditure.
on tool are 85-00 percent of the production cost of the coke. while the
expenditures on coke and iron ore are approximately 90 percent of the total
production that of pig iron. thich haeirally determines the production cost
oi steel and lulled products. Thus. the real national econoadcproduction
rout oi ierroun metal can he calculated on the basis of the data about the
actual production cost of the row materioin. on which itu production ie
board. These calculations are facilitated by the high level of concentra-
tion of production in icrronn metallurgy ([7 plants yield about 80 percent
of all the steel smelted in the country). by the territorial concentration
and small number or the raw material and fuel depouits being need.

do is known. lotions ennui in the main construction material of the final
product or the metal industry. which is produced by machine building and
metalworking. in ihv‘t‘BECtofS the expenditures on materials and semi-enu-
farthres. which consist mainly ot ferrous metal. constitute approximately
«0 percent. 1hus, here the accounting of materials according to the real
cost of their production is quite feasible when there is the preciee regi-
stration of the nonreeo of their receipt by the connuming enterprises.

Under the conditionn of a socialist economy the expenditures of labor and
the pruduriinn cost can be examined not only within the individual enter-
prises. but dine at all enterprise" and sectors. hwiiuinginterconnected
ones. Therefore. along with the calculation of the national economic pro-
duriion route of prnductn it is nine necessary to draw up for sectors and
nuhsevtorn planning and accounting balances. which are differentiated by
enterprises. ohlasts. economic regions and republics. of the rates of con-
numptlon of fuel. electric power. raw materials and materials per unit of
production. Along with the increase of the physical indicators the reduc-
tion oi the elements. which are included in the production cost. of the
marketing rouin (expenditures connected with the sale of the product and
others) and ndninistrative and operating costs servos an a source of ac-
cnmulntion.

21

''()l( IN‘FIllI/d. il‘ l: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The standardization of the coating of products and its calculation by ele-
ments of the expenditures are an obligatory prerequisite of the calculation
of the real national economic expenditures and the measurement by them of
production efficiency. At present the methodology of calculating the pro-
duction cost is different in different sectors. in some it is calculated
according to the elements of the expenditures. in at -rs within the produc-
tion cost there are so-called complex items (shop costs and others). which
include both material expenditures and expenditures on wages. In a number
of sectors the proportion of these complex items in the production cost is
Very high. For example. in machine building its reaches at times 60 per-
cent of the total production cost. The determination of the actual national
economic production costs presumes the standardization of the methods of

their calculation in all sectors according to the elements of the expendi-
UII‘CS.

inithe level at the individual enterprises the indicator of the production
cost of products can be supplemented hythe indicator of the cost of the
processing of these products. in case of which only the amounts of the ex-

penditures of the enterprises on the processing of purchased raw materials.
fuel. materials and aemimanufactures would function as a criterion of pro-

duction efficiency. while the cost of the latter would be excluded. Under

the conditions of the price calculation of the expenditures on purchased

raw materials and aaterials the indicator of the cost of processing the
products characterizes the efficiency of the production structure and the
operation of individual enterprises better than the production cost of these
products as a whole. however. when calculating the real national economic
production cost of products the advantages of the indicator of the cost of

procenalnn disappear. for the production cost itself becomes a reliable in-
dlcaior oi the social expenditures.

it should he noted that vhen determining the optimum production structure
under the conditions of new construction not only the calculation of the
production cost. but also the second component of the adjusted expendi-
tures--one—time capital investments-cahould be adjusted. Like the produc-
tion cost. the capital investments should be calculated according to their
real national economic importance. Thus. when there is a substantial dif-
icrcncc between the zone vholessle prices and actual production cost of

construction materials. it is necessary to evaluate the latter according
to the rust of their production.

when calculating the capital investments. as vhen calculating the produc-
tion cost. all the transportation expenditures on the delivery of raw mate-
rials. tool and materials and on the shipment of finished products to con-

quarts should he determined with allowance for the actual distance and coat
or carriage and the capital investments in the development of the transpor-
iailun network. in some sectors the transportation costs. which are repre-
sentvd in the form of the average values for the entire country. are in—
cluded in the wholesale prices for purchased raw materials. materials and
somimanuiactures. The prices for some very important materials are the

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Si-2 lh‘iM‘

saw and do not reflect the regional dllietenees of the. production cost.
Finally. the cone prices for products and raw materials. which are in ef-
fect in a number of sectors (for example. In the sugar industry). distort
the comparable evaluations of enterprises of different capacity. Therefore.
the calculation of the production cost of products at the places of con-
sumption. it seems to us. should be made according to the formula:

c" . (c - T) + (Tl + T2)

where C" is the adjusted real national evononlc production cost of a unit
of products in the region (place) of consumption: c is the adjusted produc-
tion cost of these products in the region (place) of production; T is the
actually paid transportation costs for the delivory of basic raw materials.
tuei. materials and semimanufactures. including the transportation expendi-
turcs included in the wholesale prices of raw materials. fuel. materials
and others; TI is the transportation costs for the delivery of raw mate-
rials. fuel. materials and senimanufactures. which are calculated according
to the production cost depending on the actual distance of carriage; T2 is
the transportation costs for the delivery of finished products. which are

calculated according to the production cost depending on the actual dis-
tance of carriage.

The problem of calculating the real national economic expenditures is most
important when estimating the efficiency of the existing production struc-
ture. as well as when establishing the efficiency of the capital eapendi-
lures on its creation. Another problem hn what indicator is suited to the
greatest extent for the estimation of the sizes of a works at enterprises.
in individual sectors and subsectors and in the national economy as a whole?
we assume that the sizes of an enterprise in one-prodtwt sectors (that is.
in sectors with the mass output of some one product), as well as at indi-
vidual works of sectors. which produce various types of products with a uni-
form combination. can be measured in physical terms. Thus. the sire of
enterprises in the extractive sectors. in the construction materials indus-
try. in electric power engineering. ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy. in
founding and forging and so on is best characterized by the number of pro-
ducts produced by them over a specific period of time. of course, in one-
product sectors the physical indicators of the output of products. per-
ticulnrly when establishing the efficiency of the production structure of
individual enterprises. are subject to correction. This is connected with
the fact that. first. the some products haVc in a number of sectors differ-
ent indicators of labor-intensiveness of their production and quality. In
this case the calculation of the sizes of enterprises or individual works
needs to be nude on the basis of a conversion according to coefficients of
equivalency In conventional units.3 Second. in some sectors the output of

—. .-_~——-._. _.—._—.

1. For example. the size of a works for boilers should be measured by their
total output and productivity in thousands of tons of steam per hour; tur-
bines and generators--accordin3 to the number and amount of output of the
turbines and generators in thousands of RH; motor vehicles and tractors in
conventional physical units--accordin3 to the total carrying capacity and

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

products differs depending on the assortment. in such sectors it is better
to determine the size of enterprises according to the anount of installed
similar equipment. Third. in the sectors processing agricultural raw mate-
rials. the receipt of which is of a seasonal nature, the site of the enter-
prise is determined by the amount of raw material processed in a day.

However. there are few one-product sectors. The majority of sectors pro-
duce various types of products. Therefore, the calculation of the total
production can be made only in value forms-as the gross or commodity pro-
duction of the individual sectors of physical production and the gross na-
tinnnl product on the scale of the entire national economy or as the net
production (or value added) of individual sectors and the national income.

The drawbacks of the indicator of the gross (and coamodity) production as
an indicator of the sizes of a works are well known. Therefore. a number
of industrial enterprises. when determining the size of the works. also use
the indicator of the processing cost. which is calculated as the difference
between the cost of the output of the gross production over a specific
period of time and the expenditures on purchased materials. semimanufac-
tures. fuel and electric power. The processing cost (or the value added)
is formed from the basic and additional wages with deductions for social
insurance. various deductions (for the creation of the bonus fund for the
introduction of new equipment. for scientific research). amortisation deduc-
tions from the value of the fixed production capital. expenditures on the
maintenance of equipment and the surplus product (the profit). The indica-
tor of the processing cost or the value added during processing is used to
characterize the sizes of e works at enterprises and in individual sectors
in the statistics of all industrially developed countries. This indicator
reflects the sizes of works more precisely than the indicator of the gross
or commodity production. although it is not free from the influence of
prices. which affect it through the subtracted value of the materials and
semiannufactures used in the production process. The differences in the
wage rates and the profit by sectors and works also have an effect.

In the calculation of the cost of raw materials, ‘H-‘, -9'~ri:ls and trans-
portntion rates according to their actual national economic production cost
the influence of the price factor is basically eliminated. There remain the

assortment differences in the amounts of the profit. which can be eliminated
by introducing an average profit. which is uniform for the enterprises of

on sector or another and is independent of the assortment (this has already
hvvn done at the enterprises of the Ministry of the Shipbuilding Industry).
There are no ideal value indicators. Therefore it is necessary to choose

l. (continued) horsepower; casting-oin conventional tons; excavators--in
cubic meters of capacity. In ferrous metallurgy the smelting of steel is
the most reliable Indicator of the sizes of enterprises under the condi-
tions of uniform combination. since the product mix of rolled products at
the plants and the labor-intensiveness of the production of their various
types differ substantially.

 

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the aunt reiiahie ones. on far no punslhic adjunting them by physical in-
dicatoru. in our opinion. the net production. which relfects all the ex-
penditures of living labor. In the "mat precise value Indicator of the
uizee of a works. in this case it Is necessary to exclude from the net
production all the nonprodnctive cspendituren (the payment of fines. penal-
lice and furloiiu--usunlly they remain in it). and with respect to enter-
prises to take into account the fact that the alumnts of the net production
should he adjuniud by the indicators of the power-worker ratio. Otherwise
the umall. poorly mechanized enterprise will have advantages over the well-
mcchnnizcd large enterprise.

Thus. in the specific calculation of production efficiency on the national
economic scale in the numerator there will be the national income. while

in the denominator there will he the expenditures which forl the social
production costs and are taken into account in the production cost of pro-
ductu (material expenditures. including in then the aaortisation deductions.
and the paid wages in all their forms with deductions for social insurance
benefits). The efficiency of capital investments, it scene to us. should
be estahiished at the stages of the planning of new construction or the
technical modernization of enterprises. When measuring the efficiency of
production and the production structure at operating enterprises. the capi-
tel investments are taken into account in the production cost as asartisa-
tion deductions.

Let us cite a real calculation of production efficiency in conforsity with
the method of its calculation. which we have adopted (the materials expendi-
tures are presented not according to the actual national economic production
cost. the calculations of which are not presently heing node, but according
to the current wholeaalc factory prices).

According to the data of the intersectorial balance, in [972 56.3 percent
of the gross product fell to material production expenditures. 22 percent--
to wages and other forms of pay and 2i.7 percent-~to the surplus product

of society. The gross national product in 1972 was equal to 717.4 billion
rubles. Thus. the material expenditures were 603.9 billion rubles, wages
and other forms of pay-~157.8 billion rubles. while the coefficient of ef-
ficiency. that is. the ratio of the expenditures to the net production (the
produwcd national income. which in I972 was equal to 3l3.2 billion rubles)--
l.79. The calculation will he sure precise when calculating the national
ecunoaic costs according to their actual production cost. The amortisation
deductions. as was noted nhovo. are the standard onesanddo not always re-
flect the actual depreciation of the fixed capital. however, their propor-
tion in the social production costs in small (about 5 percent) and they

cannot change the rcnnltn of the calculation of the econo-ic efficiency of
production.

The need to specify the minimum expenditures when calculating the efficiency
of the production structure. in our opinion. is determined by the presence
in the production cost of products and the capital expenditures of

97
FOR OFFICikL USK ONLY
FOR "VVlClnL USE ONLY

conditionally permanent and not entirely proportionate expenditures which,
as planning practice shows. decrease with the concentration of production.
in a number of instances they reach their nininun with sizes of a works.
which exceed the total national economic demand for one product or another
for the planned period of tine. In this case. beginning with a specific
(high) lows! of concentration. the production cost decreases negligibly.
the relative increase of the capacity entails alsost the same relatiVe in-
crease of the capital expenditures.

As has already been Indicated hiecononic literature. eVen at the level of
lntraworks expenditures concentration and specialization in planning are

the optinun when the increase of the capacity with respect to the preceding
value on the dinensional level outstrips the increase of capital investments
and when the production cost decreases sharply. what has been said pertains
to lntrnwnrks efficiency. The consideration of all the conditions liniting
the consolidation or production and the factors not yielding to quantitative
measurement is also necessary.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekononiki". 1978

7807
680: [820

28
FOR OPPlClﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HETIIODOLOGT OP DETERMINING IMPACT 09 NIH TECHNOLOGY
Hoecow VOPROST uouormu in Rueeien No 12 Dec 78 pp 106-119
[Article by V. Pel'unheue, e review of Interiel received by the editore]

[Text] The new "Hethode (leeic Provieione) of Deternining the Scone-1c Bf-
(ectiveneee of Using New Equipment. Inventione end Efficiency Propoeele in
the hetionel scene-y"l ere nendetory for ell hrenchee of the netionel eco-
may end eerve en the heeie for developing end epproving hrench uthode in-
etructione. no of new, the einietriee end depert-ente heve worked out end
epproved. with the concurrence of the 088! Council of Hinietere 8tete Cou-
eittee for Science end Technology 37 hrench nethode inetructione in de-
veloping the indiceted "Methode."i Ieeuence of the 'Tlethode" end hrench
inetructione conteining e nuher of new provieione hee elicited co—ente,
queetione end euggeetione ei-ed et further perfecting the nethode of de-
termining the econonic iepect of new equip-out fro- ecientific end prec-
ticel workcre. During the eoeewhet leee then two yeere eince the ieeuence
of the methods.“ e certein enount of precticel enperience in their nee hee
heen eccuouleted in ecientific-reeeerch end plenning inetitutee end et en-
terprieee end eeeocietione.

The editors think thet feeilierizing the reedere with neteriele eent the
journel will fecilitete further inproveenent in the methodology of econo-ic
celculetione. Thie will in the end he reflected in the officiel nethode ne-
teriele which will he developed ee e reeult. Below ie e review of render
lettere end oheervetione.

Ira. Ripe] end In. Sevel'yev/ (ho-cow. Vullelehtroprivod [All-Union Scien-
tific Reeeerch. Plenning end Deeign Inetitute for Auto-etic Electric Drive
in Indultry, Agriculture end TreneportetionD include enong the nerite of

the new "uethode." ee conpered with thoee previouely in effect, the fect

thet in then. the econonic inpect of new equip-eat of long-tern epplicetion
ie deter-ined ee ite ennuel production throughout ite eervice life with re-
gerd to e tine fector. The tine fector ie coneidered by referring one~ti-
expenece end overheede (inpect) to e eingle ioetent of tine. the edjnet-ent
noreetivc t, equel to 0.1. differing fro. the nor-etive effectiveneee fec-

tor tn, equel to 0.15. which ie the use for ell hrenchee of the netionel
econooy end industry.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WPHIIM. "Si-2 “NLY

IV. Herkelov/ (Kher'kov Inetitute of Autonobile Roede) notee thet uee of
the new method provider en opportunity for eveluetin; the econonic inpect
of neeenree to inprove the quelity of the vehiclee being produced. The pro-

duction of improved equipment frequently requiree edditionel expendituree
of live 1ehor. uteriele end cepitel inveetmente, which lowere the econonic

indicetore ot enterpriee operetion. At the eeme time, the releeee of euch

equipment prowidee e eigniticent inpect in the eree in which it in need, end
thet leede in the end to netionel incone growth.

The netionel economic inpect ee celculeted under the new 'ﬁethode“ detecte
the reeulte of inprowed product quality. In Eect. Eormulee [4] end [5] of

the '1iethode."3 end eepecielly point 16. which elucidetee how to celculete
the ennue1 econonic inpect of en inprowed product. eliminete the previoue

ertiticiel contrediction between product quelity end the megnitude o! the
nntionel economic inpect.

Ae IV. Vyhornov/ (11inch. lelorueeien Stete Inetitute of the letionel IcOnomy
Imnni V. V. Kuyhyehev) nheervee. the "Nethode for Determining the Annue1 Ico-
nonic Inpect of New lquipnent" which were epprowed in 1961 contained the er-
roneoue recoemendetion thet the inpect of new equip-eat be determined ee the

e1gehreic totel of the economic inpecte of producing end uein; thet equip-ht
in etegee, eccording to the fornule:

3' = (Ch-321+ (3'. —3':>: (1)

where 3. end 3-: erc reference expendituree in producing heee end new toole
of labor; J'. end 3'; ere reference expendituree in the operetion of been end
new toole of 1ebor. The ehortcomin; of chic celcu1etion method ie thet ex-
pendituree on nenufecturing heee end new toole of 1ehor ere celculeted re-
pnetedly. In the Eiret term of fox-mule (1) they ect ee cnrrent expenditures
on their nenufecture. hut in the eecond term (with the eddition of normetiwe
profit). they ect ee cepitel inveetnente on the ecquieition of thin equipment.

The bulk of the coneideretione conteined in render relerke end lettere hewe
been connected not with the known :slculetion nethode eweilehle in preceding
nonnative documente. but with methode eppcoechee need for the tint time in
the 'uethode": methode of celculeting the 1ong-term netionel econonic in-
pect of new neeno of 1ehor. the reletionehip of netionel economic to con-
accounting inpact for new equipnent. end eveluetin; renowetion deduction:
when detenining netionel economic impect.

A nunher of oheervetione were connected with point 13 of the "Hethode."
which given the method (or celculeting the ennuel economic impect of pro-
ducing end ueing new meene of 1ehor of long-tern epplicetion (nechinery.
equip-eat. epperetue. end no forth) with inproved quelitetive ~:herecterie-
tice (productivity. durehility. opereting outleye). It conteine formule [10]

for celculeting “the ennuel economic impect of producing end uein; new meene
of lehor of long-term epplicetion.“

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fuk OFFICIAL Ufll‘; “NI-Y

"I P) :'lu
u' -- Il' ...r.. K'--".I ,
+ ( .' _ . Ilﬁ"‘4:’._‘..-H._‘_.). . 34A,, (2)

where 3. end 31 are reference expenditures per unit of been and new leens
oi labor (in rubles). respectively; In and In ere the annual eeounts of
product (work) produced using a unit at hose and new neens of labor (in
physical units), respectively; In and P1 -- the proportions of deduc-
tions from the balance cost for full restoration (renovation) of base and
new eeana of labor are calculated as reciprocals of the service life of the
scans of labor, with considorrtion of their obsolescence; E. is the norms-
tive coefficient of capital investment effectiveness (0.15); uﬂ and “3 are
the consumer's annual overheads on using hose and new ennns of labor. cel-
culntcd per amount oi product (work) produced using the new eeans of shor
and excluding expenditures on their renovation (in rubles); K3 and K; are
the concomitant consumer capital investments (capital investments excluding
the cost or the means of labor being examined) on using base and new neans
oi labor, calculated per anount of product (work) produced using the new
seans of labor (in rubles); A,is the annual production of new means of
labor in the calculation your (in physical units).

The authors note the tereinologicsl imprecision of using the word "annual"
[or the economic inpnct of producing and using new means of labor of long-
term application (machinery, equip-ant. apparatus) as calculated using for-
mula [6]. IL. Blenk/ (Hoscow, TleIOHTP [Central Scientific Research for
the Organization and Mechanization of and for Technical Aid to Construction]
of the USSR Goestroy). IK. Velikanov/ (Leningrad Polytechnicsl Institute
imeni H. I. Kelinin) end IV. Vyhornov/ suggest calling it the iepect of the
annual reissue of new equipment for its entire service life, with considera-
tion of obsolescence.

And, the authors add. the economic impact of using new technological pro-
cesses. of production eechenisation end sutonetion, of new nethods of or-
ganlaing production end later. is calculated under point l2 according to
formula [J] as an annual impact, but the impact of creating new loans of
labor according to formula [4] is an impact over many years. Uhst happens.
then. is that the national economic inpact of a new nachinc is several-fold
higher (or its manufacturer than for the plant using it to eechanise produc-
tion.

A number of letters express doubts as to the correctness of calculating the
national economic impact of producing and using new noses of labor using
iormula [h] as the annual amount of new means of labor produced A‘. K.
Vclikanov end L. Blank think the amount of product (work) produaﬂ using new
equipsent in the year it is used, and not in the year it is esnufactured.
must he the basis for calculating the econoeic impact of any equipment.

1!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llh'I-I ONLY

L. Blank coneidere nulti-yeer calculations of expendituree on and the re-
suite of individual neaeuree 0n introducing new local-acale equip-ant un-
l'eeeihle. In hie opinion, the poeeible deviatione in initial data valuee
(including nateriele pricee and eervicee rates) when evaluating the impact
of individual inplenente, objecte and nethode of labor. ae dietinct fro-
calculeting the impact of ecientific-technical prograne and other large
projecte. will lead to conplete indetereinacy of the econonic inpact value,
and t very teak of chooeing the beat technical reeolutione will he unfea-

aible. Therefore, the acononic inpect over the eervice life of any inple-
nant of labor can turn out to he eeveral dozen-fold or even hundred-fold

higher than the inpact obtained by the national econony. Moreover, when
calculating the long-tern inpact, the very bane of cenparieon hece-ee a
variable. 1.. Blank notea that, under Point 10 of the "llethode." when eolv-
ing the problee of introducing new equip-ant. "indicatore of the beat equip-
nut deaigned in the 088R or foreign equip-eat which night he purchaead in
the neceeeary quentitiee" are ueed ae the baee. If the econenic inpact cal-
culation ia ande in 1978. the letter notee. and the beat equip-ant ie ueed
ae the bane (etandard). in 1983. each lane 1988. that equipment cannot be
the heat and cannot eerve an a etandard when detenining the econoaic in-
pact over the eervice life of the nachine.

Many practical workere are intereeted in the thinking hehind and the origin
of formula [1.] of the "ilethode." The content of thin forwla wae not re-
vealed in the cor-enter, by repreeentativee of the 'Nethode" authore' col-
lective or in the article by one of ite authore. I. Zeyteav.5 V. Vybornov
attenpted to derive the indicated for-11a. the annual national .econoaic in-
pnct of new equipnant when evaluated by ephere of coneunption (3) . ea in
usually done. equals: .

fit-'15.: l3I—32) + (C'. +02). (3)

where 3' and 3; are reference expendituree when nanufacturing baee and new
inplenenu of labor. 6.. ie the nornative capital inweet-ent effectiveneee
coefficient. (5'. and C'. are current expendituree on operating baee and new
uncene of labor.

The "Methoda" delineate that portion of current equip-ant operating expendi-
turee which are deeignated for renovating Ileana of labor. That value in de-
ternined ea proportione of capital inveetnante on the acquieition of leene
of labor (aasunlng equal reference expendituree on their nanufacture) Pm
and I’.-.»'.- . reepectively. If we now deeignate that portion of the toned--
er'e operating expenditurea renaining for renovation ea 11’. and I!” . then
expreeeion (3) beconee:

3 = 3| (P: '9' Eu) *3: (Pa-{- £4) + (”'1 - ”'2) -

Dividing all the elements of thie expreeeion by P.+E. . we obtain:

' . Pu +5.. ”II-”’2 (0
e - _ -,..___. —3.
3 J. PI'I' I + P) + En ’

 

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR i‘Fl-‘liillil. lL‘il: 0le

where 3 ﬁ 3

P... i' f'n

Pornule [1.] ol the "Hothoda" is also obtained by adding three clean“ to
expression (lo): I) the coelficient of change in the productivity of a unit

of the new Ileana of labor as compared with the. bane fit- which. when lulti-
I

plied by the first (tee of foreuu (1.), eneuree that the baee variant will
be node identical to the net result; 2) the difference in the value of con-
conitant equipment cnnauner capital invest—ante, multiplied by the effect-
iveness nornative ”nib"; --l\".l, which ie added to the nunarator of the second
iten. and 3) the value of the ennuel production of new neane of labor A, in
the calculation yeer: the entire specific impact free: the introduction of
one neans of labor is nultlplied by it.

v. Vybornov eaintaine that the sun of the renovation norn P and the effec-
tiveness nornntlve (5.. does not lend itself easily to econo-ic interpretation.
Rather it is dictated by the convenience of the co culation, inae-uch ae
both theee aleuente are expressed in the eane unite of neaeurenent (propor-
tione of capital invest-ante). K. Velikanov. L. Blank, Ye. Ripe and I. Se-
vel'yev think the difference between (in-0.15 and E -0.10. whose values are
fixed in points 8 and ll of the "Methods," is not taken into account in the
derivation of fornula [6] of the "Methods" and in calculating the renovation
deductions for been and new equipnent P. and P, . Providing that. a differ-
ent formula is derived than for-uia [6], obtained as a result of the tune-
(oreatione described by V. Vybornov.

Ite derivieion is provided by Ya. hips and l. Savsi‘yav. They conpare the
base and new equipment variants with the correeponding indicators of produc-
tivity H. and n; . service life T; and T7 . reference expenditures on nann-
facturing the equipment 3. and 3, . annual coneuner operating outlaye (ex-
cluding renovation) II'. and II', . proportion of renovation deductions P. and
I',- and the concoeitant consueer investments K'. and K', . According to for-
nula (3). the national econoeic inpact with coneideration of uniting the vari-
ante identical to the net result in annual terns equele:

. BI

3 .= 3'. "1!: -— 3'3. (5)

where .5 is the iepact in annual terns and 3’. and 3’, are reference expen-
dituree in the operating ephere.

The reference expenditures in the equip-ant operating sphere are eheped in
accordance with the usual rule. which looks as follows in the accepted no-
tation:

3'. a: w'. + m3.) 4- E. (3. + K’l) . (6)
and
3', .—. m': 4- than 4- E. (31+ K3). (7’
ll

t'I‘R "Fl Nil/d. “SF. HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

hence. the national economic impact in annual terma. ae celculeted beeed on
the difference in annual reference expendituree. ie:

j .= -311. l (n'. + 9.3.) + 13,. (3- + K’IH -‘
— [(II', 4- P23!) + En (32 + K5)! - (8)

when determining the national economic impact not for the year, which we

have deeignated 3. but for the entire eerwice life of new equipment 7'. ,
deeigneted 3 in the "Nethode," Ye. Ripe and I. Savel'yev coneider it ne-

ceeenry to divide enpreeeion 3 by a reference time factor ma (l-l-E)‘.

that ie. 3 _ 2 u 37:— lnaemuch ea value 3 ie conetant by year of
+ .)a E
l-l

P; ﬂ _
nun-nation eccording to :uethode" Appendix 2 (l +5) ’--I .
I .

.= -33.. -“I-(I+£)"' 3 <9)
3' ,E n+5)" 3“T-'W'

Then. heving eubetituted enpreeeion (9) for (8; end regrouping the membere
more conveniently, they give the final formula :

3 - [3, Jews“

8. Pg+£

("4-33- -1“); ’ ,--"’- ‘

. _-—..— -o

 

then

n+5. (w)

 

 

in their opinion, the national economic ispect of the production and uee of
new equipment throughout ite eervice life ehould he determined ueing for-

nula [lo]. It ie aleo clear from thie formla thet, given 5" E , it re-
ducee to foreule [6] of the 'Methode.” the euthore point out that celculat~

ing the impact ueing formula [lo] of the "Nethode" yielde a negative error
which ie a function of eervice life T; .

L. Blank and K. Velikanow think formula [6] incorrectly replecee cepitel in-
veetnente on machinery ecquieition with reference expendituree on ite manu-
lecture, eince the beeie of capital inveetmente ie the wholeeale price of
the machinery. which differe from the amount of reference expendituree on
its production; moreover. reference expendituree do not include erpeneee

on delivering and inetelling machinery.

in thie eeem fornula [6] of the "llethode," current coneumer enpendituree

W. and W; for all yearn of hue end new equipment operation are accepted
without change. In thie connection, II. Pinhel'l (Ul'yanoveh. mrrnmh
[eepeneion unknownl) maltee the intereeting obeervetion that growth in the
economic impact of new equipment occure gradually. beginning with loeeee in
the initial yeere of new equipment utiliretion. reaching a maxi-um. and then
beginning to drop quite eharply to e branch-average level and lower. ineemucn

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hm ”Fl-'II‘IM ”til-i UNIX

as the demand for current naintenanco and equipment servicing increases.
'l‘hiu contradiction obviously dictated V. Vybornov'e idea that the basic for-
nula ior calculating national ecu-ionic llnpnci mmt posness a high degree of
standardization and correlation.

Further. K. Velikanov writes that, heated on the necessity of ensuring com-
parability oi the variants in terns of annunt of output produced. value 3,
in (crude [a] is multiplied by a coefficient of productivity growth for a
unit of new sienna oi Ishor which is equal to the ratio at annual out t
(work) anonnts produced when a unit of base and new scene of labor feed
6‘ is used. respectively. “this procedure [or making the variants identical
in terms of output volume can lend to distortion of the amount of capital in-
vest-ants required under the base varinnt. The enount of investment does not
change continuously, as a function of the mount of lnhor productivity growth
factor being examined. but spasnodicnlly, inasmuch as the investment eeount
is calculated in accordance with the require-cote tor means of labor. which
is wet often an integer.

i.. Blank notes that in formula [’0]. nultlplylng reference expenditures for
base equipment by a coefficient of change in the service life of a new means

of labor ._;'.T.%!_yieldn .in impact value which differs iron that obtained when
1* In

calculating repeated expenditures for all cycles of base and new equipment
service life. with a corresponding discounting of then.

One methods innovation introduced into practice for the first time by the
"tiethods" is the calculation of renovation rates according to the fomla:

E

P3 77.33727 -. In this instance, the annual total renovation contribu-

tions will be somewhat less that the total deducted in economic practice.
L. Blank, proceeding iron the fact that capital investments on the acquisi-
tion of nachinery are generally effected through the state budget. thinks
they should therefore be viewed as "interest-free loans" which the enter-
prises repay in equal snounts throughout the service life of the machinery
in the tern of nonthly deductions for renovation. He concludes from this
that. it the tine factor is considered. deductions for renovation should be
increased. However. in the end. he towns to the conclusion that that need
not be done. inasmuch as profit iron the use in the national economy of re-
novation deductions for the service life of the nachinery should actually
be viewed as the reimburse-nut of loss tron "intareet~£ree loans."

An etteept in nude in the new "Methods" to link the national economic impact
oi new equip-ant to the actual cost accounting of the enterprise. liowever.
Ii. Veliitanov. while agreeing that. under the existing system of enterprise
and association cost accounting. it is precisely the profit increment which
is the new equipment impact which is actually being calculated and taken

into account, writes: "Hhat relationship does this increnent in profit
above the neural profit have to saving aggregate social labor. the achieve-
ment of such economy having done the most to create new equipment and improve

3')

FOR ilFFliTIM. USE ONLY
Fl)“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

existing equipment?!" In his opinion, those who think that the profit in-
crement of an enterprise, branch or ministry is the same as the national
economic impact, which is identical to the economy in aggregate social la-
bor, making the maxim. such profit the sole grounds for choosing the di-
rections of national economic branch development and solution variants for
specific production tasks, are mistaken.

IV. Likhechev/ (Izhevsk) notes that nothing is said in the "Methods" about
the revenue obtained by the enterprise from the marketing of base equipment
(Kp). ‘l'hat rcvenuc, in his opinion, need not be found from the amount of
capital investments needed to introduce new equipment, inasmuch as the old
equipment is generally sold after the now has been introduced. 'l’het reve-
nue goes into the production development fund and is a source for subsequent
investments in new equipment. V. Likhschev therefore proposes that the re-
venues from selling old equipment, calculated with consideration of the time
factor and multiplied by a normative effectiveness factor 5,, K, , be added
to the profit of the corresponding year.

A number of authors raise in their remarks certain organisational-legal ques-
tions of the operation of the new methods." Introduction of the new "He-
thode" must, in v. liarkelov's opinion, also entail a review of the bonus
scales for the creation and introduction of new equipment. Increasing the
impact ostimete period from one year to a number of years equal to the ser-
vice life of the new equipment in and of itself leads to an increase in the
impact. V. Herkelov notes that if the annual economic impact is calculated
using the formulas given in the "iiethods" for new means of long-term appli-
cation labor with improved qualitative characteristics (either for the pro-
duction and use of new objects of labor or for improved ones), then the im-
pact obtained will very often exceed several-fold the two-million ruble merlt
(calculations of an impact higher than this are agreed to by the USSR Coun-
cil of Ministers' State Co-ittee for Science and Technology), although the
technical-economic indicators of the new equip-ent exceed the indicators of
the equipment being replaced by only 30-50 percent. Such considerable eco-
nomic impact amounts should be explained by the fact that, under the previ-
ously existing methods, the economic impact was determined as if it were ob-
tsined in a single year, while under the new "tiethods," (Point 13), the im-
pact is determined over the entire service life of the new equipment. lia-
turally. in this case the total economic impact increases significantly,
while the bonus scale remains unchanged.

1. Finkel' raises an important problem associated with introducing the new
"Methods": when plant specialists who do not recognise the technical-economic
indicators for the base variant, regardless of whether they were calculated

on the basis of branch time norms or the achievements of a leading enterprise
producing similar output, are encountered when confirming actual effectiveness.
Designers sometimes intentionally or unintentionally strive for a situation

in which one indicator (reference expenditures on the base variant) is in-
crossed t-v a maximum value and another (reference expenditures for the ver-
iant being planned) is reduced to the minimum value possible. Therefore, in

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I. liniwl'u opinion it In ialporluiil in ouiahliah scientifically substantiated
Iules (nu culculatlng the ecu-music nlln-ilvonnas of introducing new equip-slit.
to Im-raass Icupouslbiliiy and introduce Hues inr al'til'icial under- or over-

stating of an ernnuulu: impact. ior new equlpwliii cuneumara' evading confirm-
ing that impact.

in what ways mat the methodology of determining the ccouonic effectiveness
of new equipmeni he improved? Au increnuinx nuuher of uclontiats and prac-
ticing ecownaisin consider it appropriate to create a single uthod for da-
teinining social plihlucl inn rtieclivoursu. a method which would regulate
the resolution of various economic ancl technical decision-halting tasks on
a uniform methodological basis.”

The necessity oi integrating the numerous methods mterials on determining
the cooparative ccnnOmlc nt’factivnness of variant resolutions of specific
economic -productlon and technical tasks with a view towards selecting the
nest ei'iicient among thus has been substantiated in detail by K. Veliksnov.
he notes that. given two official aethods. the "Standard hathods of Deter-
mining the Economic Eirectivenoss of Capital Investments" (1969) and the new
"Hethods" (Basic l’rovlsinns, I977). their spheres of application and their
"subordination" have not been clarified. The aunin thing is that the metho-
dological principles of ithcte methods differ greatly from one another, while
the selection of the best variants for using national sconoeic resources
must be built on unilied fundamental principles. Therefore, K. Velilanov
proposes the immediate organisation of involvement of broad segments of the
scientific con-unity in the creative development of unified Methods of de-
termining the comparative economic effectiveness of socialist production de-
velopncn: variants and variants of the use of its resources. It would be
expedient, in his opinion. to draft such methods after a preliainary local
review. subliltlng that draft {or discussion at an all-union conference such
as was held in 1958 to discuss the basic provisions of the first "Standard
Methods of Determining the Economic Effectiveness of Capital Investments
and Rev Equipment in the National Economy."

The new "liethods" were developed on the basis of research done by acadsey
and branch institutes. It takes into account the results of a discussion

of the problems of economic effectiveness by the scientific co-unity and
production workers. The "Methods" reflect the state of the theory of capi-
tal investment and new equips-eat effectiveness. so we are fore-oat interested
in evaluating experience in applying the "tiethods" and in discussing its in-
dividual provisions in order to continue perfecting the theory and nthodo-
logy of determining effectiveness.

let's concentrate on calculations of the annual econonic inpact of the pro-
duction and use or‘ new scans of long-tern application labor according to
formula [h] in conformity with Point 13. There is good reason for the in-
tercsl in Point 13 of the Methods." inasauch as it is a new and fundamen-
tally important point which was absent from previous methods.

i7

Fill: I‘l-FICIM. USP. Hh'lh
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The inpurtance attached to expanding the planning horizon is know. There
was a contradiction between this demand and the accepted methods of evaluat-
ing the comparative effectiveness of economic and technical resolutions -~
the latter were static in nature and were oriented towards determining the
annual economic impact. The Methods" for the first time add a dynamic mo-
dification to the static formula of reference expenditures. In this connec-
tinn. those letter-writers who think the impact estimated using formula [6]
is not an annual impact in the generally-used meaning of the term, but the
impact of the annual release of new equipment over its entire service life,
are correct. naturally. the national economic impact of new equipunt must
he calculated using the same formula by both its producers and its consumers,
on the basis of the exact same indicators and yielding the exact same value;
otherwise, it does not justify the "national-economic" label.

In connection with Point 13 of the "Methods." R. Velikanov thinke the actual
amount of output produced using the new equipment in the corresponding year
of its use must be adopted as the basis for calculating economic impact.
however. this problem is not solved so indisputably and unambiguously. The
fact is that the "liethods" are intended to resolve various tasks (wherein
lies their advantage), including selection of the best variants of new equip-
aunt and bonuses for its creation and introduction. In order to solve these
tasks. it is important to know the amount of the anticipated impact from ell
new equipment being produced, its economic potential. As cancerns its planned
and actual impacts. they must be determined for the amount of equipment ac-
tually being used, as outlined in the "Methods" (Section III).

let us recall that, in connection with this same Point 13. 1.. Blank is against
dynamic methods of calculating expenditures and results for individual local-
scale new equipment introduction measures in principle. In our view. he
greatly exaggerates the difficulties in making them and the size of the pos-
sible error. although such difficulties do exist objectively. One can hardly
agree that the accuracy of the economic parameters forecast increases with
the transition from single small-scale technical measures to larger projects
such as ecientific~technicel and economic progrems. Experience shows that

a forecast of the expenditures associated with the production and use of new
tractors. excavators and sechine tools turns out to he more accurate than.
for example, a determination of the estimated cost of implementing large-
scale projects end programs.

Moreover. the present apparatus for forecasting the economic parameters of

equipment was developed applicable to individual types of equipment. and not
to large-scale scientific-technical systems. In combination with the use of
methods of recording indeterminacy in decision-making. continued improvesnnt
in the methods of forecasting the economic parameters of individual types of
equipmnt and large technical systems (including the process of celculeting
long-term economic impact) will undoubtedly enable us to overcome the exist-
ing difficulties. As concerns the "variable base." however. increasingly

improved types of equipment will naturally be created in the scientific and
technical development process. llut the process of selecting equipment and

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
pleuning its introduction is also continuum. clearly. equipment introduced
in 1978 becauso its Indicators exceed lhoaa oi the best domeatic or foreign
equipment whom it was developed will in I988 have indicator. inferior not
only to the beoi of that tine. hut also in sunny intermediate tvpoa of iden-
tical-purpose equipnunt. llut it does not follow from this that we need to
reject ite Introduction In [978 and umI even older equip-ant while waiting
for l9lid or. due to the variable base, avoid calculating the long-term im-
pact, as that is needed to make correct decisions under the conditions of
the informtlnn available at any given mat-mt.

V. Vyhornov dose not see the economic sense of adding renovation norns and
the effectiveness nonnative /’+ I.'.. . This is related in part to the fact
that. when deriving inrouls (‘0), he formally divided both parts of the tranc-

formad axprosninn (J) by l': l- Iz,I . or. which is the sauna thing, Iultiplied

then by -. .1. The economic essence --- l—--- hecosaes clear from the

['21: '15.. I'; I 12'.
transformations of Ya. lips and II. Savel'yev. as from formula (9). for ex-
ample. That is the total discount isultipliors for annual expenditures (if

constant) over period T; . that is. over the service life of the new leans

I is the total such nultipliere for the service

"' ' ’5" P.+z-:..

life of the base means of labor (7;). But Erection "[3375 signifies no-
' II

thing other than the relationship or this total for a new means of labor to

its value for the base nsans. called the "coefficient of recording change in

the service life of a new eecns of labor as compared with the base means" in

tho "iiethods. "

oi‘ labor; similarly. ..

Formula [lo] of the "Methods" and its derivation provided by V. Vyhornov are
strictly correct only given the aseulption that the nonnative of comparative
capital invest-ant effectiveness and the discounting norm are essentially
the same indicator, or in any case are the same value. Otherwise, one com-
ponent. consumer savings. is adduced based on a normative equal to effect-
ivencss coefficient 5,. and another coeponent which takes renovation deduc-
tions into accor‘t in accordance with Appendix 2 is adduced hand on norma~
tive E . which differs from E. , in one and the sane formula. In this in-
stance. formula (10). obtained by Ya. Ripe end 3. Savel'yev, is easily de-
rived instead of expression [6]. however. that derivation only formally
confirms the imprecision (given the aboveonoted requisites) of expression
[6]. In fact, use of the discount norm E in the formula of renovations
E

"I" ".:"" is doubtful.

II 4- If) ' - I
A. Lur'ye, having substantiated such a method of calculation renovation when
coeparing plan variants. proceeded from a unified concept of the effective.
neee normative (which he called the discounting norm). "To correctly com-
pare variants." he wrote. ".. .expenditures to recompense worn-out fixed as-
sets must. . .be equated to such annual expenses which will, over t years
(the service life of fixed assets), together with losses in possible savings.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

comprise s sum equal to the cost of the fixed assets. Thus. in order to de-
termine the amortization deductions, which we have designated A. we obtain

_4 .= . ’3'"-.. ,"9
" (I -|-I:‘)' - I
Apropos of L. Blank and K. Velikenov's ideas about substituting reference
expenditures on smchinery manufacture for capital investments on machinery
acquisition in formula [6]. let us note the following: replacement of the
wholesslo price of machinery with reference expenditures on its manufacture
permits a more precise evaluation of its national economic impact as a sav-
ings of sociel labor expenditures. when distribution prices are used. the
size of the impact of a machine become dependent in considerable measure on
the difference between tho amounts of profit for base and new equipment in-
cluded in the prices. Incidentally. the State Price Co-ittee of the USSR
Council of Hinisters replaced bees item prices with reference expenditures
on their eanufacture in the "eiethode of Determining wholesale Prices for low
Production-Technical Output" (1975) for calculating the upper limit of prices

for new equipsent. taking into account the knovn shortcomings in price forma-
tion.

As regards K. Vclikanov and l.. llanlt's observations apropos of including
methods of making the not result identical in calculation formulae [6] and
[5]. our vievpoint is that such inclusion is undesireable. It complicates
ca lculeting the economic impact because making tho base variant identical to
the net result does not elvays yield a whole-number resolution (vhich was
pointed out by K. Velikanov) end because it is impossible to detect tho sav-
ings in hypothetically constant current and capital expenditures. It not
be added to this that there actually is a discrepancy, as L. llank notes.
between the vslue of the impact obtained using formula [ls] when sultiplying

reference expenditures for base equipment by the coeﬁf-iicifsnt of recording
I I

change in the service life of s new means of labor ‘—""" and that value
P3 +£-

of it which is obtained by direct calculation of repeated expenditures for
all cycles of the service life of base and new equipment with their corres-
ponding discounting. It once again results from the fact that in the second
case. the discounting norm 5 is used and differs from the effectiveness nor-
mative E... Given identical E, and E values, the calculation results co-
incide.

This can he illustrated by the follouing numerical example. A new mans of
labor which differs from the base means in only two indicators -- service
life and expenditures on its manufacture -- has been developed. All other
indicators of the base and new equipment are essuud to be identical. for
the purpose of eliminating their influence on the calculation results.
(chart on page following.]

1.0
FOR OFFIClIiL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicators Base New
equipment equip-ant

Reference expenditures on nenufacturing the

neans of labor (3). in rubles $00 1,000
lts productivity in physical units per year 2,600 2.600
Service life (1‘), in years 5 20

Renovation none at the seas service life, ac-
cording to "Methods" Appendix 2 (P). in pro-

portion ol one-tins erpendituren 0.1638 0.0175
Current custoasr expenditures (‘4'). in rubles 80 80
Concolnitent custoeor capital investments (K').

in rubles 100 100
Production of the new means of labor per year.

in units -~ 320

Calculation of the national economic inspect based on the indicated initial
indicators provides the following results using for-ula Us]:
81 P' + Eu (Il’l "' I"), '— ”I! (KI? "' K’l)

3 = [3" BC ' "In-'9- 1-... + " ....__._ 'l’ﬁ 'h'. -
2600 0.I038+0.l5
._ . ,._= 5y . . .. . .

3’1’“ l w 2000 U.U|75+0.l5
(to ~80] onsuoom 100)

+ 'u.on.‘s'+u.|5 " ‘ 1000] '320z-20800 rubles;

with the addition of repeated expenditures discounted at 8 - 0.10:

500 500 500
3 = [150° + "u +6;foT" 4' manna + mm?

— I000 }-320 z +39328 ruhles;

with the addition of repeated expenditures discounted at I .580”:

500 500

3“ {I 5"” -(_|“+0.i5—)-’- (T+‘b;u's)"6‘+?r?o;n‘sﬁ’

...|ooo}.320 z ~20800 ruhles.

The whole series of formulas used in the "iiethods" is based on those concepts
of effectiveness for which the discount nor- is accepted in principle as be-
ing equal to the effectiveness nornetive. ‘i‘hus, aany shortconings of for-ole
[‘0] stars from the rejection of that principle and the introduction of dif-
ferent values for the effectiveness normative and the discount norn.

1t see-s to us that the next editing of the "Methods" should replace for-ole
[(0] with a more universal for-ole for calculating the cueuletivs (integral)
iapect over the service life of the equip-ant. a for-ule not linlnad to the
fire condition that the eaount of current expenditures in operating base or
new equipment be constant for all years of its operation. The principles
for determining the national econo-ic cunulative inpact have been substan-

tiated in the works of A. Lur'ye. V. Novozhilov. ‘1'. nachaturov, 1.. cetovskiy

lo]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Vi)" OFFICIAL USE (lNlN

and other Soviet economists. end the appropriate foreules ere conteined in
the "Beeic Provisions for Optimizing Production Development end Distribution"
which were prepared by the 088R Acsdemy of Sciences Siberien Depertment‘s
'l'sliil and ISO" [expansions unknown], jointly with the Council for the Study
of Productive Forces ettechsd to the USSR Gosplen, es well es in the "Methods
of Detersuining the Economic Effectiveness of New Bquipeent." worked out by
the USSR Acedemy of Sciences' Institute of Economics in l973. Some of the
remeining disputed methods questions of celculeting cumuletive impect could
be resolved through discussion. As concerns melting the end result identi-
cel, however. seperete methods heving been included in for-ales [ls] end [5]
of the “Methods," thet obviously must precede celculetion of the impsct.

Among the nerits of the "Methods" not noted by the euthors cited here ere

the inclusion in it of s new section, "Reflecting the economic effectiveness
of new equipment in norms, normetives, plenning end reporting indicetors,"
which is celled upon to estsblish e link between the netionel economic im-
pect of new equipment end the cost-eccounting results of enterprise ectivity‘.
It stteepts to introduce into the unsgement of scientific end technicsl pro-
green three verieties of the impect celculsted on s single methodologicsl
basis: anticipated (plennned). plenned end ectuel.

K. Vslikenov's idees shout the ”Methods," thet the increment in profit from
the repletement of bees equipment with new equipment is considered to be its
netionel economic impsct end thet the meximum such increment be considered
the criterion for decision-skins, seem to us to be without foundstion.
They do not follow et ell from either the text of the methods or from pub-
lished coenentsries on it.

Point lo of the ‘iiethods" stetes: "Decisions on the expediency of creeting
end introducing new equipment. inventions end efficiency proposels ere msde
on the besis of the economic impect es determined by the level of production

of the new equipment in the celculetion yeer (ennuel economic impsct)." hut
Point 6 cleerly stetes thet "the ennuel economic impect of new equipment

(inventions end efficiency propossls) is the totel ssvings of ell production
resources (live lehor. meteriels, cepitel investments) the netionel economy
receives es s result of the production end use of new equipant end is in
the final enslysis expressed in increesed netionel income."

Thus, the "Methods" enticipete decision-melting on the besie of the netionel
economic impect es the totel sevings of ell production resources, which is
eeeentielly very close to K. Veliksnov's sevinge of eggregste sociel lebor.
As concerns profit end other indicetors of enterprise economic ectivity, how-
ever. eccording to the "iiethods," the netionel economic impsct of new equip-
ment must be reflected in the plenned end ectuel velues of these indicetors.

This signifies. first. s precise subordinetion of the netionel economic end
costreccounting impects of new equipment: decisions ere ads on the hseis
of the netionel economic impect. which is only reflected in the cost-eccount-
ing inpsct. Second. the Methods" obviously proceed from the feet thet the

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ill-‘Fli'lM. lliilz UNLY

prices for new aquiymnnt are set in accordance with the 'Hethods for Setting
Prices for New rroduction-Technical Output." The interaction of these two
sethoda is an essential condition for the planned nanagenant of scientific
and technical progress. The increment in the profits of the producer and
consu-sr of new equipment. as has been proven in the works of L. Oatovskiy.
H. Vilanskiy. D. L'vov. A. Koshura and others, is two parts of its national
econoeic inpnct.

Prue our point of view. neither can we agree fully with V. Likhachev's pro-

ponal (p 8). in thin case. revenues Iran the aale of base equip-eat affect
the results of enterprise cost-accounting activity but find no reflection
whatsoever in the national econoeic inpact indicators as calculated using
formulas [3]. [a]. [5] or [7]. Moreover. the uae of these funds to acquire
any other new equipaent as a consequence becoees the subject of another cal-
culation of the econoeic impact of introducing that (other) new equip-ant.
it scene to us that the indicated revenues. which increase the capital in-
vesteent funds of society. should still be deducted from capital expenditures
on new equipment when calculating rlm national economic inpact with consir
deration of the ties factor. as V. Likhachev proposes. but when deter-ining
the cost-accounting inpact -- without such consideration (as applicable to
the year of sale) for has: equipment.

Finally. L. Blank's proposal on calculating renovation. It lust first be
noted that the method of calculating renovation adopted in ths 'lethods" is
intended only for calculating the anticipated (designed) national econoeic
inpact and has nothing whatsoever to do with actual econoaic relations as-
tween the state and the enterprise. This is a calculation aethod having as
its goal ensuring a stricter comparability of variants and the possibility
of evaluating the- economically in an objective manner. The opinion about
reciprocal compensation of interest charges between the state and the enter-
prise is also without foundation for that reason. Moreover, from our point
of view, L. blank incorrectly interprets renovation contributions as paying
off a state loan for the acquisition of new equipnent. In fact. deprecia-
tion deductions (including renovation) are a aethod of transferring the cost
of means of labor to the product produced. ensuring raieburseeent of leans
of labor after their full depreciation. This incorrect interpretation of
the essence of renovation also pradeternines errors in the foresl apparatus:
instead of referring renovation deductions based on a tine factor to the
last year of operation of the machine, L. Blank proposes referring the. to
the year of its initial acquisition. and consequently would not reduce the
norm of deductions for renovation. but would increase than as coupered with
the note accepted in econoeic practice.

In conclusion, it should be noted that one very important direction in in-
proving the methodology of determining the effectiveness of new equip-Int
which was not reflected in reader letters and observations was the search
for cathode of calculating its socioecononic inpact, which oust in tile re-
place the indicator of economic inpact in resolving tasks of eanaging sci-
entific and technical progress.

I.)
FlIR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rooms

1. Approved by the USSR Council of Hinietere State Co-ittee for Science
end Technology, the USSR Couplen. the USSR Acedeey of Sciencee end the
USSR Council of Hinietere Stete Co-ittee for lnventione end Diecovor-
ice on l6 Februery 1977.

2. For the eeke of brevity, we will eubeequently uee 'ﬁethode" to eignlfy
theee perticuler nethode.

3. In order to dietinguieh "Hethode" for-ule nunbere from thoee in thie

review. we ere encloeing the former in breckete end the letter in peren-
theeee.

1.. Thin viewpoint ie cloee to V. Rreeovekiy'e poeition preeented in hie er-

ticle "Integral Inpect end the The Pector" (VOPROSY “Will. Ilo 8.
1971.. p a).

5. Sea: BROWICHESKAYA GAZBTA. No 10. Herch 1977. eupplelent; B. Zeyteev,
"Deter-ining the Effectiveneu of Technicel Innovetione" (VOPROSY RROIIO-
HIKI. No 10. 1977).

6. The euthore reduce veluee W. and K’. in the for-ule to the enount of out-

8
put for the new neene of lebor by multiplying the. by 3’-
|

7. The reference in to the inpect of e eingle unit of new equip-ant; ec-
cording to the "hethode." thie expreeeion ebould be eultiplied by A‘ ,
the enount produced by the new equipment. in order to deter-inn the en-
nunl rcleeee lupect.

8. See. for eulplc: VOPROSY IRWIN, No 6, 1978. p 121.

9. A. L. Lur'ye, "Ekonoelcheekiy eneliz nodeley pleniroveniye eoteielie-
ticheekogo khozyeyetve" [Economic Anelyeie of Socieliet economic Plen-
ning Hodele]. Neuke lad-v0, l973. p 335. The ey-bole edopted by A.
Lur'ye have been reteined; they correepond to the following eydole
need in the "Method“ end in thie review: r-r;;E-£.;’l -P,.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Prevde", "Voproey ekonoallti", 1978

H.052
C30: “320

END

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY