FUR OFFICIAL lﬁSI'I ONLY

JPRS L/10291
29 January 1982

USSR Report

AGRICULTU‘RE
(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

AGRICULTURE
(P000 2/82)

Coursurs

REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Effectiveness of Industrial Seed Production in Siberia Noted

(V. S. Verevkin, G. I. Novosel'tsev; SMTSIYA I
smmvowm, mv 81)0......I.IOIOOIOIOOICIOCOOOQOO0.0.0.0.... 1

AGRO-EMNOMIG AND ORGAN IZATION

Effective Capital Investmnt in Degestan Fruit Processing
(6-6. A. Salikhov; PLANIROVANIYA I 0013': V SEL'SKDKHOZYAY-
STVENNYKH PREDPRIYATIYAKH. Nov 81) lo

Utilizing Productive Fixed Capital in Leningrad Area

(Y. M. Latins, M. Ye. mil'tsova; PLANIIDVANIYE I UOiI-Z'l'
V SEL'SKOIG'IOZYAYSTVENNYIG‘I PRBDPRIYA'HYAKH. NOV 81)............. 8

Recomndstions for Developmnt of Private Sector Outlined
(I. Vasil'yev, B. Fruitin; WPRJSY EKOROMIKI, Nov 81).......... 17

TILLING AND CROPPING RCHNOLOGY

More Attention To Improvement in Seed Production Urged
(c. P. Zhinov; SBLEKTSIYA I SMNWODSTVO, Nov 81)............ 22

- a - [III - USSR - 7 FOUC

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UDC 631.14:631.53l.01
EFFECTIVENESS OF INDUSTRIAL SEED PRODUCTION IN SIBERIA NOTED
Moscow SELEXTSIYA I smmovoosrvo in Russian No 11. Nov 81 pp 30-31

_/_Article by V. S. Verevkin, head of the division of seed production of the Siberian
Scientific Research Institute of Agriculture. and G. I. Novosel'tsev. candidate of
economic sciences. senior scientific worker at the institute's division of econ-
omics: "Btperience in the Specialiration and Concentration of Seed Production27

ﬁexg- Basic Directions in the Econoaic and Social Development of the USSR for
1981-1985 and for the Period Until 1990 note the need for an iuprovement in the
system of production of seeds of agricultural crops. acceleration of its transfer
to an industrial basis, the most rapid introduction of highly productive. new va-
rieties and hybrids and improvement in the quality of seeds.

In accordance with the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council
of Ministers "On Measures for the Further Improvement in the Selection and Produc-
tion of Seeds of Grain and Oil Crops and Grasses" (1976) a system of industrial
seed production was developed in Omakaya oblast. It envisages the production of
seeds of the highest reproductions of grain and oil crops and grasses on the ex-
perimental production farms of the Siberian Scientific Research Institute of Agri-
culture (Omskoye, Novoural'skoye. Boyevoye and ineni Frunze), on the educational
farm No 2 of the Omsk Agricultural Institute imeni Kirov and at the Siberian Oil
Crop Station, which should annually produce more than 110,000 tons of elite and
first reproduction seeds of grain crops. 50 tons of perennial and annual grasses
and 110 tons of oil crops for strain changing and renovation.

A production association for varietal seed rsising--G>laortsewrom—-inc1uding 16
specialized seed producing farms located in rayons with conditions most favorable
for seed production (steppe and forest steppe) was established under the oblast
production administration of agriculture. They reproduce elite seeds of grain
crops to the second reproduction and fully provide 68 kolkhozea and sovkhozes in
six rayons of teiga and subtoiga zones with them. The specialized seed producing
farms of Oblsortsenpron were also entrusted with the production of seeds of crops
occupying small. sown areas (millet. buckwheat. peas. vetch. oil crops and grasses)
and with the procurement of a significant proportion of seeds of grain crops
(80,000 tons) and perennial grasses for state resources and the oblast insurance

stock.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UPDILIAL USP. UNI-l

A total of 18 intrarayon specialized seed producing farms were established in ra-
yons of the northern forest steppe zone. 0n the basis of interfarm cooperation
they should meet the need of all the other farms in their rayon (65) for seeds of
grain crops. 0n large aovkhozes and kolkhozes of stepp‘ and forest steppe zones
(161 farms) seed production for local needs is concentrated in seed producing de-

partments and brigades (intrafarm specialization). which now form the basis for the
oblast's seed production.

The introduction of industrial seed production has ensured an inprovenent in the
quality of seeds. Most of the cblast's farms have high-quality seed stocks of the
best regionalized varieties. Last year the oblast's sovkhozes and kolkhoaes sowed
95 percent of certified seeds of grain crops. including 67.3 percent of first- and
second-category seeds, whereas in 1970 these indicators were 85.2 and 57.9 percent
respectively. During the 10th Five-Year Plan sown areas wera basically varietal.
94 percent of the areas being occupied by regionalized varieties.

Strain changing--replacement of old unproductive strains with highly productive
ones--should be the Iain task of seed production at the present stage.

The variety ratio in production improved considerably and more productive, new va-
rieties appeared: of spring wheat--0mskaya 9. Thelinnaya 20, Sibakovskaya 3. Alan:
and others; of barley--Tselinnyy 5; of oats--Risto and Omskiy kornovoy l; of hil-
let--0makoye 5; of peas--0mskiy 7; of vetch--0michka and others. On the average.
in 1977-1980 on the Novoural'skiy EXperimental Model Farm from an area of 9.920
hectares the Omskaya 9 spring wheat produced a grain harvest of 36.5 quintala per
hectare and in 1980 from 3.aoo hectares. 62.5 quintals per hectare.

The areas sown with new varieties expand annually. For example, whereas in 1975
they comprised 2.6 percent of all the areas sown with grain crops, in 1980 they
made up 39 percent.

Along with an improvement in the seed production system in the ohlast much atten-
umisthomeunnmmmgMtMsxmﬂsmudﬂuﬁtummubumir
provement in the crop structure and introduction of a scientifically substantatied
agrocoaplex contributing re the production of high-quality seeds. For exanple.
the construction of 355.000 square meters ofasphaltedgrounds. 330 grain cleaning
flow lines and 32 seed complexes is envisaged for 1981-1985. In accordance with
the technological systems developed in the Siberian Scientific Research Institute
of Agriculture clean fallow should comprise 18 to 20 percent and areas sown with
grain crops,55 to 60 percent in the structure of arable land of seed producing
farms during the 11th Five-Year Plan.

To raise the farming standard. specialized seed producing farms began to introduce
the soil protective system of soil cultivation and the fertilizer system in crop
rotations.

In accordance with the recommendations of the Siberian Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Agriculture plans are made to apply 57 kg of nutrient elements, including

34 kg of phosphorus fertilizers, 15 kg of nitrogen fertilizers and 8 kg of potas-
sium fertilizers, per hectare of arable land during the 11th Five-Year Plan.

INDI'OIWNCIAI.IEHB(NNLY
lili¢ﬂﬂﬂ<1Al.US£13NLY

The transfer of seed production to an industrial basis, its further concentration
and intensification of specialization will create optimal conditions for a rise in

labor productivity. decrease in production costs and growth of production profit-
ability.

Calculations show that the level of profitability of the production of varietal
seeds of grain crops on the experimental production farm of the Siberian Scientif-
ic Research Institute of Agriculture will comprise 127 percent and on specialized
seed producing sovkhozes, 110 to 124 percent. At the same tine, when seeds are
grown on specialized seed producing sovkhozes, the production costs of grain on
kolkhozes and sovkhozes decrease, the net income per hectare of sown area increases
and the profitability of grain farming rises.

The results of the general economic evaluation of seed production on specialized
seed producing farms of Oblsortseuprom for kolkhozes and sovkhozes indicate that
the specialization and concentration of seed production are effective for seed
raising. as well as consuming. farms. The total annual econoaic effect from seed

production on an industrial basis is 2.501.900 rubles. or 33.2 rubles per hectare
of sown area.

A rapid introduction of highly productive. new varieties of grain crops and the

transfer of seed production to an industrial basis will enable sovkhozea and kol-
khozes in Omskaya Oblast to increase the grain harvest by 3 to 5 quintals per hec-
tare and to additionally obtain 60 to 65 million rubles of profit from grain pro-

duction every year.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Kolos". "Selektaiya i senenovodstvo", 1981.

11.439
CSO: 1824/114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
EFFECTIVE CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN DAGESTAN FRUIT PROCESSING

Moscow PLANIROVANIYA I UCHBT V SBL'SKOKROZYAXSTVBNNYKH PRBDPRIYATIYAKH in Russian
No 11, Nov 81 pp 26-32

[Article by 6-6. A. Salikhov. chief of financial division of Dagplodoprom: "nigh
Effectiveness of Capital Investments"]

[Text] The Dagestan specialized association for producing, storing. processing and
selling fruits and grapes (Dagplodoprom) combines 36 sovkhozes. most of which have
been organized since the Hatch (1965) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee on the
basis of economically weak kolkhozes. During 1971-1980 more than 220 million
rubles in funds from the state budget were used for the development of kolkhoz pro-
duction. During that time the value of fixed production capital of the farms in-
creased 2.5-fold as compared to 1970.

Under the Tenth Five-Year Plan the provision of capital for the sovkhozes_increas-
ed by 26.6 percent as compared to the level of the Ninth Five-Year Plan. An analy-
sis of the assimilation of capital investments on the sovkhozes of Dagplodoprom,
where perennial plantings comprise 61 percent of the fixed production capital for
agricultural purposes, shows that the capital-labor ratio and the provision of
capital for the farms increased under the Tenth Five-Year Plan as compared to the
Ninth Five-Year Plan by 16 and 22 percent, respectively, and the output-capital
ratio decreased by 50 percent during this same period.

But we do not think that one can draw a conclusion about a reduction in the effec-
tiveness of the utilization of capital investments and fixed production capital
just on the basis of these figures since the rapid increase in their volumes could
not but affect the level of the output-capital ratio in agricultural production.

A certain amount of time is required in order to obtain a greater return from in-
vested funds. and it is very important to take all necessary measures for reducing
the time periods for recouping the funds. According to our calculations, the time
period for the assimilation of capital investments on farms with orchards and vine-
yards is from 6 to 15 years.

Research has also demonstrated that, although Dagestan has been engaged in orchard
growing since time immemorial. it did not begin to plant intensive orchards on
large areas using valuable low-growing strains from domestic and foreign selection
until little more than 10 years ago. The republic has every opportunity to exten-
sively develop intensive industrial gardening in zones with mountain valleys and

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
plains. Still, the orchard growers are searching for optimal variants of the se-

lection of crops which provide for obtaining the largest volume of products with
the least expenditures and for high effectiveness of capital investments.

Dagplodoprom is taking measures for reconstructing less productive orchards on the
sovkhozes and intends to replace them completely with intensive orchards in the
future. In 1980 the sovkhozes of the association planted 815 hectares of orchards
using new planting technology and distributing #00 to 1,000 trees on one hectare.
In planting the new orchards preference is given to crops whose fruit has pits
rather than cores. and the most valuable strains are being used.

The sovkhozes of the association have a large selection of planting material for
fulfilling their earmarked plans. Thus in 1980 the farms received 1,323,000 fruit
tree seedlings (with a plan for 1.3 million) and, moreover, produced 9.6 million
grape seedlings. In 1980 the sovkhozes received more than 2 million rubles in pro-
fit from the sale of fruit and grape seedlings. In the next few years the nursery
sovkhozes of Dagplodoprom will be able to supply planting material of valuable
strains of fruits and grapes not only for kolkhozes and sovkhozes of Dagestan, but
also for farms of other krays, oblasts and autonomous republics of the Northern
Caucasus.

In recent years large changes have taken place in grapr production in Dagestan
where until recently mainly manual labor was used. We have assimilated new techno-
logy for the cultivation of grapes and the kolkhozes and sovkhoaes are planting
plants that form the bush on a high stem with broad interrows, which will make it
possible in the future to fully mechanize all labor-intensive processes and, be-
cause of this, to sharply reduce the production costs of products and to increase
productivity.

The areas planted in intensive vineyards are expanding from year to year. In 1980
alone the sovkhozes of Dagplodoprom used progressive methods to plant 911 hectares
of vineyards.

0n multibranch farms which have achieved sufficiently high effectiveness of capital
investments in orchard and grape growing. the indicators of the provision of capi-
tal for production and the capital-labor ratio are still low in other branches, es-
pecially animal husbandry. For example, on an average for 1976-1979 the sovkhozes
of Dagplodoprom produced 375 rubles' worth of products per 1,000 rubles' worth of

fixed production capital for agricultural purposes, and for a whole group of sov-
khozes this indicator was even lower-~only 112-217 rubles.

The low level of provision of capital and the capital-labor ratio is explained by
the inadequate amounts of capital investments in these branches. Thus 80 percent
of the overall volume of capital investments allotted to Dagplodoprom were used for
the development of orchard and grape growing and for technical rearmament of their
material base. and only 15-20 percent were used for the construction of buildings
and other structures for production and non-production purposes.

The main impediment to increasing capital investments in the construction of build-

ings and structures, and also in the reconstruction of animal husbandry facilities
and production structures for other services, is the failure on the part of the

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
main contracting organizations to fulfill their plans for construction and assem-
bly work. Each year they upset plans for the startup of fixed capital. Thus in

1981 all seven contracting organizations that serve the association failed to ful-
fill their plans for contracting work and, as a result of this, the volume of in-
complete construction as of 1 January 1981 amounted to more than 4 million rubles.

Despite the great need for the construction of new facilities for production and
non-production purposes, while the sovkhozes have temporary facilities and incom-
plete construction on their books they do not have the right to include new facili-
ties in their plans for capital work, even though the facilities that are under
construction are not being introduced on time because of factors that are beyond
the control of the farms.

Specialized construction organizations pay little attention to construction in ru-
ral areas and, for this reason, they delay the fulfillment of long-range plans for
the socio-economic development of the farms.

Further increased effectiveness of fixed production capital through reducing the
time periods for its assimilation after atartup, improving its structure, and in-
creasing the productivity of each branch in all ways.

In practice the sovkhozes are also experiencing certain difficulties in providing
for the volumes of capital investments from the appropriate sources of financing.
This pertains primarily to perennial plantings, for which there are large differ-
ences between the volumes of investments indicated in the production and financial
plans of the sovkhozes and the plans for capital investments (form No. 3) that are
submitted to the institutions of the Gosbank and sovkhozes. Each year the farms
are forced to petition higher organizations for the allotment of additional volumes
of capital investments in excess of the plan at the end of the year.

Under the Tenth Five-Year Plan the sovkhozes of Dagplodoprom assimilated an addi-
tional 2,400,000 rubles' worth of capital investments without changing the plan for
capital investments, and 93 percent of this amount went for perennial plantings.
The sources initially allotted according to the plan for financing capital invest-
ments (form No. 5), as a rule, are inadequate for providing for the volumes of work
that is done for tending the newly planted areas, and by approximately October the
sovkhozes have expended all the funds from the account for financing capital in-
vestmenta for the yearly volume of work. As a result. the sovkhozes generally have
no funds left for financing work for planting new orchards and vineyards.

Since they have no funds in their accounts for financing capital investments. the
sovkhozes are unable to promptly pay for tne seedlings they receive or for the

work of plowing the plantations which is done by tractors of Raysel'khoztekhnika.

At the same time the farms that supply the seedlings and associations of Goskomsel-
khoztekhnika require only preliminary, and not subsequent payment for the commodity-
material values and services they render.

As a result, in order to fulfill the plans for planting orchards and vineyards, the

sovkhozes are forced to temporarily utilize their own circulating capital for these
purposes, in the hope that it will be remobilized at the end of the year as a re-

sult of additional funds being allotted by the higher organization. Moreover, the

6

IWDR 0F?WC]AI.USE1)NLV
additional funds that are allotted usually go into the account of the farms in the
last days of Deceaber, and the managers and workers of the hockkeeping and planning-

economic services cannot be sure that the imbilized internal circulating capital
will be renobilized in the same calendar year.

In order to rectify this situation, in our opinion. it is necessary for the RSFSR
Plodoprom to proopcly back up all volumes of capital work with the appropriate
sources of financing.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'arvo "Kolos", "Planirovaniye i Uchat v sel'skhokhozyaystvennykh
prepriyatiyakh", 1981

11772
C50: 18'44/116

FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY
. a... a...---.- .u.- urn-u.

AGRO—ECONOMICS AND ORGANIZATION

UDC 351.9:63

UTILIZING PRODUCTIVB FIXED CAPITAL IN LENINGRAD AREA

Moscow PLANIROVANIYB I UCHET V SEL'SKOKHOZYAYSTVBNNYKB PREDPRIYATIYAKH in Russian
No 11. Nov 81 pp 28-32

[Article by Y. H. Latina, head economist for financing and organization of bookr

keeping of the Pobeda Specialized Production Association in Leningrad Oblast. and
H. Ye. Zhil'tsova, economist: "Control Over the Utilization of fixed Production

Capital"]

[Text] The Pobeda Specialized Production Association was organized in 1975. It
includes 4 sovkhozes, of which 3 specialize in vegetable and dairy products and l
in dairy products and potatoes, with the development of hog raising. They have all
retained their legal independence and carry out their activity on the basis of the
Provisions for the Socialist State Enterprise.

The overall area of land included in the association of sovkhozes amounts to
16,260 hectares, including 11,761 hectares of agricultural land. of which 8,105

hectares is plowed. The structure of the association's fixed capital is shown in
the table.

From the figures in the table one can see that under the Tenth Five-Year Plan as

compared to 1975 the amount of fixed production capital for agricultural purposes
had increased by 16.2 percent and amounted to 66.5 percent. During this same peri-

od the capital availability increased by 16.8 percent. For every 100 hectares of
agricultural land and 100 hectares of plowed land there are 302.500 and 661.400
rubles' worth of fixed production capital for agricultural purposes, respectively.
The capital-labor ratio increased by 17.4 percent, and the energy availability per
one average annual worker increased by 6.3 percent and is equal to 26.5 horsepower.

Under the conditions of comprehensive and consistent intensification of agricultur-
a1 production and the growing capital investments, effective economic control must
play an important role in increasing the effectiveness of the utilization of fixed
production capital. In the association the latter is exercised by the associations'
council, the administrative services and public organizations.

The association council organizes its work according to a plan that is drawn up for
the quarter. It envisions concrete measures for control and inspection issues, the

time periods for conducting them and the individuals responsible for them. The
council holds meetings no less than once a quarter. The decisions it makes are

FOR OFFKJAI.USEGDNLN
Fixed production
capital for agri-
cultural purposes

--total 30,244
Including:

buildings 10,315

structures 10,924
or these:

irrigation and
flooding machines,
equipment 7,257

driving apparatus 3,385

means of trans-
portation 725

productive live-
stock 3,639

capital expendi-
tures on land il-
provement 1,056

others 200

Fixed production capi-
tal for nonagricul-
tural purposes 2,399

Fixed nonproduct ion
capital 12.998

—_—.——_——-——-——_

Total fixed capital 45,641
implemented through orders from the general director—the chairman of the associa-
tion council. Control over their execution is the responsihility of the staff le-

gal advisor. who reports each week on the implementation of the earmarked measures
at operations meetings in the presence of the general director.

The association council devotes a great deal of attention to control over the utili-
zation of fixed production capital on the sovkhozes of the association. Thus a
number of measures have been taken for efficient utilization of the land, produc-
tion facilities, agricultural equipment. productive livestock and so forth.

In the structure of the fixed production capital for agricultural purposes, land
reclamation funds comprise 32.5 percent in the association. and fixed capital for
croy growing-SO.9 percent. Products obtained from reclaimed land comprise 68.9
percent of the overall volume of the gross production of crop growing products.
Therefore special attention it devoted to efficient utilization of reclaimed land.

Specifically, the association council has deve10ped a long-range plan for land re-
clamation construction during 1976-1980. a plan for centralized care for the land
reclamation network, and also a comprehensive set of land reclamation measures,
including preparing a long-range plan for irrigation and drainage of land, conduct-
ing technical crop work, assimilating poorly utilized small sections of land (along
roads. riverbeds. canals and farms). liming fields. planting meadows. restoring the
fertility of the land and other measures for efficient utilization of the land.
They have also assumed control over the time periods for construction. the. volumes
and quality of work performed by contr1ctors in keeping with the calendar plan for
construction, the availability and utilization of land reclamation equipment. its
storage and its removal from the books.

As a result of the aforementioned measures the gross production of products from
reclaimed land increased by 19.7 percent under the Tenth Five-Year Plan as compared
to 1975 and the output-capital ratio increased by 18.8 percent during this period.
For each thousand rubles of average annual value of land reclamation funds we ob-
tained 790 rubles' worth of gross output, or 125 rubles more than in 1975.

As a result of plowing roadside strips and previously unutilized sections of land
along canals, riverbeds and the edges of fields. under the Tenth Five-Year Plan
the sovkhozes of the association put abOut 400 hectares of land into circulation
and procured 33,000 tons of peat.

The value of productive livestock in the association increased by 109 percent during
the past five-year plan as compared to 1975, and constitutes 15.1. percent of the
fixed production capital for agricultural purposes. The culling of cows increases

from year to year. While in 1975 it amounted to 18.8 percent, in 1980 this figure
was 26.9 percent with the plan calling for 25 percent.

The association council exercises strict control over the reproduction of the pro-
ductive herd, increasing the milk yield of first heifers and recently calving cows,
the maintenance and feeding of animals of the productive herd, a Ionthly analysis
of the condition of the reproductive herd and the maintenance of the livestock on
the sovkhozes, and also the fulfillment of measures earmarked for improving the
work for reproducing the basic herd.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The director and the head specialist regularly report at council meetings on the
question of the reproduction of the productive herd on the sovkhozes. All this
contributes to successful implementation of measures for improving the reproduction
of the herd and increasing the output of calves and the milk yield per cow on for-
age.

In 1980, for example, the output of calves per 100 cows in the association amounted
to 83 head, while the plan was for 81 head. At the head sovkhoz, Pobeda, and the
Petrodvortsovyy. with plans for 84 and 82, respectively, they each actually obtain-
ed 86 head. The output of calves in the association as a whole has increased by
16.2 percent as compared to 1975. The milk yield per cow on forage amounted to
3,661 kilograms of milk or 8.9 percent above the 1975 level. During the Tenth

Five-Year Plan the gross milk production increased by 53.8 percent as compared to
1975.

In order to increase the efficiency of the utilization of the machine and tractor
fleet, the association council has developed measures for implementing the decree
of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers, "0n Measures for
Further Increasing the Efficiency of Utilization of Agricultural Equipment, Im-
proving its Maintenance, Providing the Kolkhozes and Sovkhozes with Machine Opera-
ting Personnel, and Ensuring That They Remain in Agriculture," and is exercising
control over their implementation. At its meetings the council considers questions
of improving the utilization of the machine-tractor and automotive fleet, improving
their structure and also stepping up control over the work of the interfarm complex
and the combined detachment for procuring feeds, the distribution of technical

equipment for spring planting, the organization of the shipment of organic fertili-
zers to the fields, and so forth.

Additionally, the association council follows the course planning and construction
work, and current and capital repair. At the same time it checks on the way orders

1nd decisions for ensuring the efficiency of the utilization of fixed production
capital are carried out.

The bookkeeping, economic and other services are very important for exercising con-
trol over the utilization of fixed production capital.

The organization of the accounting for fixed capital and economic analysis of its
utilization are directed toward revealing reserves for increasing the effectiveness
of the utilization of fixed production capital.

The sovkhozes of the association have introduced a progressive method of accounting
for fixed capital using card files. Comprehensive mechanization of accounting has
been introduced in three of them, which makes it possible to obtain exhaustive in-
formation on the availability of fixed capital in the care of each materially re-
sponsible individual, in the structural subdivisions and in the various groups of
iixed capital according to the established classification, and also concerning a-
mortization deductions and its distribution among the structural subdivisions and
facilities whose expenditures are accounted for.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a V» vase-nel- vvh Us nus

Official instructions have been developed for all bookkeeping workers, including a
complete list of accounting and control functions for each. For example, the re-
sponsibilities of the head bookkeeper of the head sovkhoz include organizing ac-
counting and accounting for fixed capital, accounting for wear and tear and amorti-
zation of fixed capital, and accounting for the charter fund. Additionally, within
the time period established by the plan for document circulation, he receives from
materially responsible individuals docunents for the receipt and transfer of fixed
capital (form No. 52), documents for writing off machines, equipment and means of
transportation (form No. 56), and docuaents for writing off buildings and struc-
tures (form No. 55). He also checks to make sure that the receipt and writing off
of fixed capital are correct. In additiOn to this, the deputy head bookkeeper must
promptly, completely and precisely reflect the technical descriptions of fixed capi-
tal on the inventory cards, check on the correctness of the deductions and distri-
bution of amortization each month, make sure that the accounts with the suppliers
of fixed capital are up to date and correct, inform administrative services about
the existence of unused machines, equipment and also fixed capital that is unsuit-
able for further operation, prepare the necessary bookkeeping information for con-

ducting an economic analysis of the utilization of fixed capital, and, in conjunc-
tion with specialists of other services, take an inventory of it.

The bookkeeper in charge of auxiliary production is responsible for accounting for
the operation of the machine and tractor fleet. Bis duties include keeping eunu-
lative information about the operational indicators of the motor vehicles (shipped
cargo [tons], ton-kilometers, the nuaber of motor vehicle-days of operation, the
expenditure of fuel and so forth) for the various individual vehicles and makes of
vehicles as well as drivers, the respective work on conventional standard hectares,
and the expenditure of fuel for the various makes of tractors and tractor operators;

the determination of the production cost of a ton-kilometer and a conventional
standard hectare;

the drawing up of statistical accounts of the work of cargo transportation and the
production costs of automotive shipments (form No. Z-tr) and the work of tractors
and grain harvesting combines (form No. l and 2-mekh);

control over the correctness of journals for checking out motor vehicles and re-
turning them to the garage, registration of travel sheets for the automotive fleet
and tractors for transportation work;

the preparation of bookkeeping figures concerning the operation of the machine and
tractor fleet that are necessary for conducting economic analysis.

The association's economic service is partially centralized. The association's
head economist is also the head econonist of the head sovkhoz, and the economists
are responsible for the same parts of the work for the association as they are for
the head sovkhoa. The supervisory function of the workers in the economic service
are also determined by official instructions.

Control over the utilization of fixed production capital (except for productive
livestock) is the responsibility of the econoaist for cost accounting and analysis.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Additionally, he analyzes and supervises the utilization of the fixed production
capital of each sovkhoz and their structural subdivisions;

he promptly submits the results of analysis to the corresponding services (agrono-
mical, zootechnical, engineering, construction and so forth);

he substantiates the economic effectiveness of capital investments and the sequence
for their realization;

he develops measures for improving the utilization of fixed capital;
he conducts economic training for workers of the association's sovkhozes.

The duties of the senior economist for animal husbandry and the economist for crop
growing include control over efficient utilization of productive livestock and the
land, respectively.

Each month the association also does an analysis of the reproduction of the produc-
tive herd and the production of milk, the operation of the machine and tractor
fleet, the motor vehicle fleet, the repair shop and the construction shop. For
example, the main economic indicators of the production of milk reflect the average
number of head of cows, the gross milk yield per cow on forage, their offspring,
the production of calves per 100 cows and noncalving young cows. the production
cost of one quintal of milk in terms of the various elements of expenditures, and
labor expenditures per one quintal of milk.

The main indicators of the operation of the machine and tractor fleet give detailed
information about its utilization both in the association as a whole and on the
sovkhozes that comprise it.

Each year after drawing up the annual report, the workers of the economic service
make an in-depth analysis of the structure of fixed production capital as a whole
and per one hectare of agricultural land and plowed land, the production of the
gross output from crop growing and animal husbandry in terms of all of the kinds,
the capital availability, the capital-output ratio, the level of development of
agricultural production. the output—capital ratio, the capital-intensiveness, fi-
nancial results and the profitability of agricultural production.

All specialists are informed of the results of the economic analysis and they are
considered by the association council and in economic conferences. The latter are
conducted monthly both in the association and on the sovkhozes. The results of

the work for the quarter are summed up by balance commissions. From the results of
their materials orders are issued which earmark measures for eliminating existing
shortcomings as well specific people responsible for executing them. The bureau

of economic analysis exercises control over the implementation of the decisions of
the balance commission. A large role in this is also assigned to the head special-
ists in production technology-~agronomists, zootechnicians, engineers and special-
ists of the middle level. Their control functions are determined by official in-
structions. Thus the head engineer-hydrotechnician is responsible for technical ‘
supervision of the construction of drainage and irrigation systems and other hydro-
technical structures for all the sovkhozes of the association, and also control

13

FOR OFTNC1A1.USEI)NLN
over the condition and correctness of their operation, the organization of the pro-

per storage for land reclamation and watering equipment, prompt and high-quality
repair of it and its preparation for operation.

He simultaneously guides the development of measures for utilizing technical equip-
ment efficiently, raising the level of mechanization of work for preventive main-
tenance and repair of land reclamation structures, and he regularly analyzes the
economic effectiveness of comprehensive measures and individual agricultural land
reclamation measures that are taken for radical improvement of the land.

The duties of the association's head engineer-mechanic include supervising the de-
livery of new equipment to the sovkhozes in keeping with orders and funds that have
been allotted, the meeting of schedules and making sure that planned preventive
repair of technological and mechanical equipment is carried out, and correct stor-
age of agricultural equipment, spare parts and other material values.

Agricultural equipment comprises 10.3 percent of the association's fixed production
capital for agricultural purposes. As of 1 January 1981 the value of these ma-
chines and equipment was 4,026,000 rubles. Operational expenditures for the ma-
chine and tractor fleet last year amounted to 20 percent of all the production ex-
penditures in crop growing. They spent 650,000 rubles on current repair of techni-
cal equipment alone. Therefore the engineering service devotes special attention
to making sure that agricultural machinery is always in a state of technical readi-
ness, introducing advanced methods of its utilization into production and reducing
expenditures on the operation of the machine and tractor fleet.

As a result, in 1980 the daily output per one standard tractor had increased by
30.0 percent as compared to 1975, and the expenditure of fuel per conventional
standard tractor had decreased by 1.5 kilograms. The number of machines in the
automotive fleet had increased by 12 percent, and the cargo shipment--by 32.1 per-
cent. Hhile in 1975 the association produced 8,072,000 ton-kilometers, in 1980
this figure was 10,651,000. The production cost of one ton-kilometer decreased
during this time by 6 kopecks. But the coefficient of the utilization of the motor
vehicle fleet is still low. In 1980 it was 62 percent.

Operational information provides a good deal of assistance in the organization of
control. The association has 50 intrasovkhoz and 6 intersovkhoz radio stations,

a central dispatch point and a teletype. Various kinds of information comes into
the central dispatch point, including information that is used for control. All of

it is initially processed and analyzed by the senior dispatcher and it is then sub-
mitted to the head specialist of the association.

The central dispatch point maintains communications with all of the sovkhozes and
their production subdivisions and services, promptly transmitting the appropriate
information so that it can effect the results of the economic activity. The senior
dispatcher also keeps a special journal which he uses to check on the promptness

of the implementation by officials of orders and instructions from the general di-
rector and the head specialists.

Public organizations also devote a good deal of attention to control over the utili-
zation of fixed capital in the association: the bureau of economic analysis, the
production-technical council and peoples' control groups and posts.

16

FORIDFFKJAI.USEGDNLY
The bureau of economic analysis was created here in 1973. It is headed by the
deputy general director for production. The bureau includes the head specialists
of the head sovkhoz, the leaders of farms and brigade leaders for field work, and
also leading workers, amounting to'a total of 21 people. Its main task is to dis-
close internal production reserves and develop practical recommendations for in-
creasing the production of products, reducing production costs and increasing labor

productivity, the profitability of production and the efficiency of the utilization
of fixed production capital.

The bureau of econoaic analysis conducts its work on the basis of developed provi-
sions and a plan that is approved by the general director, in close contact with
the economic and bookkeeping services and peoples' control groups and posts. The
bureau meets no less than twice a quarter. For example, the work plan for I981

envisions conducting 8 meetings, 5 of which are to be on questions of efficient
utilization of fixed production capital.

Three peoples' control groups and 15 posts have been created at the head sovkhoz
of the association. The peoples' control groups are assigned the areas of crop
growing, animal husbandry and work with machines, respectively. The farms and the
subsidiary shop each have three posts. housing and municipal services have four,
and other five are at the garage, the repair and mechanics shop, the construction
shop. the section for minor mechanization and the machine and tractor fleet. A
total of 96 people have been elected as peoples' controllers, including 47 commu-
nists and 8 Komsomol members. The peoples' control groups and posts are elected
for a period of two years.

The peoples' control groups of the head sovkhoz direct the work of the shop posts.
The latter are under the jurisdiction of the rayon peoples' control committee.
The activity of the groups and posts is carried out in keeping with the plans.
Long-range and annual (quarter-by-quarter) plans are drawn up for the work of the
head peoples' control group. They are approved at a meeting of the sovkhoz party
committee.

In keeping with the plan that is developed and on the basis of the Law on Peoples'
Control in the USSR in 1979-1980, the peoples' control groups have conducted a
number of inspections directed toward eliminating inefficiency and revealing in-
ternal reserves for increasing the efficiency of the utilization of fixed produc-
tion capital. In particular. a good deal of attention has been devoted to the
implementation of measures for preparing for and conducting spring field work,
providing the farms with seeds, efficiently utilizing agricultural equipment in
spring planting, shipping inorganic fertilizers and procuring feeds, cultivating
the soil well and conducting planting work, caring for the pastures and preparing
them for use, and also efficiently utilizing drained and irrigated land, land re-
clamation structures and technical equipment, and providing for their maintenance.

The work plan for 1981 envisions exercising control over the expenditure of funds
for the maintenance of buildings, structures and technical equipment, the fulfill-
ment of volumes of capital construction and its quality, efficient utilization of
fuel-energy and other material resources, and also organization of the forthcoming
wintering of livestock.

15

FOR OFTECJAI.USE¢DNLN
Additionally, the peoples' control groups conduct various kinds of inspections un-

der the mottos "production reserves in action!", "no idle time for technical equip-
ment!" and so forth. The materials from them are discussed at a meeting of peoples'
controllers where they earmark measures for eliminating shortcomings that have been

revealed. The association's general director, the party comittee and the workers'
committee of the trade union are informed of their decisions.

In order to provide for efficient utilization of fixed capital, it has been suggest-
ed that the peoples' controllers arrange for continuous operation of the transport-
ers that are used for loading hay for ventilation; increase the efficiency of the
repair of technical equipment; hear at an expanded meeting of the party cormaittee
those managers of the construction shop, the energy service and the minor mechani-
zation service who are not ensuring that the farms are properly prepared for the
wintering of the livestock; and report to the head agronomist on poor control over
the utilization of technical equipment and the organisation of labor in the opera-
tions for placing root crops in clamps. Additionally. it has been suggested that
the number of people working to prepare seedlings be increased in order to utilize
technical equipment more efficiently during the planting of cabbage.

The peoples' control groups check on the implementation of the decisions that have
been made by conducting repeat inspections. They also hear reports from individu-
als who are directly responsible for their implementation.

All-around control over the association's production and financial activity has
contributed to increasing the efficiency of the utilization of fixed production
capital. During the Tenth Five-Year Plan there was a marked increase in the volume
of production of agricultural products. Labor productivity also increased, end one
average annual worker employed in agricultural production produced a total of

7,387 rubles' worth of gross output. which is 12.8 percent more than in 1975.

Direct labor expenditures per one quintal of output decreased as compared to 1975
(in man-hours): milk--by 0.8, gain of live weight of large horned cattle-~6. hogs-
3.9, potatoes--0.3. vegetables--0.1, and so forth. During the Tenth Five-Year Plan
we obtained 525 rubles' worth of gross output per 1,000 rubles' worth of fixed

production capital for agricultural purposes, or 17.7 percent more than in Lenin-
grad Oblsst as a whole.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Kolos", "Planirovaniye i Uchet v sel'skokhozyaystvennykh
predpriyatiyakh", 1981

11772
CSO: 1824/116

16

FOR OFTICIAI.IENE(NVLY
KECOHHINDATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT or PIIVATB SICTOR OUTLINID
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No 11, Nov Bl pp 157-159

[Article by I. Vssil'ysv and B. Pruniin: “Development of the Private Sector and the
Sale of Its Products"]

{Text} The first all-union scientific-practical conference dedicated to discussing
the role of the erh [lichnoye podsobnoye khosybystvo; private sector] in socialist
agriculture convened in Moscow in April 1981. It use organized by IKHSS [Institute
of Economics of the world Socialist System] of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 13
[Institute of lconomics] of the 0858 Academy of Sciences and by VASKhNIL [All-Union
Academy of Agricultural Sciences imeni v.1. Lenin]. More than 300 scientific,
economic and party workers from various cities, republics and oblaets throughout the
country participated in the work of this conference.

In opening the conference, scedemician-secretary of the Department of Economics of
VASKhNIL, VASKhNIL Academician A. Nikonov, emphasised the great theoretical and
practical significance of an overall study of the development of the LJKh in the
USSR, in all of its aspects -- economic, social, legal, economic-domestic. aesthetic-
educational, ecological and so forth. The party and government are orienting the
scientists and practical agricultural workers in this direction: during the past

4 Years alone, special decrees ained at increasing the production of agricultural
products on the private plots vars adopted on two occasions.

Tuo principal grOups of problems were discussed during the course of the conference:
the overall aspects associated vith development of the private sector; problems
concerned with the development of collectiv. horticulture, gardening and other forms
for_perticipation by citizens in the private sector. In the speeches by the deputy
minister of agriculture for the 0583 A. lyevlev, the secretary of the L'vovskaya
Oblast Committee of the Coommniet Phrty of the Ukraine H. Vesyliv and others,
emphasis van placed upon the importance of the Lllh for supplying the population with
food products and attracting additional labor, land and material resources into
agricultural production. Thus, in 1980, the LPKh accounted for 64 percent of the
overall volume of potato production in the country, vegetables, fruit and berries --
33-34 percent. milk. meat and eggs -- 29-32 percent. This was promoted by the
implementation of the mentioned decrees. Ior example, in 1980 the number of swine
being maintained in the LPlh increased by 19 percent compared to 1976, poultry -- by
ll percent, the production of vegetables -- by 15 percent, meet -- by 8 percent and

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
so forth. At the same time, full use is not being made of the potential available
for implementing the measures called for in the decrees. In a number of republics.
oblasts and rayons the measures required for improving the conditions for further
increasing production in the lPKh have not been undertaken and the requirements of
the population for young cattle end poultry stock. orchard-gardening implements,
light mechanization equipment and agricultural chemicals are not being satisfied.
Serious derelictions are taking place in the area of ensuring that the private
sector is supplied with feed, haying and posture lends end so forth. The provision
of agrochemical. engineering, veterinary, agronomic end other types of production
services for the private plots of the rural population end for the horticultural-
gerdeming associations of city dwellers is at a low level. The level of organisation
for the procurement, transporting end storage of surplus products tram the Lilh is
still not very high. As a result, even in the rural areas only 69 percent of the
families are maintaining private plots end chi: is lowering the ability of the rural
population to supply its own food products and at the same time it is limiting the
variety of products available in the kolhho: markets in cities.

In those regions where the supplying of feed is under control and eootechnical end
other types of services have been organized and extensive use is being made of credit
and other measures for stimulating the development of the LFKh. as called for in the
decrees. noticeable results have been achieved. Thus, from 1965 to 1980, the gross
production of the LPKh in L‘vovskaye Oblast increased by almost 26 percent, including
by more then 30 percent in animal husbandry. The oblast's rural population is not
only not purchasing meat products in the state stores. but rather it is selling them
to the state end to the consumer cooperatives. Receipts from the private plot
constitute 33 percent of the total income of a kolkhoz family. Considerable capital
investments have been saved in connection with the construction of animal husbandry
facilities on public farms; additional labor rescurcee -- persons engaged in
non-agricultural branches, pensioners and students -- have been attracted to
participating in agricultural work through the private sector.

The organization of logistical supply and trade services by kolkhozes, sovkhozes and
consumer cooperatives is playing a great role in the development of the LPKh.
Further information was furnished on this subject by member of the Board of the USSR
Ministry of Procurements S. Hysov and the chief of the Main Administration of
Tsentrosoyu: {Central Union of Consumers' Societies] H. Sinyakov. It was emphasized
in the speeches that growth in production and profitability for the LPKh is greatly
dependent upon the development of production in the public sector (logistical
supply. the furnishing of various services, the use of a production infrastructure
and so forth). The organic link which exists between the private sector and the
public sector is promoting the transformation of the LFKh into a component part of
the socialist agroindustrial complex. Special attention was given to this matter
during a discussion of the theoretical problems of the functioning of the LPKh

under socialism. In the speeches delivered by Doctor of lconomic Sciences

6. Shmelev, Doctor of Economic Sciences H. Sonin. Doctor of Economic Sciences

V. Grigorovskiy, Doctor of Historical Sciences V. Ostrovskiy, Doctor of Economic
Sciences 1. Suslov. Candidate of Economic Sciences L. Nikiforov, Candidate of
Economic sciences I. Khyayal and others, e comprehensive analysis was furnished on
the socio-economic nature and functions of the private sector during the stage of
developed socialism. it was emphasised (G. Shmelev) that a more precise definition
of the social essence and economic role played by the LPKh is required for preparing

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a long term concept for its development, for predicting the consequences of
carrying out various measures in this sphere and so forth. the socialist nature of
the LPKh derives mainly from the fact that it is operated by workers who are
permanently engaged in public production, using their own labor; it is closely
associated, in a production-economic sense, with the public sector and it
participates in the creation of the country's food fund, in reproduction of the work
force in the public sector and so forth. Cooperative horticulture and gardening
organically combine active relaxation by the municipal population with socially
useful agricultural labor, they promote the economic use of poor land and so forth.

In the opinion of a majority of those participating in the conference, the chief
function of the LPKh, for an extended period of time into the future, will continue
to be that of supplying the rural population and the residents of small cities and
settlements of the municipal type with agricultural products. The subsidiary farms
of enterprises, which presently occupy more than k million hectares of land, have
the same function. In the speeches by Doctor of Economic Sciences V. Veneher and
Doctor of Economic Sciences A. Il'ichev, emphasis was placed upon the importance of
disseminating the measures called for in the decrees on the LPKh to this type of

subsidiary farm. encouraging their development in every possible way and especially
in regions of new development.

In the future the marketable function of the LPKh will intensify in terms of a
number of products based upon integration with the public sector. In this regard,

a great amount of attention was focused on the problems concerned with the specific
forms for regulating and controlling the LPKh. V. Crigorovskiy and Candidate of
Economic Sciences Ye. clukhov advocated increased planning for and control over the
development of the LPKh, including the creation of special organs at the oblast and
rayon levels. A. Il'ichev and L. Nikiforov emphasized the importance of economic
methods for regulating production operations in the LPKh. A number of problems were
addressed: the differences in the types of private plots for the rural and
municipal populations. the importance of the LPKh for solving the social-demographic
problems of the rural areas, the development of rural settlements and so forth
(Doctor of Economic Sciences 1. Buzdalov, Candidate of Geographic Sciences

6. Ginsburg. Candidate of Economic Sciences K. Kopach and others).

In the opinion of a number of those participating in the conference ODoctor of
Bconomic Sciences 3. Rakitskiy and others). the organic link existing between the
development of the LPKh and the development of the public sector raises the need for
taking it into account when determining the effectiveness of production in the LPKh

and when solving the problems of price formation for its products and the financial
relationships of the LPKh with the budget.

During the conference, a considerable amount of attention was given to improving the
legal documents which regulate the management of the LPKh and to the development of
contractual forms for integrating the private sector with the public sector and its
contacts with the various procurement systems (Doctor of Laws M. Kosyr'. chief of
the Legal Administration of the USSR Ministry of Agriculture A. Denisov and
Candidate of Laws A. Stamkulov).

For solving the socio-sconomic problems, determining the prospects for developing
the LPKh and preparing appropriate recommendations. great importance is attached to

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
sociological studies. the method employed for such studies and the results obtained
were discussed during the conference by Doctor of Economic Sciences Ye. Bryenskikh,
Candidate of Economic Sciences T. Antonove. A. Shaposhnikov end A. Shchannikov
(ssrsa) and Candidate of Economic Sciences 1. Reyg dISSE). Control over the
development of the LPKh requires consideration not only of the peculiarities of its
various types but also of the regional conditions (availability of land and labor
resources. population traditions and others). The results achieved in the use of a
differentiated approach for developing the LJKh in various regions of the country
were discussed by Candidate of Economic Sciences V. Nikitin, chairmen of the
Yeroslevekaye Oblest Council of Horticulturist Societies Yu. Kirillov, Doctor of
Economic Sciences L. Shepot'ko, Candidate of Economic Sciences I. Prokope,
Candidate of Economic Sciences Eh. Markov, Candidate of Economic Sciences A.
Semoylov. Candidate of Economic Sciences E. Khyeyel end others.

Recommendations were developed during the conference concerning the more important
production-economic end organisational-legal aspects of the functioning of private
plots.

In the interest of improving the operation of the LPKh. a proposal was made calling
for the organisation of large-series specialized production of modern orchard-
gardening implements end light mechanization equipment end also for expanding the
opportunities for maintaining end utilizing horses on the farms of the population.
Recognition was given to the advisability for developing a network of state
nurseries end seed production enterprises, taking into account the requirements of
the population, ensuring that the kolkhos and sovkho: plans include a task aimed at
improving the availability of livestock feed to the private plots end so forth. The
recommendation was also made to have the plans of industrial and lend reclamation
enterprises include tasks for installing transport-engineering lines of communication
end for furnishing other production services for the orchard and gardening
associations.

In order to improve the sale of LPKh products, the recommendation was made to
orient such sales mainly towards augmenting the local food funds; to intensify the
role played by consumer cooperatives in organizing the proCurement and marketing of
highly perishable and difficult to transport products; to expend the network of the
bureau of trade services, for the purpose of ensuring the sale of LPKh products at
kolkhos markets and so forth.

Within the framework for improving the organizational-legal forms for regulating the
development of the LPKh, it is considered advisable to combine in a general and
systemstised legal document the norms and statutes governing the management of the
LPKh and the sale of its products; to introduce the latest changes having to do with
the management of the LPKh into the Model Regulations for e Kolkhoz and civil
legislation; to create, at the local and national economic levels, special
administrative structures for the management of and control over the activities of
the LPKﬂ.

In the interest of improving the organization of scientific studies and the
preparation of recommendations on specific problems concerned with the development
of private plots, the need is recognized for creating an all-union scientific-
methodological council or section at one of the councils of VASEhNIL, with problem

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
groups in individual regiona of the USSR. Thia would make it poeaihle to coordinate
otudiee and vorke concerned with LPKh uttere, increase their methodological unity
and also the scientific validity of the reco-endatione.

The realization of these proposala. in the opinion of thoae vho participated in the
conference, could proeote e note cot-plate and effective i-plenantetion of thoae
party and governaental decisions having to do with the develop-ant of private plota
within the eyateu of eocieliat agriculture.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'atvo "Pravda", "Voproey ekononiki", 1981

7026
630: 1824/109

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I“ “In-Ml: use. mun

TILLING AND CROPPIhC TECHNOLOGY

MORE ATTENTION TO IMPROVEMENT IN SEED PRODUCTION 0263!
Moscow SBLEKTSIYA I SEHENOVODSTVO in Russian No 11. Nov 81 pp 2-6

lzrticle by G. P. Zhinov. deputy chief of the USSR All-Onion Production Association
for v$rietal Seed Raising: "Constant Concern for the Development of Seed Produc-
tion"

liens] During the 10th Five-Year Plan, owing to the selfless labor of millions of
Soviet people and the great contribution of scientists and agricultural specialists.
the average annual gross output of grain in the country reached 205 million tons
for the first time. For the purpose of most fully meeting the demand for grain and
for its processing products, the 26th CPSU Congress set the task of increasing dur-
ing the 11th Five-Year Plan the average annual production of grain to 238 or 243
million tons. including of pulse crops, to 12 or 13 million tons. In order to at-
tain such a level. greet efforts on the part of all the workers of the agroindus—
trial complex, a correct and economical utilization of the material and technical
resources allocated to agriculture. introduction of advanced grain production tech-
nology and mobilization of all existing internal reserves will be needed.

According to the evaluation of scientists and agricultural specialists, the harvest
and gross output of grain can be increased by 20 to 25 percent as a result of a gen-
eral improvement in seed production and an annual utilization in sowing of high-
quality seeds of new regionalized and promising varieties.

Phlfilling the decrees of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Minis-
ters "0n Measures for the Further Increase in the Efficiency of Agricultural Sci-
ence and the Strengthening of Its Connection With Production" and "On Measures for
the Further Improvement in the Selection and Production of Seeds of Grain and Oil
Crops and Grasses" (1976). extensive work on improvement in selection and seed pro-
duction has been done in the country in the last few years. Selection centers have
been strengthened organizationally, a network of specialized seed producing farms
has been approved and their material and technical base has been strengthened in a
planned way in a number of republics and oblasts.

A total of 183 new varieties of grain. pulse and hulled crops were regionalized
during the 10th Five-Year Plan. They include 17 winter wheat varieties with a po-
tential yield of more than 80 quintals per hectare (Krasnodarskaya 46, Akhtyrchan-
ks. Zaporozhskaya 0stistaya. Odesskaya 66. Polukarlikovaya 49 and others). Pro—
duction received 13 new intensive winter rye varieties with a potential yield of

22

FUIIOFFKJA1.USB(IVLY
50 to 60 quintale per hectare-Chulpan. Voskhod 1. Voskhod 2. Belorusekaya 23. Be-
zenchukskaya 3 and others. Highly effective varieties of spring wheat and spring
barley, millet varieties immune to smut and highly productive rice. oat and buck-
wheat varieties were developed. There are significant shifts in the selection of
pulse crops. Nonshattering varieties of peas--8eosypayushchiysya l. Tenaks and
Voroshilovgradskiy Yubileynyy-- were developed.

A total of 1.195 overall centers and plants of a varying capacity for the treatment
and storage of seeds were put into operation on kolkhozes. sovkhozes and educa-
tional-experimental and experimental production farms in 1977-1980.

The organization of specialized seed producing farms and the construction of over-
all centers and plants for the treatment and storage of seeds on them initiated a
new procedure for the provision of kolkhozee and sovkhozes with seeds of grain and
oil crops and grasses and the transfer of their seed production to an industrial
basis. As a result. in many republics. krayt and oblasts during the 10th Five-Year
Plan, despite the unfavorable weather conditions. work with seeds was improved. the
plans for their storage in assortment were fulfilled and the volumes of insurance
and carryover stocks were increased. In 1980 specialized seed producing farms pro-
duced about 7 million tons of seeds of grain crops. 63.000 tons of sunflower seeds
and more than 83.000 tons of perennial grass seeds.

In the Union and autonomous republics. krays and oblasts. where the set of measures
for an inprovement in seed production and its transfer to an industrial basis is
carried out in a planned and purposeful manner. the yield and productior of plant
products increase. work on the transfer of the production of seeds of grain crops
and grasses to an industrial basis is most successfully organized in the Belorus-
sian SSR.

A total of 27 experimental bases for the production of elite and first reproduc-
tion seeds are directly subordinate to the Republic Production Association for Ve-
rietal Seed Raising (Belsortsemprom). In the system there are also six oblast
production associations for varietal seed raising. A total of 117 head seed pro—
ducing farms (one in every rayon). at the base of which rayon interfarm seed pro—
ducing associations are organized. are subordinate to the latter. The construction
of overall centers and plants for the treatment and storage of seeds is carried out
successfully on specialised seed producing farms. The Belorussian SSR Ministry of
Agriculture allocates material and technical facilities (tractors. motor vehicles.
mineral fertilizers and so forth) to production associations for varietal seed
raising for their delivery to heed seed producing farms. Specialized seed produc-
ing farms are relieved of the sale of commodity grain to the state. Plans for the
production and sale of varietal seeds to kolkhozes and sovkhozes of the serviced
zone are annually established for them. For varietal seeds sold in excess of the
established sales plan specialized seed producinsfarms receive mixed feed.

The conclusion of the construction of overall centers and plants for the treatment
and storage of seeds and the establishment of rayon interfarm associations for the
production of seeds enables specialized seed producing farms to fully provide the
rcpublic's kolkhozes and sovkhozee with high-quality varietal seeds of grain crops
and grasses by 1983.

23

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(M‘LY
we orﬂuu. use; unu

There are examples of a good organization of seed production in a nutter of oblasts
in the RSFSR, the Ukrainian SSR, the Lithuanian SSR, the Latvian SSR, the Kirghiz
SSR and other republics. However, there are still serious shortcomings in the work
on the transfer of this sector to an industrial basis and on accelerated strain
changing. For exawle. in Vladimirskaya, Ivanovsksya, Kalininskaya, Kostromskaya,
Ryazanskaya. Yaroslavskaya. ‘D/umenskaya and Kemerovskaya Oblasts, the Bashkir. Kal-
ulytskaya and Dagestanskaya Autonomous Republics, the Georgian SSR, the Uzbek SSR
and a number of other republics and oblasts from 13 to 25 percent of the areas al-
located for grain crops are annually sown with seeds of nonregionalized varieties.
Owing to the inefficient organization of seed production and the lack of the nec-
essary volumes of insurance and carryover seed stocks. a large quantity of seeds.
often of nonregionalized varieties and of low sowing quality requirements. is an-
nually brought to these oblasts and republics from the country's other regions.

New varieties are introduced slowly in these and a water of other oblasts and re-
publics.

In the Azerbaijan SSR, the Tajik SSR, the Uzbek SSR, the Armenian SSR and the Ka-
zakh SSE insufficient capital investments are allocated for the construction of
projects of the material and technical base of seed production.

There are also shortcomings in the fulfillment of the plans for the sale of elite
and first reproduction seeds. For exanple, from the 1980 harvest scientific re-
search institutions in the Russian Federation fulfilled the plan for the sale of
seeds of the highest reproductions of winter rye 73 percent, of spring barley. 77
percent. of oats, 71 percent,‘of buckwheat, 66 percent, of peas, 6’» percent and of
vetch, only 60 percent.

Measures for the intensification of the specialization of seed producing farms and
for the concentration of the production of seeds of grain and oil crops and grasses
on them are not carried out in a sufficiently active way in many republics and ob-
lasts. In most cases local directive bodies, instead of increasing assignments

for the production of high-quality seeds for specialized seed producing farms, as
before, assign stepped-up plans for the sale of food grain and other nonseed out-
put to the state to then. which does not mite it possible to increase on special-
ized seed producing ferns the production of seeds for kolkhozes and sovlthozea and
their procurement for state resources. Hany seed producing farms are not satisfac-
torily provided with tractors. agricultural machines. mineral fertilizers and chem-
ical plant protection agents.

At present it is necessary to expand the production of seeds of pulse crops—peas,
vetch. lupin. soybeans. kidney beans, fodder beans, lentils and others. Their
chronic shortage does not mke it possible to improve the structure of the grain
wedge and to increase the production of high-protein fodder.

In the last few years there has been a decline in the production of grain and
seeds of this group of crops mainly as a result of a reduction in the areas sown
with vetch, fodder lupin, lentils and chick peas and in many oblasts of the Rus-
sian Federation, with peas as well.

In order to ensure the average annual production of pulse crops envisaged during

the 11th Five-Year Plan. in the forthcoming 1982—1983 period, along with inproving
the technology of their Cultivation and increase in yield, it is necessary to ex-
pand the areas sown for grain to 8 million hectares (as compared to 5 million

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
hectares during the 10th Five-Year Plan). The assignments for the production of
these crops for 1981-1985, as well as for the expansion of their areas sown for
hay and green fodder, were determined in the decree of the CPSU Central Committee
and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n Measures To Increase the Production and To
Improve the mality of Fodder" (1978).

Proceeding from this. the USSR Ministry of Agriculture together with the USSR Hin-
istry of Procurement and the USSR State Committee for Supply of Production Equip-
ment for Agriculture developed and approved in April 1980 the Program for an In~
crease in the Production of Seeds of Pulse Crops for 1981-1985. 'lhe necessary vol-
umes of production of seeds, of their storage on farms and of procurement for state
resources by the years of the five-year plan were determined in it. Measures for

a priority allocation of the necessary equipment and other material and technical
facilities to farms producing seeds of pulse crops were developed and the need for
an accelerated construction of overall centers for the treatment and storage of
seeds in the :ones of their commodity production was pointed out.

To implement this program, in most Union and autonomous republics. krays and ob-
lasts the appropriate work was done and,measures for an increase in the production
of seeds of pulse crops were determined. where such work has not yet been done,in
the very near future it is necessary to implement specific measures for an improve—
ment in the production of the seeds of these crops. to expand their areas sown for
grain and to increase the production of commodity seeds.

For zonal scientific research institutions this program set the assignments of de-
veloping advanced technologies of cultivation and harvesting of seeds of pulse
crops and,joint1y with agricultural bodies and advanced farms. of ensuring their
introduction into production. Provision of specialized seed producing farms with
equipment, special herbicides, mineral fertilizers, desiccants and chemical plant
protection agents on a priority basis creates the prerequisites for the introduc-
tion of these technologies on all areas sown for seeds for every soil and climatic
zone and cultivated crop in the next few years. It is most important to introduce
and organize this work on the farms of scientific research institutions and on

seed producing farms in all the zones of cultivation of pulse crops and to organize
seminars and the training of managers. specialists and machine operators.

For the purpose of improving the state of affairs with the production of seeds of
pulse crops, it is necessary to utilize all the existing varietal seeds of the
best cultivated and new productive varieties for areas sown for seeds.

A shortage of buckwheat seeds has also been felt in the last few years. In order
to increase their production. it is also necessary to solve the problems of con-
centratiou of areas sown for seeds in regions and on farms most fully correspond-
ing to its biology. to improve the agrotechnology of cultivation and to take meas—
ures for the development of beekeeping, because bee pollination is one of the most
important factors in an increase in the yield of this crop. It is necessary to
introduce regionalized varieties on its entire sown area.

An accelerated introduction of highly productive. new varieties and hybrids is a
very urgent problem. The annual increase in their sown areas for grain crops
averages about 5 million hectares. As a result of a full utilization of the total

25

INDR OFFICJAI.USE2(HULY
sun UPPILMI. U3!- UNI-I

grown harvest of newly regionalized and promising, varieties for seed purposes. it
is possible to at least double the rates of their introduction. In every republic.
oblast. kray and rayon there are unutilized potentials for this. First of all.
this involves an iwrovement in the work of scientific research institutions and
educational-experimental farms. for which agricultural bodies should annually re-
fine the plans for the production and sale of elite and first reproduction seeds.
increasing the volumes of the latter for new regionalised and promising varieties.

The problems of a rapid introduction of new varieties into production are most clo-
sely connected with the solution of the problem of transfer of seed production to
an industrial basis according to the following scheme: scientific institution-ape-
cialized seed producing farm (seed producing department)-kolkhozes and sovkhozes.
Unfortunately, however, the volumes of sale of varietal seeds from specialized seed
producing farms directly to kolkhozes and sovkhozes are growing extremely slowly.
Two reasons are observed here. One of then is the still weak mterial and techni-
cal base of seed producing fares and the other. the lack of the necessary condi-
tions for their work according to purpose (in many cases specialized seed producing
farms are ranked with farms producing food and fodder grain). in connection with
which the mnagers and specialists of these farms are unable to form standard
batches of seeds, including of new. varieties. and to sell then to kolkhosss and
sovkhozes. The agronomic service of all levels should place under special control
the full utilization of the harvest of new varieties for seed purposes alone. For
this it is necessary to widely practise interfarm exchange and the sale of seeds of
new varieties for state resources. because seeds of newly regionalized (scarce)

and promising varieties are accepted for state resources from all farms regardless
of the established plan for the procurement of varietal seeds.

work on the treatment and storage of seeds of spring grain and oil crops and
grasses for sowing in 1982 continues on kolkhozes and sovkhoaes and at other state
agricultural enterprises. It is very important to intensify this work everywhere
with a view to completing it before cold winter weather arrives.

Managers and specialists lust see to it that their farms are fully provided with
seeds in the necessary quantity for every crop and acquire seeds of new regional-
izad varieties. Interfarn exchange. as well as the acquisition of varietal seeds
in the form of exchange for food and fodder grain from state resources. can serve
as a source of replenishment of seed stocks. At the same time. it is necessary to
clean. bring up to sowing quality requirements and ensure a reliable storage of
carryover stocks of winter crops and of insurance stocks of seeds of spring grain
crops.

It should be noted that in the practice of many kolkhozes and sovkhozes in the
chernozem zone of the RSFSR seeds of winter crops placed in the carryover stock
are often subjected to spoilage during the period of storage. or are used for oth-
er. nonseed. purposes, as a result of which their volume is reduced by one-half at
the time of fall sowing. Therefore. freshly harvested seeds. often inorted, of
nonregionalized varieties. have to be used for sowing. which leads to a failure

to keep to sowing schedules and to a reduction in the harvest.

Agricultural bodies and scientific research institutions should see to it that
elite and first reproduction seeds are prepared promptly and distributed correctly
throughout specialized seed producing farms and other kolkhozes and sovkhozes with
due regard for the planned strain changing and strain renovation.

26

MOMMUSEONLY
A good harvest of clover, lucerne and other perennial grass seeds was formed in
many regions in 1981. This makes it possible to significantly improve the provi-
sion of kolkhozes and sovkhozes with then and to fulfill the established procure-
ment plans for state resources and the all-union fund for delivery to regionsuhere,
owing to climatic conditions, it is not possible to obtain them. Specialists of
agricultural and procurement bodies. grass seed producing stations and specialized
seed producing farms should organize work on grass heap cleaning so that the maxi-
mum output of high-quality seeds is obtained.

All work on the establishment of seed stocks. their quality preparation. prompt
'check of sowing qualities and reliable storage should be carried out under the con-
stant and unabated control of specialists of production associations for varietal
seed raising and of state seed inspectorstes and the country's entire agronomic
service.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Kolos", "Selektsiya i senenovodstvo", 1981

11 ,4 39
cso: 1824/115 run

27

lNJI‘DFFICLlL [EIEINULY