FOR OWCIAI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10631
2 JULY 1982

USSR Report

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPIS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the scurce. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 8! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
(1’000 5/02)

CONTENTS

COIISTRWTION
nook Bxcnrptn: Contraction Quality Control
(Ntkhnu Htronovich Bhul'kcvich. at n1.; ”M90010!!!

PO WOLYU “GIBB‘I'VA STROITBL'BTVA ZHILYIII I '
o'smsmmm WIY. 19.1) 000.00....OOOOOOOOOUDOODOOO

BUILDING MARINA“
look on Optintting Propertiu of Building tutu-1.1:
(V. G. luilito; OPTIHIZATSIYA SVOYSTV STROI‘I‘BL'W
mmmv. 19.1) OOOOOO'OOOOOOOIOOOOCCC.9.300000000000000
mnmm EQUINE"?

Probluan in Nathinetool Induotry unlined
(G. Kiporun, 1.. Vlaunkavn: VOPROBY mum. Apt: 82) ....

Hotel the in Machinctool Induttry Diocuuod
(N. Ivnntoovn; VOPIIOSY “0&0!!!ch Apr 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

- a - [III - USSR - 365

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60:“?le 101'

.93001' EXCERPI‘S: CONSPRWTION QUALITY COMROL °

hiev SPRAVWHNIK P0 Kormw MCKES‘I'VA SPROTM'sI'VA ZHILYKH I onsmms'rvmma
warm in Russian 1981 (signer. to press 21 Jan 81) pp 355-359

[innovation and table of contents Iran book "mndbook on Quality Control of Con-
struction of Residential and Civil Buildings" by Mikhail Nironovich Shul'kevich,
'l‘nlida Danilovna Dmitrenko and Alekandr Ivanovich Boyko, Indatel'stvo "Budive1'-
nik", 70,000 copies, 359 pages; passages enclosed in slantlines in boldface?

[foxy] Tho handbook emnarizes data on quality control in construction and in-
stallation operations and describes the requirsnents imposed for quality of con-
struction materials and industrial structural components and the methods of con-
trolling quality of products for their acceptance at constmction sites.

In conformity with normative docments, the technical requirements are presented
for production technology of zero-cycle operations [raboty nulovogo tsiklg? and
construction and installation and finishing work, as well as for operations in-
volvinc- the engineering equipment of buildings and public services and amenities
for areas. Methods of evaluating the quality or basic types of construction and
installation operations are described.

Normative materials are cited as of 1 July 1980.

The book is intonded for engineering and technical personnel of construction or-
zanizations, customers' technical inspection engineers, personnel of plan ’
organizations engaged in originator supervision [Fabotniki avtorskogo nad .
inspections of state architectural and construction verification, and public con-
trol of trade union organizations.

TABLE OF CW8

Chapter 1.

/Orranizing construction quality control/ . . . . . . e o 5
Engineer-ins and technical personnel in construction . . . . . 12
'l‘eclmical inspection by the entail” e e e o e e o e e 13
Oriyinator's inspection 0 e e o e o e o o o o e 16
ﬁtate architectural and construction verification . . . . . . 19
Construction bank verification . . . . . . . . . . . 21

1
FOR OFF"? I'AL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chde ““1“” imcctim o e e e o e e e a
State fire inspection . . . .
Departmental inspections for controlling construction quality
laboratory monitoring of construction organizations . .
Geodetic verification in construction . . . . . . ‘
Public contrOI o e o e e 0
Evaluating the quality of construction and installstion operations . .
Acceptance for operation of enterprises, buildings and structures completed
by congruction (8MP Sta-3476) @onstruction Standards and Specifications
Sh-BO',’ e e e e
!-'onitoring the organization of construction production (8811’ Sh-1-76) . .

I O O O O
O O I c I
0 e O O O 0

.000...

Slxnpter 2.

ﬁnality control in ucavation and earth moving (8N1? III-8-76)/

O O 0
General requirements e e e e e e e e e e e e e e
”partitions on unstabl. ”u. e o o o o e O o o e
acetation and earth moving in winter conditions . . . . . . .
Chapter 3.
Iqunlity control in the installation of fomdations and substructures (SNiP

Ill-9'7“)/ o e e e e e e e e o e e e e e e
Genera]. conditions e e e c a e e e e e a o e e e
natural substructures a e e e e e e e. e o e e . e
CmpaCtion Of unstable 305.13 0 e e e e e a o e e o e
Hater draudown in construction . . . . . . . . . . . .
stabj limg 30118 e ' o e e e o o e o e o e
Pile-supported foundations and piling [Shpmtovne barriers . . . .
Concrete and reinforced concrete filling piles . . . . . . . .
Appendices e o e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e
Chapter ‘6.
ﬁnality control in the erection of stone structm‘es (SNiP III-l7-78)/ . .
-'icneral requirements e e e o e e e e o s e e e e
Qtorcwork e s e e e e e e e e e o e e e e e
Brlc‘ﬁ'lork e o e c e e e e e
Asses blimz vans of brick panels and blocks . . . . . .
ua}: ing walls of ceramic, concrete and natural stone in the correct pattern .
Iayinr quarry stone and rubble concrete . . . . . . . . .
Erecting arches, vaults and crosspieces . . . . . . . . e
Erectink stone structures in winter conditions . . . .
crarncteristics of stonework operations in earthque regions (SNiP 11-1.

1?. ~r-9‘) [no reference for asteri . . . . . . . . . .
Constructing furnaces, nues and vents . . . . . . . . . .
Acceptance Of stonework ”oration“ e o e e e e o e e e e
Acceptance Of MC. work e e e e e e e e e c e e e

23
2h
25
26
29
31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 50

/’-)unlitv control in the erection of concrete and reinforced concrete
structures (sum 111-15-76, sun nI-16-79)/ . . . . .
Preparing concrete rm 0 e e o e e s s s o s
Reinforcement operations e e e e e e e e e e e
POurinz the concrete mixture . . . . . . e . - .
Precast concrete and reinforced concrete structures and components
weldim and anticorrosive coating of laid and connecting components
Caulkinn and sealing jOintB and m e e e o e e e 0
Acceptance Of oporations e e e e e e e e o e e
“pPCndiCQB e e e e s e e e e e e e e e

Chapter 6.

/C_ualitv control in assembling buildings with large panels and modules
(snap III-16.79 SNiP III-20.71», su 420-71 @mstruction Standards
1920-717, RS" 298-? 8 [expansion unlmongv . . . . . .

Storing Ort10193 and Btmtm o e o o o e e o o

Assembling large-panel buildings . .

Asse‘rlinr, building alls of vibration brick ﬁibroldrpichmrye panels

Aososbling buildings out of modules . . . . e . . . .

Exterior and interior Ems e o e o e o e e e e e

Appendices e e e e e o e e e e e e e e .

Chapter 7.

llfunlity control in fabricating and assembling metal structures (SM?
1 I 1-13.l}5 )/ O O 0 O O 0 I O O O O O O 0
General conditions e e e e e e e e e e
Fabricating metal structures . . . . . . . .
Frivinn. painting, marking and acceptance of metal structures
Assembling metal structures . .

O C . C O O O
O O O O O O O
O O I O O C O O

O C O O O 0
Requirements set for foundations . . . . . . .
Acceptance of operations . . . . . . . . .
Appendices e e e u e o e e e e e e

Chapter 8.

/Qua]ity control in rust protection of buildinr structures and installs-
tions (Ship 111.23.76.st 11.28.73)/ 0 e e o o e o 0

Control in preparing surfaces . . . . . . . .
Quality control in applying costs of paint . .
quality control in applying mastic, spackli and filling 5le :J .
Quality control in applying: glued backing okleyecmye pokryti;§y .
T ;ua1it,v control of protective metal surfacing . . . . . . .
a‘uality control of facings and linings . . . . . . . .
-2cslity control and acceptance of completed operations . . . .
Appendiceﬂ e e e e e e e e e e o e e s e
3

MD APPTPI’AV "Q? ONLY

103
103

1W
113
118
118
119

120-125

0......

119
126
128

1%
110?
M8

1109
11:9
149
155
158
159

159
161

162

166
16?
168
168
168
170
172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“mortar 9.

Itzuality control in fabricating and mumbling wood structures

(”Hip 111-19'76)/ s e e e a s e s e o e o s O 17‘.
humeral conditions 0 o e s s o e e e o e e e e 17“
FH‘H'i eating W“ CtmctWCB e e e e e s o e e e o 178
Assenbly and protective treatment of wood structures . . . . . . 178

Chapter 10.

liﬁuality control in orkanizing the filling out of window and door openings] 179

Windows, balcony doors, stained glass panels and shop windows of aluminum
3110:15 s e e o s e s s o e o e e e e a e 1&

Y hapt or 11 .

/-"ualit~.- control in laying out roofs (sun III-19476, suna 111-16-79)/ . 18h
At: 10 1‘me 0f V006 “mctm‘ s s e e e e e o a e e 18"
Attic roofs of precast reinforced concrete components . . . . . 187
“00,8 without attics e e s e s e e o o s e s s e 188
Chapter 12.
ﬁnality control in installing roofing, latex-mating. and steam and

thermal insulation (8N1? III-20.7“)/ o o o I s s o s e 189
Ge neml conditions 0 o e s e e e e e s s s s 189
R0113d and ”Otic roofing materials a e o e e o s e s o 191
Roofinr of asbestos cement sheets . . . . . . . . . . 195
Itetnl components of rooting . . . e . . . . . e . . 197
Tiled roofs s e s s e s o o s e o e o e e o 198
Acceptance Of operations a e e e e e e o e o s s e 1”
”(It’ll-Proofing and ”m inmtion s s e s s o e e e 0 2‘”
Thermal insulation 9 o e e o e s e e e e c e e 205

Chapter 13.

/Qna1ity control of soundproofing (8MP II-L.l-?1‘, SHiP II-L.2-73‘.
5N1? II-lZ-??)/ [no reference for asterisks? . . . . . . . 209

Chapter 11;.
/<3,~.:nlity control in laying out staircases and balconies (8MP II—Zl-75)/ . 212
Installing shircases e e s s e s e s s o s e e 212
11189215111117, mconé 3: o s s s s o o o s e e e s a 21‘.
Chapter 15.

lomlity control in installing floors (SNiP III-V.1‘&-72)/ . . . . 216
General requirements s s o s e e s e e s e e s e 216
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Preparation of foundations under floors and arranging underlying strata .
Installing 513003 [styazhkg e e e e e e e e e e e s
Soundproofing ﬂoors 0 o e e e e s e e s e e e o
Iﬂlulliﬂl ﬂoor CUTIQCCC s e e s e e e e e s e s 0
Earth floating s s e e e o s e e e o e s e
Gravel and .138 ﬂooring e e e e e o e e e e e e
CNBhOd stone flooring e e e e e e e e e e e
Crushed stone flooring treated with bituen . . . . . . .
Clay ﬂooring s e e s e s e s o e s e e e 0
Concrete. cement-sand and mosaic (tmazzo) flooring . . . . .
Polyvinyl IcontHumtOCert. ﬂooring e e e e s e s e
”Qtal caught ﬂooring e e o e s e s e e e e e e
Fireproof concrete flooring . . . . . . . . . e .
Acid-resistant concrete flooring . . . . . . . . . .
Asphalt concrete ﬂowing s e e e e s e e e e e s
COMPTON ’“mt block flooring . o s o o e s s s o
pOIYVIJQ'l 800mg. noon" 0 e e e s s o e e e s s
Cobblestone flooring . . . . . . .

Flooring of stone blocks and brick (o clay, treated with bituen.
clinker and acid-resistant, 6081‘ ‘07‘0-6? All-Union State Standard
"7h'627) e e e e e e e s e e e e e e

513‘) flooring e e e e 0

Flooring of cast iron and steel stamped perforated slabs on nos-tar

Flooring 0‘ mt iron ‘1.“ on and s e e e o e e

woodblmk Eatmj ﬂooring e s s e 0

Flooring of parquet slabs and panels, chip board . . . .

Flooring of inlaid parquet pieces . . .

Flooring of linoleum (polyvinyl chloride on mthetic rubber with heat-
insulnting an- -d soundproofing layers), synthetic carpeting and a poly-
vinyl chloride pmtib CWd e e e e s e e e e e

“COOP”. 0f ”CritiOIIB s e s e e e e e e e e e e

.00....
.00....

Chaoter 16.

/Cuality control of finishing work on building structures (sun: III-21-73)/
General requirements . . . . . . .
‘uality control of interior surface finishing with manufactured sheet

materials ﬁistome materialy industrial'nogo proinvodst'g. . . .
Plasterinlz 83d molding e e e e e e e e e e e e e
racing operations e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e

General requirements e s e e e e s e e e e e e
; inishinz facades with natural stone . . . . . . . . .
quality control in installing prefabricated suspended ceilings of menu-

factured til-QB e s e e e e e e e e e s e e e
1'9.th inn operations 9 e e s e s e e e s s e e

Ge"sra1 requirements e e s e e e e e s e e 0
Painting surfaces with aster-based compounds . . . . . .

Painting interior aux-faces with oil-, lacquer or synthetic-based

d. e e s e e e e e s s o e

Painting facades e o e e e e e e e e s e e e

O

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

219
219

220
20
220
221
221
221
221
2216
225
226
226

228
230
230

231
231
23b
235
235
235
238

2‘01
2“}

2106
2‘06

21.7
254.
25:.
25:.

260
261
261
261

263
265
FOR OWICIN. USE ONLY

Painting metal surfaces . . . o . . . . . e . . 268
Painting wood Curfues e e o e e a e e e o e o 268
.'1011”P°rim s e e s e e e s e s e e e e e e 269
313me e a s - e e ' e e e e e e e e e e e e 271

Chapter 17.

Nuality control in installing sanitary engineering equipnent for build-'-
in?‘ and structures (mi-P III-28'75)/ e o s e o e s e e 272
General roqulrﬂOntB . o a o o o g o g s o . g . 272

Requirements for building structures e e e e e e e e e 273
Layinc cast iron, asbestos cement, concrete, reinforced concrete and
COMIC pip.‘ e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e 275
Welding steel pipes e e e s o e e s e s e o e e 277
01336551" and welding mmtim o o s e e e s s e e e 2??
i. GSiC rﬂuirmmta o e e e e e e e e s e e 277
Interior water lines and hot water supply . . . . . . . . 280
twin? Pipeline! e e e e e e e e s o e e a 0 am
Installing, fittings . e e e e e o e e e e e o 2&3
Acceptance of interior water lines and hot water supply . . . . 281
Interior sewer system and drains . . . . . . . . . . . 282
Layinr pipelines o o e e e s e e e s s e e e 2&
Instnllinr sanitary dOVicos e o e e e e e s s e 28"
Acceptance of interior sewer qstem and drains . . . . . . 285
Central heating and heating boiler rooms . . . . . . . . 286
Laying pipelines e s e e e s e e e s e e e e 286
Inaunim heaters e e e e e s e e e s 2%

Installing expansion tanks for air collectors, pups, and water heaters 28?

Installing fitt .1133 and instrumentation . . . . . . . . 288
-namlling heating boiler rooms . . . . . . . . . 288
..cceptance of central heating and heating boiler rooms . . . . 289
VCHt Ill“: -0“ and air conditioning o s e e e e o s e s e 292
Layinp metal 811' ducts e e e e e e e e e e e e 2%
Layinr asbestos cement air ducts . . . . . . . . . . 293
Arranging air ducts in building structures . . . . . 293
I .~.sta1 ling ventilation equipment and regulating devices . . . . 293
Ecceptance of ventilating and air conditioning systems . . . . 295
Iratallim: refuse chutes (‘JSN 8-72) [at-pension unknovﬁ . . . . . 296
Acceptance of refuse chutes for use . . . . . . . . . 297
”‘npter 13.
./‘“ unlit: -' control in hater supply, drainage and heat supply operations
(5'11? III-30'7“)/ e a e e e e e e e e e 302
in“ ﬁrm and assembly of pipelines {or water supply and drainage . . . 302
c not iron and asbestos cement pipelineu . . . . . . . . 303
Peinforced cancrete and concrete pipelines . . . . . . . 303
Polyethylene pipelines . . . . . . . . . e 303
Steel pipelines (assembly and welding) . . . . . . . . 301+
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Control of welding operations . .
Acceptance of pipelines and water supply installations. and drainage
for a. O O 0 O O O O O 0 O O O O O O
Hoatinr networks s e a a e o e e s s s e s 0

Chapter 19.

ﬁnality control in gas supply operations (SNiP III-29476”
General conditions a s e o o e s s e o
ﬁnality control in gas pipeline welding . . . . .
Interior nas lines . . . . . .

'runlitzz control in installing exterior and interior gas lines, gas equip-

C-B'Zt and applchB e s c e s e a e a s e e e
Acceptanceofgaslinesfornse . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 20.

,./“un3ity control in installing structures and facilities for radio and
television broadcasting (SNiP III-hB-75)/ . . . . . . .

'.'a5ic conditions . . . . . .

tcceptance for operation of projects completed. by construction .

Chapter 21.

/' tualitv control in electrical installation operations (SNiP III-33476”
General conditions .

Acceptance of work completed on distributing facilities and substations
Electric lighting e a a e e s e e e e e

a e 0
Electric wirin! e e e e s a e s o s e e s
Laying flush 51mm; wiring o e s e o e e e e
Laying in conduits or building structurss o s s e a a 0
Acceptance of completed operations . . . . . . . . .
Chapter 22.
ﬁnality control in erecting structures and installing telephone and
telegraph networks (SNiP III-h7-7S)/ . . . . . . . .
Basic conditions a e s o s e a e e s e e e e
c3519 113103 e e e e s e e s e s a a a e 0
Appendix 0 e o a e e e o e e o s e a o a

Chapter 23.

/',.un.“t:' control in operations to provide public services and amenities

in In at” (SNiP III-10.75)/ e s e a a a e s e a
General conditions . . .
Clear-in: areas and preparing them for development .
Thorourhtores. pedestrian crosswalks and grounds .
landscaping 0f ”“8 being built up 0 a a a

O O O O
O I O 0
O O O O
O O O O
O I O O

7
FOR OW‘I’CTAI. "9!? ONLY

.000 00...... O. O...

3§§§

310
310
311
313

315
315

329
329
331

33?-
332
333
333
335

337
337
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 21+.

/Quality control in providing public services and amenities for buildings

“d apartments/e s s e s e e e e 3‘99
Providing residences with television antennas and nailbaxes . . . . 9:9
Equipping buildings and strutctures with lightning arnstors s e e e 350
Requirements for installing guardrails for balcmies. staircases and

”pet! e e e e e 351
Firefighting squipnent for residences and public bmdings. . e s e 352

LIBt 0f 11¢.th o e e e e s e e e s s s s e 35“

C(PY'RIGHT: Izdntel'stvo 'Mvol‘nik", 1981

893‘
650: 1821/128
FOR OFFICIAL USl-Z ONLY

lull l.l)l Nll MATERIALS

BOOK 0N OPTIMIZING PROPERTIES OF BUILDING MATERIALS

Moscow OPTIMiZATSIYA SVOYSTV STROITBL'NYKH MATERIALOV in Russian 1981 (signed to press
19 Mar 81) [no page and number given]

lTitlc page, annotation and table of contents from the book "Optimizing Properties of
Building Materials," by V. G. Zazimko. Moscow, Izdatel'stvo transport", 4,000 copies.
103 pages]

ITuxt] Full title: "Optimizatsiya svoystv stroitel'nykh materialov: Uchebnoye po-
qubiye dlya vuzov Zh.-d. trans." [Optimizing Properties of Building Materials: Text-
book for Railroad Transport VUZ's] UDC: 625.06/.07.006.68

Reviewers: Doctor of Technical Sciences and Professor V. I. Solomatov
Candidate of Technical Sciences 8. I. Stupakov

Annotation: The basic technical properties of composition materials and the technolo-
gicnl processes of their derivation as a function of a complex of factors, each of
which is a random value, are described. The principles of probability theory and ma-
thematical statistics are presented. The optimization of the basic technical proper-
ties of composition materials and the technological processes of their derivation,
done using statistical methods, is examined. Examples are given of the resolution of
tasks of optimizing the properties of composition materials being used in transport
construction. The textbook is intended for use by construction—specialty students in
transport VUZ's. Figures -- 29; tables -- 22; bibliographic entries -- six.

Table of Contents

From the Author 3

Chnpter i: Basic Technical Properties of Building Materials
1. Basic information on Dc‘ormabiiity, Strength and Homogeneity of Properties 5
2. Concept of Composition Materials. Dependence of Their Strength on Struc-

tural Characteristics I0
3. Tochnological Principles of Obtaining Concretes 17
4. Structural Characteristics of Concretcs and Determining Them 23

5. Methods of Monitoring the Basic Technical Properties of Building Materials 27
Chapter Ii: Basic Concepts and Methods of Mathematical Statistics

I. Some Information from Probability Theory 34

2 Basic Concepts and Laws of Mathematical Statistics 38

1. Processing Measurement Results 43
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. luvs of Distribution Given A Small Number of Heasureuents 50
5. Basic Methods of Hathenatical Statistics 52
rhaptcr Ill: Optimizing the Technical Properties of Couposition Materials

1. Optimizing Experiment Planning 60
2. Optimizing Concrete Heat Treatment 66
3. Calculating Concrete Strength By the Finite-Elements Method 73
4. Optimizing the Properties of Heavy and Light Concretea 88
Appendices:

l. Values of Function 0(“7) 92
2. Laplace Function Values 94
1. Probabilities P(A) for Different A Values (A. N. Kolnogorov's Distribution) 95
A. Values tp for Different Levels of p Significance (Two-Sided Criterion) 96
5. Values Pp for Different Levels of p Significance (One-Sided Criterion) 97
6. Cochran Criterion (6) Values for Different Levels of Significance 100
Recommended Bibliography [02

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Transport', 1981

IlnSZ
(:50: [821/129

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HETAIHORKING EQUIPMENT

PROBLEMS IN MACHINETOOL INDUSTRY EXAMINED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 4, Apr 82 (signed to press 26 Mar 82)pp$5-64

[Article by c. Kiperman and L. Vlasenkova: "Fulfillment Indicator of Contractual
Obligations")

[Text] In the fulfillment of the national-economic tasks for the current Five-Year
Plan ensuing from the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. the chief emphasis is
placed on expediting the growth rate of end-results through the intensification of
the economy and increase in the effectiveness of social production.

At the November (1981) Plenum of the CPS" CC it was stressed that a smoothly coordi-
nated performance of all elements of the national economy is becoming the principal
prerequisite for streamlining the economy. That is why, in the system of measures
outlined by the decree of the CPSU CC and the USSR Council of Ministers, "0n Impro-
vements in Planning andIntensificationof the Effect of the Economic Machinery on
increasing the Effectiveness of Production and Quality of Work," a major role is
assigned to refining the economic machinery for assuring proper mutual proportions
oi production, and to making the plans better balanced.

The balanced and smoothly meshed development of the economy hinges on the rigorous
tulfiliment by every association and enterprise of the plan of output and delive-
ries on schedule and in the necessary variety. This should be assisted by the pro-
cedure for assessing the performance of production enterprises, on chiefly proceed-
ing from the fulfillment of the plan for deliveries of means of production and
consumer goods in accordance with the contractual terms (or orders placed). as
specified in the decree of the CPSU cc and the USSR Council of Ministers concerning
improvements in the economic machinery.

The new accounting procedure with respect to the fulfillment of tasks and pledges
for output deliveries as related to the awarding of bonuses to administrators.
engineers, technicians. and white-collar workers is mandatory at production asso—
ciations and in industrial enterprises as of 1 January 1978.

The application of this [fulfillment] indicator has favorably influenced the perfor-
mance of associations and enterprises and enhanced their responsibility as suppliers
Lu users. Further, it has contributed to focusing the attention of enterprises and
their managers on assuring a smooth flow of production, as well as to an improved

operational scheduling and a better observance of contractual obligations. All this

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The number of associations and enterprises that fail to fulfill their contractual
obligations to customers has not decreased. In particular. the proportion of these
enterprises during January to September 1981 amounted to 48 percent. which corre~
sponds to the level for a like period in 1980. The overall shortfall in the supply
of means of production and consumer goods has not diminished either: it amounted to
12.7 billion rubles. In 1980 the production associations (and enterprises) of the
all—Union and Union-republic industrial ministries undersupplied their customers to
the extent of about 17 billion rubles. Nearly 40 percent of that shortfall was

in the sub-sectors producing raw and other materials and fuel; 14.2 percent, in the
machine-building associations and enterprises; about 30 percent, in the sub-sectors

producing consumer goods; and 1.8 percent, in the enterprises of the construction
ministries.

The factors affecting the fulfillment of the production plan with allowance for
deliveries are diverse and vary depending on the specific nature of the industrial
sub-sectors. They can be conditionally divided into two groups: factors independent
of the production and economic performance of the manufacturing enterprises, and
factors dependent on that performance.

The first factors may include the failure of co—producing enterprises to fulfill
their contractual obligations for the provision of raw and other materials. compo-
nent products, etc. For example. the operating experience of the "Frezer" Moscow
Machine Tools and Instruments Plant imeni H. I. Kalinin demonstrates that for many
years it has not been supplied by metallurgical enterprises with the necessary
quantities and variety of metal. In particular, in 1980 these co-producing plants
undersupplied the "Prezer" Plant to the extent of 152 tons of high-speed steel,
and 12 tons of hard alloys, which caused the plant to undersupply its customers to
the extent of 1.7 million rubles of output. In the same year the ”Krasnyy
Prolctariy" [Red Proletarian] Machine Tool Building Plant undersupplied its custo-
mers to the extent of 620.000 rubles of output, chiefly owing to the failure to
receive on time its own supplies of metal and accessories.

A major effect on the fulfillment of the output and delivery plan is produced by
shortcomings in the performance of transport, prolonged stoppages during loading and
unloading operations, and idle runs, so that associations and enterprises are not

adequately supplied with means of transport and the schedules for providing rolling
stock to transport output are not being kept.

The fulfillment of shipments by enterprises is also complicated by delays in the
reception of plans, orders. and other shipping documents, frequent modifications of
orders placed by the material-technical supply agencies. and insufficient deliveries
nr raw and other materials and components from the bases and depots of the local
agencies of the USSR Gossnab [State Supply Administration].

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In our opinion. the factors enumerated above are to a large extent due to the fun—
aamonlal remissness of supply organizations and wholesale trading enterprises in
introducing the new procedure for evaluating economic performance according to the
fulfillment of obligations to customers. This markedly restricts the effectiveness
of the fulfillment indicator as a means of improving the performance of industry.

Although the level of fulfillment of the orders placed is determined by evaluating
the performance of the supply organizations. the principal indicator of that per-
formance. in practice. remains the volume of goods turnover. It is this latter in-
dicator that is used as the basis for calculating the needs for manpower and mate-
rial resources at the supply organizations. as well as for determining labor pro—
ductivity and the level of expenditures of liquid assets. Further, this indicator
is used as the chief criterion for determining the bonuses paid to the employees

of the supply organizations. That is why these organizations are interested in
retaining this indicator. Inasmuch as it reflects the overall value of the sales
of means of production and consumer goods. the indicator of goods turnover prompts
the supply organizations to give warehousing and shipping priority to expensive pro-
duct: in large batches. Low-cost products and small shipments are inconvenient to
supply organizations. since then the indicator of goods turnover is lower and

hence also the bonuses are lower. Such products are reluctantly warehoused and
sluggishly sold. And yet. even short—lasting interruptions in supply disorganize
the operations of many enterprises and construction projects.

Considerable harm to the fulfillment of the plan for consumer goods supplies is
caused by the discrepancies between the performance indicators used by industry
and those used by trade. In trade. the principal indicator is goods turnover in
retail prices. Yet the performance of light industry to this day is evaluated in
terms of the fulfillment of the plan of sales in wholesale prices. At the same
time. the fulfillment of the supply plan in financial terms (retail prices) and

in kind is not considered when evaluating the performance of enterprises. As a
result. industrial enterprises which officially fulfilled their sales plans

remain debtors as regards supplying goods to trade and satisfying consumer demand.
Thus. of the total number of light-industry enterprises which underfulfilled con-
tractual obligations and orders for the supply of their products to the extent

of 2.051 million rubles during the first 9 months of 1981. enterprises which offi-
tlally fulfilled their sales plans account for 86 percent. During the first quar-
ter of 1981 alone the light industry of the RSFSR underfulfilled its supply plan
to the extent of more than 17 million sq m of cotton fabrics; mostly. these fabrics
represent inexpensive but scarce goods: printed calico, satin. linen and kerchief
fabrics. twin-color towels. Yet the sales plan was officially overfulfilled on
the grounds that the resulting supply shortfall was offset by a factor of 1.5

by overfulfilling the plan with respect to the fabrics "advantageous" to the
producers.

Shortcomings in material-technical supply and in the performance of transport as
well as contract violations by co-producers and other factors outside the control
of the particular enterprise itself affect just about equally the performance of
diflerent associatons and enterprises. Yet these factors do not prevent many en-
terprises from completely fulfilling supply obligations to their customers. In
the first 9 months of 1981. for example, 52 percent of production associations and

13
[13R 0FF1C1AL.USEZ(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enterprises whose performance reports were based on "output sales volume with
allowance for fulfillment of delivery obligations." fulfilled completely thier
contract obligations to customers. During the same period. 20.4 percent of

all Minstankoprom [Ministry of Hachinetool Industry] enterprises fulfilled by
99.1-99.9 percent their sales plans with allowance for delivery obligations.

and 31.8 percent had fulfilled it completely: at the Hinpribor [Ministry of
lnstrumentmaking Industry] the corresponding figures were 20.3 and 62.5 percent;
and at the Hinavtoprom [Ministry of Automotive Industry]. 17.7 and 18.3 percent.

Experience shows that at the enterprises and aossociations with an efficient orga-
nization of all management links. proper operational planning. smooth production
operations. proper monitoring of the fulfillment of delivery obligations. long-
time economic contacts. and a rational application of economic incentchs. the

plan for output deliveries is as a rule completely fulfilled. year after year.

this applies in particular to such machinetool enterprises as the Novosibirsk Plant
imeni 16th Party Congress. the Khabarovsk and Gomel' imeni S. H. Kirov plants.

and the Yerevan' Production Association of the "Soyuzstankoprom" VPO All-Union
Machinetool Industry.

The operating experience of the industrial enterprises indicates that the principal
causes of the underfulfillment of contractual product delivery obligations and
orders is shortcomings in the organization of production at associations and enter-
prises: snags in production. delays in organizing the manufacturing of new product
types. inefficient utilization of equipment and material resources. faulty intro-
duction of new equipment. technologies. and mechanization of labor-consuming pro-
cesses. and the absence of an efficient shipment control system.

The effectivenes of the new indicator is largely due to the role which it plays
as an incentive for improving the production and economic performance of enter-
prises (associations) in the sense of evaluating the performance of the plant
personnel.

Operating experience indicates that the introduction of the new indicator does not
restrictthe scopeof the indicatorof’overall sales volume.which remains the principal
indicator for evaluating the performance of production associations (enterprises)
and continues to conflict. in a way. with the indicator of the fulfillment of deli-
very obligations. The reason is that the fulfillment of delivery obligations is
verified according to the shipping or delivery of products by transport organiza-
tiOns. whereas the fulfillment of the sales plan is verified according to the
payments made-—which requires the observance of contracts not only by consigners
but also by consignees. The latter. for some or other reason. not infrequently
violate their payment obligations. thus threatening the fulfillment of the plan of
uvernli volume of sales and income by the suppliers. For example. delays by custo-
mmrs in paying for shipments of products by the Lubno "Kommunar" [Communard]
Huchinetool Plant during the first half of 1981 reached: for 20133 machine tools.
56 and 37 days; for 2H131 machine tools. 41. 54. and 21 days; for 2A423 machine
tools. 53, 23. and 26 days; for 2H17S machine tools. 71 days; and for ZU131M
machine tools. 8 days.

Under such conditions. considering that the indicator of the overall sales volume
directly affects their profits and incentives. suppliers are primarily concerned
for the fulfillment of that indicator. This can be seen from a comparison of the

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (II-I-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

fulfillment of plans for overall sales volume with allowance for delivery obliga-
lions. According to USSR TsSU (Central Statistical Office] data. during the first
9 nmnths of 1981, more than 70 percent of the production associations and enterpri-
ses which underfulfilled their contractual and order delivery schedules had ful-
filled or overfulfilled their plans for overall sales volume. For exalple. enter-

enturprises during the second half of the month ship their products preferably
to nearby custouers. Hunting for possibilities of selling more products. the

is a result the range of minimum percentage varies broadly among individual
<cctors and within the sectors and sub-sectors. In particular. in 1981 the
1instankoprom [Ministry of Hachinetool Industry] specified a uininun of 2 oercent

15
Hill OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

under-fulfillment for 19.3 percent of its enterprises; from 2 to lo percent for
51.1 percent of its enterprises; from 6.5 to 8 percent for 25.2 percent of its
enterprises; and more than 8 percent for 5.6 percent of its enterprises. Yet, as
noted previously, a close interrelationship of different industrial sub-sectors
requires a smooth meshing of their operations. which is not possible unless
mutual deliveries among co-producing sub-sectors are strictly implemented.

Analysis shows that ministries often impose excessively high minimum percenta-
ges of underfulfillment of output sales volume with allowance for delivery obli-
gations. Thus, at the enterprises of the VP0 "Soyuzstanltoprom" the minimum
percentages approved for 1980 ranged from 3.0 to 9.0 percent while the actual
shortfall in deliveries reached 7.1 percent

Most dubious in this context is the expediency of fixing different minimum per-
centages of underfulfillment for enterprises operating under the same objective
conditions. True, this is done with allowance for the actual percentage of under-
fulfillment during a reference period. but that is nothing else than a variant of
the long-condemed method of planning "according to the level attained." The

fact that actual underfulfillment of deliveries often turns out to be below the
specified minimum percentage markedly reduces the effect of the indicator of
delivery fulfillment on the amounts of bonuses granted for basic production
performance.

It is worth noting that in practice the permissible underdelivery percentage has,
as it were. become a standard whose observance could be used almost with impunity
to let down customers and even then to be a victor in socialist labor cowetition.
The reason is that the instructions in force downgrade the role of the indicator
of delivery fulfillment as a standard for sales volume and do not promote material
and moral incentives for the fulfillment of that indicator. Some sub-sectors of
industry do include this indicator among the terms of socialist labor competition.
But in such cases the level of fulfillment of the indicator in relation to sales
volume has been set at below 100 percent for both contestants and victors. For
example, at enterprises of the electrical engineering industry this level has
been set at 93-97 percent (depending on the nature of their production). In par-
ticular, victory in the sub-sector competition for the first quarter of 1981 was
awarded to the Cheboksary Electrical Equipment Plant which fulfilled only 96.3
percent of its scheduled contractual delivery obligations.

The reductions in bonuses for basic results of economic performance have been
performed according to criteria developed by the ministries. Considering that

the existing [decreed] instructions do not provide for any standardization of such
criteria. do not restrict the minimum allowable percentages of delivery underful-
fillmcnt, and do not link them to the actual percentages of such underfulfillment
:md to the extent of reduction of bonuses. every ministry and production associa-
tion has approached this problem differently. A broad variety of different criteria
for reducing bonuses to managers in the event of underfulfillment of deliveries
has appeared. Fairly often in different sectors and sub-sectors of industry,
lot the same minimum percentages and the same actual underfulfillment of sales
volume with allowance for deliveries. the applicable reductions in bonuses vary.
Host of the existing criteria for reducing such bonuses do not meet the principal

16
ron' OFFICiAL use ONLY
IWJR 0F11C1AL.USE13NLV

requirement of increasing the level of material responsibility for the underfulfill-
ment of delivery tasks and obligations in measure with approach to the minimum per-
centage level. Thus, one of the criteria of this kind applied by the Hinstankprom
provides for depriving managers of 50 percent of their bonus if the sales plan

with allowance for deliveries is underfulfilled by 6.7 percent--and for depriving
then entirely of their bonus if the plan underfulfillment is just 0.1 percent
greater (6.8 percent).

The procedure existing since 1978 provided for a cumulative determination of the
extent of underdelivery to mobilize the interest of the enterprises in compensat-
ing. during the subsequent periods. the shortfalls in quantity and variety of

the off-schedule deliveries during the preceding period. But such a procedure
ignores the time factor. since an enterprise which underfulfills its deliveries
during the first quarter of the year but compensates for them with increased
deliveries during the second or fourth quarter. is entitled to receive an intact
anount of incentive funds. It thus turns out that the losses sustained by society
owing to underfulfillment of deliveries during the first quarter do not affect
adversely the incentive funds received by the supplier enterprise.

To strengthen the effect of the indicator of fulfillment of delivery tasks and
obligations (in relation to sales volume) on the performance of associations and
enterprises. a new set of instructions has been draftrd and approved with respect
to the accounting procedure for the fulfillment of the tasks and obligations

of delivering industrial and consumer goods on schedule, in accordance with con-
tracts. to be applied to the evaluation of performance and granting of incentives
to production, supply-marketing. and trade associations. enterprises, and organiza-
tions. These new instructions are effective as of 1 January 1982.*

Pursuant to the decree of the CPSU CC and the USSR Council of Ministers on
improvements in the economic machinery. the new instructions proceed from the pre-
mise that the fulfillment of the tasks and obligations as regards the delivery of
industrial and consumer goods is to be a criterion in evaluating the performance of
enterprises. associations. and organizations; determining the scope of incentive
funds; awarding bonuses to managers. engineers. technicians. and white-collar
workers; and assessing the results of the all-Union and republic socialist labor
competitions. Thus. this decree enhances the role of the indicator of sales volume
with allowance for deliveries in the system of indicators. and links it to other
economic instruments.

While they retain the existing procedure for crediting full or partial compensation
for underdelivered output during a subsequent period. and for fulfilling the indica-
tor of sales volume with allowance for deliveries. the new instructions provide

for a compromise decision-~a partial restoration of the withheld amount of incen-
tivu funds. The procedure for and extent of utilization of the reimbursed

material incentive funds are to be determined by the USSR Gosplan. the USSR

Ministry of Finance. the USSR Goskomtrud [State Labor Commission]. and the

VTsSPS [All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions].

The instructions provide that underfulfillment (cumulatively. since the beginning
of the year) of output delivery tasks and obligations by associations, enterprises,

35cc masonicnrslom cum. No 1.1., 1981. p 15. .

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and organizations excludes them from eligibility for relay Red banners and first,
second. and third prizes in all-Union and republic socialist labor competitions.

These new instructions also specify that the minimum percentage of underfulfill-
nent of output delivery tasks and obligations, as established by ministries and
departments for the associations. enterprises. and organizations under their
jurisdiction. may not exceed 2 percent. and in isolated instances. 3 percent.

in the event of underfulfillment of tasks and obligations with respect to delive-
ries of certain means of production that are of major inortance to the national
economy. no bonuses at all will be awarded to managers of associations. enterpri-
ses. and organizations for their economic performance, regardless of any specified
minimum percentage.

The new instructions further specify the standard criterions for reducing the
bonuses awarded to managers of associations. enterprises. and organizations. by
linking the percentage of delivery underfulfillment and the extent of bonus re-
duct ion to a minimum percentage of underfulfillment below which these managers
are entirely deprived of their bonuses, thus making these criteria uniform for
all sub-sectors of industry. The criteria are so designed that the degree of
"punishment" is reduced when the underfulfillment is slight but markedly in-
creased when the underfulfillment is considerable.

Further. the new instructions define more precisely and specify the principles
governing the roster of branches and types of production to which they apply

and the determination of the volume of output sales with allowance for the fulfill-
nent of delivery obligations as well as the pertinent statistical reporting pro-
cedure. Even so. many questions still remain unresolved.

There is much room for improvement in the method itself of calculating the per-
centage of the fuflillnent of output sales plans with allowance for the fulfill—
nent of delivery tasks and obligations. Since the total delivery shortfall.

as computed cumulatively since the beginning of the year. is linked to the volume
of sales planned since the beginning of the year. in practice different measures

of material responsibility are meted out for the same amounts of delivery shortfall.
Suppose that a yearly sales plan amounting to lo million rubles is uniformly
divided among the quarterly periods. Given a 10,000-ruble delivery shortfall
during the first quarter. under the current procedure the percentage of shortfall
in the first quarter will be 1.0 percent; in the third quarter. 0.33 percent;

and in the fourth quarter. 0.25 percent. Material responsibility for the shorftall
correspondingly diminishes. Thus, given a minimum acceptable underfulfillment
percentage of 1 percent. the extent of reduction in bonus will be (pursuant to

the appropriate standard criteria in the new instructions) 75 percent in the first
quarter; 50 percent in the third; and 25 percent in the fourth.

Given such a computational procedure. it is convenient for enterprises to establish
underestimated output and delivery plans for the first one or two quarters of the
year and unjustifiably to postpone until year-end the most labor-intensive. res-
ponsible. and inconvenient orders (which. as a rule. include most of the tasks
relating to the production of new equipment). All this can adversely affect the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:mwnithness of production throughout the year and the fulfillment of the
output (delivery) plan as a whole.

In our opinion, calculations of the percentage of output underdelivery should be
linked to the plan (report) period in which underdelivery took place and for which
bonuses. or rather reduced bonuses will be paid. In any such [quarterly] period

the reduction in bonuses for the same output underdelivery should be of the same
extent. To this end, the calculations of percentile fulfillment of the output sales
plan with allowance for actual deliveries should allow for cumulative fulfillment
of deliveries and be linked to the planned sales volume for the reporting period
concerned. Such a calculationnl method would contribute to tightening the delivery
discipline and the responsibility for the period of increased deliveries to
compensate customers for the shortfalls.

it should also be stated that the new assessment indicator has "inherited" from
the indicator of general sales volume the shortcomings inherent in its value
structure. which is analogous to the structure of gross and marketable output.
The interestedness of enterprises in producing expensive. less labor-intensive.
and relatively more material-intensive products has not been counteracted. This
is reflected in the attempts of enterprises to influence correspondingly the
formation of the delivery plan. The "grossl-volume] approach" to determining the
shortfall in deliveries (the adding-up of quantitatively large low-cost under-
dcliveries) results in that even a major violation of contractual obligations to
deliver relatively low-cost but important products (spare parts, etc.) is hardly
noticeable against the background of the overall volume of sales. Such an approach
markedly weakens the mechanism of the fulfillment of all contractual obligations
without exception.

One way of improving the methods and indicators of planning and incentive granting
at present is the refusal to use the indicator of gross (or marketable) output

in evaluating the performance of enterprises. The principal indicator of output
volume at enterprises (chiefly within the branches of the processing industry)
is. increasingly. the indicator of net (normative) output. This role is still
played by the indicator of marketable output only in certain sub-sectors--the

raw materials industries and the industries in which changes in variety of output
and in raw material needs do not significantly affect economic performance. In
this connection there arises the question of whether the fulfillment of delivery
plan can be evaluated in relation to volume of output calculated in terms of
normative net output (NNO)?

In our opinion. this evaluation is not only feasible but advisable, since it will
aid in eliminating the existing contradiction between the evaluations of plan ful-
fillment in kind and in terms of financial value. This also would promote orient-
ing the associations and enterprises toward fulfilling their output and delivery
plans in terms of the planned variety (products list). A basis for evaluating

the fulfillment of the delivery plan in terms of "N0 has been provided by the
conversion of most industrial sub-sectors. as of 1982. to new wholesale prices with
respect to which the price lists specify the norms of net output. At the same time.
a more substantiated solution of this problem requires an experimental verifica-
tion of the evaluation of delivery plan fulfillment on the basis of “NO and its

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relation to the system of plan and assessment indicators of the performance of
associations (enterprises).

A major problem remains the meshing together of the various economic instruments
in order to assure the complete fulfillment of the output delivery tasks and
obligations in the quantity and variety meeting the contractual obligations

and requisitions as well as the orders placed by foreign-trade organizations,
within the scheduled target dates.

The new instructions provide for reducing the deductions for the incentive fund
in the event of failure to fulfill contractual deliveries on schedule. However.
this does not completely solve the problem. Analysis of the crediting of incentive
funds at industrial enterprises reveals that the effect of the indicator "sales
volume with allowance for the fulfillment of delivery obligations" on the size

of these funds is minor. and that the reduction in these funds owing to under-
delivery of output is insignificant owing to the low deductions specified per
percentage point ofunderfulfillnentof the plan for sales volume with allowance
for the fulfillment of output delivery tasks and pledges. For example. the
following norms for reducing incentive funds have been fixed for the associations
and enterprises of VPO "Soyuzstankoprom" per percentage point of deetease in;
labor productivity, 2.6 percent; share of output belonging in higher quality cate-
gory. 2.6 percent; per percent of increase in production cost. 0.65 percent;

per percent of umderfulfillment of output delivery tasks and obligations. 1
percent; and per percent of decrease in sales (profits). 1.3 percent. The lack
of uniformity in these norms is still greater in the electrotechnicai industry.
Thus. at the Kamkabel' Cable Plant in Perm', the plants manufacturing electro-
tcchnical equipment. high-voltage electrical insulators. and electromechanical
equipment. and the Lys'venskiy Turbogenerator Plant, for every percentage point
of decrease in output in the higher quality category the amount credited to the
incentive fund from profits is reduced by 6 percent, whereas for every

additional percentage point of delivery underfulfillment the reduction in that
amount is 0.5-1.5 pertent.

Noreovor. these reductions in incentive funds are partially or entirely offset

by their increases to reward plan overfulfillment in terms of labor productivity.
share of output in the higher quality category, or additional profits from sales

91 output in the higher quality category (part of surcharge on wholesale price).

It thus appears expedient to increase the incentive-fund penalties for failure

to fulfill delivery obligations. to the same extent as the penalties applied for

u decrease in the share of higher-quality output or in labor productivity.

The now instructions specify that in the event of fulfillment of all output deli-
very tasks and obligations by associations. enterprises,and organizations, their
managerial personnel, enginers. technicians, and white-collar workers will
receive increased bonuses. A similar provision had also existed in the previous
instructions. with regard to both the fulfillment and the overfulfilluent of the
delivery plan. For example. within the Hinstankoprom the regular bonus can be
increased up to 25 percent depending on the importance of the additionally deli-
vered products. In practice. however. this provision has not been applied, since
the enterprises lacked the funds to pay that extra bonus. To stimulate the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fulfillment of the plan of sales volume with allowance for deliveries, a provision
should be made for augmenting the incentive fund. Thus. since 1981. the Hinelektro-
lekhprom [Ministry of Electrotechnical Industry] has been allowed to augment its
incentive funds by 10 percent. and to increase the bonuses awarded, for complete
fulflllment of the output delivery plan.

Experience shows that enterprise heads receive bonuses not only for fulfilling the
orders placed but also for a great many other indicators. If they underfulfill
the delivery plan. they recoup the bonuses lost for this reason by receiving
bonuses for other reasons such as. say, for supplying scrap.promoting innovations.
conserving resources, introducing new technologies. etc. There is a need for
establishing that bonuses for these other indicators may not be awarded in the
event of underfulfillment--below some specified minimum percentage--of delivry
obligations.

To enhance the effectiveness of the indicator of sales volume with allowance for
fulfillment of obligations as a criterion for evaluating the performance of enter-
prises. it is necessary to radically improve the study of supply and demand; to
prepare and approve in good time the yearly plans. as specified in the decree on
improvements in the economic machinery; to sharply enhance the role of long-term
direct ties among enterprises; and to make the rigorous observance of contractual
obligations the main criterion for evaluating the performance of enterprises. The
established minimum underdelivery percentages should be of an interim nature, and
within the next few years they should be revoked. But even this will not produce
the expected results unless every enterprise and association introduces a system of
measures to assure smoothness of production and an unconditional fulfillment of

the plans for the variety (assortment) of output. This presupposes major improve-
ments in operative production planning. intia-plant cost effectiveness analysis.
and monitoring of the fulfillment of every order.

There is no doubt at all about the importance of indicators in ensuring a balanced
production and promoting an increase in and improvements of production. But this
role should not be exaggerated. In themselves. indicators do not, of course. affect
the level of performance of enterprises and associations; they merely orient
management and labor toward taking the measures needed. This equally applies to
the indicator of sales plan fulfillment with allowance for the implementation of
delivery obligations. The indicator shows which measures must be taken. or rather
what complex whole of measures must be taken, in order to assure the implementa-
tion of the terms of every contract and every customer order. This work should be
organized by the ministries with broad participation by sector scientific

research institutes.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonomiki". 1982

I 380
cs0: [821/117

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MI-TI'A 1H ORR INC 300 I new

METAL USE IN "Acmm INDUSTRY DISCUSSED
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No 4. Apr 82 (signed to press 26 Mar 82) pp75-82

[Article by N. Ivantaova: "Metals Demand of Production and the Potential
for Conserving Hetsls"]

[Text] The CPSU CC and USSR Council of Ministers decree "0n Intensifying the Work
on the Conservation and Rational Utilization of Raw-Material, Fuel. Energy. and
Other Material Resources." outlnes a complex whole of specific measures to improve
the system for the planning and promotion of the utilization of material resources.
This concerns the conservation of resources both during production and during the
utilization of the finished products.

The major customers for finished metal products are machine building. metal machin-
ing. and construction. The growth rates of these sub-sectors and the changes in
their structure as well as in the metal requirement of their production directly
affect the volume of metal consumption and the metal requirement of the finished
products. Machine building and metal working are the largest consumers of metal.
Thus. metals account for about 30 percent of the material expenditures of machine
building and metal smehining, with allowance for intra-plant turnover in the machine
_buiiding industry-~or for 50 percent if that turnover is disregarded. i.e. they
account for the principal part of the sub-sector's material expenditures.

The level of metal requirement of production is still comparatively high, which
leads to considerable waste of metal in the metal-consuming branches. At the 26th

CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev pointed out that cutting in half the losses and wastes
of metal in metal work'rg would be tantamount to a 10-percent increase in the output
of ferrous rolled stock. The waste of metal in the metal-using branches is increas-
ing and at present it exceeds 19 million tons annually (of which 9 million tons
wasted in chips). The utilization factor of rolled stock in machine building has
remained at the unchanged level of 0.72 for the last 10 years. The decree on

'he conservation of material resources points to the need to improve the structure
of the national economy and its branches in the direction of an all-out reduction

in the energy- and material-intensiveness of production.

The unit metal requirement of production within discrete machine-building and
metal-machining subsectors varies, and hence changes in the sub-sector structure

of that complex affect differently the metal requirement of the production of
machine building. industry, and national product as a whole. Within machine build-
ing itself the most metal-intensive subsectors are:heavy, power. transport. tractor,

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL est ONLY

and unriuultural machine building. Their share of the sector's gross output

in substantial (nearly 30 percent) and affects the increase in the metal-intensive-
ncss or the production of the entire machine building sector. In the long run.

the growth rate of the output volume of these sub-sectors will somewhat slow down
and their share in the output of machine building will decrease, which will result
in a decreased metal-intensiveness of the production of machine building as a whole.
The level of metal-intensiveness of the productionof road-construction and chemical
machine building sub-sectors as well as of the automotive industry is close to the
level of metal-intensiveness of the production of machine building as a whole.

The share of this group of sub-sectors will keep rising, and it will lead to some

increase in the level of metal-intensiveness of the machine building sector as a
whole.

Not as metal-intensive are machinetool and machine building for the light and food
industries, the electrotechnical industry. and, especially, instrumentmaking. The
mctui-intensiveness of instrumentmaking is only one-seventeenth as high as that

or the production of heavy, transport. and energy machine building sub-sectors.

The vigorous development of the above sub-sectors with their lower metal-intensive-
nous will contribute to reducing the metal-intensiveness of the machine building
svctor as a whole, even though the demand for metal will increase in volume.

Studies of the internal structure of individual sub-sectors of machine building
point to a considerable potential for reducing metal-intensiveness through improve—
nwnts in the structure of these sub-sectors and in the design of the products they
manufacture. The production structure of tractors, machine tools, and certain
other types of machinery and equipment still remains fairly metal-intensive. Thus.
caterpillar tractors account for a substantial part (40 percent) of the structure
of tractor building. The metal consumption norm per caterpillar tractor is greater
by a factor of 1.8 than per wheeled tractor. In the long run, the tractor pro-
duction structure should be improved by increasing the share of wheeled and low-
power tractor types, including garden and orchard tractors. This will help reduce

the metal-intensiveness of tractor building as well as of machine building as
a whole.

The most effective ways of reducing the unit metal-intensiveness of production

per unit of basic machine parameters are: concentration of capacities within a
discrete assembly, increase in productivity, and improvements in the performance
characteristics of machinery and equipment. In recent years a gap has arisen be-
tween technical potential of many types of equipment manufactured and the actual
level of its utilization; that is, the increased parameters are far from being
fully utilized. For example large— and heavy-sized metalworking equipment accounts
for a large part of the output structure of metal-cutting machine tools and press-
forging equipment. Such a ratio results in greater metal-intensiveness of the
production of machinetool building as well as of machine building as a whole. but
even so the larger machine tools are far from always operated at full capacity.
This results in wasteful expenditures of not only material but also manpower re-
sources. That is why it is so important for designers and developers to proceed
from actual operating conditions of equipment when devising new types of machinery
and equipment .

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lmprnvcments in the type-size structure of machinery and equipment remain a topical
problem. Potentially, they lead to considerable savings of metal and other pro-
duction resources. Given the same resources of metal and the same production
capacities, relatively low additional outlays could result in a marked increase

in machine-building output. To uncover such potential, the design and operation
of machinery should be based on a unit metal-intensiveness adapted not only to

the specifications of machines but also to the operations they are designed for.

life until the first major overhaul. The work to optimize machinery type-sizes
should be carried out in every sub-sector of machine building. The Main Directions
of the Economic and Social Development of the USSR for the 1981-1985 Period and for
the Prrind Until 1990 point out that unit capacities of machinery and equipment
should be increased within optimal limits while at the same time reducing their
dimensions. metal-intensiveness, energy-intensivenesa. and the cost per unit of
final useful effect.

An efficient utilization of metal products in the metal-using branches as well as
the development of ways of saving metals during their treatment largely depend on
the usuallurgical sub-sectors. Despite the definite accomplishments in improving
the structure and quality of metals, the demand of branches of the national economy
for most highly economical types of rolled stock is being far from adequately met.
Many domestically produced machines are heavier than their foreign-produced counter-
parts, chiefly owing to an insufficiently progressive structure of metals: the
vumpnratively high proportion of castings in the structure of metal production

Jud the insufficient proportion of rolled plate and especially sheeting in the
structure of rolled stock.

Th0 factors decisive to the level of the metal-intensiveness, reliability, and
length of service life of machinery. instruments, and structural elements include in
particular the quality and structure of ferrous metals. Metal-intensiveness of
structural elements can be reduced by improving the structure of the production of
metallurgy through a reduction in the share ofcastings and an increase in the share
of rolled stock. especially sheeting and its economical types. In recent years

the structure of ferrous metals used has become more progressive, but the share of
castings still continues to be comparatively high (see table).

A; can be seen from the figures in the table, the structure of metallurgical pro—
ducts used in machine building as a whole for the last 15 years has not changed
hlﬁﬂlllfﬂﬂtly: the share of castings decreased 3.3 points and that of sheetings
increased 5.7 points. In the largest metal-using sub-sectors--machinetool build-
ing, the automotive industry. and heavy and chemical machine building--the share
uf castings has remained at practically the same level. Even for 1985. the anti-
ulpnlvd decrease in the share of castings for all sub-sectors of machine building—-
c<clusivc of machinetool building and road-construction machine building--will be
iusluuificaut.

The relatively high proportion of castings in the structure of metal consumption
is in some cases attributable to shortages of certain types of ferrous rolled
stock. This results in producing castings from heavy-weight ingots as well as in
a metal-intensive structure of some sub-sectors of machine building. Analysis of

24
FOR OFFICIAL l'Sli ONLY
FOR Ol-‘l-"li‘lM. USP. ONLY

thv structure of the consumption of castings has shown that in the long run the
volume of the production and consumption of castings can be reduced by 5—7 mil-
lion tons annually by supplanting cast components with rolled products and reduc-
ing the weight of castings through the introduction of precision casting techni-
ques. This will make it possible to reduce the metal—intensiveness of production
and obtain substantial savings. Thus. the replacement of cast components with
welded sheet components saves roughly 103 rubles per ton. Consequently, the
replacement of 5-7 million tons of castings with rolled components would save
500-700 million rubles annually for the national economy as a whole.

table: Rounded-Off Structure of Metal Consumed by Machine Building (in 2)

share of Castings in Share of Rolled Sheets

 

Metal-Consuming Sub-Sector Metal Production in Finished Rolled Stock
'___ 1966 1980 1966 1980
Machine building and metalworking 31.1 27.8 46.9 52.6

of which:

Tractor and agricultural machine

building 38.8 31.9 35.5 43.2
Heavy machine building 32.9 33 3 46.3 49 7
Automotive industry 18.6 18 5 40.3 49.0
Machinetool building industry 51.5 51 1 30.3 38.0
Road-construction machine building 29.9 24 0 54.7 59.2
Chemical machine building 35.4 34 7 48.0 61 3

Currently certain organizations in this country have been working on the technical
and economic substantiation of the manufacture of rolled-stock weldments in lieu
of castings. The institutes of the machinetool and instrumentmaking industry have
dcvclupcd a large number of welded rolled-stock bed plates replacing cast-iron
bed plates for lathes. grinding machines, roughing machines, and press-forging
machinery. Lightweight designs of agricultural machines using rolled-stock compo-
nents in lieu of cast components have been developed.

ExtenSive work to reduce the metal-intensiveness of structural elements is being
done by the VNIImetmash [All—Union Scientific Research and Design Institue of
Metallurgical Machine Building] which. together with the Institute of Electric
Welding ineni Ye. 0. Paton, has developed an automatic line for the production of
sheet-steel radiators (in coils, by the die-forging and welding method) in lieu
of cast-iron radiators. The mass (unit metal-intensivenesu) per equivalent square
were: of a welded sheet radiator is lower by a factor of 3.4 than that of a cast-
iron radiator. The production of radiators from rolled sheets will save consi-
derable quantities of metal. The VNIImetmash has also developed a new method

for designing prestressed bed plates of hydraulic presses and rolling and tube
mills. The development of presses with prestressed bed plates reduces metal con-
sumption by a factor of 2-7 compared with presses having conventional columns

or a frame design. Prestressed-coil designs of the bed plates of rolling and
lube mills are roughly only half as heavy as their all-cast counterparts.*
*STITK. I. Tselikov, i'Metallurgicheskiye mashiny i agregaty: nastoyashcheye i
budushcheyc" [Metallurgical Machines and Assemblies: The Present and the FUture].
Metallugiya Press. 1979. p 136.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

argnnizing the production of the already developed lightweight designs requires
rolled stock. which is still in short supply. In the past Five-Year Plan period

the growth rates of the production of rolled stock and castings have been the same,
which cannot be considered a progressive trend. In the next few years a correspond-
ing reorganization of this production should be carried out, on being reinforced
with n system of economic incentives such that the growth rate of the production

of rolled stock would--on condition that the necessary quantities for replacing
castings be allotted--exceed the growth rates of the production ofsteeland iron
castings.

The reduction of the weight of machinery and equipment is being hampered by the
widespread use of rolled shapes by the metal-consuming branches. They still
account for a considerable part of all rolled stock consumed: nearly 50 percent in
machine building and metalworking and from 50 to 60 percent in individual
anh-snutors of machine building.

"hanging thc production structure of finished rolled stock is necessary in view

at the accelerating development of the sheet-intensive branches of industry whose
demand for rolled sheets is steadily increasing. The output of rolled sheets should
increase at a much faster rate than the output of rolled shapes, in order to meet
lhv demand of such sheet-intensive branches as automotive industry and electrotechni-
cal industry. as well as for the production of gas and crude petroleum pipe.
structural pipe, roll-formed sections. and coated sheetings. as well as for use in
construction and for supplanting castings and rolled shapes. The use of rolled
sheets. especially the thinner sheets and cold-rolled sheets. produces consideraable
savings. The adjusted cost in rubles per ton of finished rolled-sheet products is
rnuuhly 20 percent lower than per ton of products manufactured from rolled shapes.

II [he share of sheets in the structure of rolled stock is increased to 50 percent
inslcnd of the current 40 percent. the resulting savings to the national economy
could total roughly 1.5-2 billion rubles.

The variety of output of rolled shapes is being broadened fairly slowly. Tentative
.nlrulntions by experts indicate that the demand of the national economy for this
uuLpuL is greater than the supply by a factor of 1.5-2. To completely meet the
demand of, c.g. machine building, the production of more than 800 new rolled

Lhapcs must be organized. A shortcoming of the available variety of simple rolling
shnpes is the smallness of their sizes. which results in either an excess consumption
of metal (2.5-15 percent of the metal is wasted on chips)* or greater metal-
;"Lunsivenesﬁ of machinery and structuralelements as well as in lower productivity

vf social labor. increasing the number of intermediate sizes of rolled stock would
nvrvv to markedly increasse the savings of metal during its consumption.

I»: (hr whuie. it is worth noting that the output of the following economical
rlevd shapes is insuiiicient: rolled structural steel, high-precision shapes,
and roll—formed sections, whose use in lieu of their conventional counterparts
Induces the weight of blanks and products. General- and special-purpose rolled
structural steel elements are more economical. 0f the total number of these
tlvmvnls in production (970) only one-half are of lightweight design.

53:3;757 F. Sklokin, "Ekonomicheskiye problemy povysheniya kachestva i razvitiya
nwsurimcntn chernykh metallov" [Economic Aspects of Improving the Quality and
Broadening the Variety of Output of Ferrous Metals], Hetallurgiya Press. 1978, p 138.

 

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFII'IAI. USE ONLY

of heat-hardened coated low-alloy steel rolled stock as well as special and light-
weight rolled shapes. The national economy uses chiefly regular carbon steel in
hot-rolled state (75 percent), which far from always meets the increased require-
ﬂmnts posed to modern materials. especially in strength. Low-alloy steels are
much more effective: they are stronger than carbon steels and display satisfactory
plasticity. impact strength, weldability. and corrosion resistance.

An important means of assuring the durability of machines and savings of metal is
a consistent increase in the volume of output of rolled stock with various types
of coatings and in heat-hardened state. About 10 percent of the output of ferrous
metals is lost to corrosion. The greater part of rolled stock is produced without
being work-hardened. whereas the heat treatment of hot-rolled carbon and low-alloy
steels serves to markedly increase their strength. Plastic-coated and aluminum
sheets are produced in insignificant quantities. The economic effectiveness of
the use of heat-hardened coated and low-alloy steel rolled stock has been calcu-
lated to be such as to save from 20 to 60 rubles per ton. Machines and structural
elements made of such metal are stronger and lighter. and have a longer service
life. while at the same time metal consumption is reduced and the metal-intensive-
ness of products is lower. Thus, galvanized sheet products last about 2—5 times

as long as those made of uncoated sheets. The demand for these types of rolled
stock is much greater than their production.

Improvements in the structure of metal and rolled stock as well as in their quality
require taking a complex whole of measures to optimize the organizational structure
of ferrous metallurgy and preparatory production for machine building. It is

0f major importance to elevating the technological level of metallurgical pro-
duction are: an accelerated development of the melting of steel in oxygen
converters and electric furnaces; vacuum treatment of steel outside the furnaces
and continuous casting of steel; and a broad introduction of modern high-producti-
vity equipment that can assure the desired quality of metals production. The
possibilities for the intensification of the production of ferrous metals largely
depend on the structure of capital investments in ferrous metallurgy. It is
expedient to increase the share of capital investments in rolling-mill operations,

including investments in improvements in the quality and expansion of the variety
of rolled stock.

Promising trends in metalworking technology are: precision casting and die-forging
techniques; welding and rolling of components; and powder-metallurgical methods,
that is. low—waste and waste-freetechniques of manufacturing components of machi-
nery and equipment. However, the mechanical treatment of metal by cutting still
prevails in machine building, and this leads to considerable waste of metal in

the form of chips and increases the metal-, labor-, and capital-intensiveness of
production. There is a need for the standardization of technological processes

27
FOR OFIWCJAI.USE|DNLY
FOR (WI-1C Ml. USE ONLY

and the development of optimal technologies in the pre—processing shops of machine
building. The structure of technologies should he planned from the standpoint of
rvduclng material- and labor-intensiveness. It is necessary to conduct in a planned
and systematic manner analyses of machine designs and processing technologies in
order to uncover the potential for metal conservation and broaden the scale of

the utilizationof progressive structural materials. Increasing the technical and

organizational level of metalworking technologies is a major means of metal
conservation.

The insufficiently high degree of the specialization and concentration of prepa-
ratory (pre~processing) production in machine building impedes the introduction

of high~productivity resource-saving equipment and effective technological pro-
ceases. An intensive development of the centralized production of blanksuould
require a special planning of specialization indicators. It is also necessary to
prepare a long-range plan for specialization and co-production among the machine
huilding sub-sectors. including the preparatory production sub-sector. Capital
investment funds should be allotted precisely to these specialized types of pro-
duction rather than for the expansion of pre-processing shops in machine-building
enterprises or for the construction of comprehensive plants.

A rational utilization of metals and a decrease in the metal-intensiveness of pro-
duction depend on the scale of the application of the various structural mate—
rials used in lieu of metals. Plastics have found broad application in every branch
of the national economy. The plastics-using branches have developed progressive
lighter designs incorporating polymeric materials instead of ferrous and nonferrous
metals. However. the level and rate of developuent of chemical industry as yet

do not provide the technical and economic possibilities for the utilization of
these effective structural materials, both in volume of output and in qualitative
features. The volume of output of plastics is still insufficient. particularly

as regards the output of up-to~date structural thermoplastics and glass plastics.
The prices of structural plastics and synthetic resins remain high.

All this delays the expansion of the scale of use of structural polymeric mate-
rials and the reduction in the metal-intensiveness of the products manufactured.
The demand of machine-building sub-sectors for plastics is on the average sa-
tisfied only 65 percent, and in regard to certain types of plastics. even less.
Increasing the output volumes of structural plastics. especially those with
improved characteristics that are capable of competing with ferrous and nonferrous
metals; improving the technical and economic characteristics of the production

of plastics; and reducing their production cost-such are the measures that will
provide the conditions for not only reducing the metal-intensiveness but also the
weight of the machinery and equipment built.

Clearly. in the long run. plans should be made to expedite the development of
structural plastics and the refinement of the technological facilities for their
production as well as of the intraobranch structure. The structure of plastics
production should be so planned as to utilize plastics primarily in the sub-
sectors where their effect is maximal. Such should be the target of the branch's
technological and structural policy.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A vrnmlﬁlnx substitute for ferrous metals is aluminum, which displays high physica—
.hrleJI properties and corrosion resistance,low specific gravity,and good decorative
properties. and effectively replaces steel and heavy nonferrous metals while at the
same time markedly reducing the weight of machinery and equipment. The most effec-
tive field for the application of aluminum alloys is transport machine building.

A spearheading growth rate of the production and consumption of aluminum has become

I characteristic feature of technological progress. In this country in recent

years the growth rate of aluminum output has outpaced the growth rate of the output
of ferrous metals.

Metal conservation through increasing the technological and organizational level of
enterprises greatly depends on the indicators specified in output plans. The
current system for the planning. evaluation. and economic stimulation [incentives]
of production in tons and by volume of output sold in relation to output achieved.
results in emphasis on manufacturing heavier and more metal-intensive rolled stock
and equipment. At the November (1981) Plenum of the CPSU CC L. I. Brezhnev pointed
out that such indicators. which essentially encourage waste, stlll have not been
successfully eliminated. This concerns the notorious [indicator of] "gross"
[output] in tons or rubles. The enterprises are not motivated to organize the
production of new lightweight rolled sections and machines. since such production
adversely affects the technical and economic indicators of their performance: the
volume of output sold and labor productivity decrease. In ferrous metallurgy

the labor— and capital—intensiveness of high-grade production often are higher.

since high-grade products require additional treatment. All this adversely affects
the size of incentive funds.

As provided by the decree of the CPSU CC and the USSR Council of Ministers, "
Improvements in Planning and Intensification of the Effect of the Economic Mecha-
nism on Increasing the Effectiveness of Production and Quality of Bork." the new
system of nwaautes to further refine plan and assessment indicators is being
implemented slowly and not in every branch. An economical utilization of material
resources is promoted by planning such indicators as normative net output and
Volume of sales with allowance for the fulfillment of contractual and ordered

nulput deliveries. It is necessary to plan a broadened products list in units of
Immsurement that reflect more fully their use qualities.

Thr new indicators should be reflected in prices and standards and technical docu-
Imhltution. The wholesale prices introduced in 1982 are based to a greater extent
than previously on indicators of the material-intensiveness of production. which
serves to intensify the motivating effect of prices on the conservation of mate-
rIJI resources. however. the planning and incentives for the production of
uvrcuin types of equipment are geared to the tonnage indicator. In ferrous me-
Lnllurny tonnage also remains a major plan and assessment indicator. since on

its basis it is easier to fulfill the plan by increasing the volume of rolled
stock of ordinary quality. It is worth noting that experiments are under way in
lcrrous metallurgy to plan and account for discrete types of rolled stock and

its output in terms of meters, square meters. and theoretical weight. It is ex-

pedlont to broaden the approval of indicators that allow most fully for the
quality of metal.

29
FOR OWTNCJAL USE‘ONIN
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

Hctulvlntensiveness and standard weight of products are indicators of the economi-
cality of both their production and consumption. Clearly. these indicators should
become mandatory in the design of structural elements and technologies as well

as in organizing the production of new or modernized products. So far, however.
sufficient incentives have not yet been provided for designers and technologists
to develop less material-intensive types of products. Sufficient attention is

not being paid to reducing the material-intensiveness of products at machine-
building enterprises as well. This is because under the existing regulations
products are manufactured if they meet all the requirements posed to them save
the requirement of reduced material-intensiveness. A high level of material-
lntensiveness is no obstacle to awarding the Quality Badge to products.

A nmjor role in surmounting these shortcomings will be played by the implementa-
tion of the measures. specified in the decree on the conservation of material
resources. to further refine standards and technical conditions and strengthen
their role in improving the quality of production and conserving material re-
sources. Now the basic production characteristics specified in standards and
technical conditions will include indicators of material- and energy-intensiveness
corresponding to the best achievements of domestic and foreign science and
technology. Certification of products in higher quality categories will pre-
suppose the fulfillment of these requirements.

The implementation of the measures for the conservative use of material re-
sunrces. as specified in the decree. requires corresponding revisions of the
organization of bookkeeping and accounting according to indicators of rational
utilization of material resources. In particular. a technically substantiated
set of standards should be devised with respect to the principal material re-
sources. all metal. and the basic types of machine—building production. Until
recently, planning covered only the conservation of hot-rolled stock. As for
machine-building production. it is far from being completely covered by appli—
cable standards. As a result. for example. the volume of the production and con-
sumption of castings has been unjustifiably increasing and hence also the share
of castings in the structure of all metallurgical production has been diminishing
slowly. This has been impeding a reduction in the weight of machinery. Horeover.
the introduction of the achievements of science and technology is not always accom-
panied by revisions of consumption standards. As of 1981. the planning of tasks
relating to the mean reduction in the unit consumption of materials for steel

and iron castings and forgings. as well as to the coefficient of utilization of
rolled stock, has been introduced. This should promote a more efficient utiliza-
lion of all metal.

The decree provides for setting tasks relating to production cost--beginning in
l983--to industrial, construction. and transport ministries. enterprises. and
organizations. in the five-year and annual plans. These tasks include material-
expendlturc limits in financial terms per ruble of output. The norms for the con-
sumption of the principal types of materials. fuel, and energy will be determined
in kind per output unit. There will be a broader list of material resources

with respect to which centralized tasks for the mean reduction in consumption norms
will be imposed. To implement the planned measures. norm and standard management
at enterprises must be improved. It is necessary to promptly refine the existing

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

norms for the consumption of raw and other materials and fuel and energy resources
and to fix new progressive norms of this kind on proceeding from the plan tasks
with allowance for the introduction of new achievements of science and technology.

A number of scientific research institutes has conenced to implement these measu-
res. In particular. the NlIPiN [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Planning Norms and Standards] under the USSR Gossnab is developing a list of the
principal material-intensive types of production as well as of material resources
and working out standard procedures for calculating technically and economically
substantiated norms and standards and planning the material-intensiveness of pro-
duction. The institute has also prepared a draft of a standard set of rules
governing the awarding of bonuses for saving material and technical resources

and reducing the material-intensiveness of production.

0f major importance to a rational utilization of materials is the balancing of

the production and consumption of all types of resources and the presence of a cen-
tralized optimal stockpile of these resources. The shortages of certain types of
rolled stock and the limitations on the allocation of ferrous metals compel the
enterprises to maintain reserve stocks and ration their use in basic products.
Essentially. enterprises establish their "own" stockpiles to meet various addi-
tionally arising needs. such as the compensation of losses due to rejects. which
results in an inefficient utilization and imobilization of quantities of material
resources at enterprises. as well as in shortages of certain types of metal.

While in the plan-preparation stage, the ministries should identify the actual
demand for all types of rolled stock and the possibilities for meeting it. This
requires preparing a balanced plan for the production and consumption of metals.

For a proportional and balanced development of the economy, centralized material
stockpiles should be provided for in the plans for economic and social development.
The establishment of such stockpiles will contribute to eliminating the dispersion
of resources among individual departments and enterprises and assure the possibility
of selecting and more effectively utilizing the needed materials.

The decree on the conservation of natural resources considers it necessary to
increase the interest of blue-collar workers. management, engineers. technicians.
and white—collar workers of the associations. enterprises, and organizations in

an effective utilization of material resources. Clearly. a unified system of
incentives for the conservation of these resources should be set up. The incentive
funds of the ministries. departments. associations. enterprises. and organizations
will evolve depending on the level of material expenditures per ruble of output
(operations) and on the sun-nary savings achieved by reducing material expenditures
below the established limits. The payment of bonuses to blue-collar workers, fore-
men. and technologists. designers. and other engineers and technicians, will

be linked to savings of particular types of material resources in excess of the
establ ished technically substantiated consumption norms. Bonuses for the manage-
ment and white-collar workers at production associations. enterprises. and organi-
zations will be linked to the level of material expenditures per ruble of output
as compared with the approved level. with allowance for the fulfillment of the
tasks relating to production cost at the association, enterprise. or organization.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The implementation of all these measures will serve as the basis for setting up
a unified systen of incentives for the conservation of resources.

The economical utilization of mterial resources will be prouoted by converting all
branches of industry to planning the sales volune indicator with allowance for the
fulfillment of output deliveries in tense of full range and variety. When
crediting the incentive funds. allowance should be asde for the level of the
mterial-intensiveness of products and the fulfillment of contractual obligations
as regards schedule of delivery and quality and variety of products. It is
expedient to increase the monetary penalties as well as to tighten the personal
responsibility of the heads of enterprises and ministries and the mloyees of

the supply apparatus for violations of contractual obligations.

As outlined above. these trends in the reduction of the netal-intensiveness of pro-
duction and in a rational utilisation of netalnin particular, the optimization
of the sub-sector structure of netal users and improvements in the structure of

structural mterials—will, in our opinion, contribute to an economical utilization
of material resources.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekononiki". 1982

1386
CSO: 1821/11? END

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY