APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00860R000100010021-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010021$

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8214
11 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Economxc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

ll $.JCJUHW'PllﬂJthﬂﬂ1CﬂﬂS RESIDARCIQIIHUVWCE

FOR OFFICIAL USE UHEY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010021-8
NW8

ares publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of s brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or :ranslitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names p.eceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itema.arc as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGH' MRS MID REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 11118 PUBLICATIOU BB RESTRICTED POROFFICIM. USE OﬂLY.
Wm _
u »
TRANSMTIONS ON EASTERN EUROPE - BCOMHIC AND INDUSTRIAL

ms- W W _

O. Peder-Lag ngaalaauaa Name aaa Menu 0. Fake aaI/Iach Uak Ne.

Joint Publications Reeearch Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

‘2. Speaociag chaaiaadea Nome aad We“

pen - to
11 Janna 1979

     
 

    

         

 
    
     
     
   
   
  

    
   

13.? an. an»
cm.“ M '

Aa above

"I“! I

The aerial report contains articlea on economic- theory, organization. planning
and menagunent; major agreementa on and development of trade within can and

outaide the Bloc; articlea on all aapecta of the materials, aervicea. machine,
electronica, and precision equipment induatriea; and concepta and attainmenta
in agriculture, forestry, and the food industry.

       
   
  
     
       
   
      
   
 
   
 
   

   
 

International Aftaira Bcononica
Albania _ Technological
Bulgaria

1: Czechoslovakia

Baat Germany

__ Hungary

__ Poland

_ Romania

_ Yugoslavia

Vb. Ideaiﬂua/Opea-Eaad Te-a

  

m. wanna/amp SC, 131

7 AvaileNI-ty state-eat
For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

 
 

"0' I"... CID”! “COO-00¢ ‘OMF'V‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPPS 3/8214
1]. January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Ecouontc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(9000 2/79)

CONTENTS PAGE
czmtoswvexu

Machine Induetry Inveeznente for Seventh Five-Yen: Plea
(Jiﬂ K111; INVESTICNI WSTAVM, No 10, 1-978) ocooeeeee 1

'Conplem Experiment' in Heullutsy, lleevy Engineering Svelueced
(Jemelev Veverke; POMIKOVA ORGANI‘MCE, No 8, 1978) .. 11

-a- [111-32-64 F000]
FOR OFFICIAL use oxu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZRCNOSIDVAKIA

MACHINE INDUSTRY INVES'I'HEN‘IS FOR SEVENTH PIVE-YEAR PLAN
Prague INVESTICNI WSTAVM in Czech No 10. 1978 pp 313-317
[Article by Eng Jiri Krsl]

[Text] The resolution of the presidium of the CSSR government No. 176/1977
dated 25 August 1977 about the long-term program of reconstruction and
modernization of the production base in the machine industry (further Rah)
directs the ministers of metallurgy and heavy engineering (ms) and of
general engineering (MS) in cooperation with the deputy premier of the
government and the chairman of the State Planning Co-ission:

«To process. identify and determine precisely the capital investment
needs to insure implementation of the he)! program in the engineering pro-
duction base in the Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plan periods in coordina-
tion with the other parts of the plans and in accord with the results of
studies made in the first stage of the m program;

«To build up gradually a uniform and organically linked system of tech-
nological design offices for the preparation of comprehensive innovation
of engineering production processes and for advisory activity in rationali-
sation to be completed by 1986 with a work force of 5,000.

The above institutions in cooperation with the MIR and mo (Federal
Ministry of Foreign Trade) were instructed:

“To implement individual tasks for the Seventh and Eighth Five-Year Plan
in the second stage of work on the long-term Ra}! program comprising the
meeting of needs of capital construction andexports, solving the hitherto
unresolved problems in the areas of capital investment, the work plan and
the material supply of machinery especially in complementary production
sectors; to demonstrate economic viability by achieving savings in labor.
reduction of material requirements, increasing the production of automated
production processes. increasing the profitability of foreign trade and the
competitiveness of engineering products.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Content and Concept of Reconstruction and Modernisation (Ran)

The objective of the set of Ram actions in the engineering and production
base is to render production more economical by transition from extensive
to intensive development in the sphere of production. and reduce construc-

tion expenditures to a minimum principally by self-help and arclusion of
building construction subcontractors.

RaM is a system of technical and organizational measures which. when imple-
mented in a specific production unit, must prove their effectiveness by the
achievement of favorable technical and economic results and increased labor
productivity. The system is designed to resolve problems in manufactures
and enterprises within a short time with a minimum of new building construc-
tion. In principle, the proportion of investment in machinery should consti-
tute or exceed 70 to 80 percent of overall budgetary expenditures (RN).
Excluded from the Rah program are investments intended for the extensive
development of the production base. the construction of new enterprises

and difficult construction projects generally. further investments for the
simple replacement of physically wornout means of production, the construc-
tion of auxiliary production enterprises, service facilities and factory-

wide installations, the replacement of machinery, enlargement of work areas,
etc.

Principles Governing Economic Justification of tax Actions

Statewide methodological guidelines must be followed when proposing Rah
actions. Individual actions must aim primarily at:

--tesolving labor shortage problems;
--saving materials. and

--saving electric power.
These are the principal criteria governing final selection.

Other criteria to be considered include the time of investment repayment,
relative savings achieved in expenditures proper, increase in labor pro-
ductivity, production increase. etc. The data and indicators required to

assess the usefulness of Ron actions must comply with statewide guidelines
governing capital construction.

Part of the Raﬁ summary forms an outline prepared by the proponent contain-
ing a detailed justification of the principal aims of modernization, a
comprehensive evaluation of the economic effect of the Ran action on the

VHJ as a whole. justification of foreign exchange requirements, potential
liquidation of inefficient manufactures, etc.

2
FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
serial number of action in VB.)

action category

overell budgetary expenditures (in millions Kcs)
expenditures for machinery (in millions Kcs)

building construction expenditures (in millions
Ices)

production before Ran in VC (wholesale price)
(in millions Kcs)

production after no)! in V6 (in millions Kcs)
expenditures proper before Rs)! (in millions Kcs)
expenditures proper et'ter Rex (in millions Kcs)
nuder of workers before Rea

number of workers after Rex

nutter of workers from the ION (krsj national
co-ittee)

l

one-time import of machinery and equipment from
capitalist countries (in millions Kcs o.p.)
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

INK

INS

BK

BS

03

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

one-tine import of machinery end equipnent from
socislist countries (in millions Kcs o.p.)

reguler import of raw murerisls and supplies from
cepitslist countries (in millions Kcs o.p.)

regular import of rev msteriels end supplies from
socialist countries (in millions Kcs o.p.)

export of goods to capitalist countries (in
millions of tee o.p )

export of goods to socielist countries (in
millions Kcs o.p.)

number of production sector

These dete are printed by the computer in the (ore of an input tebulstion.

An output tebulstion use prepered es the basis for the final evaluation and
selection of Ben serious in which, in accord with the input data, the com-

puter printed for all proposed sctions the velues 12,03,INC.INS.INST.QO,Ql,
L0,Ll.LV.IZK,IZS,IHK.IHS.EK.ES end further the following indicetors:

1.

2.

3.

So

6.

8.
9.
10.

00-01-00

. 9L.
ova \moq0 vm

INC
DVN

m-
9.2
[.0
SE
Ll

BLC.
L1

29.
u

£0...
mc

oL-u-m
nu-w 3% - 14

production increase (in millions Koo)

relative saving in expenditures proper (in millions
Kcs)

investment repsyment time (in yesrs)
productivity before as“ (in millions Kcs per worker)
productivity efter Rah (in millions Kcs per worker)

specific investment expenditures per worker (in
millions Kcs per worker)

production increase per worker (in millions Kcs
per worker)

invest-eat efficiency (Kclecs)
absolute seving in labor

relative saving in labor

b
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the input tabulation individual actions of each WU were arranged ac-
cording to categories and the values INCJNS.INST.QO.Ql.DQ.Lo.Ll.LV.DL,RL,
lZK,IZS,TMK.le,BK and 28 were sunarised according to categories. VBJ's
and the entire ministry.

Further. a partial separate sumariaation of machine building and metallurgi-
cal VHJ's. etc. was carried out. In addition, a tabulation of all Rah ac-
tions. arranged according to production sector numbers. was prepared which
made it possible to evaluate the fulfillment of the production increase and
other indicators in selected sectors.

Organizational Implementation of the Action

The RAM program was prepared by the ministry in cleiance with the resolution
adopted by the presidium of the government. On order by the mus Kovo-
projekta Praha [listellurgicel Design Bureau Prague] prepared for this ministry
the calculations comprising the evaluation and selection of Ra)! actions pro-
posed by individual VHJ's, participated in negotiations with VB.) representa-
tives in selection proceedings and prepared the final set of Ra)! actions to
serve as the basis for consideration by the presidiun of the government.

The computer work focused on the processing of "IHJ proposals from the view-
point of quality to provide a basis for the evaluation and selection of

actions within the ministry's limits and possibilities on one hand and with
regard to the effectiveness and urgency of the solution from the viewpoint
of modernization of production sectors and the needs of WJ's on the other.

This approach represented a certain turn and a transition from quantity
to quality on the basis of criteria reflecting objective conditions.

Results of Evaluation of'naﬂ Actions

Altogether. 11 engineering and three metallurgical VHJ's were included in
the Ram program of the MTS. The base data submitted contained a total
of 630 proposals of individual actions. The limiting factor was

«the financial lieit set by the nears as part of the means available for
SZNR and construction projects not exceeding Kcs 2 millicn in budgeted
expenditures :

--proportion of investments in machinery amounting to no less than 70 per-
cent of overall expenditures.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AVI‘ Vaalvhlu. you vase-a

Table 1. Principal Indicators of Selected Rea Actions

 

a. Overall number of proposed actions (8!!)
b. Approved actions (RN)

Production increase

total RN (output)

6 Investment in Inchineg
' total budgeted expenditures

e. Labor productivity (in Kcs per worker)
f. lnvestnent repay-eat time
5. Names of V'rlJ'e

The proposed actions were evaluated comprehensively in accordance with the
following selected criteria: production increase. relative savings in pro-
duction expenditures, investment repayment tine, increase in labor efficiency,
effectiveness of investment, absolute and relative savings in labor, foreign
exchange requirements and other criteria.

In view of the nusber of evaluated actions and criteria. classification and
calculations were performed by coeputer. The first tabulation, consisting

of all 630 proposed Ran act..ons divided among individual VHJ's. was used in
the selection process proper. Following evaluation and elimination of about

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

100 actions which were not of an Rah nature a second tabulation was prepared
containing data pertaining to 310 selected actions in addition to the sum of
principal indicators for the VHJ as a unit and the entire PHMTS.

Following the evaluation and final discussion with representatives of the
FHHTS, KPP and individual VHJ’s Ran actions in the SZNR category and the
category of building construction projects not exceeding Res 2 million RN
were selected amounting to Kcs 3,653,000,000 (engineering VHJ's). Thereby
the Kcs, 3,656,000,000 PHHTS limit set for Rah actions was fulfilled by

99.97 percent. The selected actions represent 60 percent of the overall
RN of all submitted proposals.

A different approach was taken to the Rah program in individual VRJ's,
resulting in different degrees of fulfillment of limits. of engineering
VHJ's, for example, the Cs. vagonky [Czechoslovak Freight Car Horks] failed
to fulfill the minimum limit (with Kcs 5.5 million against the stipulated

sum of Res 115 million), Skoda Plzen by Res 650 million and IVTAS by has 51
million.

The 220 Rah actions in engineering and metallurgical VHJ's included in the
limit of the SZNR category and that of building construction projects not
exceeding Res 2 million RN represent a production increase of Kcs 6,868,000,000
or 34 percent. The production increase amounts to an average income of

Kcs 1.61 for every crown invested. Actions with RN exceeding the specified
investment limit with an expected production increase of Kcs 2,225,000,000
and profitability of Kcs 1.89 were left for further consideration. The
selected Rah actions will increase labor productivity by 37 percent. These
technical and economic advantages are being achieved primarily by internal
shifts of workers, only in rare instances--especially in Slovakia-absolute
increases are planned within the framework of limits allocated by the KNV.
In the Seventh Five-Year Plan the overall shift of labor within the Ran
framework involves 4,040 workers.

Additional data about the effectiveness of actions were entered individually.
Primarily the questions of investment repayment time, relative savings in
expenditures and labor and other criteria must be assessed differently in
applications on production processes (final production) than in actions
involving storage, handling of materials, etc (the nonmanufacturing, other
than final production sphere). Also the specific evaluation method calls

for the introduction of nominal prices of technology and heavy production
technology.

By applying the above-mentioned set of criteria in the evaluation and final
selection of Rah actions in building construction projects not exceeding

Kcs 2 million RN individual VHJ's of the FHHTS achieved results contained
in Table l.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The table reveals that the progran also includes actions uhoae investment
repayment times are unfavorable on first inspection. But these are actions
necessary to achieve rationalization of related facilities, specifically of
storage facilities and facilities for the handling of.materia1s. the recon-
struction of some power resource, etc. Other indicators also must be viewed
in a broader context (profitability, labor productivity).

Table 2. Comparison of the number of actions and their Rah investment
expenditures in individual work stages (in millions Kca)--Seventh Five-Year

Plan (l981-l985)--SZNR actions not exceeding Res 2 million in RH for building
construction projects. '

  

Flam-evenn-

Del 1) b L-s- III- as 'd III-pain.” 2 f) 'r-‘m ”I“
“I — _- -_.— -_ "'ﬂ .

I "‘u x-ww ~=~==ﬁE==x EEEEEEE- a
“I“ .0 D I ‘ D I ON a. - - I. I
W.- .: I I II a. O O I“ CC — u ﬂ 0
humans as as: I I n I I I'll -Oe II I - I
Came- I use us I an II II In «a a II III I
“my a II I e II II I as -o - - n AI
nun- I no u I II I I so -u I 0 e- I
“uh . N ‘ I II! I U u -. I 0' - U
MAI I U D n H . 0. n d - - I I
Caverns- I m 9 I e- I .u. I“. _-_u_ C II as
M”... b "I N . II. I! C “I. I. I . D
has... I m I. I so I I ‘0' N I I. - - I
mumuuuuummuammuuu -

u we... _| - - s - s e

I has... _ _ _ . - " _

se Hum—a - -. - ’ .- q I
“W“ sn—mmnmnnmm—mm :

Key:

a. Serial No.

b. First stage: number of actions; overall RN; of this. building construction
projects;

c. Second stage--proposal:

d. Second stage--approved:

2. Minimum limit

f. Difference in second stage: proposed actions-~approved actions; number
of actions; overall RN; limit drawn in percent and RN

g. Proposals exceeding the limit: number of actions; overall RN; construc-
tion projects

h. Overall request: RN; of this construction projects

1. Total for engineering

j. Total for metallurgy

k. Total for FMMTS

l. VHJ, name of enterprise

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Oll OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Table 3. Sumry of all RAH actions according to VHJ cctegory am not
exceeding the ch 2 n1 llion budgatary limit for building construction project.

     
  
    

 

Gaga-E "-'-‘ ESQ-:5: --'-'~

ummmmmnmmmm
”Emanumuannan

     
   

  

     

l
i

      

e?
if:

it

;
.3!

i

'3300p'vpvv-

 

lilii
H

Key:

a. Serial No.

b. within limit: number of actions; INC. total all. INS RN for machinery;
INST 9:! for building construction: 00 previous production level. 00
pzoduction increase

c. In excess of linit: number of action; INC, total mm an for machinery;
INST RN for building; conetruction; QO previouo production: DQ production
increase

d. Engineering W

e. l‘lctelluralcal VHJ

f. VlU. noses of

g. Total for engineering \mJ'e

h. Total for netellurgiccl VHJ'e

1. Total for engineering and metallurgical “11'-

Table b. Summary of all an)! action: exceeding Koo 2 million an according to
ﬂu (in millions Kc.)

 

"J "J .2.

In...“ - u u- o o s I u I u . -

u nul- - — — - - - c u u to O 0

I g In.“ . a - - .o a o - a - - c

. Ow". _ - - - .- - C m ‘0 I. N .0

O he...“ - c _ - - - - - - - - -

c on... - p a - . .- o O N ‘5 u an I!

0 came-.— 0 an I. I. ‘ ‘1 o .- - .- - u

a m“ - - - - - - o no In at a- :-

.I“HM - - - - .- - .- - - - . o

n NM. o w u a: can m In an- A. can an In

.41.. . 0 u u . no I o u to 0 on u
-__

I lean u up .- u can In I mm cpl one .-

Mu...- o no In 0 I o u no no u u

l! u n,....... - - - - - o In I no a In In

It lacuna-h. .- - n a u to I. C) U I- N

u—nnuunmmmm onu-

lrznr—u mm «In

 

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 01“.?

The number oi Ran actions and their invest-ant expenditures for individual
work stages of the MTS Rah program are aueuarited in Table 2. The

principal budgetary and production indicators of selected actions are
euueaarized in Tables 3 and G.

The work performed so far indicates that by completing the second work

stage or the Rah program in cooperation with “We. a qualitative change in
the concept of the entire action and in correlation with the investment plan
has occurred and more realistic conditions were created for the isplenentation

or thle progran. in order to iepleeent the next stage of the Rail objectives
it will be necessary:

«To consider the possibility of raising the investment liaits of effective
actions which exceed the limit so far;

«To tackle the problem of the need for an absolute increase of nuebere of
workers from m labor resources by internal shifts. especially by the
elimination of inefficient enterprises;

«To plan for the implementation of adequate technical and design preparation;

«To use specialized technological work resources for tho preparation of
selected MM actions in accord with resolution Ito. 176/197? of the presidium
of the 055R government;

«To secure the inclusion or the hall actions in the inplenentation plan for
individual years of the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

The entire material was submitted to the nuns as a basis for discussion by
the minister's council and for the preparation of a report for discussion
by the presidium of the government. The project prepared by Kovoprojeltta
Prague was approved in these proceedings and recon-ended for application to
conditions of the tents. his will provide for the unification of the data

base for the preparation of the ieplementation stage of the Bali program in
botn engineering sectors.

COPYRIGHT: Sh’TL-n.p. Praha 1978

8661.
C50: 2600

10
FOR OFI'ICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. US! ONLY

cztcaootovem

'coum W' IN mm. HEAVY mm nvmm
Pregue ”WA mmecr in Czech No 8. 1978 pp 338-363

[Article by Jeroelev Ve Ierke. Doctor of Lev. deputy ninieter of
netellurgy end heevy engineering of the 688R: "couple: uperinent
of tfficiency end Quelity control in lletellurgy end lleevy Engineering")

[‘l'ext] 'lhe directivee for econqnic end eociel defelopeent of the 0883
in 1976- l980. epproved by the 13th crcz Congreee, enpheeired the need to
develop end further inprove the nenegenent of the netionel economy to
neke it nore inetrueentel in reieing efficiency of the development of
neene for e nore thorough epplicetion of the ecientific end technologicel
progreee end eocieliet economic integretion. eo thet it nobiliree
reeervee for thet purpoee end etinuletee higher productivity. better
quelity of production end our working people‘s creetive forcee end
initietivo. 'rhet denende noet of ell thet teeke of the plen be further
coneolideted, thet the plenning diecipline be inteneified on every

level of “neg-eat. thet economic incentivee be utilized lore
efficiently to fulfill plen teeke. end thet the orgeniutionel eyeten
of the production end technologicel hue be retionelieed.

In hie report to the 15th crcz Congreee the preeier of the federel
govorueent, Centrede Strougel. etreeeed thet to echieve e higher level of
uenegenent. new end better nethode of plenning ee well ee conpreheneive
neteriel incentivee nuet be more couregeouely nought, teeted end
introduced. end thet euch neeeuree which ere in hernony with the
objectively compelling trende of the further developoent nuet be
enforced.

The complex experinent in the control of efficiency end quelity, epproved

by the decieion of the Preeidiun of the CSSR et the end of leet yeer,

follows thoee eine. Therefore, the experiment repreeente en inportent

etep in the eree of nenegenent of netionel economy towerd inplenentetion of
the conclueione of the 15th crcz Congreee, eined et the edOption of

methode of plenniu end megenent correeponding with the chellenging
cherecter of objective proble-e we nuet reeolve now if we wieh to continue
neking ell our ectivitiee acre efficient end to ineure continuoue improve-eat
of our people'e etenderd of living.

11
FOR OFPICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAI. USE ONLY

The plenning of the complex experiment in metallurgy end heavy
engineering reechee back to the period of gradual implementation of

the conclueione oi the third plenary union of the ore: Central
emittee in September 1976 addreeeed to the teake end devd opment

of Crechoelov'ek metellurgy end engineering after the 15th crcz Congreee.
the joint docunent of the Preeidium of the CPCZ Central Couittee end

of the Preeidium oi the case government dealing with enforcement of
decieione eteeming from eeid meeting hee celled tor vigoroue eolutione

to long-term probleme ea well ea to our current urgent teeka. IIthe
orientation toward a high technological end economic level of production,
toward an increeeed export cepecity end toward better eetieiaction

of our domeetic market hee been coneietently linked in thie docuent with
e higher level of control ectivitiee in the miniatriea. econaeic production
unite end enterprieee, end with inteneitied planning end improved economic
toole. Anelogicelly, materiel end eyetem meeeuree euch at greater
attractiveneee of work. reconetruotion and modernization of the
production been. elimination of dieproportione between capacity potentiele
of the finiehing eectore end their neede muet eleo be combined when
resolving internal probleme oi metallurgy end heavy engineering.

In harmony with theee directivee iaeued by the higheet party end
government orgena. nuneroue meeturee directed at improving the planned
management are being gradually implemented in metallurgy and heavy
engineering.

Quality. completeneee end promptneee of fulfilled deliveriee ere emphaaired
especially when raining the reeponaibility for fulfillment end over-
fulfillment of qualitative teeka of the plan. Particular-attention

in given to deliveriee for inveeunent conetruction end for export
inveatment unite: e epecific eyetme oi negotiationa oi auppliere'

and aub-euppliere' contracte wee introduced along with a related

system of teeke of the ecmomic plan. An independent croee-eectional

plan of the minietry for the achievement of higher eupplier iunctiona

end their etetieticnl review hae been enforced. Moreover. the formally
recorded negotiatione of eupplier-coneueer reletione eleo proved

succeeeful in mutuel contracte between organization of the two
engineering miniatriee.

In addition to meeauroa adopted for the whole induatry to upgrade
quality in the induetry en a whole, the Federal liiniatry of liettallurgy
and heavy Engineering hee introduced its own epecific meaauree the
purpoee of which in to continue the minietry'a reeeerch in the area

of the integrated ayatem of control of quality end reliability in
selected typea of metallurgical end heavy engineering production;
inetitutee have been eetebliehed for guidance intbe area of control

of quality of producta in order to introduce a comprehenaive ayetem

of control of quality of producte hee been prepared, and formetione

of quality control are being orgenizationnlly capleted and their ateif
conaolideted; and the eyetem of. the minietry'e planning and management
of innovatioma it being improved.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Numerous steps were taken in the system for planning the divisional
structure of production, the scientific-technical development. nodal

and component specialization. preparation and application of international
socialist integration and priority of supplies for the obligatory
operations of investment construction. Furthermore, the system of

balance was intensified and administrative operations expanded. There
was a substantial expansion of the nmnber of engineering entries for which
divisional and product balance and distribution plans are being assembled
in the economic production units as well as in the ministry. When planning
the divisional structure of production and intensifiying the system

of balance and application of administrative measures. special attention
is given to finishing departments and spare parts.

To achieve the planned employment rate in the required regional
distribution and in the required structure of professions, the
regulation of jobs in selected organisations of the ministry is being
improved in cooperation with other organs; regional balance has been
improved and system provisions have been applied so as to obtain skilled
young workers end to stimulate the interest in the study in professional
and secondary schools and institutes of higher learning. The process

of wage differentiation is systematically controlled and vage systems are
being improved.

To consolidate planned management further. eutmeatic control systems

are gradually being applied and the use of computers is regarded as

a tool of control processes along the management axis: ministry-economic
production unit-enterprise. Variant assessments of the plan, tests

of its comprehensiveness and structures as well as unification of the
information along the line of direct management have been aphasised.

0n the enterprise level and in the managemer: within the enterprises

the automatic control system has focused particularly on the technical
preparation for production, operational management of production,
material and technical supplies, work and wages as well as marketing.

These examples indicate a relatively broad scope of measuree which the
Federal Ministry of Hetallurgy and Heavy Bugineering has applied
in its sector in order to intensify, improve and increase efficiency of

the planned management. As a rule these measures are adopted within
the framework of the generally valid principles.

The purpose of the complex experiment of efficiency and quality control
applied since 1 January of this year in selected economic production
units of some industrial branches is to test some new principles

and factors for a possible general application in national econmay.

Moreover, in metallurgy and heavy engineering it has significantly
contributed to fulfillment of the conclusions adopted at the third

plenary session of the ore: Central Committee, because the targets

of this experiment are in harmony with basic directions of the development
in metallurgy and heavy engineering.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effort to use the five-year plan as a basic tool and to link to it
basic tasks. relations and tools stipulated for the 3-year period has been
of extraordinary importance for metallurgy and heavy engineering.

The shift of the gr. Iity of obligatory tasks into the five-year period
may positively affect and increase the stability of production programs;
it may result in greater efficiency of the technological development and
modernisation of the production base; it may raise efficiency of
ecmomic tools. Pron this point of view the function of allowances

is of particular significance; annual plans may fluctuate within their
framework. and if they are met the annual plans are not approved but
netely confirmed. The flexibily interpreted long-term character and
stability of the plan demand in particular that the methods determinating
the tasks. limits and norms in the five-year plan be improved; they nay
affect favorably the scope and significance of problems whose solution is
concentrated in the annual operational plans only.

The long-term character and stability of the five-year plan is linked with
another relevant principle applied in the casplex experiment, namely, it
is preferable to develop and fulfill a mobilisation plan that to

surpass a less demanding plan. Furthermore, the factor of the long-term
application nay favorably affect the scheduled implementation of
rationalization programs, because the results already achieved produce
higher resources for funds of material incentives.

Consolidation of the position of economic production units is in harnony

with the trends of further development of organisational structure of

the production and technical base. The ministry has already experimented

to sons extent with returns to the state budget for economic production

units as one entity by extending credit relations between the bank

and the general administration of the trust. the structure of wage

control for the economic production unit as one entity. This was further
expanded in conditions of the experiment by the concentration of noninvesuent
financial expenditures of science and technology for aconasic production
units and by the creation of a fund for cultural and social needs in

trusts according to a regulation valid for syndicates and syndicated
enterprises .

The effect of material incentives on increased profitability of
production fundsuand with exceptional export coauiusents particularly
in heavy engineering also the effect of intensified stimulation on
better results in foreign trade-may become evident in tin coalitions
of metallurgy and heavy engineering which make above-average claims

on production funds and the efficiency of whose development is affected
as a rule by the efficiency in investments.

An integral part of the complex experiment is a more intensive effect
of prices and price ceilings on the stimulation of efficient innovation
of products and on quality of production. Of particular interest will
be the experience gained in the area of planned regulation of the wage

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

development; the determination of the norms for the basic component

of wage funds based on the share in performance itself has introduced

into the planned management a new category of values which heretofore

has been outside the workers' interest in the adoinietrative axis.

The effect of this indicator on develop-ant of the wage volume will

be relatively highly intensive and should oroate considerable

interest in the reduction of material censusptien and in the growth

of profitable production. Also. conversion footers for determining the
reel volune of basic wages according to overfulfillnont or non-fulfillment
of the planned volue of output itself diverge distinctly from the
hitherto practice; they nay affect favorably tho adoption of tho
mobiliration plan as wall as implementation of outher intensifying measures
in tho course of fulfillment of tho plan.

these examples of new elements in tho planned Ianagement which are
applied in tho complex experiment and which have far from exhausted all
the now and relevant principles demonstrate that a positive effect of
the tested principles will be of enormous importance to intensive

and efficient development of metallurgical plants and heavy engineering.

In agreement with this information. operations connected with application
and management of tho experiment were introduced in the ministry with
utmost responsibility in unusually short tine.

First of all, the economic production units within the Federal

Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering in which the experiment

is now underway have been very carefully selected. He proceeded from
the fact that this did not concern nerely e coo-and of new conditions but
also that the oxperimentiu economic production units must gradually
serve as an ample of modern efficient ferns of nanogemont in every area.
Sign. a trust of enterprises in Olomouc, and Secondary metallurgical
Production, a trust of enterprises in Prague, were chosen by the
administration of the ministry as the economic production units where the
experiment will take place. Several points of view and factors were
considered in the selection. First of all, it was necessary to make
sure that the experiment affects the technological production bass in
metallurgy as well as heavy engineering. At the same time. the
transition to a syndicated type of management is scheduled for the Sigma
economic production unit for the near future. while in the Secondary
Hetallurgical Productioneomic production unit such transition is

not anticipated for the near future. This will facilitate taste of new
factors in conditions of a syndicate as well as in conditions of the
trust type of econonic production unit. ‘l'hsir hitherto successful fulfill-ant
of the tasks of the Sixth Five-Year Plan was an important factor. Both
comic production units successfully fulfilled and surpassed their
planned tasks for the first 2 years of the Sixth Five-Year Plan and
earned foreaost ratings in a comprehensive evaluation of the results
achieved. Progressive modern forna of manage-ant have already been
traditionally applied in both economic production units and thus,

also the preconditions in terns of their personnel have been not for

15
FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deeling with teeke connected with implementation of the experiment. Iran
the viewpoint of the production progrmn the ordere for moet producte in
both economic production unite heve exceeded current production end
delivery plene. end thue it ie in the intereet of our eociety to etimulete
the meet dynamic development poeeible. end, if the reeulte ere poeitive.
to expend the reecurcee for the development of their production
cepecitiee ee well ee the recoureee to melee jobe in the enterprieee or
both economic production unite more ettrective.

ObjectiVely it muet be eeid thet the chow-mentioned eeleciicn eleo

hee ite drewbecke. euch no the ueteriel intereet of the experimenting
economic production unite in increeeing export which ie beeed

on the eyeten of pereonel end enterpriee-wide incentive. while the neede

of our domeetic merkete ere not eetiefied. thie intereet mey be precticelly
reflected merely in increeeed profitebility of export end not in the increeee
of the export volume ebove the plen.

While planning the experiment the minietry followed the mein objective
of methodicel eeeurence for plenning of the experiment in the minietry.
in the economic production unite end in enterprieee. 'i‘he operetione

oi' the Govermentel Counittee for Queetione of Plenned Netionel Bconemic
Henegcment. generel reguleticne epproved by the decieion of the Preeidium
end deteiled inetructione of the perticipeting centrel orgene were of
coneidereble help. ‘l'hue. the minietry wee eble to limit ite eupplementery
directivee to epecific inetructioee (or the depertmente. for inetcnce, on
lebor end wegee end e deteiled working echedule. Active end eninere in
which leeding workere of enterprieee enl petty end depertmentel oviciele
perticipeted were ergenieed in both economic production unite.

In the epplicetion of the experiment the ruin cult of the minietry wee
the epeciiiceticn of teeke. limite end nonee for the plen for

1978-1980. ee etipuleted by the rcguletione for the complex experiment.
The eignificence of thoee operetione ie evident free the epplicetion

of the principle of long-term velidity, eccording to which epecified
teeke, linite end norme my be chenged by centrel orgene ee e rule

only within the iremework of the etipuleted ellcwencee. Heenwhile.

tho higherto method of planning hee not epplied ecme teehe end limite
which hed to be newly defined for neede of the experiment, euch ee tlm
quote of top-grede producte. the quote of new producte in the totel
production volt-e end the quote of products with e high technicel-econaeic
etenderd, i.e.. top-grade producte end technologicelly edvenced producte.
Another eyetem of teeke end limite hee been derived from indicetore
etill in general uee; however. it muet be computed end modified.

The epecificetion of the 1978 plen, directivee for the dreft of the

propoeel for the 1979 plen end for the 1980 plen beeed on the plen for
the Sixth Pive-Yeer Plen were et the diepoeel of the eectore for
epecificetion. however. eppropriete teeke, limite end inditetore bed
to be reteeted in connection with five-yeer plan devietione from
implementetion of the ennuel plen, not of ell in tent of e higher

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rate of production dynamite and eole of producte for the eatiefaction
of urgent notional econuoic neede. no required quantificatione were
proceeeed in oeverel veriante, whereby the principle woe etipulated

that the general adeninietration of the experinenting economic production
unite on the one hand and appropriate control organe. particularly the
etnte planning co-ieeion. federal finence einietry. federal ainietry

of labor and eociel affaira. and the federal einietry for technological
and inveetnent development on the other hand would cloeely cooperate.
Collective diecueeione of theee problene in the odninietrative cooaeieeion
of the ninietry proved effective; all the participating «gene reached
there an egreeeont on the decieive pert of the epecificetion. The final
conference of the ninieter'e advieory boerd which dealt with the propoeal
for the apecificetion could then focue on a very linited group of problem
which had not been fully reeolvad in the eduinietrative cornieeion of the
ninietry end particularly on the root of reedineee of both economic
production unite for implementation of the cooplex experieont. 1t my be
said that teree and rulee of the coupler experiment and the etipulated
contente of the epecification have been net eucceeefully.

whether in the area of methodical preparation and determination of
regulations or in the nmarical epecification of taeka, linite and noree.

the quality of the coepleted worke they not be evaluated before inpleeentatioo.
anelyeie end eeeeeeoent of the reeulte achieved.

The epecificetion of the plan for 1978 through l930 for the experimenting
economic production unite in metallurgy and heavy engineering proceade
ceneietently from general regulatione approved by a decieion of the
Preeidiun of the 6858.

It centeine teeke. linite and none eet progreeeively for individual
yeare of thie 3-year period with the following ieportent new factore:

In the production and nerketing plan the total volue indicatore of
productienngreee value of the production and the production of goodeuare
not e part of the epecificetion. Volume of production have been diecueead
only with the experinenting econaeic production unite in the ninietry'e
edninietrative coeeeieeione. becauee cone epecified tube and linite

were determined on the baeie of production volume. In thie port of the
plan the beeic obligatory teak ie the tocel voluee of the eo-called final
eelee. i.e., the one of deliveriee for expert. for doaeetic oerket end for
lnveetnente in wholeeale pricee. for compiletioo of the annual plan the
epocificetion ukee poeitive allowencee of 2 to 3 percent. The value of
deliveriee for export to capiteliet countriee in wholeeele pricee, and
the volume of oechinery end equipent delivered for conetruction
exceeding Rec 2 million of the budget coete were deter-ined ee epeciel
“one in thie total delivery tut.

Voluee of export in foreign pricee are not epecified; the efficiency of
export it determined by the loweet valuee of the differential indicator.
i.e.. the ratio of foreign pricee (too) to wheleeele pricee.

'rheee valuee are eet without allowancee; it ie expected that they will be
further epecified in annual plane eccﬁding to the developuent of

M Olt‘l’lctfd. "SB 031.?
FOR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY

contractual pricee; moreover. taeke concerning deliveriee for export to
the eocialiat countrioe ae well ae obligatory production and delivery
taeke of the centrally balanced itene and development progrmu will

be complemented in annual plane.

It hae been acid before that in both of the experimenting econmic
production unite the oeeential part of the production prograe

coneiete of the finiehing eectore of production, where the neede of the
conetnerenmanufacturora of machinery and equipment and euppliere of
inveetment unite-ohava not been fully covered and eupplomentary import
which it frequently inefficient muet be ueed. Therefore. eocial interaet
ie focueed moat of all on gradual reductim of euch inequalitiee rather
than on increaeed deliveriee for direct export. lxperioncee gained from
experimental neeeeement of the new factore of control under theeo
condition. will be a valuable contribution to ite poeeible general
application.

In the area of the plan for production and ealee a new factor appeare
in the determination of quotae of new producte in the total volume of
production. furthermore, of the quota of top-quality producte in the
volune of the aeeeeecd producte. and of the quota of producte of a high
technical and economic etandard in the volume of new producte. Per
inetance, the quota of new producte in the total volue of production
in the Sigma oconmaic production unit wae determined at the average
amount of l5 percent. with alight interannuel progroeeion, and in the
Secondary Hetnllurgical Production economic production unit the quota of
producte of high technical and economic etandard in the volue of new
producte wee eat at is percent for 1978. 30 percent for l979 and 67
percent for 1980.

Fulfillment of the planned atructure of deliveriee ie one of the
conditione for creation of the development fund and, in the deeigneted
ecope. aleo for the volune of the incentive wage component. There ie a
marked material intercet in increaee of the volume and efficiency of,
export by meane of the newly eetabliehed fund which may be ueed to
incrcaee the reeourcee for cultural and eocial neede. rewarde and limited
inveetnente. According to calculatione made during the epecificatione.
if the planned preconditione are met thie incentive will amount to Ice 6
to 7 million annually in the Secondary Metallurgical Production economic
production unit and to Ken 22 to 32 million annually in the Sign economic
production unit.

The work echedule containe newly drafted methode of determining the volt-e
of wage meane. ‘l‘he baaic component which includee baeic wagee waa
determined by a norm ae a ratio of there wages to the output proper.

In agreement with the planned rate of productivity of work and profitability
of production. theeo ratioe diaplay a declining tendency in individual
yeare from 1978 to 1980. namely. in the Sign economic production unit

frma 29.2 percent in l978 to 25.0l percent in 1980. and in the Secondary
Metallurgical Production economic production unit free 26.56 percent in

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1978 to 25.81 percent in 1980. In comparison with the hitherto-cpplicd
quote of wage costs in receipts. this norm is characterired by roughly
twice the intensity of the incentives. the mount of the norm for

the 3-year period remains unchanged-with an allowance of minus 0.2

to 0.6 percent. Another component of the planned wage volume is the
incentive component corresponding to the planned volue of prmaims.
rewards and share of eomomic results. It was determined for individual
yeers es an absolute sum, end in cuparison with the hitherto fund of
rewards it appears conspicuously higher. since it conteins ell the premiuas.
Moreover. for the 3-year period interannuel workers‘ incentives with
ellowence of minus 0.2 to 0.3 percent were assigned as obligation.

In the plan of investment construction e new category of the eo-called
limited investments hes been introduced for construction up to lies 2 million
of the budget costs end for machinery not included in the construction
budget; the extent of limited inveeuents was set indirectly by the

norms end regulations for creation of the development fund. The norm

for everage allocation frat profits for this fund amounts to

approximately 10 percent, with a declining tendency according to the

planned increase in profitability end erection of profits in individual
years. The norm for the quote of limited investments financed fras
depreciation fluctuates in individual years from 12 percent to 21 percent.
both norms are defined for a long period with minus 0.5 to 1 percent
allowencc. ‘i'hese norms are supplemented with guerenteed subsidies allocated
free the ministry's centralized eeeets end with the share of limit
investments determined for guidance; the limit inveeueente are financed

by a credit amounting to 30 percent.

Marked changes in financial management of the experimenting economic
production units appeared in the modified structure of the obligatory
and guiding indicators of the financial plan.

Amm the obligatory indicators of this plan, in addition to the norms
for the creation of funds. profitability of production funds with is
extremely important is specified progressively for the Secondary
hctnllurgical Production economic production unit from 8.86 percent

to 10.66 percent and for the Sigma economic production unit from 9.02
percent to 13.37 percent for individual years from 1978 through 1900.

The development of these indicetors determines the means of the incentive
cmsplement of wages end the pert allocated from profits for the
development fund.

In the selection of indicators end in materiel stimulation new factors
of planned management stem specifically from these emples of
specification of the plan for the experimenting economic production units.

I9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After completion of the specification for the plan for 1978 through

1980 and definition of conditions for the experiment. the center

of gravity for the activity of the ministry has been shifted to
continuous evaluation of the hitherto results. Conditions have been
created at the Federal Kiniatry of Metallurgy and Heavy angineering

for systematic control of the activity of the experimenting economic
production units and for efficient assistance during the period of testing
efficiency and quality control.

Organisational provisions for implementation of the experiment cover
also the study and evaluation of its progress. Experts appointed

from appropriate professional sectors are in constant touch with

the scenario production units, and in some instances even with
enterprises. a working group has been organised by the minister' a
provision for the purpose of resolving methodical problems; the ministry' s
administrative group on the level of deputy ministers and departmental
directors has the decisive authority. The tasks related to the
evaluation of the experth in enterprises and economic production
unite are exceptionally important and relevant. A comprehensive analysis
of economic results in itself is extremely challenging if its purpose

is to present an objective assessment of the positive and negative trends
and developments. Furthermore, the effect of individual tools of
control must be analyzed in the economic experiment.

The results of the experiment are determined at present primarily

in the economic production units and enterprises. Since the fourth
quarter of 1977 the general administration of the Sign economic
production unit in Olmsouc and the Secondary Metallurgical Production
have been intensively engaged in its planning and application. Managing
and working organs were organized under the leadership of general and
professional directors; they are focusing on planning in detail the
system of management, on the one hand. and on informing in depth the
leading economists and political aid professional workers in the
enterprises concerning principles and targets of the experiment and
on discussing main problems in collectives, on the other hand.

The first direction of operations resulted in appropriate organizational
and methodical measures along the managing axis, in the specification of
the 1978-1980 plan for enterprises in experiment conditions, and in the
compilation and presentetive of the comprehensive plan; it continues
particularly in the intensified and improved activity of general
administrations as a result of general objectives and needs of the
experiment. For instance. increased efficiency in the managinent

of technical dtvelopment, intensification of the systematic approach to the
solution of pzoblems, greater differentiation in the method of rewards

on the basis of uniform fulfillment of tasks, and with a shift of the
center of gravity to indicators of quality are planned in the Secondary
Metallurgical Production economic production unit; a new rating system for
the socialist competition of the economic production unit enterprises has
been developed.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l’he Sigma general administration is intensifying and increasing the
efficiency of management in agreement with the objectives of the
experiment. while transition to the syndicated form of the scenario
production unit organisation is underway at the same time.

It is an exceptionally challenging task in terms 1 work to carbine
both tasks within the same period; however, it is in agreement with

the conception of the position of economic production units under
the conditions of the experiment.

Active and seminars as well as coordinating conferences of the chairmen
of party organs. with the participation of the leading representatives
of the Government Comittee for Questions of Planned Hanagement. the
ministry, higher party organs and trade unions, provided information
about the adopted measures and assessed them collectively in both experi-
menting economic production units.

In conclusion it may be said that the appointed program of operations
connected with application of the complex experiment for control of
efficiency and quality in metallurgy and heavy engineering has been
launched thanks to political preparation and the initiative approach

of all participating organisations. The chosen path must continue
consistently in every direction. Its success will be determined primarily
by the workers' initiative approach to a higher technological standard,
quality and economic production and their adoption and implementation

of challenging tasks in the technical and economic development of the
experimenting organisations.

more camms [photos not reproduced]

1. p 360. mu national enterprise in Hohelniceul’rocessing of
bundles. Photograph by B. Hacsk.

2. p 3101. H32 national enterprise in Hohclnice--Pressing shop of
stator and rotor plates and small parts. Photograph by
B. Hecsk.

3. p 3103. m national enterprise in Hohelnice--Shipping of finished
electric motors. Photograph by B. Hacak.

COPYRIGHT: Podnikovs Organisacc, 1978

9004
080: 2600 END

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY