FOR OFFICIAL USI". ONLY

JPRS L/10001

22 September 1981

USSR Report

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(FOUO 14/81)

Deterioration of Soviet Economic Information Analyzed

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10001
22 September 1981

USSR REPORT

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 14/81)

DETERIORATION 0F SOVIET ECONOMIC INFORMATION ANALYZED

Aubervilliers LE COURRIBR DES PAYS DE L' EST in French No 245, Nov 80,
pp 3-30

[Article by Marie-Agnes Crosnier and.Anite Tiraspolsky: “The Decline of
Economic Information in the USSR: An Attempt at Explanation"]

iText} In the domain of information, all societies are confronted with the same di-
lemma: :0 what point must one permit the publication and diffusion of data without
causing injury to the interests of the government in power that is crying to justify
government policy, to protect itself against foreign competition. and to preserve
military secrecy? °

The secrecy of information has always been a reason of state in the USSR, maintained
more rigorously than elsewhere. In the last several years it has been particu- ariv
strengthened whereas one might have hoped, after the Helsinki Conference of 1975,
for an evolution in the opposite direction.

Consideration of the official statistics furnished by the Soviet Union since that
date reveals quite clearly a serious impoverishment of the data published, both on
the domestic economv and on relations with other countries. *

it is a quantitative impoverishment first of all: between 15 and 20 percent less in-
formation on the USSR' s economy between 1976 and 1979. More serious is the qualita-
tive impoverishment, inasmuch as the new amputations affect key categories of infor-
mation: structure of net national expenditure and of product created, regional dis-

tribution of the big production categories, exports of oil, imports of cereal s, etc.

in addition to the very numerous traditional omissions from Soviet statistics.

what explanations are to be offered for this systematic desire to obscure economic
reality? Aggravation of internal difficulties has combined with a heightening of in-
ternational tensions, leading the Soviet leaders to reduce information on their
country even more

Domestic Economic Information (by Marie-Agnes Crosnier)

Despite the improvements in the preparation and presentation of statistics, they re-
main an imperfect tool in all economic systems, even though there is nothing equiva-

 

* The.detaited ruhlysis'of the annual reports as presented in table form can be con-
sulted at the CEDUCEE [Center for Studies and Documentation on the USSR, China and
Eastern Europe].

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lent to i: for learning about an economic reality. This would hold true likewise for
the economies of Soviet type. In them. the insufficiency--in all forms--of the sta-

~.ist cal data is espec: ally acute, and all the more so in that the means of investi-
gaticn on the spot are extremely lioited and are the essential and irreplacable re-
sort. Now the fact may not be ignored that the statistical apparatus of the social-
ist countries is above all the product of a political systen in whi h the State ter
tains a monopoly o: the production of information and control over it; thus the role
of this apparatt -s is, sore than elsewhere, to serve this system: statistics are
theretore an integral part of the :low of reasons for legitinitation or the govern-
aental power. Because of this fact, they can give of the Soviet- type system only an
altered reflection of the ioage which the USSR-we shall limit our analysis to that
country--wants to present to its population and to the outside world. It is there-
fore particularly necessary to handle the statistics Surni shed by the Sovietauthori-
ties with great prudence, to make use of a wide range of sources, and to rely more on
the :onvergences and intersections of sources than on isolated indexes.

The Soviet statistical apparatus has not stayed in a fixed form during these last 6C
years: it has bent under :h various pressures of the 3553's domestic and external
policy. Thus the periods of relative liberalization result in an increase in the

-:E inforaation diffused, and the opposite phenomenon can always be seen a-sc.
rs: annual statistical report came of the presses in 1919 ("Statistical Coupe:-
dium for the Period 1913-1917"), and it was followed by many publications that illus~
trated the New Economic ?olicy; the tradition was maintained, year in and year out.
until 1938 But with the outbreak of WW II and the rise of Stalin, silence was ab-
ruptly inposed, and it was not until the 20th Congress that an annual statistical re-
port tor the USSR (”The National Economy of the USSR") appeared again, in 1956. The
pe eriod extending to the aid-1970' s and marked by both a certain ideological li berali-
:ation, nany attempts at economic decentralization and a gradual opening-up to the
outside world was characterized also by a better fate for economic information. 1hr"
another sharp turn was taken. and paradoxically. just after the Eels .nhi Conference
on European Security and Cooperation (August 1975), which was intended to establish a
new, closer form of cooperation between states and contribute to better mutual underr
st andi. .g of their rea- ities.

I: is te=_tin to relate this change of tack to the turnin- -in on itself which the
USSR began as a result of the heightening of the world crisis, the impact or the cri-
sis on its economy, and the continually worsening internal structural difticulties
that i: has experienced since the middle of the 1970’s. This turningzinward, which
was expressed by a hardening of the regime internally and externally, has had the
consequence, in the statistical area, of systematically drying up the sources oE'He'
:ul tormation.

The second basket of the :inal Act or the Helsinki Conterence included a few lines
about national statistical data (production, national income, budget, consumption,
product ivity); the part ipating states committed themselves to encourage publication
and diffusion of them on a vast scale and within relatively short times-

As a new Conference, following upon those of aelsinki and Belgrade, is about to one:
in Madrid this :onth, Novenber, it is being attempted to establish the types of in-
formation that the USSR now wants to conceal. I: must be recognized that the Soviet
stati t ical services have honored at least one commitment aade at He'sinki: the time—
periods tor production of the principal statistical tool, the ”552' 5 annual stat. t--

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cal report ("Narodnoe Khozjajstvo $583" for the year 719...), have

been shortened by 2 nonths since 1975 Furthermore, the printing has increased by
10,000 copies between the 1975 report (45,000 copies) and that of 1978 (55,000
copies); but a new decrease, by 5,000 copies, was made for the most recent publica-
tion, the 1979 annual report. 0n the other hand. it appears that the informatLon
presented by the statistical annual is less and less abundant: the number of pages
has been reduced from year to year. and the total loss can be pegged at 243 pages hr

6 9““ 1974. 1975 1976 1977 197a 1979
Report Report Report Report Report Report

Date of legal filing 12 Sep 75 8 Sep 76 ll Jul 77 17 Jul 78 10 Jul 79 8 Jul 30
Print run (number _ 1 .

of copies) 55.000 30,000 45,000 “0,000 55,000 50,000
Number ofpages 833 817 686 630 606 588

 

 

The present article does not present an exhaustive list of all the information that
is now missing, and does not offer a detailed analysis of the nature of all the in-
formation censored. It is attempted rather to seek, in the mass of observations ::=:
we have been able to collect, some homogeneous elements that would make it possible
to explain the present attitude of the Soviet government toward the publication of
statistics.

2. the Statistical Apparatus of the USSR

In the USSR, numerical economic information relative to the domestic economy goes
through a single network: the Central Department of Statistics, under the supervi is:

of the Council of Ministers of the USSR. The statistical publications emanating frcr
this administration are relatively varied:

-The annual statistical report of the USSR ("Narodnoe Khozjajstvo 5588" for. 19. 2
published between 6 and 9 months a: 'ter the end of the year concerned. It should be
pointed out, though, that certain users are privileged (ministries, certain insti-
tutes, etc): they receive the annual report as soon as it has been prepared, where-
as it is not available off the shelf until 2 months after its legal tiling date.

As to: shipments abroad, they come even later (usually in December).

-A small annual report ("SSSR‘ICifthh v 19..." [The USSR in Figures for 19..
which presents in abridged form the principal-statistical date reported later in
"Narodnoe Khoajajstvo SSSR. " It has the advantage of being available in April, of

having very wide circulation (200,000 copies), and of being translated into several
western languages.

-The annual statistical reports of republics, publication of which takes somewhat
longer times than for the national annual and the printings of which are smaller.

For Western researchers, access to them is therefore more uncertain and more diffi-
cult.

-~Ihe annual statistical reports of autonomous republics, of autonomous regions sac
of regions, diffusion or which is even more limited and preparation of which re-
quires even acre ti=e.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.4: -_ﬂ

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--Theamnuai sector reports ("The Population of the USSR," "Transport and Communica-
tions in the USSR," "Industry in the USSR," "Construction in the USSR," "Soviet
Domestic Commerce,"'"Labor in the USSR," "The Agriculture of the USSR," "National

Education. Science and Culture in the USSR," etc); but publication of a number of
these works seems to have been suspended in recent years. unless they have gone in-
to a far narrower diffusion category and are now reserved only to certain depart-
nents.

--A monthly review ("Yestnik Statistiki"), in which partial statistics are published
in appendixes and in no particular order (industrial production. data on agricul-
ture. investment, etc).f These data are for the most part complementary to those
furnished in the annual national statistical report. They also offer the advantage
of appearing rapidly: certain results from the past year are published in March.

In addition to these variOus publications, the Central Department of Statistics also
communicates in the daily and weekly press the principal numberical targets of the
5-year and annual plans as well as, at the end of the operational year, the results
achieved in each of the sectors of activity.

1. From Secrecy to Statistical Poverty

It is generally granted that the statistics published by the Central Department of
Statistics are not different from those used by the economic officials and the plan-
ners at the time that :he plans are worked out; but in the statistics made public,
there are obviously omissions whose nature leaves no doubt as to the reasons for the
absences. In several industrial sectors more or less directly connected to the de-
fense industry. information is nil: thus there are no data avilable on the capacities
and production figures of the aeronautical industry, including theicivil sector, on
naval construction, the electronics industry (components, computers and related
equipment), on the manufacture of rubber. the refining of oil, and all reserves and
production of nonferrous metals and ferroalloys, without exception. It should also
be noted that the USSR has a law on secrecy of information dating from 28 April 1957
that lists all information coming under state secrecy. In addition to information of
a military character, the law concerns the reserves of radioactive elements and the
mining of uranium, as well as the enterprises that do the processing of it, the re-
serves and production of nonferrous, rare and precious metals. diamonds and piezo-
electric metals, and the reserves of oil. production of which comes under the Minis-
ter of Petroleum Industry. It also relates to the foreign-exchange reserves, the
balance of payments and the stocks of precious metals and stones. the Council of
Ministers may add to this list; nothing enables one to say that it has been added to
since its promulgation. but at least certain sign, suggest that the notion of state
secrecy has been broadened. Bulgaria, in fact, has just published a new law on the
secrecy of information; its area of application is far broader than that of the Sovi
at law of l956. and it extends in particular to certain information that has ceased
to be published in the USSR. One is tempted to think that Bulgaria's initiative is
not peculiar to it but rather falls into the framework of a concerted policy within
the tens [Council for Economic hutual Assistance].

Nor have any numerical data ever been provided on industrial accidents, drug addic-
tion, suicides. The statistics relative to the monetary mass in circulation were
published only for a very brief period. from 1928 to 1936.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
But there is something more serious than these statistical "gaps." Indeed, the Sovi
et statistical apparatus as a whole has turned away from its very vocation, which it
to be above all the vehicle of economic information, and this perversion doubtlessly
is largely responsible for the fact that planning is so often detached from reality.
This, moreover, is what the Poles have recently noted: by the admission of the direc
tors themselves, a good many of the errors indecision ccmitted by their predecessor;
are to be laid at the door of statistics unfaithful to reality or to the holding-bee!
of information whose publication would have caused social tensions, such as the cost-
of-living index, for example. This phenomenon of disinformation is not, to be sure.
based on a deliberate choice; but it is the logical outcome of many years of exces-
sive centralization and bureaucratization that have blocked all circulation of infor-
mation between governors and governed. It is hard to see how the enterprises accus-
tomed to hiding 5: their overseeing organisms the exact figures for their produc-
tion capacities, so as not to have planning objectives imposed on them that are too
high, would hand over to the statistical services information far more indiscreet
(turnover, production personnel, investments, etc).I Moreover, even though the sta-
tistical services have obVious information links in the ministries and the various
administrations. it is implausible that they w0uld be capable, in so short a period
of time, of processing such a mass of information collected through agents scattered
over a particularly vast territory.2 Furthermore, why should the statistical ser-
vices be immune from the absenteeism; negligence, carelessness and incompetence so
often denounced in the official statements when it is a matter of explaining the lack
of success in agriculture, industry, transportation or construction, or the miscalcu-
lations of the administrations? -

In the area of statistics, as in the other sectors of the economy, it is appropriate
also to stress the force of habit: apart from the fact that the number of data pub-
lished has increased quite considerably since the annual report for 1956, apparently
very few improVements have been made in the Soviet statistical apparatus since that
time. The result of this is that the USSR, as also. for that matter, its partners in
the CEHA, but with the exception of Czechoslovakia and Hungary, is quite a bit poorer

seats a deliberate choice-~to control the execution of a plan rather than to enable
it :o be worked out or to guide decision-making.

The low reliability of the Soviet statistics was very early brought to light by the
American Soviatologists, who have tried to remedy this defect by setting up a paralea
lel national accounting system, working our models based on their own statistics,3
etc. Less well-known but more seriously accusatory is the defiance shown likewise by
certain Soviet researchers toward the statistics furnished by their country's author-
ities. Indeed, certain institutes, turning up their noses at the official data are

said to be now basing their work, concerning mainly the distribution of incomes, on
their own samples and their own statistics.‘

2. The Methodological Mysteries

when one has recourse to Soviet statistics, the first obstacle one encounters is of a
methodological nature: indeed, the deepest mystery shrouds the rules governing the

preparation of them. A few explanatory notes serve as an epilogue to the annual sta-
tistical report, to be sure, but they are of the most summary kind and do not provide

5
FOR(MHWC1ALIKEZONLY
the clarifications that one would have a r Lght to expect. Is this an acknowledgemer.t
of their uselessness or a concern to save paper? .3 any case such notices were 5i:-
ply 1151 ontzof the 1979 annual.

Thus one is completely igr .orant of the nature of the prices .sed :or evaluation 0:
the principal indicators. Since prices are supposedly stable, the indexes present
only minor variations, which can always be justified by administrative measures. Now
it has been established. and even by certain Soviet economists, that wholesale prices
increase regularly by way of innovation, improvement of quality, or increase in the
objective costs of mining extraction. oil extraction, etc. These rises are never
registered in the price indexes, and it is improbable that they are taken account of
in evaiuation of the various indicators either--all the more so in that some of the:
even escape the control of the administration. By being based on a near stability of
wholesale prices, the Soviet statistics can thus show industrial growth, for example,
considerably higher than i: is in reality.

Furthermore. certain indicators are evaluated at current prices and others in compar-
able rices; but the statistical services keep carefully hidden the method that en-
ables them to go from the one to the others. It would seem that the comparable
prices are established by the aid of a price index calculated on the basis of a pro-
duct sample whose composition is not known and the prices for which are quit_e obVi-
ously those that figure in the official schedules; but this sample has little value
since it Ls not at all necessary for the products belonging to it to be actually
available in the commercial network. It is doubtlessly reVised periodically. and
this could be one of the explanations for the corrections made. from one annual re-
port to another, in the series established in terms of comparable prices. Thus, for
example. the figures for provision of everyday services to the population show, for
the series as a whole, a drop of 0.2 percent if one. compares the. data. .turnished in
1979 with those published in the annual report for 1978. It is therefore probable
that a new sample was established in 1978 and that it encompasses services less ex-
pensive that those that were taken into account for the preceding years.

3. The Deliberate Omissions

The gaps in the statistical data and the de‘ acts of the apparatus cannot be subjec: ed

to exhaustize analysis here. we shall nonetheless highlight the most notorious of
them.

The 0588' s statistical annuals abound in particularly long series of indexes that may
go back to times well in the past, such as 1913,1928 or 1940, and that trace the
evolut-L on of the principal aggregates (Net National Production, IndustrialProduction
offered, Agricultural Production, ixed capital, etc). The successiVe series or in-
-exes are connected to one another by the chain-index method. It goes without saying
that this type of data is without great interest, and in any case. unusable in its
totality, since the content of the indexes necessarily changes over so long a riot
and one does not know how the statistical services update the situation. To take
just one example, what can be the value of a growth table for industrial production
otrered between l9h0 and 1979 when the range of products offered has been entirely
replaced? This is what a. Noves humorously stresses when he asks the question: how
many DC-E's made in 1950' 13 the presently produced DC- 9 equivalent to?

In 1979. the figure for agricultural production offered is still calculated Ln 1973
prices, which makes it possible to overestimate this indicator considerably. Thus

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the western experts have calculated that by the aid of this statistical manipulation,
the Soviets were able to announce a 3-percent increase in the value of agricultural
production in l977, whereas it actually fell by 5 percent. Furthermore, the agricul-
tural statistics are on the whole inflated in relation to reality. The quantities :i
cereals ultimately usable are lower than the volume of the harvest as recorded in the
statistics. There are several reasons for this: losses in transport and in storage,
especially high humidity rates for grains, etc, and depending on the year, such
losses represent from 10 to 15 percent of the harvest.

The discribution of production among the various types of farming operations, as it
appears in the statistical annual, does not give an exact picture of the contributitn
of the small individual plot; in fact, the figure for individual-plot production sold
by the peasants to the kolkhozes and to the sovkhozes is accounted for by them as if
the production came from the collective and state farming operations.

Because of their partial and ambiguous character, the social statistics do not make
it possible to conduct very detailed investigations. The figure for the working pop-
ulation is never given, so as to make impossible any precise calculation of the per-
sonnel strength of the armed forces. All the statistics on industrial employment re~
late to ” :dustrial productive personnel." but no indication is given about the dif-
ferent categories of workers covered by this concept. and the distribution of these
personnel among the different industrial branches, which was very incomplete up to
1975, was eliminated as of 1976.

The statistics on wages and incomes make impossible any comparison among the various
occupations, between men and women, between city-dwellers and rural-dwellers. As re-
gards wages, in fact, only averages by branches are published; the pay ofahigh-rank-
ing officials is obviously not known. Finally, the data on the peasants' income from
farming of their plots are particularly succinct: they are limited to a percentage in
the budget of a kolkhoz family. As for income derived from other private forms of
activity, they are passed over in complete silence.

II. Impoverishment of the Soviet Statistics

A definite impoverishment of the Soviet statistics has been observed since the mid-
1970's. This trend developed especially fast in 1976, and to a lesser extent in
1977; and while some relative respite could be detected in 1978. the movement gainec
speed again in 1979. To be sure, not all the disappearances to be noted are of equal
importance; while certain of them now prevent the western researcher from carrying on
the investigations he previously had in hand, a: least on the basis of Soviet
sources, others, on the contrary, are of such minor interest that they appear to have
no other aim than to lighten a voluminous compendium.

I. Results of a hethod of Empirical Analysis

Cur investigation has concerned essentially the national annual statistical reports,
"Narodnoe Khozjajstvo $353" for 197.... we did a systematic comparison of the con-
tent of the statistical annuals' tables for 1975, 1976, 1977, 1978 and 1979. This
work has beenLcomplicated considerably by the frequent modifications of presentation
of the data and the cross-Eire of the tables: as between one annual and another, var-
ious tables are aggregated, others are broken up, statistics are put into different
chapters. In order to follow the evolution of a given index over several years, the

7
FOR 0FFHJA1.USE(NVLY
F0R10FFNJAI.USEZONLV

western researcher must in certain cases demonstrate all the qualities of a good de-
tective. Thus, the indexes for growth of labor productivity in construction, which
usually have their place at the beginning of the annual report in the chapter on gen—
eral data, are in the 1978 and 1979 reports found in the chapter on gross formation
of fixed capital. The same is the case with the indexes of growth of labor produc-
tiVity in agriculture, pushed back to the Agriculture chapter, and so forth.

The year 1975 was chosen as the reference point, since it is the year of the Helsin-
ki CESC [Conference on European Security and Cooperation]. It has also emerged that
a large number of data, including some of the most important ones, effectively disap-
peared between 1975 and 1976.

This method. as empirical as it may be, has made it possible to bring to light not
only the quantity and the nature of the information that has been suppressed or, on
the contrary, has not ever appeared, but also the dates when these modifications oc-
curred. Et emerges that the 1976 statistics are the ones most heavily affected by
the "purge." It was possible to establish that 120 tables disappeared between the
1975 report and that of 1976; in addition, the largest quantity of highly important
data censored was noted for the 1976 report. This annual is a somewhat special one
because it celebrates the 60th anniversary of the revolution. It seems that the So-
viet statistical services took advantage of the occasion to suppress a number of
tables and replace them with others (68 "innovations"), most of which had more to dc
with propaganda than the economy; the table tracing "the triumphant march of social-
ism in the world" or the one that gives the number of mothers of large families who
have been decorated with the order of maternal glory are the most characteristic ex-
amples of this. One might have thought that these "statistics" would have remained
the appanage of the 1976 yearbook and that they had no other purpose than to screen
the "clean-out" operation carried out in 1976. But a number of them came up again in
the 1979 annual: the triumphant march of socialism, the publishing of the works of
harx, Engels and Lenin since the installation of Soviet power, the number of deputies
to the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and to the Supreme Soviets of the republics, etc.

In 1977, 65 more tables were eliminated; but the trend seems to have slowed down in
1978, since there were only 23 disappearances. For the 1979 annual, our investiga-
tion had to be limited to the table titles and did not extend to their content. Nev-
ertheless, this simple overview brought out the continuance of a tendency that now
seems ineluctable. The year 1979. of course, was an especially critical one from the
economic point of view,6 and the first situation bulletins emanating from the Central
Department of Statistics have already revealed the goveining authorities' reluctance
to recognize the seriousness of the situation. In the first place, the monthly in-
dustrial-production reports were not published for the whole first quarter of l979.
Secondly, the Central Department of Statistics has discarded a number of data--and
not the least ones-from the annual results: smelting, iron ore, sulfuric acid, paper
pulp, motorcycles, etc. Likewise, the production of products as important as metal-
milling machines and stamping and forging equipment is given only in rubles, which
destroys a large part of the interest of the results thus furnished. It will have
been necessary to await publication of the 1979 annual report to know the production
figures for these omitted:products-figures which were previously available less than
a month after the end of the year concerned.

According to our estimates, the number of statistical disappearances between the an-
nual report.for 1975 and that for 1979 comes to 15 percent. This figure has a purely

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

indicative value and does not take into account the extent of the losses that have
effectively been suffered. It would have been necessary to be able to weight each of
the suppressed data in function of their interest and the use that could be made of
them. Indeed, one finds in the same basket as the "big disappearsnces" a whole plei-
ad of entirely anodyne information, the suppression of which does not seem to corre-
spond to any rational aim.

2. The "Big Disappearances"

The data relative to the principal economic indicator, net national production (1i:-
erally, national income) were very extensively amputated in 1976 with the elimination
of the structure of net national expenditure. Up to 1975, net national production
from the point of view of expenditure ("national incOme utilized") was apportioned
between, on the one hand, household consumption and the consumption of the adminis—
trations (the total of which forms the consumption fund), and on the other hand. the
net productive and nonproductive investments and the increasing of stocks (accumula-
tion fund). But since 1976, the annual has limited itself to giving the volumes of
the consumption and accumulation funds without any further details. This disappear-
ance has extremely extensive implications. On the one hand, the suppression of the
data relative to consumption now prevents one from constructing, at least on the ba-
sis of the Soviet statistics, the fourth quadrant of a table of interindustrial ex-
changes that gives an image of the quantitative importance of the financial flows (in

the broadest sense of the term--that is, encompassing all the operations that lead ::
a transfer of debits).

Furthermore, the structure of national expenditure furnished by the Soviet annual re-
port up to 1975 made it possible to estimate the Soviet Union's expenditures for arm-
ament. In effect, in Soviet national accounting they are accounted for under the
headings relative to net capital formation ("accumulation fund,“ in the Soviet termi-
nology), and especially in the category entitled "increase of stocks." A series of
calculations made it possible, on the basis of these data, to isolate the proportion
of capital formation for military use. The other types of expenditures can be esti-
mated-~and this is still the case--either on the basis of other headings of the annu-
al statistical report (scientific research for military purposes) or on the basis of
observation of the defense apparatus (personnel and operating expenditures). Re-
course to these different methods made possible an overall evaluation of the Soviet
Union's military expenditures, and had the advantage of being expressed directly in
current rubles without going through hazardous ruble-dollar conversions. and of being

.able to be related quite securely to net national production, because of the homogen-
eity of the data.

The Most Important Data That Have Disappeared from the 0553's Annual Statistical Re-
ports since l975 (and date of last publication)

hajor Aggregates

- Structure of net national expenditure . 1975
- Breakdown by sectors of net national production from point of

View of product 1978
- Comparison of the national income of the USSR and of foreign countries
(evaluation of the national incomes of the foreign countries in
terms of Soviet accounting and in dollars) 1977

9
FIN!(Hﬂﬂ(JAl.USEGDNLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000400050051-6

q

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Population

- Population of the autcncmOus republics, the:autonomous regions, and
the districts
- Infant mortality

Industry

- Production or oil by republics

- Production of natural gas by republics

- Production of coal by republics

- Production of cast iron by republics

- Production of steel by republics

- Production of finished laminates by republics

- Production of cement by republics

- Production of cotton fabrics, woolens, linen fabrics and silks
by republics

- Production of tires, in terms of their use

- Production of tractors, by type

- Production of paper. by kind

- Average annual numbers of production personnel employed in the
various branches of industry

Agriculture

- Principal indicators of development of agriculture in the economic
regions of the USSR

- Principal indicators of development of agriculture by autonomous
republics

- State purchases of wheat. rye, and rice by republics

- Number of kolkhoses and of sovkhozes and production of the principal
agricultural products by autonomous region and national district

- Average number of kolkhoz homes and average area of kolkhos dields,
by kolkhoa -

Transport

- Transport of travelers by rail. by republics

- Transport of goods and travelers by river. by republics

- Cost of transport of goods by rail, by water, and by road
- Average time of use 0: freight cars

Investments and Construction

- Investments by autonomous republics

- Placing of fixed capital in service by the kolkhozes, by republics
- Investments of the sovkhozes

- Construction of housing in the kolkhozes, by republics

- ConstruCtion of housing by the real-estate cooperatives, byrepublics

Labor

- Average annual number of blue-collar and white-collar workers, by
autonomous republics, autonomous regions and national districts

- Average annual numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers by
branches of the economy and by republics

10
FOR OFFﬂJAl.USEimNLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00850R000400060051-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Retail Trade

- Turnover of state and cooperative retail trade (including restaurants),
by autonomous republics, autonomous regions and national districts l976
- Equipment of the retail-trade organisms 1975

——~-—_———-——__—__—________

The data on net national production from the point of view of product were in their
turn chosen as a target in 1979. In effect, the figures indicating the contribucic:
of the various sectors to creation of national production, as well as to creation of
gross social production, disappeared from the 1979 annual. Thus, the only thing re-

maining of the general'indicators of growth are some overall figures and series of
indexes that go back to the night of time.

The Soviet statisticians have also struck some heavy blows in the area of regional
statistics. All the data relative to the 18 economic regions of the USSR or to the
adninistrative regions ether than the federated republics were suppressed either in
l976 or in 1977: population by autonomous republic, autonomous region and national
district (disappeared in 1977); rate of growth of industrial production by republic
and by economic region (1976); principal indicators of development of agriculture in
the economic regions of the USSR (1976); principal indicators of development of agri-
culture by autonomous republic (1976); number of kolkhozes and of sovkhozes and pro-
duction of the principal agricultural products by autonomous region and national dis-
trict (1977); investments by autonomous republic (1977); etc. In the 1977 annual.
there were already no more data on the economic regions.

Furthermore, the statistics relative to the federated republics have themselves been
heavily purged. It should be noted also that this operation was carried out entirely
within the framework of the l976 statistical annual; and the very few republic-sti-
t-sti:s that escaped it underwent a new offensive in 1979. Thus there ceased to ap-
pear as of that date the forest resources by republic, the ranking of "the :con-
struction and assembly organizations according to volume of work done, by republic,
as well as the ranking of the canstruction trusts, by republic.

The breakdown by republic of the production of a large number of industrial products
disappeared from the USSR's statistical annual fér1l976: oil, gas, coal, cast iron,

steel, finished laminates, cement. masonry materials, cotton fabrics, woolens, line:
fabrics, silks. The apportionment of the statistics by republic has been climinateé
in other areas also. We can cite by way of example the breakdown of natural prairies
by users, by republic; the number of specialists with higher or secondary speciaiized
training enployed in the kolkhozes, the sovkhozes, the auxiliary agricultural enter-
prises and others, by republic; transport of travelers by rail by republic; the aver-
age annual numbers of blue-collar and white-collar workers by branch of the economy

and by republic; the number of kindergartens and nursery-kindergartens by republic,
etc.

Nevertheless, it has been noted that these variOus data have not all disappeared com~
pletaly from the statistical apparatus of the USSR; a number of them have gone from a
"wide diffusion" category (the USSR's annual statistical report) to that of "‘imitec

-.
a..-

--.Eusicn" (statistical annuals for republics).7 It has not been possible to make a
systematic comparison between the data available in the "Narodnoe Khozjajstvo SSSR"

and those that are provided in the republic annuals, inasmuch as for a number ef,:e-
public: we did not have annuals available for earlier than 2975, while for others.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I V" are I I‘elﬂll vvu v. ‘__

the range of annual reports available between 1975 and 1973 is often limited to one
or two works.

Therefore, our investigation could involve only ll republic annuals (Féaérated Soviet
Socialisc Republic of Russia, Ukraine, Byelorussia, Latvia, Lithuania. Estonia. Ar-
menia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan. Uzbekistan, Tajikstan), and i: was limited to the in—
dustrial products for which the production figure by republic was eliminated from the
"Narodnoe Khozjajstvo 5558.“ It emerged that certain of the republic annuals studied
continued beyond 1975 the publication of data that had disappeared from the national
annual. Thus. coal production was still given by the annuals of the Federated Soviet
Socialist Republic of Russia (in 1978), of tne Ukraine (1978). and of Kazakhstan
(l978), production of steel and of finished laminates was in the annuals of the Fed-
erated Soviet Socialist Republic of Russia and of the Ukraine, production of masonry
materials was in the annuals for Azerbaijan (l976), of Uzbekistan (1978), of Latvia
(1977) and of Lithuania (1978), but it disappeared from the Kazakhstan annual for
1978. Thus, for these products it is still possible to construct a partial table of
the geographic distribution of production.

The case of oil and of gas is to be set aside because of the absence of interest for
the data that have continued to be published. We note also that for oil, the test
that has been nade is significant, since the nissing annuals concern republics that
produce practically none (but with the exception of Turkmenia). Of all the republic
annuals, only that of the Federated Soviet Socialist Republic of Russia continues to
furnish oil-production data beyond 1975 (509-million tons in 1977, or 89.1 percent of
coral production), but without giving any details about the contributions of the
principal extraction sites (especially Ural-Volga, western Siberia). On the other
hand, the annuals for the Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan have ceased to publish
their oil-production figures. The situation is the same for natural gas, for which
only the production of the Federated Soviet Socialist Republic of Russia is known
(69.9 percent of tocal production). horeover, this deficiency of information regard-
ing gas is difficult to understand, since it is known that the Soviets have the habit
of publishing regularly, in their specialized reviews, the state of the gas reserves
and their geographic distribution as well as a good many other very detailed data.

?inally, the production statistics for a number of products of very unequal interest
have totally disappeared: such is the case with cast iron, cement, and various cats-
39???? 9.5 fairies-

3. Attempts at Explanation

It would be illusory to hope to find a single and fully satisfactory explanation for

all of the disappearances. It seems obvious that the censor of Soviet statistics has
not followed a single guideline and that there are also different levels in the deci-
sion-making process. While it seems very likely that certain of these disappearance;
correspond to a deliberate policy, others. entirely insignificant ones, remain inex-

plicable; quite obviously. there is in the decision-making process in the USSR a lev—
el below which one cannot find any rationality in the choices nade.

Nevertheless, it goes without saying that the impoverishment of SoViet statistics
cannot be an isolated phenomenon and that it falls into a general context. Now one
observes that-after a phase of opening-up to the outside, the USSR went back, in the
aide-1970's, to a certain turning-in on itself. this tendency is to be seen quite

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

clearly in Soviet foreign-trade polity: starting in 1974
imports by selecting its purchases in strong foreign cur

its socialist partners. This new tack taken in the USSR'
the Soviets as due to the reappearance of autarchic tendencies in the western coun-

rnal reasons also. Indeed, since
the beginning of the 1970's the Soviet government has presented more than ever the
image of a monolithic regime that brings together a '
ing the various institutions constituted by the party, the armed forces and the po~
lice. For only the second time in all the history of the USSR, the armed forces we
in 1973 received into the Politburo in the person of the minister of defense. In
parallel with this, Leonid Brezhnev, secretary general of the party, was invested
with the title of Marshall of the USSR and he affirmed himself as supreme commander
of the armed forces. It will not be attempted here to throw light on the type of re

ter-that link the party and the armed
torces; but it is nonetheless important to stress the fact '

ernmen: has now entered a phase of stiffening. Is this fr
military and police apparatuses. or a natural evolution?

of internal dissidents has hardened considerably in the last decade. Likewise, vis-

a-vis the outside world the USSR has slipped from the openness dictated by detente u
isolationism accompanied by an expansionist policy in increasingly diversified the-
atres of operations. If one is to believe the Soviet propaeanda, this new attitude

adopted by the USSR has been caused by the lack of benevolence now shown to it by the
Hestern countries, the 'nited States in particular.

Feeling_threatened and besieged.
the USSR would thus be taken to have begun a response movement that has resulted in

particular in the gradual shutting-off of the "flows of information. Finally, the
taste for secrecy that is usual in the military probe

In addition, the middle of the 1970's also marked for t

economic expansion and an aggravation of the difficulties that previously had been

latent. It is probable that in the face of this new situation, the Soviet officials

reacted in the same way as in the 1950's by purely and simply stopping the publica-
tion of unfavorabLe data. Indeed, in the USSR more '

propaganda tool to be used an domestic and internati
ation of a number of figures in the results of the 1979
were extremely poor in most sectors and were published by the press in 1980-eis sig~
nificant in this regard. ..e statistical services even used an especially crude ar—
tifice: in order not to stress the multiple appearance of minus signs, they broke

' ' ' ' ' ' " ts of principal indus rial production, the

as of a territorial-development policy
' ' ° , to promote harmoni9us

iet Union. the statistical serv-
tion by handing over a part of :.e

- or sectoriai annuals. Such an operation none~
:heless implies, of course, that such information loses a good part ‘ '

into the regional and sectorial annuals have far more limited diffusion than the

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Narodnoe Khozjajstvo $853." From this angle one could also explain the weakeningof
the chapters on agriculture and on the population by the preparation of an agricul-
tural annual report, the imminent publication of which has been announced, and by the
preparation of the definitive results of the 1979 census, which should be published
at the beginning of 1981. It is true that in the annual for 1979, the chapter on
"Territory and ?opulation" is distinctly fuller than in the previous years; certain
information is of a new character by comparison with the demographic data usually
commu icsted, while, on the contrary, other information that had ceased to appear
since 1975 has been reestabliéhed. It should be stressed, though, that the results
of the preceding census of l970, published in the annual for 1971, were both more
complete and more detailed. And in a general way, it has been noted that although
the techniques of gathering and processing of the data have made considerable pro-
gress, there is presently less information available about this census than at the
same peric 9 years ago.

Other elements are also of such a nature as to weaken the hypothesis of a decentral-

ization of statistics. On the one hand, the data that have disappeared from the na-

tional annual have also been eliminated in the republic annuals. or at least in most

of them. 0n the other hand, the several sectorial annuals that were available to us

(in particular, an annual on the population and one on transport and communications?

either ceased to appear in 1975 or were eliminated, as of that year, from the list of
works whose publication is announed abroad.

The various hypotheses that have been offered are only attempts at explaining an ob-
jeccive fact: the impoverishment of economic information of Soviet origin. Neverthe-
less, we have considered it important to stress the degree to which the rise of this

phenomenon and the development of it in recent years seems to echo the evolution of
Soviet policy, both internal and external.

Evolution of Soviet Foreign-Trade Statistics (by Anita Tiraspolsky)

The foreign-trade statistics of the Soviet Union constitute an entity distinct from
the other Soviet statistics. Prepared in a different framework from that of the Cen—
tral Department of Statistics, they cannot be compared with the data relating to the
domestic economy: the monetary units differ fundamentally. The "foreign-exchange"
unit of account for foreign-trade statistics cannot be compared to the domestic
ruble.5 Another difference that scarcely permits comparison is the product nomencla"
ture, wnich in the case of trade operations leans toward the end-use aspect of the
product considered.

Des ice :hese essential differences, one notes that since 1975 there has been an en-
tixely parallel evolution between the domestic statistics and those'of foreign trade.
Overall, an sees the same phenomenon of a regression of official information.

What is the scope of the disappearances from the foreign-trade statistics? What are
the areas or products affected? What arguments can one present to explain the deter-
ioration one notes between 1975 and 1979? host of the theses advanced in an attempt
to understand this phenomenon in the internal statistics of the national economy are
doubtlessly valid in the case of the foreign-trade statistics. But beyond these ex-
planations. others seem to be more specific to a class of information that could mane
it possible to detect the Soviet Union's international policy. "--

1!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
If one compares the official annual report of foreign trade for 1978 and that for the
year 1975. one notes an evolution that is disturbing to say the least, and which at'
firs: sight seams to run against the commitments made by the Soviet Union, jointly
with the states participating in the Helsinki Conference on European Security and Co-
operation.

fhe Implementation of the Helsinki Final Act

The Final Act (Second basket) of 1 August 1975 stipulated, in the chapter onforcign
eschanges, that the participating states committed themselves to encouraging "the

publication and diffusion of economic and trade information at regular intervals anc
within thezbest times possible-in particular:

-...The statistics on foreign trade, worked out on the basis of classifications com-
parable to one another, including breakdown by product with indication of volumes
and values, as well as the countries of origin or destination.

-the laws and regulations concerning foreign trade....

-0ther information of such a nature as to aid businessmen in their commercial con-
tacts--Eor example, the periodic summaries, the lists, and when it proves possible,
the organigrams of the firms and organizations involved in foreign trade.

The states expressed the desire to "take advantage of the possibilities offered by

the competent international organizations. and in particular the United Nations Sco-
nomic Commission for Europe, in order to implement the provisions of the final docu-
ments or the Conference." And since 1977, the 326's Trade Development Committee, one
of whose functions is to collect, publish and diffuse information whose objective is
to create better conditions for developing trade.9 has been discussing these problecs

in the ocurse of its annual sessions.

More particularly, the Committee has sought to set up a multilateral system enabling
each country to give notice of the laws and regulations concerning foreign trade,aud
the changes that-might come about in this area. It would seem, though, that the
Eastern countries' interest in establishing such a system is not so lively as the
Committee had hoped.10

Certain governments have transmitted lists of sources of foreign-trade information
which they could make available to the Secretariat of the EEC. This is the case with
Bulgaria and Poland. Others, such as Switzerland, Norway, the United States and the

PRC. have submitted proposals for improving the conditions of information. But there
do not seem to have been any important sequels to this work.

Horeover, the few proposals for improving and harmonizing foreign-trade statistics
are coming essentially from Western countries--Norway, the United States, etc. She
PRC, which in its official statistics does not even distinguish exports and imports
by country, is asking for broader information on the restrictions, prohibitions, tax-
es and subsidies on or for exportation and importation, on the long-term and medium-
:erm investment programs of the governments and the private firms, and on the pro-
spective data that make it possible to trace the economic and monetary policies of
the countries. The USSR seems to have scarcely made any appearance within that
framework.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the area or foreign-trade statistics, the work is even less advanced. It is pro-
posed here to examine the case of the USSR and to raise questions about the evolutic;
observed in the USSR's official foreign-trade statiscics. May one speak of progress?
what interpretation is to be placed on the disappearance of certain headings?

I. The Soviet Statistics on Foreign Trade
The Sources

The foreign exchanges of the Soviet Union can be studied on the basis of sources
issuing iron international and national organizations.

The international sources, which themselves present data of Soviet origin. are rela-
tively few in number.11 They are mainly the "United Nations honthly Bulletin of Sta—
tistics." which once a year publishes the exchanges of the planned-economy countries
the annual GATT {General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade} publication "International
Trade in ...," comprising a special chapter on the trade of the countries of the
East. These two publications make it possible. at an aggregate level, to make inter-
national comparisons by product group for the USSR. But they do not furnish data by
product and by country. The same is the case with the annual report of the CZMA,
"Statisticeskij Echggodnik Stran Chlenov SEV," published every year since 1971, which
gives only summary indications for foreign trade: total value, breakdown by zones,
overall apportionment by products. For the USSR, the omission one notes in the Sovi-

et official annual report are found also in these international sources.

The USSR regularly publishes annual and quarterly national statistics on foreign
trade in the nonthly review VNESHNYAYA TORGOVLYA. It appears in five languages: Rus-
sian, French, German, English and Spanish. This organ of the USSR's hinistry of For-
eign Trade inserts four times a year a section devoted to the quarterly foreignetrad:
statistics. broken down by country group and by country. These statistics are avail-
able well before the foreign-trade annual report comes out. The annual report for
the USSR ("ﬂarodnoe Khozjajstvo SSSR" for 19...), published by the Central Department
of Statistics. is especially skinpy on foreign trade. It presents a selection of
data in six tables, drawn from the foreign-trade annual, at least since l96h.

In addition to these six tables, there are three original tables on the fruits of Scr
vie: cooperation. This involves construction projects in which the USSR has partici~
pated abroad, and projects planned. by economic branch and by country.

The most complete document by far is the series of annual reports published by the
?rincipa1 Departnent of Economic Planning (Glavnoe Ekonomicheskoe Upravlenie) of the
Ministry of Foreign Trade of the USSR and put out by‘Statistika under the title of
"Vneshnyaya Torgcvlya SSSR v 19... g." (Foreign Trade of the USSR in l9...). Indeed,
the introduction states that this annual "constitutes the host complete source of
statistical information published in the USSR on foreign trade."

Each annual contains the statistics for the year stated in the title and those ofthc
preceding year. Statistical revisions from one annual to the next are rates, and
they usually concern typographic corrections.12 With the-exce tion of a few pro-
ducts, the headings have been practically the same since 1958, 3 the year of the
first foreign-trade annual. But headings have been disappearing increasingly since
1975. in certain years, the Ministry of Foreign Trade has published retrospective
reports (5 to 50 years), similar to the annuals, which generally cover 2 years.‘¢

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
These annuals present the exchanges, in current prices, with breakdowns by country
groups. by countries (106 in 1978), by product groups (8 groups). a geographic break-
down for dertain products (in value or in physical quantities), and the exchanges bv
country and product in terms of value and for a narrower selection of products in
physical quantities. In addition, one will find overall indexes in terns of physlcul

volume, a breakdown of freight by type of transport. in the form of very succinct
data.

The Techniques of Preparation of the foreign-Trade Statistics15

The foreign-trade statistics are established on the basis of the accounting data of
all the export-import organisms and the other institutions involved in foreign trade.
The transport and merchandise documents are the basis of them. They are furnished by
the industrial, commercial and other enterprises that provide merchandise for expor-
tation and by the foreign suppliers and carriers at the importation level.

At the exportation level are recorded the merchandise of national production and the
reexportations of products of foreign origin (general trade). At the importation
level are recorded the merchandise of foreign origin intended for national consump-
tion and for reexportation. Furthermore, the USSR records in its statistics at both
the exportation and importation levels the merchandise of foreign origin that is the
object of a transaction abroad made by Soviet foreign-trade organizations and that is

intended for other foreign countries. In such case, the merchandise does not transit
the USSR at any time. “ ' '

The Saviet statistics do not include: merchandise delivered without payment, under
the heading of aid to foreign countries; merchandise going to the technical assis-
tance fund of the United Nations; foreign merchandise transiting the USSR; products
intended for expositions and fairs abroad or in the USSR; and the transactions that

do not have a commercial character-for example, parcel post addressed to private
parties, and passengers' baggage.

The value of nerchandise is established according to the value of the contracts, in
FOB-FOB prices. The-exchange rate used for conversion of foreign currencies into
rubles is an official rate established by the State Bank of the USSR for the corres-
ponding period. At the exportation level, the partner country is the country of con-
sumption of the product, and at the importation level, it is the country of produc-
tion of the product. If the country of consumption or the country of production can~
not be identified, the USSR records the country of first destination or of last ori-
gin. The'date of recording of a product is generally the date of its crossing the
border. These practices are not always comparable to those of the Restern countries
or even those of the other socialist countries, and they explain in part the differ-
ences to be observed from the statistics of the 0553's partner countries.16 the
problem of deternining the value of merchandise is in fact far more complicated than
is indicated in the methodological note that appears in the foreign-trade annual.

The Foreign-Trade Nomenclature

All the statistics of the.Soviet foreign-trade annual are esteblsihed in conformity
with the unified nomenclature of foreign-trade merchandise, "Edinaya Tovarnaya Home:-
klatura Vneshney Torgovli," a numerical-code system for classification of products.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAL UBI'. UIVLI
This nomenclature, published for the first time in 1954, was republished on several
occasions in 1962 and 1971, with revisions introduced in 1962, in 1967, and in 1975—
1977. the recapitulative reports for foreign trade 1918-1966 and 1959-1963 take them
into account. The principle for elaboration of this nomenclature differs consider-
ably from that of the nomenclatures by product used in the western countries as the
Standard International Trade Classification (Silt). promulgated in 1950 and revised
in 1960 and again in 1976. Except for certain nuances from country to country, the
unified nomenclature adopted by the countries of the East classifies the products
mainly in function of their final use. The first objective is to separate the pro-
ducts for productive consumption from those intended for personal consumption; next.
the nomenclature is detailed in function of the users. Thus, the countries of the
CEMA have two distinct positions for a pump intended for a steel mill and a pump de-
livered to a cement plant, even if the pumps are identical. Live animals for slaugh—
ter are in a different position from live animals intended for raising, for zoos. or
for scientific laboratories. It is obvious that establishing comparisons wi:h the
other classifications of the SITC or Brussels type becomes problematic. There are
concordance tables, though; but they can be only approximate.17

The unified CEMA nomenclature of 1971,18 adopted in December 1969, involves a system
of 7-digit indicators in which the first digit indicates a major division, the second
a group, the :hird a subgroup, the fourth and fith figures a product, and the sixth
and seventh a subposition. By way of example, the code 7 comprises the "raw materi-
als" for production of food products; 70 is cereals (including greats); :00 is cer-
eals (without zroats); 70001 is wheat; 7000103 is hard wheat.

In the 1971 classification there was a total of 9 divisions, 57 groups, 317 subgroups.
3,9h5 products and 8,293 subpositions; after the 1977 revision there appear to be,
according to the calculation done, 9 divisions, 57 groups, 320 subgroups, 6,074 pro~
ducts (132 new positions and 3 removed), and 9,178 subpositions (900 new positions

and 15 removed). It is the broadest classification of all the international nomen-
clatures (cf Table 1).

Table 1--Number of Positions in the Principal Foreign-irade Classifications

Number of Digits for Unified Nomenclature of the CEMA $1,. Brussels
for the.lnaication '1962 1971 1977 ‘ NUS [*1
1. Principal divisions 9 9 9 10 21
2. Groups 58 $7 57 56 99
3. Subgroups 302 317 320 177 -
5. Products 3,890 3,945 4,07a 1,312 1,097
7. Subproducts 6,238 8,293 9,178 - --

 

- . not applicable

_________________.__.
* [expansion unknown]

—————————__—________—__

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Besides the nine major divisions of the nomenclature, there is a series of operation;
of a productive character that are recorded as trade but do not figure in the annual
reports, except [as published] the printing of books, pamphlets and advertising ma-
terial and ship repair. In international-trade practice, these operations for the
most part are generalIy recorded in the balance of current operations as services
(except for the groups 05, 07, 09100). this operation, entitled "operations of a
productive character not falling into divisions 1-9," is given as an appendix to :he

nomenclature with a zero as indicator. In 1971, it comprised 9 grOups (2 digits) and
73 "products" (5 digits).

Ol. Patents, licenses, know-how

02. Design and research work

03. Assembly and construction work

04. Technical management and control

05. Repairs
including: 05300 ship repair

C6. Leasings and concessions

07. Improving and finishing

08. Specialist missions for training of cadres

09. Other services of a productive character
including: 09100 ?rinting of books, pamphlets, advertising material;

- became 0997A in 1976.

The Residue

The richness of this nomenclature does not, however, imply that all the positions are
utilizedr-far from it. The foreign-trade annuals provide a wide but incomplete
"choice" of headings. A significant volume of trade can be identified {as pub%..
lished]. The term "residuum" designates the value of the trade that does not appea:
in the annuals but that can be calculated as the difference between the total amount
of the exchanges. which includes the residua, and the sum of all the identified ele-
ments that make it up. The annual does not have any heading for "miscellaneous" or
"other." A residuum of products not identified or of countries may be involved.
Thus, in the "machinery, equipment and means of transport" category, the part not
broken down by type of machine represents from 9 to 17 percent of total exports and
from 2 to a percent of imports, depending on the year. For certain countries and
terrain years, this proportion can be higher than 50 percent.

Residua are found at all levels: groups, subgroups, etc. One can in fact distinguish
two big ”residue" as 3.L. Kostinsky does.19

The residuum of the machinery and equipment category--Ihe annual gives no data for
total exports and imports of metalworking equipment (10), energy equipment (11 ,
equipment for the themical,.7ood and paper, and construction industries (15), common—
itations equipment (158), or for transport (19). At the importation level. there isa
systematic lack of data for equipment and material for complete plants (15), for eg-
ricultural equipment and tractors (18). for aeronautical materiel and airplanes
(133). At the exportation level, data are never given for nining and petroleum
ecuipment (12), and since 1966, for industrial diamonds (175). The existence of a

flow can be evidenced by the 0553's partner countries and notably by the other Euro~
pean socialist countries.

19
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The total residuum--This is the biggest, and it remains very difficult to identify.
It results from the difference between total trade and the sum of the elements figur-
ing in the annual, either by product group or by country group.

The sum ofthe products reveals a residuum that represents 5 to 6 percent of the
0553's iaports and 23 to 27 percent of exports. The studies done on this subject30
attribute this residuum to the exportations of precious metals, diamonds, radioactive
isotopes and amorphous chemical products, to certain food products (meat, fish), and
in particular, to the sale of certain military materiel that go into the overall fig-
ures (certain raw materials and intermediate products, construction materialls, etc:

The total for"tbc"'-‘1i .-y supplies appears to represent about 1.2 to 1.5 percent
of exports. In fact ‘T- iulk of military materiel does not appear in the unified
nomenclature c: {on ._ . stitute merchandise in the proper sense. Moreover, a

part of the r'5iiuuu .5 c‘us’lessly to be attributed to the"ze:o"position.

At the import :..- I»ue1. :1 number ofmissﬁngproducts includes ores and ore concen-
ll

trates (uraniu'? :eLf‘.£ ,tsducts of a military character, and doubtlessly some op-
erations" of a piiductzve character also.

In the total for the countries, the residuum is apparent in an approximate way in :he
USSR's exports to the Third World: 40 to 50 percent of exports cannot be broken down
by country in the trade with this zone. horeover, the list of products given for
each country tsnot exhaustive: at both the exportation and importation levels, as
much as 50 percent or more of the 0553's total exports may be missing. In 1975. for
example, only about 87 percent of the trade with the GDR and Czechoslovakia could be
identified, 68 percent of exports to Belgium, 96 percent of those to France, 6k per-
cent to Iraq, 50 percent to Indonesia, and 63 percent to Burma.

Quite obviously, the Soviet foreign-trade statistics have great imprecisions and nu-
merous shadowy areas. And it was possible to hope that the commitments made by the
USSR at Helsinki would make it possible to resolve a number of uncertainties, at
least.in part, and to fill in some gaps.

0.

ii. The Evolution of the USSR's Official Foreign-Trade Statistics
The hethodological Approach

Description, even if summary, of the Soviet foreign-trade statistics is not useless.
The fact is that before one can talk about evolution of foreign trade, and especially
in order to interpret it, one has to be able to determine the "quality" of the ini-
tial product. This permits more correct evaluation of the "gains" or "losses."

We shall limit ourselves here to establishing a comparison of the official annual re-
ports--the most complete tool--of the 0583's foreign trade. The statistics for the
year 1975 (annual report published in 1976) were chosen as the reference year. The
most recent annual report available at the time of the present study, in March 1980,
is that for 1973 (published in 1979). Systematic comparison, table by table, permits
a number of observations. Since that time, it has been possible to supplement the
observations, after the appearance in 1980 of the annual report for 1979.

Cbservations were made at several levels in an attempt to grasp the scope of the
changes that have occurred since 1975:

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-simple comparison of the table headings
-the variations at the level of the nomenclature
-the variations at the level of the residua

Comparison of the Table Readings
The Disappearances

The first observation that must be made concerns the very volume of the annual re-
port. As Table 2 shows, the number of pages has decreased considerably since 1975.
going from 315 pages for the year 1975 to 286 pages for 1979 (published in 1980)-
davn 8.9 percent. 0n the other hand, the print run is going up and the price has
gone down, both for the paperbackf edition. which is the first to come out, and for
the harcbound edition. The annual report is coming out faster, and is now issued at
the end of March instead of in April. However, it is relatively difficult to obtain
it abroad before August or September by the conventional book-acquisition methods '
(purchase or exchange).

The decrease in the number of pages is explained by the disappearance of a table, and
especially, of numerous headings. We refer to Table XVI, which in 1975 gave in par-
allel the production, exportation and importation of the principal merchandise, in
physical quantities for 2 years. The production figures had come out of the 0583':
small statistical annual "The USSR in Figures in 19...." This relatively succinct
table made it possible to estimate apparent consumption (real consumption plus stocks
.and losses) for 33 essential products such as machine-tools for metalworking, excava-
tors, tractors, electric locomotives, passenger cars, trucks, touring vehicles, bus-
e34_§rude oil, iron ore, cast iron. steel pipe, cement, glass, paper, cardboard,
neat, shoes, refrigerators, cameras, television sets, etc.

Table 2-The USSR's Annual Foreign-Trade Reports

1970 l 73 197A 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979

 

Pages 298 316 314 316 311 286 287 286
Print run ' '

(copies) 8,500 12,000 12,000 16,620 16,300 16,000 16,000 16,000
Price (in

rubles)

-paperback 1.39 1.53 1.53 2.08 2.10 2.00 2.00 2.00

-hardbound 1.79 2.17 2.52 2.b3 2.40 2.30 2.30 2.20
Completed 4/7/71 3/28/75 6/3/75 3/31/76
Date of legal.

filing 5/28/71 6/22/76 5/21/75 6/20/76 4/27/77 3/21/78 3/23/79 3/18/86

Note: Since 1975, the official responsible for publication has been 6.0. Manaev.

 

One could no doubt reconstitute an analogous table for the following years, but for a
far more limited number of products; it is, in effect, at the product level that the
greatest number of disappearances is to be observed.

Tables XI and XIII of the 1978 and 1979 annual reports--aelative proportion of dif-
ferent merchandise in the USSR's exports (XI), and in its imports (XIII)--have no
more than 42 positions, as against 50 and 48, respectively, in 1975.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table XII of the 1978 annual (USSR's Exports, by Product) has #05 positions, includ-
ing 25 with 2 digits, 105 with 3 digits, 259 with 5 digits and 18 with 7 digits, as
against 597 positions in 1975, including 25 with 2 digits, ll9 with 3 digits, 329
with 5 digits and 2a with 7 digits--that is, an 18.5-petcent decrease in the number
of positions. In the 1979 annual report, one notes A disappearances among the S-cig-
it indicators, and 22 new positions, including 18 with 5 digits and A with 3 digits.

Which, then, are the products or aggregates that have disappeared root and branch

from the annual report between 1975 and 1978, and which have undergone a modifica-
tion?

At the exportation level, one counts 105 positions that no longer exist, 13 new ag-
gregates, and 38 positions given in value whereas in the l975 annual they were given
in value and in physical quantities.

The following have disappeared by more intensive aggregation of many categories of
machinery, equipment and means of transport (10-19): machine-tools, the various diee
sel engines, the various electric motors, transformers and batteries, all cranes,
various civil-engineering equipment, the equipment fér the radio and electronics in-
dustry, the variOus types of electronic bookkeeping machines, the various locomo-
tives, trucks, the various fuels and petroleum products (coal, oil, gasoline, fuel
oil, greases, etc), the various nonferrous metals, the various laminates and steels,
the various kinds of pipe, all nonferrous metals and all nonferrOus laminates, and
finally, all kinds of rubber and rubber articles.

The following are no longer given in terms of value: the single categories that group
the diesels, transformers, cable, rolling-mill equipment, smelting, elevators and
other road-building machinery, computers, bearings, tractors, locomotives, trucks and
parts. buses, solid fuels, oil and petroleum products, gas, cast iron, the various
iron alloys, ferrous laminates. sheet metal, pipe, cable, certain chemical products,
the various cereals.

Thus, coal (ZOO) has-been replaced by a more general category entitled solid fuels
(20) that comprises coke and lignite in addition to coal; furthermore, this category
is given only in terms of value. The Soviet sales of gas (23001) have suffered the
same fate uncer the appellation of gaseous fuels (230), which also includes liquid
gas and propane.

At the importation level, one counts 106 positions that no longer exist, 23 new posi-
tions, and 55 positions given only in terms of value and no longer in physical quan-
tities. The positions have been aggregated for the various kinds of machine-tools.
;:esses and forging machines, for the lines of metalworking equipment, the diesels,
electric notors, cranes, the various kinds of chemical equipment, certain civil-
engineering equipment, the electronic industry's equipment, the cable industry‘s
equipment, the various kinds of computer, tractors and railway equipment, trucks, the
various liquid and solid fuels, the various nonferrous minerals and ores, the variou:
ferrous laminates, pipe, all nonferrous metals, rubber articles.

Value only is now given for the singles categories that group the headings that have
disappeared, and in addition, cable, industrial equipment (for rolling, smelting,
lifting), bearings, buses. cast iron and ferrous laminates, sheet metal, pipe, white
iron, numerous chemical products, livestock and cereals.

22'
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In all the other tables of the annual report for 1978, especially by country and pro-
duct and by product and country. one notes the same evolution. however, several key
products remain in physical quantities in the breakdown by country. For example, for
the United States, Canada, Australia, Brazil, the Soviet imports of cereals (wheat,
corn, etc) are still given in 1973 and 1979 in physical quantities and in value,
Whereas for France, Hungary and Argentina, the cereals are given only in value.

As in the listing by product. one notes a sizable reduction of the total number of
positions for each countryr-in nest cases, a larger reduction for exportation than
for importation. It is in trade with the socialist countries that the greatest num-
ber of disappearances is seen: from 12 percent less in 1978 by comparison with 1975
in exports to Mongolia to 28 percent less in l978 in relation to 1975 (exportationto
Poland), from 3 percent less in importation from hongolia to 19 percent less (Poland,
SDB). 0n the average, there are 21 percent fewer headings with the socialist coun-
tries at the exportation level and 16 percent fewer at the importation level.

Proportionateiy, the number of products exchanged with the Western countries is low-
er: but here too, the details (positions of S and 7 digits) are tending to decrease
-on the average, 10 percent fewer at the exportation level and 7 percent at the in-
portation level. With the developing countries, one notes, insofar as the number of
products exchanged is significant, the same evolution. The total number of positions
stated in trade with the countries of the Third world has decreased by 19 percent a:
the exportation level and 8 percent at the importation level.

For 1979, the foreign-trade annual comprises a relatively large number of new posi-
tions: 13 for exports, 22 for imports. They essentially involve merchandise of sec-
ondary importance: metal inlpellets; boric acid; anhydrides; articles of magnesite.
of refractory clay; products of the sea; vegetables and potatoes; dried fruits and '
berries; mushrooms; margarine; cooking fats; smoking tobacco; metallic notions; metal
tableware, glass tableware; pianos for export. At the import level there appear
equipment for production of metal constructions, agricultural machinery, butter and
cheese, tobacco, phosphoric acid, fertilizers. furniture; welding equipment; cultural
equipment; pipe (in value); fatty acids; anydrides, silicates, glues; ethylene; etc.

The Nomenclature
If one takes the figures resulting from a counting of the annual's headings, in the
tables of exchanges by product (XII and XIV) (cf Table 3), one notes that the disap-
pearance: involve mainly S-digi: and 7-digit positions-that is, products. By coun
:. . one observes the same phenomenon. Starting with l977, some highly aggregatec
irdigitrpositions appear in the trade with certain partners. Imports of tin from Ho—
livia, Malaysia, Indonesia, for example, are now buried in a more general category
"fuels, nineral raw eaterials, metals" corresponding to principal division 2 of the
nomenclature. Likewise, rubber from halayaiitburma and Sri Lanka is incorporated in
"themitai products, fertilizers, rubber"-that is, principal division 3; and finally,
Iraqi oil appears in principal division 2.

The Date of the Disappearance:
The appearance or disappearance of a country in the USSR's foreign-trade annual is

Linked more to political considerations (regimes that have the CSSR's approval) than
to the existence or nonexistence of trade flows. Thus, Chile has not appeared in the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

annual repor: since 1976. On the other hand, fest Berlin has alwaysbeen considerec
as a "commercial” entity distinct from the F36. Between 1975 and 1979, one notes
several modifications. In 1976 appear Laos, the United Arab Emirates. the Philip-
pines. Angola. Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Cuniea and Panama; in 1977, Mozambique. Ja-
maica vanishes in 1977, Somalia and the Central African Empire in 1978, and Malta.
the Unite d Arab Emirates, Rwanda, Uganda. Equatorial Guinea, Venezuela and Guyana i:
1979. The appearance of Laos in the number of the socialist countries as of 1977
should also be stressed.

Table 3-Number of Positions

i din those with
Total ":1" g

 

. ... digits
Years number 0:
positions 2 3 S 7
Exportation 1975 697 25 119 329 23
1978 605 25 10¢ 259 18
1979 £23 24 112 268 19
Importation 1975 595 22 131 311 31
1978 $15 13 119 251 27
1979 633 18 123 265 27

 

 

One can distinguish C10 stages in the process of omissions of products In the first
phase. in 1976, products (3 and 7 digits) previously given in physical quantities and
in value simply disappear: such is the typical case of petroleum products. which :1.
disappear -n 1976, with only the general designation, "petroleum products," remain-
ing, a; 'th the indicator 22. in volume and value. The same thing is noted for the
various coals (200), cranes (130), ferrous laminates (264), pipe, nonferrous metals
and alloys. the various 2-bbers. In 1977, all these Products are combined in new,
broader headings (2 digits) and/or are now given only in value, or disappear com-
pletely (nonferrous metals, cranes, rubber). Many products. notably the cereals and
agricul: urai product s, and certain chemical products are given only in value starting
with 19 I, and the same is the case for certain machinery and means or transport.

Onlgr the products of secondary i. terest have found :avor with the "statisticians,'
and as we shall see, it is in that category that the choices made by the censor lies.

The Resicua

As .e have seen in the first part. there are sizable residua in the Sovietscac1st1cs.
here too. one notes a deterioration of the situation since 1975.

The proportion of not-broken-down items in the structure or the USSR' 5 exports by
product group (Table K in l975,?ab1e .x in 1978 and 1979) went from l5. 6 percent in
1975 to 19.2 percent in 1978 and 17. 3 percent in 1979, and in the st- oeture or im-
ports, from 5.3 percent to 6. 0 percent in 1973 and 5.6 percent in 1979, a relatively
negligible increase.

The items not oroken down in the distribution of trade by country (Table IV) in-
creased considerably :or the developing countries :Intil 1978. The Soviet exports to
the developing count: s were broken down by country in the proportion of 58.7 per-

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cent in 1975 and only 50 percent in 1978, and back up to SA.8 percent in 1979. For
imports, the deterioration is less: 99.2 percent in 2975, 93.- percent in 1978 and
99.: percent in 1979. With the other zones, 99.9 percent of trade is expressed.

Observation by countries and products shows once again an impoverishment of informa—
tion. especially at the exportation level. 3etween 1975 and 1973, the breakdown by
products improved for nongolia, North Korea, Denmark, Great Britain, Canada, Spain,
ﬂorway, New Zealand, Sweden, Benin, Egypt, St.iopia, Guinea, Libya, Nigeria, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tunisia. Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru. Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Eur
on, Cyprus, Indonesia, Jordan. Lebanon, Nepal, ?akistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and
the Yemen.Arab Republic. All the others show a decrease in positions broken down,
and especially the socialist countries, Belgium, France, The Setherlands, the ERG,
:ne Cnited States, Japan, Switzerland. the Ivory Coast, Ghana, Mali, aorocco, ﬂganca
Zambia. 3ruguay, Iraq, Iran, Kuwain Malaysia, Syria and Thailand.

s

For inports by country and product, the deterioration of
nounced and often of little significance, except perhaps
Poland, Vietnam, Great Britain.

creation is less pro-
: he Soviet imports from

uyv

..-. the Strengthening of Statistical Secrecy

The breadth of the changes that have occurred in the 3533's official foreign-trade
statistics is indisputable. Why, in 1976 and 1977, did the censors make so many
omissions, irrefutahly entai.ing an impoverishment of infornation in this area in
which the situation was not particularly brilliant? In 1975. out of 12,512 positions
with 2, 3, 5 and 7 digits included in the foreign-trade ncnenclature of the CEMA mem-
ber countries, the Soviet foreign-trade annual‘s lists by product gave 507 different

'tions, or about a percent of the total, including 25 Z-digit positions out of 57
:31 3-digit positions out of 317, and 320 S-digit positions out of 3,945.

sf course, not all the products in the nomenclature are necessarily imported or ex-
ported by the $853; but all the same, it can be considered that with 507 positions,
things were far out of line. For 1978, out of 13,629 nomenclature positions, the
list by product gives #29, or about 3 percent, including 2L different 2-digit posi-
tions, 119 out of 320 3-digit positions, and 259 out of 4,075 5-digit positions.
Several reasons can be suggested in explanation of this inpoverish at. we shall
cite here four of then which, it seems. have led the SoViet censorship to transform
the statistics into a very rough-woven fabric:

l--the growing difficulties of the Soviet domestic economy;
;--t.e evolution of the international raw-materials market;
J--the extension of the "strategic products" concept;
5--the 8553's foreign policy.

The statistical information that could disclose cert in economic difficul
USSR in too quantifiable a way have been omitted starting from the years i
in this regard. the particularly sensitive sectors are energy fuels and ce-eals.

.: is no cnger possible, on the basis of the Soviet statistics, to knew what the

of c: , gas and coal imported and expcrted by th 2533 are, and '~e'=‘ '6

In .—

cuantizie .n ... ._
inpossibi. a know apparent energy consumption cr to evaluate the country's stocks.
. crop in the volume of oil exports would show in too obvious a way--in the context

3

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the rise in the prices of energy sources-~the USSR‘s inability to cope simultane-
ously with a higher domestic demand and an increase in demand for oil and gas by the

Eastern countries. The same holds for the cereals-~wheat, corn, etc--Eor which the
difficulties are nocorious and the deficit constant. And similarly. the_volume of
exchanges of animals for slaughter is no longer given in physical quantities. The
evolution of the exchanges of ferrous laminates and of certain chemical product: may
also reflect a difficult situation within these branches.

heans of transport such as buses and trucks are doubtlessly to be numbered among the
products that may reflect a critical branch evolution, in view of the sizable invest-
ments made in the Soviet automotive industry in recent years. For these products,
the loss of information may also reveal nore strategic considerations.

In all these cases, of course, one can make use of the trade statistics of the part-
ner countries in order to reconstruct the volumes exchanged. The procedure is a
longer one, though, and differences in recording from country to country often make
it possible only to establish approximations which are difficult to compare with the
Soviet statistics.

The evolution of the international nonfood raw-materials market. characterized since
1973 by a constant rise in prices, has put into the realm of sensitive products a
number of basic products previously considered strategic products and treated as such
-that is, they arescovered by secrecy like all military supplies, precious metals,
diamonds and radioactive products. Thus can be explained the disappearance of all
the nonferrous metals (copper, zinc, tin, etc) and the nonEerrous laminates. The
nonmetalli: :inerals (mica, sulfur, apatie, etc) are likewise omitted. But the cam-
ouflaging of these products is not always done well. For example, the USSR imports
from Bolivia only crude and concentrated tin; it matters little whether it goes under
the heading "tin" of under "fuels, mineral raw materials, metals.” It can also be
detected easily for Malaysia. Likewise, one lrnows that the indicator 3, "Chemical
products, fertilizers, rubber," which is given for Indonesia, haleysia, Sri Lanka and
Burma covers natural rubber exclusively. As for the first series of omissions, one
can fit the Si ures by means of the statistics of the partner countries-5ut with
the same trouble that has been mentioned. In a few years, Certainly, it will be more
difficult to know exactly what is covered by the new positions. This is the only ex-
planation that can be given to justify some relatively naive disguises.

The suppression of the heading "nonmetallic minerals" (250) in 1975, by absorption
rate the 2-digit position (25) "nonmetallic minerals, clays and earths" makes it pos-
sible to bring out position 259ll--thac is, diamonds-which had to be included in
this position. as well as barite, mica, sand and graphite, which are negligible among
Soviet exports. Thus, in l975 the value of exports of nonmetallic minerals totalled
360.9 oillion rubles. In the l976:annualtrepor:, category 25, for the year l975, re-
presented 535.5 million rubles. The iffereoce is conposed essentially of Soviet
rough diamonds. The ceiling value of the diamonds can also be calculated in the list
of exports by product and country (which does not include Great Britain, the importer
of the major part of Soviet uncut diamonds) by subtracting all the countries men-
tioned from category 25. In l977, the residual value is 310.2 million rubles, and in
2973, 277.9 million rubles.

Th extension of the "strategic product" concept seems to be closely linked to the

products of increasing technicit', on the one hand, and on the other, to the greater

26
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vulnerability of the energy resources indispensable to the economic expansion of all
countries. Secrecy now covers the heavy ecuipment for metalworking (presses. ham-
mers, shears), the cranes, computers, cables of all kinds, pipe, and all heavy equip-
ment for the entractive industries.

Finally, one last motivation is certainly among the most important that can explain
the sizable loss of information~-a motivation of a political order. The suppression
of the physical-quantities statistics now makes it impossible to calculate the unit
value 6f many products by country. One can no longer make camparisons between the unit
prices of the exchanges with the socialist countries, with the developing countries
and the Western countries and those of the world market.

Un il 1976, one could know what countries benefited from real Soviet aid by means of
pr ferential exchange prices. For example. aid to Cuba takes the form of imports of
Cuban sugar at prices well above the world price and by Soviet exports of oil at
prices lower than the price of the oil sold to the other socialist countries. Such
deduccions will henceforth be very difficult to make. This doubtlessly involves a
deliberate decision to deprive foreign observers of a means for analysis of SOViet
foreign policy. It is also from a foreign-policy motive that certain sensitive pro-
ducts have disappeared for certain countries only: natural gas imported fr Iran,
oil from Iraq. In the latter case, the oil was buried under the l-digit heading
"fuels, mineral raw materials, metalsﬁ'which for Iraq includes crude oil only.

I. I1

It is certain that the Soviet intentions go very broadly against the decisions taken
at Helsinki in the matter of economic information. The evolution noted since 1976
shows clear.y the Soviets' determination not to contribute to the efforts being made
by the Helsinki Final Act signatory countries to reconcile and better harmonize each
country's trade statistics. Moreover, the USSR seems to have given similar direc-
tives to its socialist partners, which since 1975 have also more or less reduced the
volume of information that used to be available in the annual statistical reports.
Only Hungary has not followed the mDVement. Thus. since 1975 the general statistical
annual of the GDR, which was already poor for foreign trade, has aggreagsted the ex»
ports and imports by country. One can no longer calculate the balances. lnaertain
cases, the omission procedure is thoroughly crude. In 1978, for example, Sﬁlgaria
suppressed all the statistics on its ex-post imports of oil-thst is, imports after
computer composition of its foreign-trade annual report. The position of Libya,
which sells only oil to it, has been erased, and for the other oil-supplier coun-
tries, the lines have been cancelled out. Nevertheless, the poorly camouflaged vol-
ume of Soviet oil imports can be deciphered.

One question must be asked in the last analysis. How is one to reconcile the atti-
tude of the USSR.which tends to raise obstacles against anything that could contri-
bute to better understanding of that country, with the development of an economy that
remains highly dependent on its ties with the western world?

FOOTNOTES

1. I: is therefore clear that the institution, by the decree of July 1979, of the
enterprise "passport" is aimed at breaking the secrecy with which the production
units surround themselves. henceforth, in effect, it will be possible to check
the declarations of the enterprises by means of a central record filed with the

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

11.

12.

13:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Caspian and indicating, for each unit, its nominal capacity, the degree of useof
its equipment, the increase of the coefficient of rotation of its equipment, ett.
The question remains whether the authorities will effectively have the means
byewhich toapply this measure. On this subject one may refer to the July-August
1980 issue of C?! [COURRIER DES PAYS DE L'EST], No 252: "The Alterations of the
Economic Mechanism in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe."

France's economic results are published by the ZNSEE [National Institute of Sta-
tistics and Economic Studies] between 18 nonths and 2 years later.

Sergson. A., "The Real National Income of Soviet Russia Since 1928," Cambridge,
MA, harvard University Press, 1961; Becker, A.S., "Soviet National Income
1958-1965: National Accounts of the USSR in the Seven Year Plan Period," Berke-

ley, University of California Press, 1969; Trenl, V.G., and Hardt, J.: "Soviet
Economic Statistics," Durham, NC, Duke University Press, 1972; Green, o.w., and
Higgins, C.I., "SGVHOD I: A Macroeconomic Hodel of the Soviet Union,“ Niw York,

Academic Press, 1977; etc.

“A New Approach to the Economies of Soviet Type: the 'Second Economy'": 6. Du-
chene in LS COURRIZR DES PAYS DE L'EST, October 1980, No 254.

Alec have, "The Soviet Economic System," George Allen and Unwin Ltd, London,
1977.

"Results of the Soviet Economy in 1979: Toward Zero Growth," in LE COURRIER DES
PAYS DE L'EST, February 1980, No 237. '

The print run of the annual report for the Federated Soviet Socialist Ripublic of
Russia was 27,000 for 1978, for the Ukraine annual it was 6,500 for 1978, for the
Azerbaijan annual it was 6,000 for 1976, for the Latvia'annual it was 2,500 for
1977, etc. We note that for 1977 and 1978, the statistical annual for the USSR
was printed in 60,000 and 55,000 copies, respectively.

C5 "Panorama of the $553," L£.COURRIER DES ?AZS DE L'EST, Febfﬁary-Mait. 1979,
Nos 225-227, 2nd edition, 1980, pp 72-73.

"Economic, Commercial and Administrative anornation Relevant to the Development
of Trade," TRADE (R 354, 23 August 1977. ECE [United Nations Economic Commision
for Europe), Committee on the Development of Trade.

TRADE / R 389, Add 1, 9 October 1979, EEC, Committee for the Development of
Trade.

Cf h. Lavigne, "Les Relations Economic Est-Quest“ (East-west Economic allationsj,
PU? (University Presses of France], Paris, 1979, pp 20-21.

Certain corrections are not inserted in the annual reports for the following
years, but may be published in the review VNESENYAYA TORCOVL?A. Thus th indexes
of the volume of the 3553's foreign trade for 1975 were corrected for the "CEXA
countries" group in VNESKNYAYA TORGOVLYA, No 9, 1977, 9 65.

From 1920 to 1958, the 3853 published no annual reports on foreign trade. In
1958, it issued two retrospective works for the years 1956 and 1957.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10.

15.

16.

17.

13.

19.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we refer to "Vneshnyaya forgovlya v SSSR v 1955-59 3.," which was published in
1961 after the change of the nominal gold content of the .sble and which fur-
nishes the data recalculated in function of the_new rate for this period; "VesL
nyaya Torgovlya 3553 v 1959-69 g." was published after the adoption of the uni-
fied nomenclature of the CSMA in 1962 and contains the trade statistics in con-
fornity with this nomenclature for the years 1933 and 1958-1963.

According to "Methodological Explanations" in "Vneshnyaya Torgovlya SSSR‘I1978,"
pp 284-285.

A. Tiraspolsky, "The Statistical Divergence: of East-Nest Trade," in "Strate-
gies des Pays Socialistes dans l'Echange International" (Strategy of the Social-
ist Countries in International Exchange], Economics, Paris, 1980, pp 317‘QSI.

Romanov, J.A., in 31L"‘*EN' INOST RANNOY (CHMERCRESKOY INFOREATSZY, .0 3,1971,
furnishes an alphabetical list of the products of the unified nomenclature of
1971 with. opposite them. the numerical codes of the c. ‘assifications of l962,of

nu...”

the s..., and of the Brussels nomenclature.

Also: "Draft Conversion Key between the United Nations Standard International
Trade Classification and theStandard Foreign Trade Classification of the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance," Eur Cont Stats/HG 38/2, Geneva, ﬁnited Nations,
20 July 1972, and Euz'Conf Stats/WC 38/2, Amend l, of 10 August 1972.

”Edinaya Tovarnaya Homenklatura Vneshney forgovli" [Unified Commodities of the
Foreign-Trade Nomenclature]. 3rd edition, Moscow. 1971. 607 pages; and "Byul-
lecen' Eovarov Vneshney forgovli (Dopolnenie k Edinoy Tovarnoy Nomenklature
Vneshney forgovli Stran Chlenov Sovyeta Ekoncmicheskoy stimopomoshi" [Bulletin
of Foreign-Trade Comodities (Supplement to the Unified Comodities Nomenclature
for_?oreign Trade of the Countries of the Council for Economic Mutual Assist-
ance], noscov, 1977, 56 pages.

“Description and Analysis of Soviet Foreign Trade Statistics, op cit, pp 39-74

hater, ?., "Soviet and East European Foreign Trade, l966--969," Slocmington,
Indiana University Press, l973.

COPYRIGRT: La Socumentation Francoise

11267

CSC:

5119/1356 - END -

29

Pan I‘m" A I II" 0‘" V