FOR OFFICIAL I'SF. ONLY

JPRS L/10219
28 December 1981

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 8/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10219
28 December 19

USSR REPORT
HUMAN RESOURCES

(P000 8/8 1)

CONTENTS

LABOR

Zinyanin's Address to Institute of USSR Academy of Sciences
(VOPROSY “mom“. J‘n 81) DOCOI0000'.I...O‘DOOIOOIOOOOOIOOOOOII

Labor Productivity Discussed in Relation to Economic Growth
(P. Khromov; VOPROSY EXOIIOHIKI, Oct 81) ..........................

Manpower Management in a Large City
(A. Kosayev, S. Il'in; VOPROSY EKONOEIKI, Oct 81) ...............

Division of Labor Between Urban and Rural Areas
('1‘. Kuznetsova; VOPROSY EKOIIOHJJG, Aug 81) ......................

- a - [III - USSR - 38c FOUC
FOR OFF1C1AI.USEGDNLY

LABOR

ZIMYANIN'S ADDRESS T0 INSTITUTE OF USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

Moscow VOPROSY EKDNOHIKI in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 3-8

[Text] For achievements in the development of economic science
and the training of scientific personnel the Institute of Eco-
nonics of the USSR Academy of Sciences was awarded the Order of
the Red Banner of Labor. On 25 May a festive session took place
in the House of Scholars, dedicated to the presentation of the
high decoration to the collective of the institute. Comrade H. V.
Zinynnin, secretary of the CC CPSU, gave a speech. The text of
conrade H. V. Zimyanin's speech is printed below.

Comrades!

Today a high award, the Order of the Red Banner of Labor, is presented to the col-
lective of the Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

The institute is 50 years old. He are observing this anniversary at a portentoua
time--the year of the 26th Party Congress, a congress of world-historical signifi-
cance.

The entire social life of our great homeland is developing under the influence of
the decisions and ideas of the congress. They exert a positive influence on the
entire international situation.

The congress summed up the gigantic revolutionary-creative activity of the Leninist
party and the Soviet people, worked out an inspiring program for the further advance
of our country along the road to communism, for the struggle for peace and social
progress.

Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, general secretary of the CC CPSU, in the Report of the Cen-
tral Committee to the congress, showed, in the most profuound scientifically-valid
nanner, the magnitude of the historic accomplishments of the party and the people,
formulated the cardinal tasks of cornunist construction, advanced new constructive
suggestions aimed at weakening the threat of war, curbing the arms race and
strengthening the peace. They represent the consistent continuation and development
of the Soviet Program of Peace, nxet the vital interests of all the nations of the

1
FOR 0FT1C1A1.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

planet and are therefore fOund in the center of attention of the international com-
munity.

The report of comrade L. I. Brezhnev brings a new creative contribution to the de-
velopment of the Harxist-Leninist doctrine. It enriches the theory and practice

of scientific communism with basic ideas which open up new perspectives for our
social development, the further growth of the prosperity of the Soviet people, the
strengthening of the economic and defensive power of our Homeland, the positions of
peace and socialism.

The party and the people unanimously approved and supported the decisions of the

26th Congress of our party. They are rallying still closer around the CPSU Central
Committee with the outstanding continuer of the great Leninist cause, the passionate
champion of the triumph of peace and cosmmnism, comrade L. I. Brezhnev, at its head.

Amidst the great political and labor advance the fulfillment of the plan for the
economic and social development of the country for 1981 and the tasks of the five-
year-plnn as a whole has begun. Nationwide socialist competition is unfolding for
the conquest of new frontiers in the development of industry, agriculture, science
and technology, determined by the strategic policy of the party with regard to the
intensification of national production, the acceleration of scientific-technical
progress by all possible means in the conditions of developed socialism.

We have entered a new important period in the development of our Homeland.

In the realization of the tasks advanced by the 26th Congress, the Communist Party
allots a special place to science, which exerts an ever-growing influence on the
development of the material and spiritual potential of socialist society.

In the system of scientific institutions of the social sciences the Institute of
Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, organised in 1930, is an important link.
During the half-century of its existence, it has become transformed into a large
theoretical center of research in the sphere of political economy, one of the com-
ponent parts of Harxism-Leninism. The road traversed by the institute is an integral
and significant part of the history of Soviet economic science. It trained many out-
standing scholars in the field of economics, the scientific works of the collective
of the institute laid the faundation for a series of main directions in basic and
applied research, and promoted the development of economic education in the country.
And the present decoration of the institute with a high award of the Fatherland is
testimony of the recognition of its services in the development of economic science,
in the training of scientific personnel.

The work of economists in our country is honorable and responsible. Its significance
in contemporary conditions is growing sharply. Life itself, scientific-technical
progress, the tasks of intensifying national production require that the results of
production grow faster than the expenditures paid out for it and make special claims
on economic science.

The Institute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences has made significant ac-
complishments. However, against the background of the high demands made by the

2
INJR¢0FF1CJAl.lEﬂE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practice of communist construction, its work still does not correspond in everything
to the needs of today. As comrade L. I. Brezhnev emphasized at the congress of the
party, "there are quite a few problems awaiting their solution that have accumulated
in the political economy of socialism." The leading institute is given s great deal,
but a great deal is demanded of it.

we hope that the highly-qualified collective of the Institute of Economics of the
USSR Academy of Sciences will apply all of its effort, knowledge and experience to
take active part in the solution of the problems dictated by the course of national
development. that it will approach the fulfillment of the scientific and ideological
and political tasks before it with a high degree of party spirit and responsibility.

The highest goal of the Communist Party is the welfare and happiness of the Soviet
people. Its social and economic policy is aimed at the further growth of national
prosperity, the perfection of the socialist mode of life, the all-raund and harmo-
nious development of Soviet people. The main condition for the achievement of this
goal is the efficient, stable and progressive development of the national economy,
the transference of the economy to the road of intensification, the development of
science--the foundation of foundations of scientific-technical progress, the utiliza-
tion of its achievements in practice. "The tasks that life moves to the fore," L. I.
Brezhnev underscored at the congress, "require the development of theory, economic
science, its approximation to the needs of economic practice."

Soviet scholars and economists and above all the collective of the Institute of
Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences are called upon to guarantee the elabora-
tion of the urgent problems of political economy, to raise the quality and the re-
sults of the investigations of key national economic problems, to strengthen the
cooperation with the planning and economic organs.

Our economic science must actively participate in the further elaboration of the
theory of developed socialism, the ways of constructing the material-technical base
of communism, the perfection of the entire system of productive relations. Socio-
economic problems of the scientific-technical revolution and questions of the effec-
tive realiration of the achievements of science and technology in the national eco-
nomy have acquired the greatest significance at present. The direction of national
development requires profound prediction of aocio-economic and scientific-technical
progress. This, in turn, determines the necessiq; of closer collaboration of the
social, natural and technical sciences. The high duty of Our scholars is the direct
participation in the elaboration and realization of a comprehensive program of
scientific-technical progress, in the elaboration of the national economic structure
with which the country strides into the twenty-first century. Figuratively speaking,
already now we are entering its threshold.

Questions dealing with increasing the efficiency of national production, the more
rational use of the gigantic economic and scientific-technical potential of the
country, and economizing the use of natural economic resources in every conceivable
way are now being put in the forefront. He must clearly acknowledge that our succes-
ses in communist construction, the defensive capacity of the Fatherland, the strength
of our positions in the struggle for peace and social progress depend directly on

the results of our activity in all these directions, on the economic power of the

3
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

country. We expect from the scholars a new, still more ponderable contribution to
the solution of the questions of economic and scientific-technical policy, the
mobilization of reserves in the intensification of production, in the securing of
high growth rates of national labor productivity.

Increasing the efficiency of the utilization of the productive potential of the
country presupposes strengthening research in the economy of the sectors of the
national economy and, above all, the basic sectors of heavy industry-the fuel-
energy, extracting and metallurgy sectors, but also those sectors through which,
first of all, scientific-technical progress--machine building, instrument building,
chemistry--are materialized.

The activation of the participation of scientists and economists is necessary in the
solution of questions of the optimization of the distribution and use of productive
forces, in the elaboration of programs of development for the large economic dis-
tricts of the country and above all the Notchernozem Region, the North, Siberia, and
the Far East, including the zones of the Baykal-Amur Trunk Line, as is the more
systematic investigation of regional problems.

One of the most urgent tasks of the llth Five-Year-Plan is the increase in the effi-
ciency of agricultural production. With a view to the radical solution of the prob-
lem of supplying the population with the products of agriculture, the elaboration of
a food program for the country has begun. In the future. too, we will continue the
planned transference of agricultural production to an industrial basis, to strengthen
its material-technical base. However. now the center of gravity is transferred to
the return from capital investments, the productivity growth of agriculture, to the
extension and perfection of its links with all sectors of the ogre-industrial com-
plex, to the accelerated solution of the socio-economic problems of the village.

All this places new responsible tasks before agrarian theory.

The scientific elaboration of the problems of administering the national economy,
built upon the principle of democratic centralism and developing in conformity with
the economic policy of the party, acquires exceptionally great significance. Our
economy, which now represents a single national economic complex, functions on the
basis of objective laws, through whose operation the indisputable advantages of the
socialist social order over capitalism are increasingly fully revealed. These ad-
vantages must be systematically realized in the practice of planning and the direc-
tion of the national economy. The nature of the socialist economy requires its
central administration and the coordinated operation of all socio-economic factors
and organized structures of administration. Resting on the creative energy of the
popular masses, the active participation of the workers in the solution of production
tasks, highly-qualified personnel of specialists, the steady observation of plan and
labor discipline, the broad utilization of the achievements of science and technology,
we are confidently moving along the road of the creation of the material-technical
base of communism.

The party and the government have determined a complex of measures with respect to
the perfection of the economic mechanism and the improvement of planning. We are
confronted with the serious tasks of consistently carrying them out in practice.

h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A matter of increasingly great importance is the concentration of the activity of
the leading scientific institutions on questions of increasing the coordination of
the plans of production and scientific progress, the physical and cost, territo-
rial and sector indicators; perfecting cost accounting; strengthening the role of
the financial and credit levers. material and moral stimulation with a view to in-
creasing the efficiency of producton; strengthening the regime of economy and
thrift. There are many still unresolved tasks in the sphere of the perfection of
the organizational structures of administration. It is also necessary to attain
acceleration in the elaboration of more effective economic-mathematical models of
planning and administering the national economy. The scientists and economists must
to a greater extent promote the overcoming of the force of inertia, old, inert
habits, the development of new socio-economic thinking which corresponds to the re-

organization, the psychology of a certain part of the economic executives, if one
can express it that way.

A powerful accelerator of our forward movement is socialist competition. It has

been and remains an active means for linking the economic policy of the party with
the creativeness and initiative of the popular masses. A powerful impulse to its
further development was given by the 26th Congress of the party, which has set forth
the main directions for the development of national production and at the same tﬁne
the urgent tasks of the further development of socialist competition. Together with
the other social sciences, economic science must help in the elucidation and props-
ganda of the most rational and effective forms of socialist competition, promote the
strengthening of their influence on the execution of the tasks of the llth Five-Year-
Plan.

It is necessary to increase the role of economic education in the solution of produc-
tion tasks, in the development, in every worker, of a thrifty attitude toward the
public good, a rational,economic approach to the utilisation of national economic re-
sources, an aspiration to achieve high labor productivity.

In contemporary conditions, the perfection of the organization of labor and the
problem of a cautious attitude toward labor resources play a special role. Its solu-
tion demands from science profound demographic research, the elaboration of socio-
economic problems of the population, including in the territorial plan. Investiga-
tions of questions of the perfection of wages and the whole system of distributive
relations must be more closely coordinated with all this. Labor, its quantity and
quality, constitute the main criterion for distribution under socialism.;~This most
important principle of socialist social relations has been consolidated in the USSR
Constitution and must be strictly carried out in practice.

A characteristic feature of the contemporary stage of development of our society is
the constantly growing interrelationship between progress of the economy and socio-
political and spiritual progress. Economic investigations must in a comprehensive
way take into accOunt the essence of social changes in the composition of the working
class, the peasantry and the intelligentsia. of especially great significance for

the solution 0f the tasks of the further socio-economic development of the country

is the theoretical proposition advanced at the 26th Congress of the party by comrade
L. i. Brezhnev to the effect that "the formation of the classless structure of soci-

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ety will mainly and basically take place within the historical bounds of mature
socialism.“

In connection with the steady expansion of the foreign economic relations of the
USSR, it is demanded that economic science devote increased attention to questions
of the further development of economic cooperation among the countries of the
socialist commonwealth and undertake a profound study of the problems of socialist
economic integration. It is necessary to expand the analysis and generalization of
the experience of the countries under socialism, especially in the increase of the
efficiency and intensification of production, to extend the elaboration of produc-
tive and scientific-technical cooperation. the approximation of the structures of
economic mechanisms. and the perfection of the forms of joint planning activity.

'Scientists and economists must continue and extend their research into the economics
and politics of the developing countries and, above all, countries having entered
the path of a socialist orientation. It is necessary to study actively the new
phenomena and contradictions in the world of capital, the aggravation of the general
crisis of capitalism. to analyze more profoundly the basic tendencies of interna-
tional relations. the global problems of our time.

Economic science and political economy in particular is a class science, a party
science. it is directly connected with the ideological struggle.

The intensification of international tension that has taken place lately, called
forth by the aggressive, militaristic circles of the U.S.A.. by its hegemonic and
expansionist aspirations that have intensified the threat of war, has even imparted
a special sharpness to the ideological struggle in the world arena. The politicians
and ideologists of imperialism and their Peking accomplices are waging a frantic
slanderous campaign against socialism, against our Fatherland, against all revolu-
tionary and progressive forces in the world, are unleashing a veritable psycholog-
ical war. Our party and people decisively rebuff the intrigues of the forces of
reaction and war. The imperialist lie and slender is opposed by our great truth--the
justice, nobleness and humanism of the ideas of Marxism-Leninism. the world-wide and
historic achievements of the socialist social order. In this struggle we are sup-
ported by the unshakable unity of our party and people, the indestructible defensive
power of our Fatherland, by the solidarity of the world socialist commonwealth. the
support of all progressive and peace-loving forces of the planet.

At the same time we must fully take into account that it would be an unforgivable
mistake to underestimate the influence of the ideology and propaganda of imperialism,
including in questions of economic theory and practice, where our class enemies act
especially cynically and maliciously.

The scale and heat cf the contemporary ideological struggle present ever-growing

demands to our ideological work, which was pointed out at the 26th Congress of the
party in the well-known CC CPSU decree "On the Further Improvement of Ideological
and Political-Educational Work". This requires every conceivable increase in the
level of scientific research. works and all publications in the sphere of economic
science. Together with all the workers in the social sciences, scientists in the
field of economics must demonstrate the exploitative character of the capitalist

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vcunomy more broadly. an economy which is in the grips of a deep crisis; they must
more actively unmask the policy and ideology of imperialism, its predatory, para-
sitic, antipopular essence; through argumentation they must disclose the incon-
sistency of the various reform schenes and at the same time devote still greater
attention to the propaganda of the advantages and achievements of socialism, to the
education of the Soviet people in the spirit of coauunist conviction, socialist
patriotism and proletarian internationalism.

Comrades! At the 26th Party Congress comrade L. I. Brezhnev indicated that the
Central Comittee of the CPSU is in favor of further increasing the role and the
responsibility of the USSR Academy of Sciences, of improving the entire system of
scientific research. The country has the need for the efforts of "big science",
along with the elaboration of theoretical problas, to be concentrated to a greater
extent on the solution of key national economic questions, on discoveries capable of
introducting really revolutionary changes in production.

It was further emphasized that science must he the constant "disturber of calm“,
showing in what sectors stagnation and lagging have been noted, where the contempo-
rary level of knowledge provides the possibility of moving ahead quickly and success-
fully.

These propositions also fully apply to economic science.

All scientific and ideological-political work of our economists must be directed to
the further deveIOpment of Marxist-Leninist economic theory, to the increasingly more
profound and fuller discovery and utilization of the possibilities of the economy of
developed socialism, to the connunist education of Soviet people.

The Central Committee expresses the firm conviction that the collective of the In-
stitute of Economics of the USSR Academy of Sciences and all Soviet economic scien-
tists will successfully cope with the responsible tasks set forth by the 26th CPSU
Congress.

Allow me on behalf of the Presidius of the USSR Supreme Soviet to award your insti-
tute the Order of the Red Banner of Labor.

In conclusion, allow me, on behalf of the CPSU Central Comittee, the Presidium of
the USSR Supreme Soviet and the Soviet Goverrssent, to extend hearty congratulations
to the collective of the institute on the occasion of the portentous anniversary and
the high award, to wish you, dear comrades, new successes in your work for the wel-
fare of our great socialist Fatherland.

After the presentation of the order, the director of the institute, corresponding
member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, E. I. Kapustin, vice-president of the USSR
Academy of Sciences Academician P. N. Pedoseyev, first secretary of the leninist

raykom of the CPSU, V. A. Protopopov. deputy chairman of USSR Gosplan, A. V. Bach-
urin, deputy USSR minister-of higher and special education. N. I. Hokhov. vice-
president of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, 1. I. Lukinov, academician-secretary

of the Department of Economics of VASKHNIL (All-Union Academy of Agricultural
Sciences its. V. l. Lenina), A. A. Nikonov, senior scientific associate of the In-

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAE. USE ONLY

etitute of Economics. 0. V. Katikhin, gave addresses.

The participants of the session accepted with greet enthusiasm e erlutetory letter
to the cc CPSU, the Presidim of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the USSR Council of
Ministers, and comrade L. I. Brezhnev.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ekonoaiki", 1981

8970
('30: 1928/3

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LABOR

LABOR PRODUCTIVITY DISCUSSED IN RELATION TO ECONWIC csowm
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 15-23
[Article by P. Khromov: “Labor Productivity and Economic Growth"]

[Text] One of the most important aspects of the economic competition between the
two world systems is the growth of labor productivity. The cyclical development of
the capitalist countries has been accompanied by inflation, a high rate of unemploy—
ment, an energy crisis, the slower growth of labor productivity, and so forth.

Foreign economists who have studied the prospects for production development and
labor productivity have expressed different views on this matter. Some believe
that slower economic development, as that witnessed in the capitalist countries
during certain periods, is the result of excessively rapid economic growth during
preceding years, and others find the cause in the limited quantity of free land and
reduced population growth, although it is a well-known fact that there is no direct
connection between economic development and population growth in the capitalist
society, even if we discount unemployment. Some have also said that production
growth rates are influenced by technical innovations, the use of new resources and
.territories, the state of monetary circulation. the state of agriculture1 and so
forth. The views now being expressed by bourgeois economists in regard to future
economic development range from the extremely optimistic (speed "at any price"—
Japan) to the extremely pessimistic (the concept of "zero growt "-—the Club of Rome).
Several studies of economic growth rates and prospects have been printed in foreign

economic publications . 2

when we investigate the economic development of the capitalist countries in the
1980's. we must remember that production growth rates were lower in the 1970's than
in the previous decade. although the rate of decline was different in different
countries (from 1.0 percent to 50-65 percent). The long-term dynamics of production
in the capitalist countries depend primarily on the level of labor productivity,
but given the circumstances of cyclical development, a high rate of unemployment
and so forth, the dynamics of production volumes and labor productivity in the
capitalist countries do not always coincide. During the severe crisis of 1976-1975,
for example, labor productivity decreased along with production volumes in some
capitalist countries while it increased in others, although more slowly than in

pre-crisis years.

A lower rate of increase in labor productivity has recently been characteristic of
the majority of developed capitalist countries. The dynamics of the change in labor

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

productivity rates in the leading capitalist countries in recent years were the
following.

Labor Productivity Dynamics

(annual growth rates) in 1
Countries 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980*’{
United States* -3.6 -0.5 -2.7 1.3 0.1 -0.4 -l.0
Canada* -l.4 -0.8 2.6 0.7 0.1 -1.2 -3.0
Japan* -0.7 2.6 5.1 3.9 4.7 4.5 4.0
FRG* 2.5 0.1 6.7 2.9 3.3 3.2 1.0
Great Britain** -0.5 -1.2 2.8 0.3 2.3 0.8 -l.5
France** 3.2 1.2 4.4 3.0 3.0 3.4 1.7
Ita1y** 1.2 -4.0 5.0 0.6 2.1 3.8 2.5

* labor productivity calculated as the gross national product per worker through-
out the economy.

** Labor productivity calculated as gross domestic product per worker throughout
the economy.

*** Estimated.

Lower growth rates of labor productivity limit accumulation potential by complicat-
ing the entire process of reproduction in the capitalist economy. The data in the
table below indicate the dynamics of labor productivity over S-year periods.

Average for Period

 

M 19 71-1975 1976-1980
United States 1.2 -0.6
Canada 3.0 0.4
Japan 5.1 4.5
FRG 2.7 3.6
Great Britain 1.4 0.9
France 8.8 3.2
Italy 2.2 2.8

Therefore. labor productivity was lower during the 1976-1980 period than during the
preceding 5 years in five of these seven capitalist states. Furthermore. we must
remember that labor productivity statistics in the capitalist countries, especially
the United States. suffer from nethodological defects. The indicator of labor
productivity throughout the economy is calculated by dividing the gross domestic
product by the number of persons employed in the country (including civil servants
and the personnel of the trade network and of banks and other financial institu-
tions). It is a well-known fact, however. that labor productivity is lower in the
non-production sphere than in branches of physical production even when this sphere
has a higher growth rate. As a result of this, the rate of increase in labor prod-
uctivity throughout the economy is lower than in the main branches of physical
production.

10

FOR.0FTIC1AI.US£10NLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The growth rate of labor productivity in the capitalist countries is influenced by
various factors, but the main reasons for its decline are the generally antagonis-
tic nature of the process of reproduction, the deceleration of equipment renewal and
technical progress, the growth of already huge expenditures on weapons, inflation,
etc.

In the socialist society, production growth is governed by other laws, steaming from
the nature of socialist production relations: a planned economy, the absence of
cyclical crises, full employment and so forth. Nevertheless, rates of production
growth have varied during different stages of socialist construction. The period
of the Civil and Patriotic wars, the period of reconstruction, the period of indus-
trialization and other periods were marked by economic developmental peculiarities
for a nuaber of objective reasons. To one degree or another, a decrease in the
annual work-time figure, a lower rate of manpower growth, a change in the produc-
tion structure, the adjustment of accumulation norms and other factors have influ-
enced production growth considerably.

Production growth rates in the USSR are now affected by the priority assigned to
economic intensification (the augmentation of labor productivity and the reduction
of capital, material, energy and monetary requirements in combination with the
improvement of product quality), rather than to factors of an extensive nature
(the growth of labor expenditures, capital investments, natural resources and farm-
land). which once played an important part in economic development. Problems in
production growth are now being solved through the enhancement of production
efficiency, the use of the latest equipment, the improve-eat of the sectorial
structure commensurate with public needs. the comprehensive use of crude resources
and other materials, the improvement of personnel skills and of production manage-
ment and the better coordination of production with public demand.

The rate of increase in national income (used for consumption and accumulation),
which rose annually in the USSR by 5.7 percent in 1961-1965, 7.1 percent in 1966-
1970, 5.1 percent in 1971-1975 and 3.9 percent in 1976-1980, provides a general idea
of economic development. The rates of increase in national income, national product
and labor productivity during the Ninth and 10th Five-Year Plans were lower than,
for example, during the Eighth and Seventh; in absolute terms, however, national
income in the 10th Five—Year Plan exceeded the figure for the Ninth by 24 percent
(or 400 billion rubles).

An increase of 3.4-3.7 percent in national income is expected during the llth Five-
Yesr Plan. It is significant that the growth of national income during the llth
Five—Year Plan (18-20 percent) is expected to exceed the growth of capital invest-
ments in the national economy (12-15 percent), in contrast to the preceding three
5-year periods. In other words, we want to reduce the capital requirements of
national income. 'Ue must not forget that the annual absolute increase in production
will be measured in huge quantities, even if the rate of increase is low, because the
present scales of production are so great. Under present conditions, the strained
labor balance is the main factor determining the growth of national income; or. in
other words, labor productivity. The growth rate of national income will naturally
be higher than the growth rate of public labor productivity because the first is
achieved by means of an increase in total labor and a savings in embodied labor.
The anticipated increase of 17-20 percent in labor productivity in the llth Five-
Year Plan must be achieved primarily through the mechanization and automation of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production, the reduction of the number of persons engaged in manual labor, the
coordination of new jobs with total labor resources and the improvement of economic
management and organization. The more quickly labor productivity grows, the more
opportunities will be created for accumulation and consumption, but a decrease in
accumulations and a slower rate of technical progress complicate the enhancement

of efficiency; this circle is “broken" by the growth of labor productivity, by the
most highly concentrated indicator of production efficiency, as it was defined in
the accountability report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th party congress.

Average Annual Rates of Labor Productivity Growth
in Physical Production and Its Main Branches in the USSR (2)

 

 

Categories 1981-85
1961-66 1966-70 1971-75 1976-80 i 1am]

Public labor productivity

(national income per worker

in physical production) 5.6 6.8 4.6 3.2 3.2-3.7
Labor productivity in industry

(product per worker) 4.6 5.7 6.0 3.2 4.2-4.6
Labor productivity in agriculture

(kolkhozes. sovkhozes, subsidi-

ary and other productive

agricultural enterprises) 4.8 5.4 4.1 2.8 4.1-4.4

The growth rate of labor productivity was lower during the 10th Five-Year Plan than
during preceding 5-year periods. The main reason was the low rate of technical prog-
ress. shortcomings in the organization of labor and wages and in material and tech-
nical supply operations, the slow growth of agriculture. structural changes, the

low level of labor discipline, the higher rate of personnel turnover. the shortage

of manpower at some enterprises and the surplus at others. shortcomings in management
and planning. and so forth. .

Rates of production growth and labor productivity are influenced by social and
natural factors and by objective and subjective causes. Various factors interact
closely with one another and it is quite difficult to determine the exact role of
each.3 Economic growth must be viewed as the result of public labor productivity,
the dynamics of which reflect the impact of technical progress, capital investments
and all measures to improve organization and management in the national economy.

Some writers have expressed the view that the rate of economic growth is dependent
only on the rate of increase in capital investments and on their effectiveness. of
course. there is a direct connection between rates of economic growth and scales of
productive accumulation, but their dynamics are not identical: The growth rate of
national income does not always correspond to the dynamics of capital investments
and accumulations.

Public labor productivity influences economic growth not only directly, but also
through capital-output dynamics. which depend on a number of factors. particularly
the dynamics of labor productivity in investment branches, which can increase or
decrease the value of fixed assets. Labor productivity plays the key role in the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enhancement of production efficiency and the acceleration of production growth.
Higher labor productivity is particularly important in the developed socialist
society under the conditions of technological revolution and reduced manpower
reserves. The accelerated growth of labor productivity by means of technological
progress is the main factor in the elevation of the public's material and cultural
standard of living, the construction of a material and technical base for cosmunism
and the improvement of social relations and a condition for the resolution of the
manpower problem.

During the 11th Five-Year Plan an increase of 17-20 percent is anticipated for
public labor productivity, of 23-25 percent for labor productivity in industry, of
22-26 percent in agriculture (public sector), of 15-17 percent in construction and
of 10-12 percent in railway transport. Here the increasingly difficult conditions
of work in a number of branches of the extractive industry must be taken into
account. The development of extractive branches in Siberia, the Far East and the
North will require additional capital investments due to rising construction costs.
Capital investments for ecological purposes must be increased.

The utilization of the potential of technological progress under the conditions of
the socialist organization of production must overcome the effects of some negative
factors on labor productivity in a number of branches in the 1980's. International
factors will also continue to have a significant effect on the growth rates of
labor productivity. such as, for example, the improvement of socialist integration
and the more extensive use of international division of labor and favorable world
market conditions.

The use of working time, the qualifications of personnel, the standard of living,
the organization of incentives and labor discipline are important aspects of pro-
duction intensification. The efficient distribution and use of labor resources and
the disclosure of internal reserves for heightened labor productivity are now of
primary significance. The labor shortage is inhibiting the use of production
capacities, and the presence of job vacancies is intensifying labor turnover and
undesirable migration processes. Regions with surplus labor are generally dis-
tinguished by lower growth rates of labor productivity, while a labor shortage
reduces the output of equipment despite the rising power-worker ratio. A labor
shortage in some regions and a surplus in others can seriously inhibit the growth
of national labor productivity. In regions and republics with a high rate of popu-
lation increase and surplus manpower, we must not underestimate the possibility of
increasing national income not only by means of heightened labor productivity. but
also by means of the involvement of unemployed labor in public production. The
materials of the 26th CPSU Congress and the decree of the CPSU Central Committee
and USSR Council of Ministers "0n the Improvement of Planning and the Enhancement
of the Economic Hechanism's Effect on Production Efficiency and the Quality of "or "
raise an entire series of questions about the improvement of working conditions and
the organization of labor, particularly the question of reducing the rate of per-
sonnel turnover in the national economy.

In the 1970's labor turnover in industry decreased somewhat, but it is still having
a negative effect on the dynamics of labor productivity. The rate of personnel

turnover is particularly high in the country's eastern regions, among youth and in
several branches with relatively difficult working conditions, such as the coal and

13
l1)R‘OF1ﬂC1Al.USE1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lumber industries. As a result of personnel turnover, many enterprises are only
working one shift and new enterprises can only master projected capacities after
long delays. The rate of turnover is affected by many factors. In particular. the
labor balance has not been taken into account when new jobs have been created in a
number of regions. In industry, the labor of around 80 percent of all workers is
normed at the present time. Shortcomings in the norming process, however, are on.)
one of the reasons for personnel turnover and the disruption of the correct balante
between labor productivity growth and the growth of wages at enterprises and
organizations. The labor norming process at industrial enterprises is affected
negatively by, in addition to other factors, interruptions in material and techni-
cal supply operations, delays in the approval of plans and the frequent revision of
plans by superior organizations.

Sometimes "extra" workers are kept on the staff and overtime work is authorized.
During some months of the last five-year plan, for example, the Moscow Plant imeni
S. 0rdzhonlkidze produced 16.9 percent of its output during the first 10 days,
21.9 percent during the second 10 days and 61.2 percent during the last third of
the month. An output equal to almost two-thirds or even three-fourths of the
monthly plan total can only be produced within 10 days if the plant has surplus
manpower. Despite the fact that a manpower limit is now stipulated in the plan for
associations and enterprises, a staff in excess of the plan is still maintained by
many. The oblast offices of Gosbank, which are authorized to reduce total wages
commensurate with the output produced by surplus manpower, do not always exercise
this right.

Considerable reserves for heightened labor productivity also exist in the sphere of
the better use of working time. Industry suffers many losses as a result of
unauthorized absences, whole-day and intrsshift breakdowns and so forth. These
losses have generally been covered largely by overtime work on days off. The
improvement of labor discipline and the reduction of personnel turnover are pro-
moted by the transition to the collective organization of wages, the authorization
of workers in some branches to take extra vacations, the augmentation of pension
increments for uninterrupted work at a single enterprise, the cancellation of
seniority after more than one resignation from a job during a single calendar year
without a good excuse, nonrefundable assistance and the partial cancellation of
debts for cooperative and individual housing construction. The brigade form of
labor organization is becoming a factor of great economic and social importance.
The members of a brigade are interested in the results of their collective labor and
can combine professions and replace other workers more easily. The brigade form
assists in the indoctrination of young workers and should eventually guarantee
production that is highly effective in the social and economic sense.

The improvement of the organization of labor and production also promises consider-
able reserves. When enterprises are remodeled the size of the staff is often not
reduced. A sample survey of 17 remodeled enterprises in Moscow showed that the
remodeling plans for 10 of them actually envisaged an average increase of 16 percent
in manpower, the plans for 3 enterprises did not even mention the size of the staff
and only the plans for k envisaged a reduction. Remodeling plans must envisage
higher labor productivity and a reduced staff as a result of this remodeling work.

There are also great reserves for heightened labor productivity in agriculture.
The growth rates of agricultural production will soon have an increasingly

lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

significant effect on the development of the entire economy. At present, however,
product losses in agriculture are sizeable, both in farming and in animal husbandry:
Large quantities of fertilizer are lost, the annual repair of tractors and combines
costs too much, water is not always used efficiently in irrigated areas, losses
resulting from soil erosion are substantial, the incorporation of highly productive

strains of plants and new productive breeds of livestock has been unsatisfactory,
and so forth.

when measures are planned for the improvement of agricultural production, we must
reneeber that it differs from industry in terns of the manpower balance and labor
productivity. The highest priority in agriculture is the efficient use of the most
important neans of production-the land; natural conditions have a significant
effect on the reproduction process. The efficient use of land and the improvement
of organization, management and socioeconomic relations in rural areas are essential
conditions for heightened labor productivity in agriculture. One of the greatest
problems now facing our national economy is the problem of increasing the agricul-
tural product and heightening the material interest of its immediate producers in
production growth, in the better use of assets, in the reduction of losses and in
the introduction of comprehensive mechanization. A rise in the level of labor
productivity must be accompanied by a corresponding increase in the yield of crops
and the productivity of livestock.

To heighten labor productivity in agriculture, it will be important to reduce the
length of the harvest season by mechanizing these processes intensively. If grain
is harvested 20 days after it has reached full maturity, for example, 33-37 percent
of the harvest will be lost. But after all, it is no secret that many kolkhozes
and sovkhozes let the harvesting season drag on for a month or a month and a half.

The improvement of the labor balance in agriculture could augment labor productivity
considerably. In this connection, the resolution of seasonal problems will play an
important part. Pull employment must be guaranteed during the winter, particularly
employment for the sovkhoz population when there is no work in the fields. The
private farming sector must be developed. The disruption of the employment struc-
ture and the migration away from regions of agricultural production with a labor
shortage are inhibiting the growth of labor productivity.

when the growth rate of labor productivity in agriculture does not keep up with the
growth of fixed productive assets per worker, the capital-output ratio rises and

it is clear that c. :1 expenditures are not effective enough. The growth of labor
productivity is als slowed down by the absence of the optimal balance between
accumulation and consumption on kolkhozes in a number of rayons and republics. When
the accumulation fund is formed on kolkhozes, the guiding principle should be labor
productivity that grows sore quickly than wages. The institution of the measures
for agricultural development envisaged in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress
must also guarantee a rise of 22-26 percent in labor productivity in public farming
in the llth Five-Year Plan.

Everyone knows that technological progress affects production efficiency. In the
llth Five-Year Plan the development of science and technology should be geared more
toward the resolution of economic and social problems in the Soviet society, the
quicker redirection of the economy into the channel of intensive development and the

15
F0.‘0FFKJAL.USE(HVLY
FOR (WI-1f ‘Ml. NSF. 0Vl.\'

enhnncement of production efficiency. This will depend largely on the level of
research and experimental design work, the closeness of the ties between science
and produ. tion, the capital-1abor ratio, the amount of technical equipment in lab-
oratories and institutes, the existence of promising scientific ideas, the quality
of the training of scientists, engineers and designers, and so forth.

Economic growth rates are definitely related to the capital investment volume.
But the dependence of these rates on increased capital investments can be disrupted.
Not all capital expenditures produce an impact during the year of their investment;

there is a temporary lag and many expenditures only have an impact after a certain
delay.

Analysis has proved that there are great reserves in the national economy for the
augmentation of production volumes and labor productivity by means of technical
progress. However. there is not enough of the new technical equipment. Despite the
fact that obsolete machines and items are being withdrawn from the production

sphere. the percentage of "young" products in the total output of some machine-
building ministries is even decreasing. The discrepancy between the estimated impact
specified in technical plans and the actual impact of new equipment must be erased.

To intensify economic growth and heighten labor productivity and production
efficiency. it will be extremely important to reduce the percentage of workers
engaged in manual labor through the technical re-equipping of existing enterprises
and the comprehensive mechanization and automation of main production units and, in
particular. auxiliary units. In the last 15 years the percentage of workers labor-
ing without the aid of machines and mechanisms dropped from 100.6 percent to 32.8
percent in industry. but the proportion accounted for by manual labor is still

decreasing too slowly. and at some enterprises it is even increasing because there
is a higher percentage of auxiliary personnel.

Economic growth rates have always been affected by capital-output dynamics. A
higher capital-output ratio reduced the rise in public labor productivity per

1 percent of rise in the capital-labor ratio in 1976-1980 to almost half of the
figure for 1966-1970.

Labor Productivity and Capital-Labor Ratio
Growth Rates in 1966-1980 (1)

Categories 1966-70 1971-75 1976-80
Public labor productivity 39.0 210.0 17.0
Capital-labor ratio throughout the national

economy 60.5 62.0 37.0
Increase in labor productivity per l-percent

rise in capital-labor ratio over 5 years 0.96 0.57 0.66

During the Ninth and 10th Five-Year Plans, the relationship between the growth
rates of labor productivity and the output-capital ratio was negative in comparison

to the preceding period for certain reasons, particularly the inadequacy of capital
investments in the remodeling of enterprises and the development of capital-intensive

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

branches (the extractive industry and agriculture). the slow incorporation of pro-
duction capacities, the low level of production organization at many enterprises

and the need to work less productive and less accessible deposits. In the last 5
years, for example. the cost of extracting a ton of oil in the USSR was 2.5 times as
high as prior to 1972; proportional capital investments in iron ore extraction
almost tripled within 15 years. All of this affected the capital-output ratio; to
some degree, it was also affected by the relatively rapid rise in the prices of many
types of equipment in conparison to the augmentation of their productivity.

The growth of labor productivity can surpass the growth of the capital-labor ratio
if the capital-output ratio is reduced. An increase in capital, material and finan-
cial requirements, on the other hand, raises the productive accumulation norm,
reduces consumption and, under certain circumstances, can reduce the productivity of
all public labor for a year or for an entire productive asset circulation cycle. An
intense rise in the productivity of live labor and a drop in the capital-output
ratio are accompanied by less need to accumulate national income for a specific
increment in the national product.

Quicker economic growth will require the use of existing reserves for heightened
labor productivity in capital construction as well. These include the concentration
of labor and material resources in priority projects, the reduction of the number of
simultaneous construction projects, the quicker use of production capacities, the
expansion of planned remodeling, the technical re-equipping of existing enterprises.
the closer coordination of material and technical resources with the plans of con-
struction organizations and so forth. The dissipation of resources among many con-
struction projects, the practice of writing off fixed assets before they have been
fully depreciated (as a result of which a large share of capital investments must be
used for the replacement of discarded equipment and not simply the augmentation of
total equipment) and unsatisfactory capital-output dynamics slow down the enhancement
of production efficiency, the growth of labor productivity and the rate of produc-
tion development.

The improvement of national economic planning. the compilation of more effective
plans, the elimination of imbalances within economic regions and branches, the
abandonment, in particular, of the practice of making numerous changes in the plan
during the year and the balancing of consumption and accumulation, of the volume of
capital construction and the output of construction materials and equipment, and of
effective demand and total commodity turnover, and other measures will accelerate
the growth of public labor productivity and, consequently_ economic growth in
general.

The most important condition for economic growth is production intensification and
the conservation of all production elements: manpower. the means and tools of labor,
energy and natural resources per unit of social product. Our country has tremendous
economic potential; our fixed productive assets are valued at over 1 trillion rubles
and our working capital is valued at 323 billion rubles. We must strive for higher
rates of economic growth and greater final results with minimal expenditures of live
and embodied labor and the conservation of natural resources.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

See A. Hansen, "Business Cycles and National Income," Izdatel'stvo

inostrannoy literatury, 1959, p 116. Some foreign economists associate rates

of economic growth with the proportion accounted for by savings in national
income and the dynamics of the "capital-product" coefficient. Swedish econom‘st
c. Cassel was already saying at the beginning of the 20th century that the
annual rate of production growth in the developed capitalist country should be
3.3 percent. Keynes believed that intensive economic growth could be promoted
by moderate inflation. Now the majority of bourgeois economists believe, how-
ever. that inflation has a serious negative effect on the rate of economic
growth and, in particular, on labor productivity.

For example, "The Future of the World Economy," a report by a group of UN
experts headed by H. Leontief, was published. The authors conclude in general
that rates of economic development in the developed capitalist countries might
be lower in the 1980's than in the 1970's. "The hypothesis regarding the
gradual deceleration of economic growth in the developed countries is more
realistic than the simple extrapolation of their past development" (see "The
Future of the World Economy." Izdatel'stvo mezhdunarodnyye otnoaheniya, 1979,
P 29).

Various data have appeared in our press regarding the role of individual factors
in the augmentation of labor productivity. In discussions of the effect of
technical progress on labor productivity, some authors have distinguished it
from capital-labor dynamics.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

8588

C80:

1828/23

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLV

LABOR

MANPOWER MANAGEMENT IN A LARGE CITY
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOMIKI in Russian No 10, Oct 81 pp 73—80

[Article by A. Kosayev and S. Il'in: "Problems of the Management of Manpower Re-
sources in a Large City:/

[jest] The economy of a large city is a unified coupler systen, all the units of
which are closely interconnected. A small oversight in one of then can upset the
entire balance. In most instances any disproportion is explained by the imperfec-
tion of individual units and levers of the economic mechanism, particularly the
planning of the production volume of products (operations, services), the distribu-
tion of capital investments and new equipment, the use of manpower and so forth.

In the past decade the growth of the size of the population of such cities as
Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev and so forth to a certain extent has been regulated by the
restriction of registration.

The regulation of the size of the population by administrative methods presumes a
strict conformity of the total of the plans of enterprises and organisations with
respect to the number of workers with the plan which is established by the city
planning commission foreach ministry, department and the enterprises and organisa-
tions subordinate to them. At the same time the regulation of the size of the
population directs the enterprise toward the fulfillment of the approved plan on
labor, since its nonfulfillment at some enterprises and organisations will adverse-
ly affect the others. If we examine the system of planning of the distribution of
manpower resources by sectors and types of production on the nacrolevel (the city
planning commission), the impression is created that there exists the objective
possibility of achieving a balance between the needs of the sectors of the national
economy of the city and the available manpower resources. The city planning com-

mission can compare the need of the national economy for manpower (it is composed
on the generalized indicators of the planned need of workers, which is submitted by
all the ministries and departments, main administrations and administrations of the
Moscow City Soviet Executive Committee) with the available manpower resources of

the city.

The balance of manpower resources, including the balances of workers, specialists,
young people and so on, which are drawn up by the appropriate subdivisions of the
city planning conmisshutandare coordinated with the needs of the national economy
of the city. serves as a means of such a comparison. However, although the dis-

tribution of manpower resources depends on the distribution and structure of pro-
duction, it is nevertheless carried out under the influence of factors which stem

19
ltll(lﬂﬂC1Al.USE‘0NlM
F0R10FFKJAI.USE(HVLY

from the personal motives and interests of the workers. This introduces certain
elements of spontaneity in the distribution of manpower resources and affects the
level of supply of individual enterprises with manpower. It must also be noted
that the occurring inadequate balance between the number of workplaces and the man-
power resources of the city increases the influence of social factors on the dis-
tribution of manpower among sectors of production, since the opportunities to chose
a place for exerting labor increase. The presence within a large city of various
enterprises, which differ in the level of concentration, the degree of provision
with new equipment. the nature of the technological cycle, the work schedule and so
on, is responsible for the influx of workers at enterprises with relatively better
working conditions. The fact that a some enterprises there are vacant workplaces,
which often are unnecessary and are in excess of the needs of specific production,
is also conducive to this. The keeping of above-plan manpower, which exceeds the
real need of production at some enterprises. in the case of an overall balance in
the national economy of workplaces and manpower resources leads to a shortage of
workers at other enterprises.l In this connection the solution of the problem of
the shortage of manpower creates the need to attract manpower resources from other
economic regions of the country, which complicates the implementation of the Master

Plan of the Development of Moscow with respect to the regulation of the growth of
the population. '

The system of planning in the area of manpower resources should orient the develop-
ment of the economy of a large city in the case of the limitation of the increase

of employed people (first of all in the sectors of physical production) toward the
redistribution of manpower to promising sectors which are characteristic for the
economy of the city and to services. Here the measures aimed at decreasing the
differences between enterprises in working conditions. first of all by increasing
the level of mechanization and automation of labor processes, are acquiring particu-
lar importance.

It should be noted that the intensification of production for the national economy
as a whole does not rule out the development of individual sectors with the enlist-
ment of additional manpower. particularly those sectors which ensure the accelera-
tion of scientific and technical progress, as well as the nonproductive sectors,
which meet the increasing spiritual and socioeconomic needs of the workers. In this
connection the demands on the mechanism of planning are increasing sharply. Such
principles of planning as the obligatoriness of the plan for the performers, the
effectiveness of the plan and the comprehensiveness of its indicators and sections
are increasing; the demands on the scientific soundness of the plans and their
stability on the macro- and microlevels are also increasing.

Meanwhile, as statistical data show, during the years of the Ninth and 10th Five-
Year Plans the number of workers and employees engaged in work in the national econ-
any of Moscow, which was established by the enterprises and organizations them-
selves, as a rule, exceeded the possibilities of enlisting manpower resources.

Thus, in I970 the number of workers according to the total of the plans of enter-
prises exceeded the actual number by 2.9 percent, in l975-by 1.8 percent and in
I980--by 1.6 percent. For some ministries these deviations were even larger: in
I980 at the enterprises and organizations of the USSR Hinistry of the Machine Tool
and Tool Building Industry this figure was 2.1 percent, at those of the USSR Minis-
try of Tractor and Agricultural Machine Building-~4.7 percent and so on.

20
FOR OFFNJAI.USE|MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The analysis ul lhr cunprchcusIVc goal programs of the increase of labor efficiency,
which were drawn up by the labor collectives of Moscow for the 11th Five-Year Plan,
showed that. as in the past, the tendency for the estimated number of workers and
employees to exceed the established limits of the Moscow City Planning Commission
remains. Thus, in the USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification the estimated
number of industrial personnel engaged directly in production for the 11th Five-
Year Plan exceeds the limit of the Moscow City Planning Commission by 6.7 percent,
in the USSR Ministry of Ferrous Metallurgy--by 5.1 percent, in the USSR Ministry of
Nonferrous Metallurgy-~by 1.3 percent, in the Ministry of the Petroleum Refining
and Petrochemical Industry-by 3.9 percent. For 28 industrial ministries in 1985
alone the estimated number of workers and employees will exceed the approved limit
of the Moscow City Planning Commission by 5 percent.

At first glance the impression is created that there exists an acute shortage of
manpower. If we proceed. for example, from the total of the plans of enterprises,
in 1980 at the enterprises of the USSR Ministry of Machine Building for Light and
Food Industry and Household Appliances the shortage of workers, which is defined as
the ratio of the actual level of supply with respect to the number and the total of
the plans of enterprises, was 1.6 percent, the USSR Ministry of Nonferrous Metallur-
gy-l.1 percent and the USSR Ministry of the Electrical Equipment Industry-1.3 per-
cent. Mowever, these data do not characterize the actual level of the provision of
enterprises with manpower. Suffice it to say that the production program at the
enterprises of the indicated ministries was exceeded respectively by 0.9 percent,
2.0 percent and 8.2 percent with the actual number of workers.

It is quite difficult to establish the criterion of the soundness of plan indicators
due to the lack of the necessary statistical base. 0n the basis of some data it is
possible to establish that the actual deviation of the indicators of the work of
Moscow enterprises from the plan indicators was the result of the inadequate sound-
ness of the calculations of the effectiveness of the measures on the increase of the
technical level of production, the improvement of management, the organization of
production and labor and others.2 '

Thus, at Bread-Baking Plant No 28 the economy of manpower, which was envisaged by
the plan of organizational and technical measures for 1980, was not provided, as a
result of which the exceeding of the plan on the output of products by 0.8 percent
was achieved by the exceeding by 0.5 percent of the planned number of industrial
personnel engaged directly in production. At the printing house of the All-Union
Chemical Society imeni D. I. Mendeleyev, on the other hand, an economy of the labor
of workers was not envisaged in 1980 by the plans of organizational and technical
measures; meanwhile as a result of the introduction of new equipment and the im-
provement of the scientific organization of labor more than 2 percent of the indus-
trial personnel engaged directly in production were conditionally released.

A similar situation is also observed at the Perovskiy Plant of Trade Machine Build-
ing--thc plan of organizational and technical measures on the conditional release
of manpower was fulfilled by 162 percent; with an invariable number of workers the
growth rate of labor productivity at the enterprise in 1979 was 119 percent with a
plan of 117 percent. At the combine of ring-shaped rolls in 1980 the achieved
economy of labor exceeded the economy stipulated by the plan by 80 percent.

From the cited examples it is evident that any change of the output affects the
actual amount of manpower: the nonfulfillment of the planned measures on the

21
FORIOFFﬂJAl.USE(XVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

increase of labor productivity leads to an increase of the number of workers and,
on the contrary, the identification and utilization of intraworks reserves of the
increase of labor productivity, which were not stipulated in the initially adopted
plans, are responsible for the decrease of the actual number of workers and the ex-
ceeding of the plans of labor productivity.

L. I. Brezhnev, while emphasizing the need for the unconditional fulfillment of a;l
the assignments stipulated by the plan, noted that often the indicators of economic
activity are divided into "main" and ”secondary" indicators. Some managers strive
to fulfill the plan according to the "main" indicators and devote little attention
to the ostensibly "secondary" indicators. Meanwhile the plan should be considered
fulfilled only if the assignments on all the approved indicators are fulfilled. The
managers of enterprises, unfortunately, frequently consider only the fulfillment of
the production program to be the main thing.

It is well known that the indicator of the number of workers is interconnected with
the indicators of the production volume and labor productivity. Therefore the ex-
ceeding of the plan on the production of the gross output without the corresponding
increase of the indicator of labor productivity or the nonfulfillment of the plan

on the increase of labor productivity leads to an increase of the actual number of
workers.

In the practice of management, changes of the plans during the year are possible,
but they should encompass all the production indicators of the enterprise. However,
as was shown by the survey conducted by the Labor Administration of the Moscow City
Soviet Executive Committee and the IEP of Moscow Llnstitute of Economic Problems of
the Comprehensive Development of the National Economy of Moscqé7, many ministries,
when changing the assignments on the production volume (downward, but at times up-
ward), do not adjust the assignments on labor. As a result, as a rule, an increase
of the number of workers and a decrease of labor productivity are observed. For
example, at the Mostrikotazhprom Production Association the plan for 1978 (which was
submitted to the ministry for approval) envisaged an increase of the volume of the
gross output by 105.3 percent with a constant number of workers, that is, the entire
increase of the production volume should have been provided by the increase of labor
productivity. Meanwhile the initially adopted plan on the production volume in No-
vember 1978 had already been reduced by 6 percent. But since it was impossible to
decrease accordingly the number of workers by the indicated date, this led to a de-
crease of labor productivity. The main reason is the nonfulfillment of the assign-
ments outlined by the enterprise on the increase of the technical level of produc-
tion and the improvement of the organization of labor (by 10 percent) and on the in-
crease of the output norms and norms of service (by 11.5 percent). At Moscow Experi-
mental Plant No 2 with a constant indicator of the gross output the plan on the
number of workers in October 1980 was increased by 1.7 percent; at the same time

the plan on labor productivity was decreased by 1.8 percent. At the Mostochlegmash
Association with a constant volume of gross output the downward adjustment of the
initially approved plan on the number of workers for 1980 was responsible for a de-
crease of labor productivity during the first half of the year by 1.2 percent.

Frequent adjustments of the production indicators at individual enterprises of
Moscow, which are not submitted to the city planning commission for approval, lead
to the formation of a shortage of manpower in the national economy of the city,
since the increase of the number of employed people occurs owing not to the "inter-
nal" reserves of labor of the given ministry, but to the manpower resources of the

22
FOR OFFKHAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-l ONLY

city. Therefore it seems expedient to make adjustments of the indicators which
are planned by way of directive with the approval of the city planning commission.

The analysis of the planned and actual number of workers shows that the existing
disproportions in the distribution of manpower among individual enterprises within
the region are the consequence of the nonfulfillment of the assignments on the in-
crease of labor productivity, the inadequate substantiation of the plan assignments
themselves, as well as the inadequate consideration of the regional peculiarities
of the formation of manpower resources in the plans of the distribution of produc-
tion.

During the llth Five-Year Plan it is planned by means of the comprehensive use of
the system of the improvement of planning and material stimulation to ensure the
balance of manpower resources and the need for them. However, is it possible to
believe that in itself the establishment for industrial ministries, associations
and enterprises of assignments on labor and social development-«he increase of
labor productivity, the limit of the number of workers and enloyees, the wage fund
(in the sectors for which a standard of the wage per ruble of output is not ap-
proved) and the assignment on the decrease of the use of manual labor-«rill make it
possible to eliminate the existing shortcomings in the mechanism of the planning
and distribution of manpower resources? The experience of Moscow and Leningrad
attests that the effectiveness of the indicated measures to a decisive extent de-.-
pends on the coordinated functioning of the other elements of the economic mecha-
nism, which are aimed at the stimulation of enterprises to use manpower efficiently.

In recent years economics scholars, who have been elaborating problems of manpower
resources, have advanced a number of proposals on the improvement of the mechanism
of the stimulation of the efficient use of manpower. Given the different approach
to the idea of establishing the appropriate economic levers, in the end one thing
unites the authorsuthe need to establish for enterprises a fee for manpower re-
sources. In the opinion of L. Dnnilov and V. Korchagin, the assets for the repro-
duction of manpower are not reflected completely in the costs of the enterprise,
which "understates the progortion of living labor and overstates the amounts of the '
profit of the enterprise." In this case "the increase of the contributions of
enterprises for the formation of public consumption funds and the establishment of
a direct dependence of the amounts of these contributions on the quantity and qual-
ity of the manpower resources being used by the enterprises are one of the means
of increasing the interest of production collectives in the maximum economy of
living labor.“

Some scholars propose to establish cost accounting principles in the interrela-
tions of the enterprise and the city which has objects of the social infrastruc-
ture—-cltywide underground mains, available housing. a power and water main system,
institutions of culture, science, health, education and so on. In their opinion,
a fee for additional resources of the city should be introduced for enterprises in
the form of ”regular payments to the city budget, which are proportionate, on the
one hand, to the smunt of resources being used by each enterprise and, on the
other, to the needs of the city economy, the intensity of housing, municipal,
social and cultural construction. The latter form must also be regarded as a fee
for the resources of the city, and first of all for manpower resources."5

V. Bitunov and A. Zholkov take a similar stand on this question. In their opinion,
the development of the socioeconomic infrastructure in the city to a certain extent

23
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
I'UK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is complicated by the fact that the sectorial enterprises of republic, union repub-
lic and union subordination are inadequately participating in the formation of the
local budget. In this connection "the principle of the free use of objects of the
social sphere by sectorial enterprises is hardly expedient. Every enterprise lo-
cated on the territory of a city," they write, "should obviously contrébute the
necessary assets to the city budget for each newly created workplace."

For the clarification of the essence of the fee for manpower resources the content
of the concept "manpower resources” and its relationship with the category "man-
power" should be examined. K. Marx indicated that "by manpower, or the capacity
for work, we understand the set of physical and spiritual features, which the body,
the living personality of a person has and which are set into motion by him every
time he produces some use values."7 From this formulation it follows that manpower
has a specific qualitative content, but is void of quantitative characteristics.
The category "manpower resources," which is the amount of potential and functioning
manpower, was put into use in the practice of planning and in economic literature
for establishing the quantitative characteristics of manpower.

Consequently, those who propose to establish a fee for manpower resources, appar-
ently, have in mind the people employed in the national economy, that is, the man-
power included in the process of national labor (otherwise it would make no sense
to "pay" for manpower resources which are not yet employed in social production,
and especially for workplaces which, let us say, are vacant). In the case of such
an approach to the problem in question the raising of a number of questions is quite
legitimate: Who should pay whom for the manpower being used, what should the
amounts of the fee be and so on?

The thorough examination of the raised questions makes it possible to detect some
contradiction when defining the concept "fee for manpower resources" or, more pre-
cisely, for "manpower." If we proceed on the assmption that labor is the only
form of the manifestation of manpower, the revelation of the essence of the "fee
for manpower" can be achieved by the study of the relations which arise between the
worker and the enterprise, the worker and society in connection with and with re-
gard to his involvement in the production process.

The relations which arise between the enterprise and society, the enterprise and the
individual worker, are not property relations—they are relations with regard to the
involvement of the worker in the process of production and the use of his manpower
in the interests of both the worker himself and society. In accepting the assum-
tion about the need to establish a fee for manpower, we thereby recognize that an-

power is an object of property relations.

However, under the conditions of socialism, as I. A. Yagodkina correctly notes in
this regard, "while entering the social process of production as co—owner of the
means of production, the bearer of manpower does not transfer it to the ownership
of all of society, to public property and does not transform it into an object of
public ownership, since the conditions for such a transformation do not exist."8
It is obvious that the proposal on establishing "a fee for manpower resources"
(workplaces) is scientifically not sound. The proposal on the coordination of the
assets,-which are paid into the state budget for the development of the sociocul-
tural infrastructure, with the number of those employed at the enterprises, as well
as on the coordination of these payments with the assets "which ensure the training
of manpower resources"9 is not sufficiently well reasoned. In connection with such

2h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a suggestion of the "solution” of the problem a number of other questions arise. In
particular, it is not clear how to differentiate the fee with allowance made for the
skill characteristics of manpower, the territorial migration of manpower reset :es
and so on. For example, in Leningrad on the average during the years of the Ninth
Five-Year Plan the migratory increase of the population in the total increase was
76.2 percent (moreover, 85 percent of them are people of able-bodied age).l° Ac-
cording to the estimates of the [3? of Moscow, during 1970-1980 the increase of the
manpower resources in the city occurred primarily due to the migratory increase of
the population (more than 80 percent are people of able-bodied age). '

It is important here to note that far from all workers received vocational training
at the expense of the budget of the above-indicated cities. The conducted sample

vocational training, while at the enterprises of the Main Administration of Motor
Vehicle Transport of the Moscow City Soviet Executive Committee more than 90 per-
cent of the workers from other cities received vocational training in the regions
they left. Consequently, the raising of the question of connecting the assets,

which are allocated for the training of workers, with the budget of the city is 11-
legitimate.

Even if we presume the possibility of establishing a fee for manpower, the role of
this indicator in limiting the growth of the number at the enterprise will be neg-
ligible. Suffice it to trace the changes which are occurring in the structure of
employment in the sectors of the national economy of Moscow. During 1965-1980 the
number of those employed in the sectors of the nonproductive sphere increased ab-
solutely and relatively: from 39.1 percent in 1965 to 41.2 percent in 1980, while
in the sectors of physical production it decreased accordingly. During the period
being analyzed the proportion of those employed in science and scientific service
increased by 2.4 points, accordingly in public health, physical cultural and social
security--by 0.9 point and in public education--0.S point. It can be assumed that
the tendency for their leading growth will also be observed in the future. It
should be added to what has been said that the development of the sectors of the
nonproductive sphere is being carried out at the expense of the state budget, while
within the city it is being carried out at the expense of the city budget, and
therefore the establishment for institutions of a "fee for manpower resources,” in
essence, will not influence the increase of the efficiency of their use.

The existing experience of introducing a fee for manpower in a number of CEMA coun-
tries also attests that the mechanism of levying it does not have a significant in-
fluence on the release of surplus manpower and the increase of labor productivity,
since the inclusion of these payments in the production costs acts as a price-
forming factor.

The analysis of the sectorial structure of industry and the trends of its develop-
ment revealed an increase of the proportion of machine building; at the same time
instrument making, the electrical equipment and machine tool building industries
are developing most rapidly. The increase of the proportion of machine building is
responsible for the relative increase of the need for manpower, since the labor-
output ratio here is nearly twice as high as on the average for industry.11 It is
necessary to note that electrical engineering, instrument making and the machine
tool industry are the characteristic sectors for the city. The specific needs for

25
FOR!0FFKJA[.IEHE(NVLY
FINICHWNC1A1.USEioNLY

resources at them.1n:close to the average needs for industry, and a highly skilled
regular labor force is used at these enterprises, while the development of these
sectors to a considerable extent meets the needs of production for many types of
equipment for the country and the city.

Thus, the establishment of the so-called fee for manpower at the enterprises here
will not provide the necessary impact. The question arises: The use of what eco-
nomic levers and stimuli is most expedient for the increase of the efficiency of
the use of manpower and the increase of the interest of enterprises in the fulfill-
ment of the production program on an intensive basis?

The decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers on the
improvement of the economic mechanism starting with the 11th Five-Year Plan envis-
ages a statute, in accordance with which the executives of ministries, departments
and other organs of administration, who adjust the plans downward as against the
actually achieved level of its fulfillment, are held disciplinarily and materially
accountable, while the managerial personnel of associations. enterprises and organ-
izations are deprived of not less than 50 percent of the bonuses. In our opinion,
the mechanism of the influence of economic levers, which promote the limitation of
the increase of the number of those employed in the sectors of the urban development
sphere and stimulate a more efficient use of manpower in the sectors of the national
economy of Moscow, should be strengthened. This could be promoted by: the with-
drawal by USSR Gosbank from enterprises and organizations of the assets for the in-
crease of the wage fund, which resulted from the exceeding of the established plans
due to an above-plan number;12 the irrecoverable contribution to the state budget
of the profit received due to the above-plan number of workers; the increase of the
amount of the contributions from the assets of enterprises to the state budget for
social insurance, since they affect the production cost of the output of the enter-
prise (an increase of the number of workers would lead to the corresponding decrease
of the profit and, consequently, of the amount of incentive funds).

Having analyzed the problem of the shortage of workers at enterprises of industry,
it is possible to be convinced that it stemmed for the most part from subjective
factors: the lack of stability in the annual plans approved for production associa-
tions andenterprises and of the frequent adjustments of the plan of labor produc-
tivity downward as against the actually achieved level of its fulfillment. At the
26th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev noted that "the plan is a law, since only its ob-
servance ensures the coordinated functioning of the national economy. He will say
frankly: this obvious truism has begun to be forgotten. The practice of adjusting
plans in the direction of their decrease has acquired an extensive scale.... Obvi-
ously, the time has come to tighten up the demands<n1both planning discipline and
the quality of the plans themselves. The plan, to be sure, should be practicable,
balanced. But it should also be fulfilled just as surely."

The conducted research shows that the shortage of manpower is being observed first
of all at enterprises with difficult working conditions, where the proportion of
manual jobs is high. In order to use efficiently the manpower resources which a
region has, particular attention must be devoted to the mechanization and automa-
tion of labor-consuming processes and to the increase of the attractiveness of
labor, which will be conducive to the uniform distribution of workers among the
sectors and spheres of production.

26
FOR 0F11C1AI.USEGDNLY
The careful considcrntlon of the territorial peculiarities of settlement is neces-
sary when drawing up the plan of the development of each sector of a large city.
The comprehensive approach to the problem of the distribution of productive forces
will ensure the balance of the plan within the sector and its coordination with the
development of the entire national economy of the city.

FOOTNOTES

1. As the results of the survey of the use of workers from other cities, which was
conducted by the Institute of Economic Problems of the Comprehensive Development
of the National Economy of Moscow jointly with the Labor Administration of the
Moscow City Soviet Executive Committee, showed, annually 1.1 percent of those
employed in industry transfer to the sectors of the nonproductive sphere.

Here the proportion of Muscovites is decreasing most rapidly at enterprises
with working conditions which are difficult and harmful to the health, which is
responsible for the need to enlist workers from other cities. For example,

the difficulties in attracting Muscovites to the First State Bearing Plant had
the result that the proportion of workers from other cities in the annual hiring
during 1976-1980 amounted to 40.6 percent. For some occupations the hiring of
workers from other cities is the main source of the recruiting of manpower.

2. Here and below the data of the survey, which was conducted in 1979-1980 by the
Labor Administration of the Moscow City Soviet Executive Committee jointly with
the Institute of Economic Problems of the Comprehensive Development of the Na-
tional Economy of Moscow at a number of Moscow industrial enterprises, are used.

3. L. Danilov, V. Korchagin, "The Improvement of the Management of Manpower Re-
sources" (PLANOVOYE KHOZYAYSTVO, NO 11, 1976, p 29).

4. Ibid., p 29.

5. B. Khorev, R. Musiyevskiy, "The Development of Large Cities, the Use of Manpower
Resources and Comprehensive Socioeconomic Planning" ”Krupneyshiye goroda-ikh
nastoyashcheye i budushcheye" ljhe Largest Cities—-Their Present and Futuréf,
Izdatel'stvo "Statistika", 1979, pp 37-38).

6. Sec V. Bitunov, A. Zhoklov, "The Planning of the Comprehensive Development of
the Soviet Capital" (EKONOHICHBSKIYE NAUKI, No 8, 1979, p 48).

7. K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [Fork§7, Vol 23, p 178.

8. 1. A. Yagodkina, ”Vosproizvodstvg rabochey sily pri sotsializme" lihe Reproduc-
tion of Manpower Under Socialism], Izdatel'stvo "Mysl'", 1979, pp 25-26.

9. See "Krupneyshiye goroda--ikh nastoyashcheye i budushcheye," p 39.

10. See A. P. Solov'yev, G. M. Romanenkova, "Ekonomicheskaya i sotsial'naya effek-
tivnost' trudovykh resursov" ljhe Economic and Social Efficiency of Manpower
Resources], Leningrad, 1979. pp 66, 69.

27
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
I-‘(III OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11. See VOPROSY EKONG‘IIKI, No 6, 1981, p 28.

12. See "Trudovyye resursy SSSR" LESSR Manpower Ransom-c927, Izdatel'stvo "Bkono-
mm", 1979, p 152.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda", "Voprosy ckononﬂd", 1981

7807
080: 1828/ 19

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI¢NNNC1AI.USE13NLY

LABOR

DIVISION OF LABOR BETWEEN URBAN AND RURAL AREAS
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 8. Aug 8! pp 55—63
[Article by T. Kuznetsova: "Social Division of Labor Between Urban and Rural Areas"]

[Text] One form of social division of labor is that between urban and rural areas.
In the structure of the social division of labor, this form is viewed as a branch
division of labor between industry and agriculture. It evolved historically that
urban development was associated with the development of various branches of indus-
try. but agriculture was the dominant branch of the production sphere in rural areas.
According to 1926 census data. 93.6 percent of all workers living in rural areas were
employed in agricultural production. That proportion subsequently decreased. to 70
percent in 1965, 63 percent in 1975 and about 60 percent in 1978.

it for other work. with the increase in the number of branches associated with set-
vicing agriculture and processing its output. with development of the road-transport
network, and with the increase in incomes of the rural population and improvement in
their living conditions. As the agricultural production industrialization begun in
the mid-1960's intensified. along with agriculture. branches of the production and
nonproduction sphere began to be developed. primarily in the form of subsidiary hol-
khoz and sovkhoz enterprises and businesses.

national economic scale led to a gradual reduction in their proportion on kolkhozes
and sovkhozes. Thus. by 1970. the proportion of workers employed at enterprises of
this sphere on kolkhozes and sovkhozes was 22 percent of the total number of workers
in material production living in rural areas. By 1975. that proportion had decreased

to 20.9 percent. and by 1978 - to 18 percent. The nonproduction sphere is basically
represented in rural areas by institutions of agricultural enterprises.

The proportion of the population employed in nonagricultural types of activity is
adopted as the criterion determining the urban settlements in an administrative re-
gard. The administrative division reflects the existing division of labor between
urban and rural areas and strengthens the idea that this division is a division of
labor between industry and agriculture.

As soon as a rural settlesent receives multibranch development, it becomes an urban
settlement. The process whereby a rural area is transformed into an urban territory

29

FOR OFFICIAL [8! ONLY
IKNICNHWKJAI.USE{3NLY

is continuous. It was most intensive during the 1926-1970 period. Now. about 200
thousand rural residents annually become urbanites as a result of the administra-
tive transformation of rural settlements into urban ones.

As new territories are utilized. the level of productive forces rises. the distribu-
tion of various branches is perfected, individual regions are comprehensively de-
veloped and socioeconomic processes occurring in agricultural production and indus-
try. in branches of the infrastructure and nonproduction sphere. in rural settlements
and cities, develop, that is. as the processes of production and labor collectiviza-
tion intensify. both the content of the concept of division of labor between rural
and urban areas as a division of labor between industry and agriculture and the con-
cept itself of a division of labor between urban and rural areas gradually change.

The most important process determining moderning agricultural production is its in-
dustrialization, the changing character of this production and the structure of la-
bor in it. Agrarian labor is gradually being transformed into a variety of indus-
trial labor. The social conditions of labor in agriculture are changing under the
impact of these factors and production conditions in the state and cooperative-
kolkhoz sectors are being equalized.

Table 1. Dynamics of the Basic Indicators Describing Agricultural Social Production

Conditions (1965 . 100 percent)
1970 1975 1979

number of agricultural workers 93 92 90
nunber of machine operators 113 132 166
availability of capital per agricultural worker 159 267 366
on kolkhozes 176 305 433
on sovkhozes 156 246 310
availability of energy per agricultural worker 165 218 297
on kolkhozcs 153 228 323
on sovkhozes 131 186 269
availability of electricity per agricultural worker 212 669 661
wages:
on kolkhozes 166 169 200
on sovkhozes 138 172 198
labor productivity in agriculture 137 156 169

The industrialization of agriculture creates conditions for raising the level of
collectivization of agricultural production and overcoming elements of its closed-
branch nature. which have over a long period of time determined the technical and
social features of agriculture. Industrialization leads to expansion of the scope
of agricultural production through the use of output of nonagricultural branches in
the agrarian sector. The interbranch ties of agriculture grow, production relations
within it broaden. the proportion of expenditures of live labor decreases and the
proportion of expenditures of embodied labor grows. production marketability is in-
creased. and so forth (see Table 2. following page). This facilitates the develop-
ment of agricultural production specialization and concentration on a base of inter-
farm cooperation and agroindustrial integration. This process changes the structure
of the social and organizational forms of production characteristic of rural areas.
The process of transforming kolkhozes and sovkhozes into enterprises whose character
is industrial is accelerated. It becones increasingly difficult to delineate the
social forms previously characteristic of rural areas in their pure form.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

Table 2. Dynamics of Individual Indicators of a Number of Branches of Industry Asso-
ciated with Producing Agricultural Output (in percent of 1970)

1975 1979
total food industry volume 129 139
including:
sugar 107 Ill
fruit and vegetables I38 153
meat 151 156
dairy. butter- and cheese-making 129 1‘1
fixed production assets of food industry 1‘3 177
production of mineral fertilizers 150 170
production of microbiological feed protein 258 330
mixed feed production 176 256
production of agricultural machinery 177 221

In the process of industrializing agriculture. there is a branch division of labor

in it and the simultaneous delineation of a number of branches of its production ser-
vicing. processing agricultural output. and so on. These branches are formed in pro-
duction with a higher material-technical level than subsidiary shops and enterprises
of kolkhozes and sovkhozes. For example. from 1970 through I979. the number of in-
terfarn nixed feed enterprises increased 6.7-fold. the number of enterprises to pro-
cess agricultural output -- more than 2.6-fold. and the number of artificial insemi-
nation stations for agricultural livestock -- 6.4-fold.

At the present stage. production facilities are being formed whose activity has un-
til recently been considered purely agricultural. They include. for example. feed
production. In 1978, some 86 percent of the mixed feed consumed on kolkhozes and
sovkhozes was purchased and was basically produced at enterprises of the mixed feed
industry. Branches of agricultural chemistry. microbiology and others (see Table 2)
are being developed as independent branches. Industrial processing is increasing.
including the primary processing of agricultural products. Within the agricultural
framework. the branch division of labor and the derivation of a number of industrial
branches from it presuppose the creation of more developed. intensive forms of col-
lectivization of agricultural and industrial branches and enterprises.

Growth in the technical level of agricultural production and. on the one hand. change
in its structure and. on the other. the development of branches servicing agriculture
and processing its output create the conditions and prerequisites necessary for mak-
ing the combining of agricultural branches and enterprises in various zones of the
country. for zonal specialization and for improving the distribution of production
and processing of agricultural output within a regional framework on the basis of a
comprehensive approach to the development of agriculture and associated branches

more efficient. Zonal concentration and specialization permit a closer linking of
the production and processing of agricultural output and change in the nature of the
distribution of enterprises on the basis of the production servicing of agriculture.
storing and processing its output. through their gradual concentration in rural areas.
Such enterprises must be formed on a base of their cooperation with agricultural en~
terprises or on the basis of developing interfere cooperation among kolkhozes and
sovkhozes for storing and processing agricultural output. which creates prerequisites
for concentrating the production and processing of the basic types of agricultural
output in specialized zones.

31
FOR 0‘11C1AI.USE<ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The advances occurring in agricultural production and in branches of industry asso-
ciated with it lead to qualitative changes in the social division of labor. to the
formation of a new type of social division and consolidation of labor. to agroindus-
trial integration. These changes. in turn. transform the social division of labor
between urban and rural areas. On the one hand. agricultural production goes consi-
derably beyond the framework of agricultural enterprises and rural areas. and on tie
other. conditions are created for developing industrial branches. and foremost those
associated with servicing agriculture. This is borne out by changes in the distribu-
tion of workers by sphere of labor application (using a consolidated classification)
in USSR urban and rural areas from 1965 through 1978. as well as in the dynamics of
the countryside‘e proportion of the total number of workers employed in the national
economy (see Table 3. following page).

At present. the proportion of workers employed in agriculture among all workers is
decreasing. This is associated with the transfer of rural settlements to urban ones.
with the migration of the rural population to the cities. where the sphere of appli-
cation of labor is considerably broader. and with the pendulum migration with a pri-
mary "village-to-city" direction. Development of spheres of labor application in
rural areas must create conditions to compensate for the reduction in the number of
workers employed in agriculture. There is already an increment in the absolute num-
ber of workers in a number of nonagricultural branches in rural areas. Thus. from
[965 through 1978. the number of workers living in rural areas employed outside ag-
ricultural production has increased by 18 percent. and the proportion of these work-
ers grew from 30 to 38 percent of the total number of rural workers. For example,
the proportion of nonagricultural workers in rural areas increased 1.5-fold in the
Georgian SSR. 1.9-fold in the Uzbek $53 and 2.1-fold in the Moldavian SSR.

Rural socioeconomic development programs must anticipate a complex of measures which
take into account its current features. This concerns first of all the choice of
types of housing. organizing public services for the population and the road-trans-
port network. which creates conditions for securing both agricultural and other work-
ers in rural areas.

On a national economic scale. the specific economic form in which the process of
agroindustrial integration is actualized is the national economic agroindustrial
complex. Its interaction with other national economic complexes leads to change in
the structure of the social division of labor between urban and rural areas. This
also results from specializing branches of industry now associated with the agroin-
dustrial complex. automating production and perfecting production organization.
which alter the forms of production concentration by including territorially sepa-
rated production subdivisions in a unified production-technological process. This
permits a more efficient combination and unification of large production facilities.
associations and enterprises with auxiliary production subdivisions. shops and sub-
sidiary enterprises. including territorially isolated ones. In so doing. conditions
are created for the fuller use of labor and material resources. foremost those it is
impossible or inexpedient to concentrate in large production units. The siting of a
number of industrial enterprises not connected with agricultural production (enter-
prises of local industry. light industry. packaging. and so forth) in rural areas
should be anticipated first of all in regions with a labor surplus. in which all

the able-bodied population cannot be employed in agriculture.

The volume of agricultural production determines the necessary scope of development
of servicing and processing branches for agriculture. including those in rural areas.

32
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEZONIJ
)0 100 101.8 100 100 40.7 100 100

70.5 86.2 105.5 67.7 810.8 42.0 65.9 83.0
52.1 7.0 10.8 40.7 7.9 10.3 38.8 7.8
3.1 70.0 96.10 3.1 65.7 92.7 2.5 63.6 1
L1.8 9.2 35.8 12.8 9.8 31.1 13.2 10.8 1
[1.8 3.3 16.7 12.7 3.8 15.0 13.6 4.2 1
5.9 1.3 17.0 6.8 1.6 12.7 7 5 2.0 1

Ls rurel

tconpssses sll brenches relating to servicing egricu]
Istry not connected with agriculture. timber unsgem
where of socisl end cultural services includes educ:
ren's institutions. Trsde end personel services inc]
Lng snd municipal services.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The relatively limited scope of agricultural production leads to a situation in which
the resources potential of rural areas in certain regions cannot be used just within
an agricultural framework. Therefore. the siting of enterprises not associated with
agriculture in rural areas. small cities and urban-type settlements becomes increas-
ingly urgent.

The development of nonagricultural branches in rural areas. along with industrializ-
ing agricultural production. facilitates the resolution of a number of socioeconomic
tasks of rural areas. First. the limited sphere of application of labor is overcome
and the rural production structure draws closer to that of urban areas. This is im-
portant. since one of the basic reasons for the outflow of population from rural
areas to the large cities is the difficulty of meeting the demand for labor. Given
partial mechanization of production. each of the agricultural branches creates a de—
mand basically for stockraising workers. generally employed at manual labor. for
seasonal manual labor in plant growing. for machine operators and specialists. Gi-
ven incomplete industrialization of agriculture. the demand for manual laborers de-
creases slowly. leading to the necessity of using a large number of people employed
at manual labor in agricultural production. At the same time. as the level of edu-
cation rises and the demands of the rural population grow. it is increasingly less-
satisfied by those types of labor offered by modern agricultural production.

Second. the comprehensive development of the production sphere in rural areas creates
conditions for securing a permanent staff of workers in rural areas. foremost through
the industrialization of agricultural production. as a measure of whose implementa-
tion the need to enlist temporary workers in seasonal jobs must decrease. It is ap-
propriate to enlist in seasonal agricultural work foremost workers at nonagricultural
enterprises situated in rural areas. Production at nonagricultural enterprises should
be planned and run with consideration of diverting their workers into agriculture.

The use of kolkhoz and sovkhoz workers not employed the year around could be insti-
tuted at these same enterprises. The Estonian SSE already has experience in organiz-
ing this kind of enterprise in rural areas.

Third. the siting of nonagricultural production facilities. enterprises and organiza-
tions in rural areas permits the enlistment of material and financial resources above
those allocated to agriculture. In so doing. the opportunity opens up for resolving
the task of redistributing additional resources in favor of rural areas. Rural areas
are being developed primarily through the activity. means and resources of agricul-
tural enterprises. as distinct from the cities. for whose development special invest-
ments and resources are used. Solving the socioeconomic problems of rural areas
therefore depends on the economic status of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes.

The July (1978) and November (1979) CPSU Central Committee Plenums emphasized the
importance of improving "the whole matter of organizing production. housing. cultural
and personal-services construction" in rural areas. expanding the construction of
roads and the development of transport. improving services to the population. and
increasing funds to rural areas for these purposes. He now need to shift to increas-
ing capacities for the initial processing of agricultural output. to expanding the
construction of warehouses and storage facilities on kolkhozes and sovkhozes. In
this connection. forming agricultural enterprises and the enterprises and organiza-
tions of the procurement system. consumers' cooperatives and food industry into co-
operatives for the purpose of combining material and financial resources to increase
the base for storing and processing agricultural output in rural areas, including
right on the kolkhozes and sovkhozea. becomes expedient. At the same tine. better

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use should be made of opportunities for expanding the production of everyday items
made from local raw material in rural areas.

Iaplementation of the CPSU Central Conmittee and USSR Council of Ministers decree
”0n Further Developing Factory Production of Hood Panel Houses and Sets of Hood Com-
ponents for Houses Using Local Materials for Rural Housing Construction" is of im-
portant significance for developing the rural production sphere. This decree is im-
portant both from the viewpoint of rural social development - improving housing con-
ditions for the rural population. public amenities for rural population centers and.
in so doing. drawing urban and rural living conditions closer to one another - and
from the viewpoint of broadening and perfecting the spheres of application of labor
for the rural population. The decree states that one of our pressing tasks is "the
development in every way possible of the production base of industrial housing con-
struction in rural areas through the construction of new and expansion of existing
enterprises producing modern wood panel houses. as well as sets of parts for houses
with walls made of local building materials.... It is anticipated that house-build-
ing combines will be situated in maximum proxiaity to rawamaterial resources and
housing construction regions." This signifies that collectivization processes will
be intensified in rural areas. not only directly in production, but also in the
sphere of services to the population and organizing everyday life. The lore so.
since the development of construction is unavoidably accompanied by expansion of

the road-transport infrastructure and sociocultural branches.

lectivization of agricultural production, overcoming the relative socioeconomic iso-
lation of rural enterprises. and also expanding integration ties between urban and
rural areas in various areas of activity. At the same time. the infrastructure
energes as an elenent of the comprehensive development of the spheres of labor ap-
plication in rural areas and facilitates overcoming the territorial isolation of
rural areas.

The low level of develop-ant of local and, especially. intrafarm roads is a primary
brake on solving problems of preventing losses of agricultural output. developing
nonagricultural production in rural areas and ensuring that the rural population has
access to the sociocultural centers of the cities. The rapid development of branches
of the nonproduction sphere in rural areas reflects the objective process of the so-
cial division of labor between urban and rural areas. With a view towards radically
transforming branches of social services in rural areas, we need some redistribution
of centralized financial and material resources of specialized enterprises of those
branches in favor of rural areas. This can be done, we think. through direct in-
vest-ants in enterprises serving the rural population and by developing integration
ties between urban and rural areas. The present level of concentration and special-
ization of social services branches permits (given a developed road-transport infra~
structure) siting base sociocultural. trade and personal-services enterprises not
only in the cities. but also in rural settlements.

The development of local initiative in the sphere of sociocultural. trade and per-
sonal services to the rural population is an important direction in this area. In
particular. it is possible to single out certain types of services within the frame-
work of individual farms for the purpose of improving the quality of services to the
rural population and concentrating resources. In this instance. extensive use can be
aade of combining interfarm means and efforts to strengthen the material-technical

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

base of service enterprises. attract skilled personnel to them. find organizational
and economic forms and types of services (meeting local conditions). This line can
be actualized by increasing the role of local soviet and economic agencies. L. I.
Brezhnev stressed at the October (1980) CPSU Central Committee Plenum: "Much concern
for increasing the production of goods and services for the population must be dis-
played by local party. soviet and economic agencies."

Improving the social division of labor influences the development and use of urban
territories. First. taking a number of production facilities and enterprises out of
the cities and siting them in rural areas enables us to resolve difficulties observed
in cities in a number of branches in connected with limited site site. lack of manpo-
wer reserves. and so on. About 60 percent of the proposals reviewed and adopted by
the Interdepartmental Commission on Siting Industrial Enterprises (RSFSR Gosplan) in
1975-1977 applied to siting enterprises in small and sodium-sized cities, urban-type
settlements and rural population centers. The share of larger. major cities in sit-
ing new construction projects has been systematically reduced. Whereas it comprised
34.5 percent in 1975. it was 25 percent in 1976 and 22 percent in 1977.1

Second, opportunities are expanded for developing subsidiary farms at industrial en-
terprises in rural areas. The operation of such farms permits better satisfaction of
the demands of workers at these enterprises for certain foodstuffs.

Third. growth in worker well-being and increasing enterprise opportunities for organ-
izing the recreation of their own workers pose increasingly urgently the problem of
using the recreational functions of rural areas. foremost by expanding in them the
construction of recreation centers. dispensaries. tourist complexes and increasing
the number of dacha and orchard cooperatives for workers at urban enterprises.

Thus. developing integration processes between industry and agriculture. between ur-
bsn and rural areas. facilitates improving the production and nonproduction structures
of both urban and rural areas. equalizing social working conditions in various branches
and enterprises. weakening the socioeconomic specifics of spheres of labor application
in rural areas and establishing regions as socioeconomic units of the "city-village"
system. Hithin such regions. the role. functions. place and socioeconomic status of
each settlement, both urban and rural. is determined more precisely. Administrative
transformations, including change in the status of rural settlements (granting them
urban-type settlement status) are made based on better-substantiated criteria. Each
type of settlement. with its inherent advantages. finds its own forms of development
in the integrated ”city-village" system. All these processes lead to improvement in
the social division of labor at a qualitatively new level facilitating better use of
the resources, opportunities and features of urban and rural areas. overcoming differ-
entiation in the socioeconomic development of enterprises. farms. branches. settle-
ments and territories. both in individual regions and between regions. On the whole.
the development of these lines will. as was pointed out at the 26th CPSU Congress. be
effected with a view towards "using the country's production potential more intelli-
gently nnd saving all types of resources in every way possible."

COPYRlcﬂT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda”. "Voprosy ekonomiki". 198!

11052
cso: 1328/9

END
36

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY