l-‘UR (DH-N IAI. IISI-I "NIX

JPRS L/10262

19 January 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 1/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts . Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by Has. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transiiterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Governnent.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TPAT DISSEHINATION

OE THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/102€

19 January

USSR REPORT

HUMAN Resounces
(F000 1/82)

CONTENTS

LABOR

Available and Future unpower Reserves
(Ye. me‘dch; VOPmSY MROHKI. “P 81)....Ioacoalooouooaoa

EDUCATION

Estonian Vocational Education in 11th Five-Year Plan
(mu! A188; Nomoww m1” Oct 81)....0000-0...00.0.0000...

- a - [III - USSR - 38c E

Inn nm-h- - Ova— Anuv up
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LABOR

AVAILABLE AND FUTURE MANPOHER RESERVES

Moscow VOPROSY EKONCMIKI in Russian No 9. Sep 81 pp 55-65
[Article by Ye. Hanevich: "Using Manpower Efficiently")

[Text] L. I. Brezhnev paid a great deal of attention in the CPSU Central Committee
Accountability Report to the 26th Party Congress to the problem of using labor re-
sources efficiently in the USSR national economy. Speaking of the features of the
1980's and the primary task of the 11th Five-Year Plan. he noted: "As you know. a
number of factors complicating economic development will be operating in the 1980's.
One is a reduction in the increment in labor resources."

In connection with certain socioeconomic causes from the preceding decade (1971-1980).
a manpower shortage has already been noted in the USSR national economy. The deficit
may grow in the 11th and 12th five-year plans if effective. active economic steps are
not taken. The manpower shortage is being felt with varying degrees of urgency in
various economic regions of the country and various branches of the national economy.
There are several reasons for it. Among them are the slight reduction in the outflux
of rural population to the cities. which is to be explained by the significant im-
provement in the standard of living for those employed in agriculture, as well as by
inadequate rates of mechanization of agricultural production. A new influx of man-
power from agriculture into industry and the production sphere will be possible only
as a result of its continued industrialization and increased labor productivity.

One source of manpower reinforcements for social production. that of people em-
ployed in housekeeping and private subsidiary farming. has decreased sharply. Also
of great importance is the continuous increase in the number of young people in se-
condary special and higher academic institutions (9.8 million in tekhnikums and VUZ's
in 1979-1980. or 5.3 million more than in 1960-1961). The number of students in gen-
eral education schools has increased (by 8.2 million). primarily in the upper grades
in secondary school (by 7.6 million). There are also other reasons for the manpower
shortage.

However. the primary cause of the lack of conformity of available labor resources to
demand is the insufficiently effective use of the labor of those employed in social
production. Certain enterprises. associations and ministries have artificially over-
stated their manpower requirements. anticipating in their production plans consider-
able reserves of workers, engineering-technical personnel and employees. It is no
accident that year after year. the number of workers as determined by totalling en-
terprise plans exceeds the actual number by more than 2-2.5 million. indicating that
operation of the universal economic law of freeing manpower is being impeded.1

1
FOR OFI'ICIM USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Change in the Branch Structure of Manpower (in percent of the total)*

year agriculture extractive

USA 1950 12.3 1.7
1975 3.8 0.8
Japan 1950 50.1 1.3
1975 12.5 0.3
Britain 1950 5.5 3.8
1971 2.7 1.6
PKG 1950 22.7 3.3
1974 6.6 1.4
France 1954 26.7 2.1
1975 10.8 0.8

At the same time. the proportion of those employed in transport. communicat30ns. mu-
nicipal services. trade. services and management in these countries increased. As

achievement of genetics. the labor productivity growth rates in agriculture have out-
stripped the labor productivity growth rates in industry and permitted a significant

agriculture was especially rapid in Japan -- tour-told. During this same period,
the proportion of those employed in agriculture in France decreased 2.5-fold. in the
PRC -- three-fold. According to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. the number

of people employed in agriculture in the USA dropped from 3.6 to 1.9 million in the
course of 1975-1985. that is. to 1.8 percent.

During 1950-1975, the proportion of those employed in agriculture in the USSR dropped
from 48 to 23 percent, and in absolute terms. from 30.9 to 26.6 million. with conci-
derstion of labor expenditures in private subsidiary farming. the average annual nun-
ber of workers employed in all agriculture is now about 27 million people (excluding
those enlisted in seasonal agricultural work). As was already noted, the process of
freeing workers in USSR agriculture has slowed somewhat recently. Thus, the number
of those employed in agriculture decreased by an average of 260.000 per year during
1961-1970. and by 163.000 per year during l971-1977.

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1950-1975. the proportion of those employed both in agriculture and industry. in
transport and other branches of material production. decreased in all the developed
capitalist countries: in the USA. for example. from 61.0 to 33.4 percent; in Britain.
from 50.0 to 39.9 percent; in the PRC. from 66.6 to 36.3 percent. Only in Japan did
the proportion of workers in the industrial branches increase. from 20.0 to 33.9 per-
cent.

In the USSR. as social labor productivity has risen, the proportion of employment in
material production has decreased as well: about 95 percent of all the able-bodied
population was employed in 1913; in 1970 - 77.1 percent. and in 1980 -- 73.9 per-
cent. The proportion of those employed in nonproduction branches was. respectively.
five percent in 19l3, 13.8 percent in 1950 and 26.1 percent in 1980.

The operation of the economic law of freeing manpower is determined by the development
of society's production forces. growth in the organic structure of production and in-
creasing labor productivity.’

One of the primary reasons for retardation of the process of freeing manpower in the
USSR national economy is that many branches have large numbers of workers employed at
manual labor. The proportion of such workers is significant in machine building.
coal. light and food industry. forest management and building materials industry.
Their numbers are also high in auxiliary jobs -- transport. loading-unloading. main-
tenance. technical inspection and warehousing. During 1965-1975. the proportion of
workers in USSR industry employed at manual labor decreased from 40.4 to 32.8 per-
cent.3 Many workers are still employed at manual labor in agriculture. construction
and the nonproduction sphere.

The completion of our changeover of the economy to an intensive path of development
as stipulated in the resolutions of the 26th Party Congress will be possible only on
the basis of maximum improvement in labor productivity and. first of all. in techni-
cal progress -- production mechanization and automation. Thanks to the introduction
of ever-newer equipment. a real possibility has arisen that manual labor can be re-
duced and large numbers of workers in both basic and auxiliary production can be
freed for other work.

At many industrial enterprises. manual labor is being supplanted by machines. For

example. more than 60,000 people yearly were freed from manual operations in the Rus-
sian federation in the 10th Five-Year Plan through the provision of industrial enter-
prises with modern machines. Introduction of the measures planned for comprehensive
lSee: N. P. Ivanov, "Nauchno-tekhnicheskaya revolyutaiya i problemy struktury rabo-
chey sily (po materialam razvitykh kapitalisticheekikh stran)I" pp 41-43.

zﬂarx noted that "change in the technical structure of capital and growth in the
.means of production as compared with the manpower embodied in them are, in turn.
reflected in the cost structure of capital, in an increase in the constant compo-
nent of capital cost at the expense of its variable component.... This law of the
more rapid increase in the constant component of capital as compared with the vari-
able portion is confirmed at every step...." (K. Marx and F. Engels. "Soch." [works].
Vol 23. p 636).

’See: A. I. Baybakov. “Povysheniye nauchnogo urovnya upravleniya trudom" [Raising
the Scientific Level of Labor Management], Profizdat. 1980. p 109.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

mechanization. specialization and centralization in industrial production in the
RSFSR will enable us to free 1.8 to two million workers in the 11th Five-Year Plan.
However. it follows from the proposals made by many ministries and departments for
1981-1985 and up to 1990 that. on the whole. the number of workers employed at manual
labor at industrial enterprises subordinate to them will decrease only from 53.5 to
69.7 percent annually during the five years. Even at new enterprises which will be-
gin operating this decade. one of every three workers will be working by hand.1

In order to reduce the number of people employed at manual labor to a minimum. we
must resolutely change the capital investment policy: primary attention will gen-
erally have to be focused not on new construction and expanding existing enterprises.
but on the accelerated updating of existing fixed assets and on replacing obsolete
and obsolescent equipment. The CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers
Decree "On Improving Planning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mech-
anism on Improving Production Efficiency and Work Quality" states: "Funds for build-
ing new enterprises and expanding existing ones are to be allocated if the national
economy's requirements for that particular output cannot be met by renovating and
retooling existing enterprises."

Given the shortage of labor resources. particular importance is acquired by imple-
mentation of the CPSU Central Committee Decree "0n Steps to Increase the Production
and Extensive Use of Automated Manipulators in Branches of the National Economy In
Light of the Instructions of the 25th CPSU Congress" (1980). This decree plans the
extensive use of manipulators (industrial robots) to mechanize and automate enter-
prises of various branches of the national economy. which will significantly increase
labor productivity and free large numbers of workers from physically difficult. mono-
tonous production operations.

Operation of the economic law of freeing manpower depends largely on improving pro-
duction organization -- distribution of productive forces. specializing enterprises
and branches of the national economy. production smoothness. maintenance system. and
others.

The efficient siting of new production facilities is an important problem in increas-
ing the effectiveness of manpower use and in freeing it. Each decision on new con-
struction or expanding existing enterprises must be made with consideration of the
available labor resources. their age-sex composition and occupational training. In
this connection. much importance is acquired by the development of manpower balances
at all levels. beginning with the regional balances of microrayons. This is especi-
ally necessary when siting new production in small and medium-sized cities and rural
areas with manpower reserves. It is very important to create in advance all the con-
ditions necessary for workers and employees being drawn to those jobs (housing con-
struction. building medical and children's institutions. developing the personal and
cultural services sphere. and so forth).

Broad opportunities for freeing manpower are opened up by scientifically substantiated
production specialization. According to our calculations. one-third of the annual in-
crement in labor productivity in machine building alone can be obtained by intensify-
ing specialization. In accordance with the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council
of Ministers decree on improving the economic mechanism. capital investments will be

1See: SOTSIALISTICHESKIY TRUD. No 4. 1981, PP [IO-Ill.

FOR OFFKJAL.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

directed foremost into deveIOping specialized production; the planning and construc-
tion of multipurpose enterprises must be curtailed; small and unprofitable shops pro-
ducing output for interbranch use must gradually be eliminated.

Strengthening cooperative delivery discipline, developing direct, long-term ties
among related enterprises, and strengthening material penalties against those enter-
prises which do not carry out contracts for delivering raw and other materials. semi-

finishsa products and finished items are significant factors in deepening speciali-
zation.

Quite a few opportunities for freeing workers and employees are opened by by increas-
ing production smoothness. Understandably. if the final 10-day period in the month
accounts for only one-third of all monthly output, instead of 50-70 percent. enter-

prises will not be required to hold in reserve workers whose labor is used primarily
in the last 10-day period.

Operation of the economic law of freeing manpower is also determined by the status of
labor organization: labor discipline. the organization of wages and material incen-
tives. quality of labor rate-setting. development of socialist competition. dissemi-
nation of leading production experience. ensuring average labor intensiveness and
eliminating losses of working time. Losses of working time are considerable. At
many industrial enterprises. intrashift losses are 15-20 percent of working time.

and actual amounts are obviously higher in view of the fact that the a large part of
such losses is not taken into account in statistical reporting.

Losses of entire days (recording of which is far from precise) are about 20 days per
worker per year in industry. nearly three-fourths of which is accounted for by sick
days. and about five days. or 25 percent of all whole-day losses. is accounted for
by so-called failures to report which are permitted by the administration and anti-
cipated in the law (time off to workers and employees to attend meetings, assemblies
and respond to summons from investigatory or court agencies. and others). Moreover,
it must be borne in mind that individual enterprises have hidden days off for hidden
overtime work, that absences are often recorded as "unpaid vacation." and so forth.
According to time-and-motion studies conducted at a number of enterprises of various
branches of industry. the average amount of time basic workers spent carrying out
shift assignments is more than half their working time. Intrsshift losses of work-
ing time are also high in agriculture.

Thus. just eliminating whole-day losses of working time would offer an opportunity
to free approximately 7.5 million people per year. Improving production and labor
organization and the material incentives system would enable us to eliminate working
time losses caused by personnel turnover and often by inefficient worker migration.

Under present conditions. training highly educated and skilled personnel has taken
on ever-increasing importance in improving labor productivity and freeing manpower.
The proportion of skilled workers has increased year by year. For example. during
1965-1975, the proportion of automated line and machine-tool system repairmen. fit-
ters and electricians increased from 16 to 19 percent of all industrial workers. New
occupations have appeared in all branches of the national economy -- computer operat-
ors. dispatcher equipment electrician, robot-manipulator operators and repairmen.
multipurpose unit operator. and others.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Horkers have mastered two or three occupations at many industrial enterprises. Such
specialists are in increasing demand given brigade labor organization. as they help
free workers by combining occupations.

Shortcomings in training skilled personnel affect production efficiency and lead to
high losses of live and embodied labor. Surveys have shown that about 70 percent of
the defects and 30 percent of equipment breakdowns at machine-building enterprises
are due to poor operator skill. Low skill levels are often a reason for high losses
of working time. For example. among lathe operators at Odessa Press and Automatic
Machine Plant. the highest losses were among the less-skilled workers: 23.2 percent
among workers in category II. 22.1 percent in category 111. 12.0 percent in category
1V and 5.! percent in category v.1

The number of workers at enterprises depends largely on the quality of labor rate-
setting. Prompt reviews of norms and the introduction of technically substantiated
rates based on the implementation of organizational-technical measures permits carry-
ing out the production program with fewer workers. During the 10th Five-Year Plan.
1.706.000 piece-rate workers were freed as a result of norm reviews.2 And there are
enormous reserves in all branches of the national economy.

The freeing of manpower at enterprises of various branches of industry is being de-
layed by the diverting of workers and employees to agricultural work. construction.
procurement organizations. vegetable centers, Pioneer camps and other jobs. or
course. when it is necessary to render amnediate assistance to kolkhozes and sov-
khozes in gathering the harvest. as a result of some natural calamity. for example.
such assistance should be rendered. without question.

It should be noted that in recent years. the number of workers being sent to help
sovkhozes and kolkhozes during the harvest period has increased. Thus. kolkhozes
and sovkhozes enlisted 1.4-fold more workers and employees from other branches of
the national economy in 1970 than in 1960. and in 1978. 2.4-fold more than in 1970
(average for the year). In view of this practice. enterprises keep a certain man—
power reserve so as to be able to send workers to agricultural work without at the
same time failing to meet their own production plans.

Based on the fact that each of the enlisted workers works for a month on the kolkho:
or sovkhoz. it works out that in 1979. some 15.6 million people were diverted from
their immediate duties. including 7.8 million workers employed in material production.

The diversion of workers and employees into agricultural work is economically inef-
ficient. The agricultural output produced by these enlisted workers is generally
approximately two-fold more expensive than that produced by agricultural workers.
Calculations show that the efficiency of the ‘abor of industrial workers enlisted
in agriculture is approximately four-fold lower than were they on their main jobs.

lSee: V. 1. Markov. "Oplata truda v sisteme upravleniys ekonomikoy razvitogo sotsi-
alizma” ("ages In the Management System of the Developed Socialist Economy]. Izda-
tel'stvo "Ekonomika". 1980. pp 52-53.

2See: H. Glyantsev. "Rate-Setting At the Level of Modern Equipment and Labor Organi-
zation" (SOTSIALISTICHESKIY TRUD. No 4. 1981. p 97).

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consideration should also be given to the fact that shifting industrial workers and
employees to temporary work in rural regions and returning them are accompanied by
high losses of working time. Thus. many workers lose two days traveling from the
city to the kolkhoz (sovkhoz) and a similar amount of working time when returning.
Calculating per worker employed in the sphere of material production. losses for
1979 were 15.6 million work days when two days were lost and 7.8 million work days
when one day is spent in travel. This corresponds to 55.000 to 110.000 year-around
workers in working time.

Moreover. industrial enterprises. kolkhozes and sovkhozes incur large wage expendi-
tures for workers and employees working in agriculture (approximately two billion
rubles was paid them in 1979). as well as expenditures on organizing food service.
transportation and other types of services for the workers enlisted.

In his speech at the November (1979) CPSU Central Committee Plenum. L. I. Brezhnev
called for order in this matter: "The practice of local agencies' enlisting people
from enterprises and institutions in various kinds of work - gathering the harvest.
procurement. construction. public welfare. and so forth - has expanded recently. In
some instances. this is useful. but in others, it is not. The most important thing.
though. is that much disorganization and irresponsibility is permitted in it. Hence.
there are high losses of labor. normal enterprise operation is disrupted. and enter-
prise leaders try to keep excess manpower 'in reserve'. It is time to put this into
proper order. to eliminate dependence and lack of personal responsibility. This
also applies to sponsorship ties between urban and rural areas."1

In our opinion. as agricultural industrialization develops. it is appropriate to
gradually reject the practice of enlisting workers and employees from cities in ag-
riculture; we need to seek out harvest workers in rural areas. This will become pos-
sible in connection with changes in the structure of the spheres of labor application
in rural areas and with the development of a number of industrial and service branches
in rural areas.

Thenks to improvement in the use of manpower employed in agriculture (and there are
many opportunities for doing do). and as the agroindustrial complexes and the integra-
tion of industry and agriculture are developed. the possibility will appear of doing
without the annual large-scale dispatching of workers and employees to kolkhozes and
sovkhozes. The decisive role will be played by increasing the availability of energy
to agriculture and by its comprehensive mechanization.

However. even now. it i: more effec:ive for sovkhozes and kolkhozes to hire for the
harvest people living in rural areas or in nearby cities and worker settlements (stu-
dents at secondary and higher academic institutions. vacationers or able-bodied pen-
sioners). In this regard. we need to establish wages which would materially interest
workers. The savings to the state as a result of rejecting the labor of those work-
ers and employees now being enlisted would be quite high. These steps would have a
positive effect on improving the economic indicators of both industry and agricul-
tural enterprises and would open up opportunities for freeing millions of workers
and employees and using them efficiently.

——-.—-..-_-—----_.

PRAVDA, 28 November 1979.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the planned freeing of workers and employees and the fulfillment and overful-
fillment of production assignments with significantly fewer workers could be ensured
just by reducing various kinds of losses of working time - intrashift and whole-day
.. and the diversion of workers and employees to agricultural and other work.

The CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers Decree "0n Improving Plan-
ning and Strengthening the Influence of the Economic Mechanism on Improving Produc-
tion Efficience and Work Quality" (1979) outlined fundamentally important planning
changes: "Production association (enterprise) and organization five-year and an-
nual plans are to be worked out on the basis of economic and engineering calculations
without permitting the setting of plan assignments based just on the dynamics of the
corresponding indicators which have evolved."

Unfortunately, the practice of "planning from what has been achieved" is being over-
come very slowly and continues to hinder the freeing of those workers which are not
needed at a particular moment. In order to overcome the shortcomings in the economic
mechanism which hamper the operation of the law of freeing manpower and are directly
reflected in its use in social production. we think a number of economic transforma-
tions should be effected in the current five-year plan which will. in the end, ensure:
significant expansion of the rights of enterprises; broader use of commodity-monetary
relations; rejection of "planning from the level achieved"; changing the system of
distributing profit - payment of income tax to the state by enterprises and associa-
tions. with retention of all profit remaining after such payments at the enterprises;
broader use of collective and individual. personal material interest among workers.
engineering-technical personnel and employees.

Improvement in the economic mechanism and ensuring material interest in revealing
and using existing reserves for improving labor productivity unavoidably intensify
the struggle for the economical use of manpower and consequently open up real oppor-
tunities for operation of the law of freeing manpower. It will also enable us to
overcome shortcomings hindering the freeing of workers and employees; in particular.
it will be possible to avoid (with rare exceptions) reviewing products lists during
the course of the economic year; gradually reject all kinds of diversion of workers
and employees to work not directly related to the production activity of a particu-
lar enterprise; abolish the dependence existing heretofore at enterprises of machine-
building industry between the number of workers and employees and the size of the sa-
laries of supervisory and engineering-technical workers.

The tasks of intensifying the processes of freeing and improving the use of manpower
in the country insistently demand changes in several statutes of the existing labor
legislation. In our view. these include the following: on granting the administra-
tions of enterprises, organizations and institutions the right to free workers. en~
gineering-technical personnel and employees if they are not needed for the normal
production and management process; on freeing enterprise and institution leaders of
the task of finding jobs for workers being freed and entrusting job-placement agen-
cies with these duties; on increasing the size of discharge benefits and other ma-
terial provisions for time spent looking for a new job and in retraining.

Thus. the decisive way of ensuring balance in the country's labor resources in the
11th and subsequent five-year plans is to free manpower on the basis of comprehen-

sive labor mechanization and automation. with the extensive use of automatic manipu-
lators (industrial robots) which create real opportunities for displacing manual and

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heavy labor; fundamental improvement in production organization (foremost. production
specialization. improving material-technical supply and smoothness); improving 13b»!
organization and material incentives. In turn. implementation of these measures will
become possible thanks to implementation of the improvement in the economic mechanism
planned by the party. which is first of all understood to mean a restructuring of the
planning system and the creation of genuine interest in labor results among each col-
lective and in each worker.

Given these conditions. in spite of the drop in the birth rate and the reduction in
the increment in the able-bodied population. we will be able to provide all branches
of the national economy with manpower and achieve significant labor productivity im-
provement.

But now. before the economic mechanism has been fully restructured and perfected and
a more or less appreciable freeing of manpower achieved, before manpower use has been
fully improved, many branches of the national economy need manpower.

Do we have some significant additional labor resources which could somehow meet the
manpower demand and compensate for the anticipated sharp reduction in the increment
in the able-bodied population in the 11th Five-Year Plan. There are no such signi-
ficant resources at present. Moreover, consideration must be given to the fact that
we will need to significantly increase the number of people employed in the services
sphere in the 11th Five-Year Plan. both in connection with the increasing total po-
pulation and also to improve the quality of service. However. we do have certain
labor reserves. They include. first. young people coming of working age. second.
able-bodied citizens in housekeeping and private subsidiary farming, third. the un-
employed portion of the rural population in regions with a labor surplus. and fourth.
pensioners.

Speaking of young people coming of working age. it must be borne in mind that several
months often pass between graduation from a general education secondary school and

the start of labor activity. Each year. thousands of young men and women in each

city and other population centers are not admitted to higher academic institutions
and do not participate in social labor for an average of six months. In certain re-
gions of the country with labor surpluses (the Central Asian republics in particular).
young people with no specialties are added to those kolkho: members and sovkhoz work-
ers and employees in private subsidiary farming.

In order to improve the use of young people's labor. it is expedient that city and
rayon job placement bureaus efficiently organize job placement for young men and wo-
men not entering higher or secondary special academic institutions. taking into ac-
count their desires and occupational orientation data; vocational guidance work among
young people be increased in the Central Asian republics. especially in rural areas.
and construction of vocational-technical schools be expanded there; Russian language
study be radically improved. beginning with preschool children's institutions, and
then in general education schools and vocational-technical schools; intensify the
organized recruitment of young people in these republics on the basis of creating
favorable living and working conditions in labor-deficit regions of the country;
grant young workers. engineering-technical personnel and employees who have worked

at enterprises less than a year loans to pay for cooperative apartments, acquire fur-
niture. and so on; disseminate at the large enterprises the proven experience of com-
bining work with study at plant vocational-technical schools. plant tekhnikums and
sovkhoz tekhnikums.

IN)R OFIWCJAL USEiNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Housekeeping and private subsidiary farming play an increasingly small role as addi-
tional sources of manpower. According to 1970 census data. 5.9 million people were
employed in housekeeping and private subsidiary farming. In the 10 years since, op-
portunities for enlisting women in social production have decreased significantly in
the USSR as a whole. However. such opportunities still exist in certain regions of
the country, the Central Asian and Transcaucasian republics for example. In order to
do this. to need to increase the number of children's institutions and inprove their
operation. At present. approximately 63.3 percent of the children attend day nurser-
ies and kindergartens (1979 data). In terms of availability of preschool institu-
tions. the USSR is behind the 6011. where the proportion of children in preschool in-
stitutions is 78.6 percent, Hungary -- 56.9, Bulgaria -- 50.5 and Czechoslovakia --
46.!» percent.1 Along with budget funds. we neet to attract funds from uterprises
and highly paid groups of parents.

The rural population is not fully employed in several republics. The dynamics of
the union republic rural populations provide an idea of this. At the same time that
a sharp reduction in rural population is being observed in a number of republics.
very significant growth is occurring in the Central Asian republics. The distribu-
tion of man-days worked by month of the year testifies to the incomplete employment
of kolkhoz members in social production. For example, the October work load of 1:01-
khoz members in the Central Asian republics (the cotton harvest) is nearly three-fold
higher than the January work load. And on the whole. the work load in July is nearly
two-fold higher than that in January in the USSR.

In this connection. there is a great manpower surplus among the rural population (es-
pecially in the Central Asian republics). and this surplus is currently being used
poorly. A number of steps must be taken to enlist the able-bodied workers of these
regions in labor in social production. To do this. we need to create industrial en-
terprises for processing agricultural products. to lower output norms for women em-
ployed in difficult jobs, improve personal services, make housekeeping as easy and
quick as possible. locate various personal services as close to jobs as possible
(taking orders for sowing and repairing footwear and clothing and for selling food.
taking advance orders. setting up high-quality public catering at enterprises. and
others). establish service institution working hours convenient for the workers. im-
prove transport operation and develop pendulum labor migration.

Noting the known manpower surplus in Central Asia and a number of regions of the Cau-
casus. the CPSU Central Comittee Accountability Report to the 26th Party Congress
pointed out that "we need to involve the populations of these place more actively in
mastering the country's new territories. And of course. we need to develop there
production needed by the national economy and train more skilled workers from the
native nationalities. and foremost from among rural young people."

As sample surveys have shown. each kolkhoz member and aovkhoz worker spends an aver-
age of 45-50 man-days each year in private subsidiary farming. In order to achieve
an increase in the labor expenditures of kolkhoz members and sovkhoz workers in the
public economy. while retaining and developing private subsidiary farming. it is ap-
propriate. along with further developing and strengthening the public economy on

1See: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo stran-chlenov 88V" [CEHA Member-Nation Economies]. sta-
tistical annual. Izdatel'stvo "Statistika". 1980. p 422.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kolkhozes and sovkhozes. to strengthen personal and collective material interest in
labor results. to assist kolkhoz members and sovkhoz workers everywhere in increas-
ing labor productivity on household plots. In order to do this. we need to fully ac-
tualize the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers decree on developing
private subsidiary farming and. in particular. to set up the release of multipurpose
cultivation tools with mechanical drives and hay-mowers. to assist kolkhoz members
during the harvest in the form of equipment and draft animals belonging to the public
economy. to allocate feed for personal livestock and to grant means of transport for
marketing surplus output.

Pensioners are a rel-.tively large manpower reserve. The total number of pensioners
in the USSR was 49.9 million in 1981. including 36.3 million due to age. By the year
2000. there will be approximately 80 million. At present. the proportion of old~age
pensioners who are working is approximately 25 percent.1 Along with implementing the
Decree "On Steps to Haterially Stimulate Pensioners to Work in the National Economy"
which was adopted by the CPSU Central Comittee. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and
USSR Council of Ministers, in order to use the labor of pensioners more extensively
and efficiently. we need to take the following steps: create favorable conditions
for elderly people wishing to continue their labor activity; organize in advance re-
training for those who consider it necessary to change their occupation or specialty;
provide opportunities to work (especially for persons in the second five-year period
on pension) a reduced work day or week and set reduced norms and labor assigmnents
for them; grant routine sun-net vacations when possible; create the most favorable
psychological climate. encourage them materially and morally;2 to pensioners (es-
pecially the disabled) interested in working at home. extend all benefits outlined
for specialized enterprises using the labor of invalids (reduced work day. longer
vacations. and others). Significantly expand and better organize work at home (es-
pecially in labor-surplus regions). In order to do this, we need to expand the use
of work at home at various enterprises of industry and the services sphere. Enter-
prises using home labor must ensure that raw and other materials and tools are deli-
vered to those working at home and the prompt acceptance and shipment of finished
products. We need to work out a unified statute on the use of home labor. It would
be appropriate for it to define the rights and obligations. organization of labor
rate-setting and wages. bonus terms. and opportunities for mechanizing and easing

the labor of those working at home. Attaching serious importance to using the labor
of pensioners, the 26th Party Congress stressed the necessity of "involving our ve—
terans more broadly in labor activity. particularly in the services sphere. of course.
as they are able and as the economy requires. This is very important now."

1A sample survey of the health of nonworking old-age pensioners revealed that about
80 percent of them were able to work and 35 percent of them could work a full work
week at their former specialties. This means approximately 1.4 million old-age

K pensioners could. under certain conditions. be enlisted in working the the national
economy just in the Russian Federation.

2Unfortunately, as the survey showed. no substantial changes occurred in using the
labor of pensioners even after the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Minis-
ters Decree "0n Steps to Haterially Stimulate Pensioners to Work in the National

Economy" went into effect on 1 January 1980. This is to be explained by the fact
that enterprises have not created conditions for pensioners to work a partial work
day or week and have not simplified hiring. wage and other procedures.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Additional manpower sources also include workers at those enterprises. organizations
and institutions not very necessary to the national economy and which could. given

a more well thought-out production and labor organization. be painlessly abolished
and their functions transferred to other enterprises and organizations. This relates
first of all to unprofitable and low-profit enterprises whose raison d'étre has now
diminished or even disappeared. Thus. for example. the RSFSR along currently has up-
wards of 20 percent small enterprises producing 0.6 percent of its total output and
enploying 3.5 percent of its total workers and eaployees.

In order to reveal such enterprises. organizations and institutions. much work will
have to be done. we should possible conduct a unique census of all enterprises and
institutions following a special programs for the USSR ninistries and departments.
union republics or oblsst. city and rayon organizations. In order to do this, we
will obviously need to create conpetent Soviet of People's Deputies coal-lesions.
jointly with state monitoring agencies. Of course. the decision to abolish an enter-
prise, organization or institution or to merge then with others lust be thoroughly
thought out and weighed. When appropriate. some workers (staff) of the enterprises
and organizations being abolished should be transferred to the others. The state
would save a great deal of money as a result of such work and many freed workers
would be used to greater advantage elsewhere. without question.

In our opinion, the positive experience of Riga personal services enterprises merits
further study and dissemination. Instead of maintaining a large. expensive apparatus
in cafeterias. snall restaurants and dining halls (director. deputy directors. ac-
countants, waiters. cloakroon attendants and others). corresponding organizations en—
trust families or individual citizens with all work on maintaining and servicing the
swell cafeterias. restaurants and dining halls. As has been noted in our central
press.1 experience has shown that both the state (increased revenues) and the work-
ers (improved service and food quality) turn out to benefit. At the seas tine. nany
workers have been freed for use in other organizations or institutions. It seens to
us that this experience could be disseminated to many other personal services enter-

prises (shoe repair. clothing repair. appliances repair and others) in all regions of
the country.

The CPSU Central Committee Accountability Report to the 26th Party Congress states
that "a thrifty, economical attitude towards labor resources will acquire particular
importance" in the 1980's. "This is a complicated natter requiring the resolution
of nany tasks of an econoaic. social. technical and educational nature."

COPYRIGRT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voproay ekononiki". 1981

11052
cs0: 1828/18

12 .

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EDUCATION

ESTONIAN VOCATIONAL EDUCATION IN 111'“ FIVE-YEAR PLAN
Tallinn NOUKOGUDE KOOL in Estonian No 10, Oct 81 pp (0-7

[Article by Elmer Alas: "Implement Party Decisions: Vocational Education in
the 11th Five-Year Plan")

[Text] The "Basic Directions for 1981-1985 and the Period Until 1990" approved
by the 26th CPSU Congress regarding the economic development of the USSR stress
that the new decade will be a major step in the establishment of conunism's
material-technological base, the development of social relationships and the
shaping of a new man.

The CPSU will in the 1980's steadily continue to implement its economic strate-
gy whose highest aim is the irrevocable raising of the people’s standard of
living and cultural level, and the creation of most favorable conditions for a
comprehensive development of a person on the basis of further increases in the
effectiveness of social production, labor productivity, and the social and
labor-related activity of the Soviet man. The success of solving these economic
and sociopolitical tasks, it was noted at the 26th party congress, is most
directly connected to the level of the education and working skills of our
youth, the growth in the social and labor-related activity of Soviet people.

At the 26th CPSU Congress it was stressed that the labor class in our society
has grown and will continue to grow. This is due not only to its numerical
growth but also to the increases in its ideological-political maturity. its
education, and skill levels. Consequently, the preparation of vocational school
students must be perfected, the responsibility of the vocational school to the
society for fulfilling these tasks must increase.

From this there follow specific tasks for state vocational education systems, for
the educational staffs of the vocational schools, for the party and other social
organizations of the educational institutions—for all who have been entrusted
with training the young workers, the new relief of the glorious working class
of our country.

In meeting directives of party and government the personnel of the vocational
education system of the republic have accomplished a remarkable job during the
10th Five-Year Plan in broadening and perfecting the preparation of young skilled
workers. During the last five-year period the vocational education network was
expanded by three institutions, and the number of youths studying in vocational
schools increased by 21 percent. The vocational schools met the tasks of the

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

10th five-year period: In 1976-1980 almost 35,000 qualified workers were pre-
pared and employed in the national economy, including 8,500 in industry, 5,500
in construction, 6,000 in agriculture. At courses offered by the vocational
schools, 13,500 persons received training or increased their skills. This year
5,630 persons graduated from vocational schools.

In addition to these facts, qualitative changes must be stressed. During the
five-year period the reorganization of the schools into vocational secondary
schools and technical schools was accomplished. Currently more than 15,300
youths are studying in the 28 vocational secondary schools and 6 technical
schools of the vocational education network.

The comprehensive success of the system has occurred thanks to the constant
attention and practical assistance of the Soviet organs and the selfless work
of the teaching staffs of our schools. I: can be said that one result has been
a rise in the prestige of the vocational education system and in its importance
in solving socioeconomic problems in the republic.

Even though we accept almost 9,000 persons into vocational schools, it is by
far not enough to meet the requirements of the national economy for labor.
This has been taken into account in compiling the llth Five—Year Plan. Thus,
38,600 skilled workers must be prepared in 1981-1985, including 29,000 in the
day courses of vocational schools. Admittance to technical schools will in-
crease markedly.

Meeting this goal will not be easy, considering employment and shortage of
labor in our republic, and the limited youth cadres. It requires that youth

be precisely distributed among the educational systems and that the vocational
counseling and assignment be improved markedly. This need was underscored in
the speech of Comrade K. Vaino to the ECP CC congress, and in the decisions of
the congress. We have begun to establish the necessary material base for meet-
ing the task. More precisely. preparations began 2 years ago when the 80? CC
and the ESSR Council of Ministers adopted a directive regarding the vocational
training of the republic's youth. That directive approved a specific voca-
tional school construction schedule for 1981-1990. According to this directive
8 new vocational secondary schools with 720 spaces each are to be constructed
in the llth Five-Year Period, to be followed by 5 new ones. and construction is
to begin of 4 more vocational schools. The construction of new vocational schools
and expansion of existing ones will increase the capacity of the system by more
than 11,000 spaces in the two five-year periods, almost doubling the capacity.

At this very time six new vocational school complexes are being built. The 33d
vocational school at Sillamae opened its doors on 1 September to train skilled
metalworkers, machinebuilders, and laborers for local needs. Intensive con-
struction is underway to begin training personnel for the Tallinn light industry,
the "Talleks" and "Volta" plants, and the Machine Construction Plant imeni J.
Lauristin. A rural vocational school is being built at Kose in Harju Rayon to
train machine operators and rural construction personnel. Construction has be-
gun on vocational schools at Kohtla-Jarve and Tartu to train personnel for,
respectively, the oil shale complex and the staffs of the Ministry of Meat and
Dairy Industry, and the Ministry of Food Industry. Construction of two more

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vocational schools in Tallinn is scheduled for the 11th Five-Year Period to
train personnel for the Ministry of Construction and the Ministry for Communal
Industry.

Hide-ranging tasks concern the expansion of existing vocational schools and the
creation of the lacldngmaterial base. the improvement of student-teacher living
conditions. Since an expansion of student bodies in most of the existing voca-
tional schools is impossible, it is obvious how important the completion of the
outlined construction program has become. 0n the basis of the decisions of
party and government we must markedly improve cooperation between planning
organs, the concerned ministries, the local party and soviet organizations and
other builders so as to guarantee the unswerving fulfillment of state construc-
tion plans for vocational schools.

A considerable increase in new students in vocational schools will result in
marked changes in the distribution of young people between the various educa-
tional systems. Thus the percentage of 8th grade graduates entering vocational
schools rose from 20 to 25 in this year alone. This number will steadily grow
in future years and should by 1990 rise to 32-33 percent. Admittances to tech-
nical schools will increase to 2,500 by 1985.

This fact must be taken into account in the work of our vocational and general
educational schools. These questions must be explained to the parents, they
must be an important focus of attention of base enterprises and plants.

The implementation of general secondary education has made secondary education
universal, more precisely, it has become the educational level of the majority
of workers. It is known that almost 70 percent of graduates of secondary
schools will start work in the industry of our republic. For this reason the
correct vocational information, guidance. and skill selection of the youths in
conformance with the needs of society have become of crucial importance. Unk
fortunately, there are still great differences between the needs of society and
the interests and wishes of youth. For this reason we must make the counseling
much more effective, especially concerning orientation of laboring vocations.

Vocational guidance in itself is a large complex of means that includes a con-
siderable portion of a young person's life. The main emphasis is of course on
the general educational school.

Undoubtedly the home and kindergarten play an important part, but the primary
task lies with the teacher who has immediate contact with the youth, evaluates
vocations and trains his students to respect the work of a laborer and the work-
ing man. The teacher's example and his word is often decisive. We all are fac-
ing a wide field of work in giving the teaching body a correct overview of
vocational education, provide it with the most necessary information and mater-
ials for vocational guidance. This will provide the preconditions for an active
participation on the part of the teachers in these processes.

Vocational guidance within vocational schools consists primarily of increasing
the interest, respect and love of each student for the subject being taught.
- In addit:on. a trainee must often and for various reasons be transferred to

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

another specialty or into another school. considering the trainee's personality
and the specific needs of the national economy

Considering theplan for development of the national economy the ESSR State Voca-
tional Education Committee and the vocational schools have compiled yearly plans
of admission according to the type of school, length of study and specialties in
cooperation with the ministries and central organs. We provide information to
vocational guidance institutions about specialties and class sizes within the
plans of towns and rayons, and make the necessary vocational propaganda.

The teaching staffs of the vocational schools are steadily striving for goals
that are posted by the party and government to train the students of the voca—
tional education system and to further perfect the education.

Teaching staffs have done a great job in constructing and furnishing training
facilities that meet the requirements of the programs and are completely mechan-
ized. One should point out especially the 3d vocational school imeni A. Huurisepp,
the lst vocational school. the 15th technical school (in Tallinn), the 30th
vocational school (in Helme), the 14th vocational school imeni A. Grivtsov (in
Nnrva), the specialized vocational school No 3A, etc. The departmental system

has been implemented in vocational schools.

The cooperation of several sponsoring installations--the "Dvigatel" plant, the
Estonian Railway Department of the Baltic Railroad, the "Punane Ret" plant, the
Tallinn Residential Construction Combine--with the corresponding vocational
schools in improving the training base and practical training has improved.
Many teachers and masters conduct productive pedagogical work. New effective
teaching methods, training aids and handouts, interdisciplinary connections and
technical teaching methods are constantly used by, for example, 5. Torri of the
lst vocational school, a Redkin of the 10th vocational school, H. Tae of the
vocational school imeni K. Karber, c. Batina of the vocational school A. Kreia-
berg, A. Sinisalu and V. Eisen of the 15th technical school, B. Ahven of the
13th vocational school, H. Vajakas of the 3lst vocational school, and many
others. All of the above has positively influenced the training in vocational
schools. The connections between education and raising the student have been
strengthened, success in learning has improved, as has the quality of training:
the knowledge, skills. and experiences of students have improved. The number
of distinguished graduates of vocational and technical schools has increased;
they can enter higher institutions of learning immediately after vocational
school. There were almost 100 such youths in 1980.

One cannot be satisfied with the results by any means. A new directive about
planning, teaching and training will come into force this year, a new method of
experiments and tests has been put in force. Several new recommendations about
a perspective-thematic planning of general subjects have been issued to effect

a better connection between specialized subjects and productive training. All
of this should contribute considerably to further improve teaching management
and to raise the effectiveness of training. This requires that teaching staffs
pay greater attention to the unity of teaching and raising, general and voca-
tional training and their organic connection, to the improvement of labor train-
ing, to effective teaching methids and facilities, to learning from and implement-
ing exemplary educational experiences.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0NL\'

The training of highly skilled workers demands that production-related training
be further improved and better planned, that training and productive work be
selected correctly and comprehensively, and that it be taught on the basis of
complex production. Our aim is thlt the teaching facilities in the training
shops of vocational schools be as similar as possible to the working conditions
in industrial enterprises,that they will provide for the use of various work
methods, modern technology and equipment.

The acquisition of specialized knowledge, skills, and experiences is enhanced by
the students' secure grasp of general educational subjects. For this reason we
must pay greater attention to increasing the effectiveness and quality of general
education, and to improve the connections between it and vocational training.

The training and education of students takes place primarily in classrooms. For
that reason we will attempt to further improve preparation for lessons, to vary
the forms and methods, to shape a student's habit for independent work, to im-
prove the activity of the students. It is in the classrooms that a young per-
sonality must be shaped, one characterized by cmmmunist conviction, preparedness
for self-denying work for the benefit of the society. Therefore each lesson must
meet its educational objective. and vouchsafe the unity of the youth's ideologi-
cal—political, vocational, and moral education.

We have begun to devote more attention to removing the gaps in the knowledge of
graduates of the eighth grade, to individual attention for poorly progressing
students, to a systematic arrangement of teaching materials.

The collegium of the ESSR State Vocational Education Committee has approved the
experiences of several school staffs and teachers. Their distribution and im-
plementation has contributed to improving the level of education and training of
vocational schools.

A creative attitude to work, the implementation of exemplary experiences must
become a daily habit for all teachers and vocational training masters.

It must he said that there are many unused reserves for this work. The experi-
ences of those teachers and schools who constantly achieve perfect success in
training, where student attrition is low and work discipline high are still
little known and generalized.

Today's vocational school is not merely a place to acquire a skill. Here a young
worker's character and willpower are shaped, here he acquires his ideological and
moral convictions, here a base is laid for a socially active personality. In view
or these requirements the school's educational, ideological function broadens.

The goal of school work during the 11th Five-Year Period is the achievement of a
new level in the communist education of the youth, especially in the fields of
Ideological-political and internationalist education, moral and skill-related
education.

The improvement of the schools' educational work must first of all be realized
by making the educational work performed in the classrooms more effective. Se-
cure knowledge of the basics of science is a precondition for acquiring the
Marxist-materialist world view. But it must not be forgotten that the student's

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR ()l-‘FK‘MI. “SI-I “NIX

world view does not come into being by itself as a byproduct of acquiring
knowledge. To that end each lesson must have a definite direction.

Education through subject teaching has been in the center of attention during
the past years. A majority of the teachers accomplish this as a matter of
course, consistently, and according to the specialized nature of each subject.

I would especially like to point out the great job in this field done by Rus-
sian teacher L. Laidla of the 1st vocational school, the social studies teachers
V. Tchukina and L. Cross of the 10th and 25th vocational schools, mathematics
teacher N. Belova of the 3d vocational school imeni A. Huurisep, and many others.

These teachers rely increasingly on student presentations, debates, various forms
of individual and group work that enable the youths to solve creative tasks, and
to evaluate life phenomena from the position of the Soviet society's value stan-
dard. In the current school year a great part will be played in raising the
ideological aspect of teaching by discussion of the materials of the 26th CPSU
Congress, by gaining a knowledge of all the ideological richness of the con-
gress and the developmental perspectives of our country, including the home
republic, town and sponsoring plant. This work began already in the last school
year and it must be continued skillfully and in a thought-out manner. The con-
gress' ideas and the goals established should enrich the subject matter in each
lesson, so that education will be organically tied to a conception of the great
tasks facing society, and that they be communicated to each student in an under-
standable and concrete way. Of course. the contents and specifics of each sub-
ject must be taken into account, as well as the applicability of the presenta-
tion. Attempts must be made so that the students will not only be passive
listeners but that they present information, lectures and speeches in the
classes, seminars, student conferences, that they prepare appropriate exhibits,
etc.

The meaningful organization of free time plays a great importance in shaping a
young personality and its comprehensive development; it must complement work
done in classes. it must increase the students' activity. He have much that is
positive in the field of technical creativity, art and hobby circles, and sports.

For several years this republic has held the rotating red flag of the All-Union
Voluntary Sports Federation "Labor Reserves" for massive sports involvement.

There are no minor matters in educational work. Teachers and principals must

in their practical work pay more attention to the achievements of science and

of exemplary achievements. they must create the necessary atmosphere of this and
establish a demanding creative environment. The successful achievement of goals
for the schools depends greatly on the level and style of school management. The
main task of our school principals is the creation of an environment of creative
work, mutual assistance. and high requirements in cooperation with social and
party organizations. This demands a considerable improvement in school manage-
ment. a delegation of specific tasks, a consistent organizing task and constant
supervision of problem solving. The weakest area in our school work is internal
control. an exchange of experiences, a discovery of better work experiences.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our school managers and teachers must understand that the school is primarily
an ideological organization that cannot be removed from life. We often organ-

ize educational mass events but forget the need for individual attention to
the student, especially problem students.

The young must be taught to evaluate social phenomena from class positions; this
is a primary task that demands canstant excelling and consistency, a broad knowl-
edge and dedication from each teacher. shop supervisor, educator and principal.

For years shortages of shop supervisors and counselors have been sources of

serious concern.
N

In this field we are helped little by sponsoring enterprises.

One of the most important tasks must remain the constant improvement in the pro-
fessional training of teachers and shop foremen. In the future we want to con-
tinue to rely on the most recent achievements of pedagogics.

Means to successfully meet the above tasks of vocational education have been in-

corporated into action plans of the system's staff to impI-ent the decisions
of the 26th CPSU Congress.

COPYRIG'RT: Kirjastus "Periodika," "Noukogudekool," 1981

9240
C80: 1815/12 END

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY