50R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10600
21 June 1982

East Europe Report

ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 5/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATIONSERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAI DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
EAST EUROPE REPORT
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(POUO 5/82)

CONTENTS

CEGiOSLOVAKIA

Greater lble Urged for Econonic March
(Vaclav Kves Interview POLITHXA BKONOHIE, No 1, 1982)....

Matallurgy, Heavy Engineering Tasks for 1981-1985 Discussed
(Antonin Rndvanovaky; HUI‘NIK, No 2, 1982) ...... . .......

-a- [III-EE-64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

GREATER ROLE URGED FOR BCONONIZC RESEARCH
Prague POLITICKA BCONOMIE in Czech No 1, 1982 pp 1-10

[Interview with Vaclav Kves, chairman of the CSAV [Czechoslovak Academy of
Sciences] scientific college of economy, CSAV corresponding member, rector of
the CPCZ Central Committee Political College: "Directions of Economic Research
after the 16th CPCZ Congress"; name of interviewer and date and place of in-
terview not given]

[Text] The entry into a new year is usually connected
with a brief look back at the year just passed in order
to vividly recall thekey events of permanent value which
affect further development. Such events of fundamental
importance in the year which we have just concluded and
for the year which just started were the 16th CPCZ Con-
gress and 26th CPSU Congress. Among other things they
formulated important social goals for basic economic
research and, at the same time, confirmed the correct-
ness of its orientation to the economic problems of
developed socialism under the conditions of a scientific-
technological revolution. In this context, the editorial
board of our periodical turned to the most competent per-
son, CSAV correspondent member Vaclav Ives with the re-
quest to answer several questions.

[Question] Can you evaluate the importance of both congresses for the further
development of economic research?

[Answer] The development of social sciences in our country, including economic
theory, candraw on the ideologically reliable source of intellectual wealth
produced by the first socialist state in the world and reinforced the tenor
and initiative of the 26th CPSU Congress. The inevitability of the develop~
ment of the socialist society-«and within it the socialist economy--reasserts
itself and must be recognized through study as developmental tendencies. It
is the more clearly reflected in a "purer form," the more developed the
socialist production relations are. In this respect, this development has
reached the'highest stage in the Soviet Union, laying the foundations of a
comunist society. For this reason, the applications and initiatives of the
26th CPSU Congress are also of fundamental importance for the development of
awareness in our country. Not because every point could or even should be
mechanistically applied to our conditions, but because the Soviet experience

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI-‘K 1A1. USE ONLY

provides a model economic guidance for all other socialist countries.
Czechoslovak sciences must. therefore, assume a more responsible and more
consistent attitude toward the adoption and application of Soviet scientific
achievements to Czechoslovak practice.

The initiative and lessons drawn from every CPSU congress, including the 26th,
for Czechoslovak economic research cannot be limited to quotations from
individual congress documents, their dissection and recombination and so on,
because such an approach obscures the paramount ideas constituting the essence
of congress resolutions. After all, everybody who carefully followed the
preparation for the 26th CPSU Congress will confirm that it was preceded by
substantive discussions by Soviet economists, including scientific studies.

We have here an iumensely rich intellectual wealth of new theoretical and
practical findings. I intentionally emphasize the newness of these findings.
Among other things, the 26th CPSU Congress reaffirmed that Marxism-Leninism
was a living doctrine of constant creative development, enriching itself with
new findings, cleansing itself by purging outlived ideas and emphasizing the
new. Naturally, it also elaborates and adds to former conclusions on the devel-
opment of socialist society.

As the congress agreed, there are so many new findings and conclusions that the
time has come to develop a new CPSU program. It can already be expected that
its approval by the 27th CPSU Congress will again enrich the economic sciences
with a mighty stream of initiatives for further theoretical thought. Never-
theless, it is desirable that even now we make the greatest possible contribu-
tion to the development of economic theory and thus to the development of
socialist society. After all, the CPSU congresses make known not only Soviet
experiences, but also the experiences of other countries of the world social—
ist system. That is why its conclusions are not only of international signifi-
cance, but some of them also have an international priority.

Host of the creative employees in research and development areas proceed from
the premise that the conceptual ideas on building developed socialism, as they
are reflected in the resolutions of the 26th CPSU Congress. are of fundamental
importance for the further development of the socialist political economy and
of the socialist economic thought in general. According to this concept, so-
cialism will further develop within the historically rather long period of its
maturity. This development existed in the past in relative harmony with the
requirements of objectively operating economic laws and conditions whose
effects transcend the social sphere. To what extent will this development be
in conformity with them or have shortcomings and even mistakes and errors
depends on the subjective actions of the people. The point is not that more
attention should be paid to some of these objective laws and predeterminants
than to others (sometimes the term "to suppress" is used in this connection
which is illogical because objective and natural laws operate independently

of our will‘. The point is that we must create conditions under which objec-
tive and natural laws can operate comprehensively as one. For this reason,
the profound knowledge of objective and natural laws creates optimal condi-
tions for a comprehensive compliance with their requirements and a consistent
development of the national economy.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is a fundamentally new feature which reflects new historical conditions

of the new developmental phase of developed socialism. It is marked by a
qualitative distinction and precision in comparison with previous developmental
phases of the communist socioeconomic formation. This new quality makes it not
only possible, but also requires alarge-scale compliance with plan even in the
early stages of communism resulting from'objective economic laws in the
management of the development of socialist economy. The high degree of syste-
matic plan compliance and high quality of management will result in very
effective control of the "means of production" by society as the owner. This
will increase the rate of actual socialization of production. This will fur-
ther increase the implementation of the law of economy-of-tims, i.e. social
labor productivity will substantially increase. And according to the 25th
CPSU, the way and guarantee of achieving this goal lies in the combination of
results of the revolution in research and development with the advantages of
socialism. Along this line, capitalism will be vanquished by the higher pro-
ductivity of social labor representing. in accordance with L.I. Lenin's scien-
tific predictions, the final victory of socialism over capitalism.

[Question] Does the congress also represent a methodological contribution to
economic science and research?

[Answer] The 26th CPSU Congress urged economists to increase their share in
the solution of socioeconomic and sociopolitical problems of the present and
future. At the same time and above all, it formulated qualitatively new
approaches for the economists for the solution of old and new economic problems
in contrast to the past "traditional" approaches motivated by the necessity of
the permanent and merciless struggle against capitalist elements and their
vestiges within the socialist society.

The class nature of new approaches is based on the recognition of the opera-
tion of objective economic laws under the given historical conditions. Only
by their application will it be possible to settle the question of who will
defeat whom on the world scale and achieve the great social goal within each
socialist state. This can be concluded from L.I. Brezhnev's statement at the
26th CPSU Congress: "Management of the national economy is the core of all
party and state activity. It is precisely in the economy that the foundations
are laid for the achievement of social goals, for the strengthening of the
country's defenses and for an active foreign policy. That will create the in-
dispensable prerequisites for the successful advancement of Soviet society
toward communism."

1 think that the use of new approaches is the most important, but also the
most complex and difficult task facing the Czechoslovak economic thought and
practice. So far, the contribution of the Czechoslovak economic thought to
the new intellectual currents cannot be regarded as satisfactory. All the
greater will be its responsibility for the solution of both pressing and
future problems.

Although the change in the substance and goals of economic development from
extensive to intensive, from quantity to quality. from ad hoc structural
changes to continuity and balanced development constitutes an ideological link

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between the last CPSU and CPCZ congresses, it was particularly the 26th CPSU
Congress which put emphasis on it. By substantiating and validating the cor-
rectness of the inspiration and contribution of the Soviet economic theory
during the last 10-15 years as well as by outlining the principal subject and
the goals of the developed socialist society, the Congress transformed the
previous sources of inspiration into clearly formulated conditions and com-
mitments for creative economic thought. This means that in accordance with
the ideology we must reconsider the concept of developed socialism and current
historical conditions--a number of issues and problems seemingly settled in
the past. I will demonstrate by at least two examples that this requirement
is justified:

A. During the period of building the socialist raw-material capital-asset
base of socialism, during the rapid growth far-reaching structural changes,
the requirements held a permanent, theoretically and practically justified
priority over resources. To continue these imprudent policies under developed
socialism, in contrast. is totally unacceptable. Needs or better, balances,
are not concerned only with satisfying the production and investment needs of
the economy, but the satisfaction of needs in general, that is, including the
consumer needs of citizens in a socialist state. Under the conditions of de-
veloped socialism these needs cannot be judged from the social standpoint
alone. Today, when the key goals of social nature have been essentially
achieved, it is no longer the satisfaction of some basic needs that matters.
The emphasis now is on the economic-political aspect of the problem, that is
on worker gratification not only in terms of the size of nominal wages or
nominal incomes (particularly in comparison with other members of the society).
but also--increasingly and more urgently--on satisfaction of their needs as to
equal opportunities for spending their earned incomes. This must be the basis
and the beginning, if the motivation is to work in full harmonywith the wage
incentives to contribute to the permanent increase in labor productivity and

quality.

This is also the condition for achieving a higher state of democratic central-
ism as the method providing for active participation and worker initiative in
the production management, distribution, compensation and consumption. The
main feature of this participation is amdmmst increasingly become permanent
and effective control by all people over the balance between the rate of work
or final work results and consumption rate by the work collectives and indi-
viduals.

v.1. Lenin emphasized that a people's control constituted an integral part of
socialist competition. It bolsters the element of competitiveness and at the
same time marks socialist competition as an independent, specific and, from the
standpoint of production increase, the most important area of the creative
initiative of the masses. The significance of balance between the amount of
labor expended and consumption is so great in developed socialism because it
creates feedbacks in tne society, feedbacks without which, as past experience
has demonstrated, the law of compensation according to work performed could

not be effectively used for promoting production efficiency and quality.

I.

FOR 0F11C1Al.US£9)NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This law could not be fully applied in the early stages of development of the
socialist society primarily because priority had to be assigned to numerous
noneconomic tasks of the new system despite considerable scarcity of material
resources. This was one of the major reasons why the achievement of struc-
tural balance of the market of consumer goods and means of production could
not be regarded as the foremost task--despite the direct linkage between this
balance and efficiency.

3. The increase in the economic efficiency of production is the condition and
also the result of intensification of the reproduction process. During the
predominantly extensive type of development--which was an inevitable, but only
temporary, phase of the socialist economy--the center assigned and controlled
the tasks related to the full utilization of resources inefficiently used under
capitalism and to the needed restructuring of the production basis. In the
area of management, methods imposing strictest discipline for the fulfillment
of assigned tasks had to be employed. in the predominantly intensive develop-
ment of the socialist economy, the emphasis is on those management methods
which continually motivate the managed units to chumeand innovation. The
difference cannot, ofcourse, be interpreted to mean that the social role of
work and other discipline loses its importance under the conditions of devel-
oped socialism. On the contrary, its importance increases! Discipline must
increasingly become an organic part of the creative attitude toward work and

a manifestation of social commitment—~an active part of production management,
and by its very essence increasingly less the result of noneconomic necessity.

It is beyond the scope of this interview to deal with broader theoretical
differences in the approaches to the solution of the balance and efficiency
problems of the socialist economy. wage incentives and moral suasion, work and
other discipline and initiative, and socialist competition and other problems
related to the concept of building a developed socialist society. All that
was done in the preparation of the 26th CPSU Congress and everything that has
been written down, that is, its intellectual background, as well as the
approaches to the implementation of its resolutions, is an inexhaustible
source of theory, methodology and range of practices. Their common denomina-
tor is the stated concept of cohesion, comprehensiveness and systematization
of the effects of socialist economic laws and conditions. The basic economic
law, the system of planning and balances, the law of economy-of-time, the law
of values, the law of compensation according to the amount and quality of work
and other laws operate, of course, as an internal contradiction joined by the
éialectically contradictory unity. Like all other contradictions under social—
ism, however, they are not of antagonistic nature. Their mutual effect is

not a cancellation, but is interdependence and complemention. The contradic-
tions must be resolved--on the basis of their increasingly profound content--
by their increasingly broader, more effective and more comprehensive use. It
can be accomplished by a systematic improvement and development of the economic
mechanisms.

The mandatory nature and importance of using every one of the objective laws
constituting a unified system have been confirmed by practice. If optimum
conditions for an operation of one of them cannot be created, noise is
created and the requirements of other laws and conditions cannot be met. The
inadequate application of the law of proportion and of the law of value, for

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

—~

example, undermines the effect of the law of compensation according to the
amount.and quality of work and worker initiative, and similar breakdown also
occurs in the operation of the law of economy of time and basic economic laws
of socialism.

I would also like to emphasize that the generalizations at which the Soviet
economic theory has arrived and which to a considerable degree contributed to
the formulation of conclusions and recommendations of the 26th CPSU Congress
are of such great importance to us not only and not in the first place be-
cause they can be simply received and used as the formulations of generally
valid laws, but primarily because the recognition of laws, and the laws them-
selves. are the more meaningful, the more mature is the reality. Only in
developed socialism, are the economic laws and conditions reflected as distinct
developmental tendencies which can be reliably recognized as such by the methods
of scientific abstraction. 0n the basis of this knowledge, can the goals of
future development then be formulated and changes modeled which will lead to
the best possible attainment of these goals under the specific Czechoslovak
conditions, that is, at the lowest possible cost of social labor.

If I spoke earlier about the adoption of new approaches of the Soviet economic
thought as our foremost task, now I would like to elaborate on this concept.
Adoption means a creative application to our conditions by planning and model-
ing of changes in economic relations subordinated to the multiform goal of
developed socialism. And if I spoke of the responsibility of our science in
the application of general outcome to our conditions, I had in mind primarily
the necessity of averting the tempting danger of an effort to transfer mechan-
istically the solution to various practical problems by making the so-called
use of experience without the profound knowledge of the different conditions
in which these eXperiences originated and in which they are to be used. A
responsible, indeed scientific application of theoretical generalizations

and conclusions must not ignore the fact that under different conditions
identical goals are usually attained with different and sometimes even oppo-
site methods.

[Question] Can you compare your thoughts with the conclusions of the 16th
CPCZ Congress and also with the present goals of economic studies?

[Answer] The resolutions and conclusions of the 16th CPCZ Congress on economic
questions were based on the critical and thorough evaluation of the functioning
of the economic mechanisms. It was stated that in the past our economy was

not prepared to cope with the problems of the objective external and internal
developments with which it was confronted. The necessary transition to inten-
sive development was not achieved; specifically, the application of research
and development lagged behind needs and the potential. Science and technology
did not become a source of substantial increase in efficiency which did have
and still has unfavorable effects on the increasingly complex foreign economic
relations.

It is, therefore, imperative to achieve a positive turn in economic development

in the shortest time possible. This change should have all the features of
intensive development, such as integration of science and production, and

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

changes in the orientation of the economy from quantitative to qualitative
aspects. This again involves the already mentioned change in approaches to

the solution of all economic issues and problems, in the decisionmaking pro-
cesses at all levels of management.

The development of an objective reality calls for a fundamental change in the
thinking of economic and other personnel which, in turn, will be positively
reflected in this development. without such a change, the great goals estab-
lished by the party as the guiding force of the society, among which the fore-
most is the retention and the increase of the high living standard of our
people, could not be achieved. An important step which is to lead to this
change in thinking is the "Set of Measures." Its merit lies primarily in

the fact that it shows the way to overcoming malpractices such as anonymity
in decisionmaking and avoidance of responsibility,particularism of individual
ministries, compensation (distribution) not according to work, protectionism
over inefficient production methods, speculation and distortion and other
generally known and long criticized problems.

While we speak of the "Set," we must not forget the warning expressed while
still in preparation stage for its implementation at the beginning of last
year: the "Set" is not and cannot be regarded as a panacea for the solution
of all existing problems and its gradual implementation cannot bring about

a revolutionary change in management. After all, the economy cannot be under-
going any revolutionary changes. The "Set" must be accepted as the beginning
of an unfailing effort to implement a number of measures aimed at a gradual
qualitative change. Economic theory must not lag behind in this effort. It
must continue to contribute to its implementation by coping with cardinal
problems such as: the long-term nature and goal-orientation of development
plans of the national economy (that is, enforcement of principles of planning
and purposefulness in management so that theplans will not be, as they are
today, a sort of extrapolation of socioeconomic development); a scientically
justified uniform standards necessary for developing a quality plan as a basis
for a balanced development of the national economy (the problem of the plan
stabilization; standards cannot be regarded as indicators derived from the
plan and so on); Problems arising from the labor theory of value operating
under the conditions of planned management of development of socialist economy,
specifically, from the relation between the plan and the labor theory of value
in the application of complete khozraschet [cost accounting system] or in
determination of (domestic, as well as export-import) wholesale prices; the
problem of effective organization of the production basis and the levels of
management based on it (not from the standpoint of legal aspects, but as the
necessity of satisfying social needs by higher economic efficiency of the
increasingly socialized reproduction process); problems of wageincentives
(based not only on the quantity and quality of work but, particularly, in
relation to the technical standard of production and so on).

The "Set" is particularly valuable because it represents a relatively compre-
hensive road and a desirable trend toward improvement of the entire management
system. If even the first step in this direction gives rise to conflicts
between the new and old, they must be regarded as foreshadowing even greater
discards in the future. In this sense, the system of planned management must

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

remain open to suggestions on solutions of increasingly complex problems. And
just as the "Set" cannot be regarded as a one-time measure, the planned related
measures will come to reflect the endless process of gradual qualitative in-
provements of management. The very term management system, rules out the
rigidity of methods, means as well as_of the tools of management.

It is no secret, that by far not all practical economists were overwhelmed by
the newness and significance of the contribution by the academia's to the pre-
paration of the "Set." It is not yet appropriate to detail in this context all
disagreements and conflicts between "theory" and "practice." There is no doubt
that disagreement between the theoreticians and practitioners will continue

in the future because they are the inevitable epiphenomenon in the carrying out
of fundamental, frequently revolutionary changes. And we can expect them in the
area of management because, as stated earlier, the changes in the system of

planned management are objectively dependent on the needs of developed social-
ism.

During the first phase of changes in the management system, it was enough to
clarify the new approaches on a rather general plane of overall trend, emphasis
on the planning principIes, increased role of market relations. increased
interest of the khzoraschet sphere in innovations, introduction of goal-
oriented programmatic planning and so on. This generalization will not suf—
fice in future phases because the practical measures will be progressively

less of a compromise between the old and new. At the present time, for
example, it suffices to adjust the volume indicators by qualitative ones.

It appears likely that they will have to be replaced altogether in the future.

It will be necessary to develop theoretically all possible consequences of
the full implementation of this newly created management trends. And this
requires ideological crystallization.

The Soviet conception of developed socialism, to which I have already referred,
provides this. Its development must take into account specific features of
oureconomy, particularly the lower stage of development of socialist production
relations, greater openness of the economy resulting from its size and sectoral
structure and from natural and historical peculiarities. The further develop-
ment of the theoretical premises and approaches to further development of our
economic mechanism cannot proceed without the ideologically unifying role of
this [Soviet] concept. No other theoretical basis of further development of
the socialist economy exists.

When it adopted the resolution on the "Set," the CSSR Government was fully
aware of these circumstances as well as of the necessity of greater future
involvement of the economic theory in improving the planned management system
of the national economy. Therefore, it directed economic research not only

to increase its activity in this area which has been neglected in the past,
but also formulated ideological guidelines (for stimulation of research and
development, participation in the international division of labor, more effec»
tive utilization of resources and an increased role for customers and con-
sumers in the economy) which fully support this concept. It further instructed
economic research [departments] to develop its own system development alterna—
tive in the form of a long-range conceptual study. I said on another occasion

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that this was a big chance for research. Here I just would like to add that for
a dignified fulfillment of this social need our economic theory must be in

step with the resolutions and tasks set by the 16th CPCZ Congress, character-
izing specific tasks and features of our national economy, and with the poli-
tical-economic concept formulated by the 26th CPSU Congress, including its
broad intellectual background. Otherwise it will not be able to hold its
ground.

[Question] CSSR Government Resolution No 42 of 1980 assigns specific tasks
only to the Council of Economic Research and individual ministers directing
economic research institutes, in other words to applied research. In this
context what is your opinion on the role of basic research and particularly
on the still unsettled issue of research-development-implementation cycle?

[Answer] I think that it is not only correct, but also the only way to assign
tasks of this nature to applied research. The fundamental. that is primarily
scientific and a priori type research performs an important and irreplaceable
function in the so-called "scientific wellhead." For this reason, we cannot
be asked to accomplish tasks which could be immediately implemented. To avoid
misunderstandings, however. we have to clarify this problem. Let us start with
applied research. I feel that every qualified person in applied research must
provide for his own basic research for his project. This does not mean that
he must undertake the scientific research personally. He must, however, be-
come acquainted with the basic, general theoretical findings in his field of
activity. He must evaluate the views and approaches tothe solution of funda-
mental a priori problems, use it as the theoretical basis and apply it to

the area of economic policy or activity. To develop, within the framework of
applied research so conceived, a concept of developed socialism means, pri—
marily, to develop a thorough understanding and mastery of each research of
the projects the uniform interaction of all economic thought and conditions

of the developed socialism, and to express it as completely as possible in

the research project solutions. Generally, they would take on the form of
changes to be carried out in order to achieve the changes in quality and the
end function in a given area of economic relations, representing a transition
from the lower to the higher phase of development of the socialist economy.
Another integral part of applied research outputs should be the clarification
of systems conditions and their consequences for development of the economic
mechanism as well as for the real economic development of advanced socialism
as a whole, and with it the corresponding subsystems.

Only, under these conditions can applied research with its intellectual
stimuli, transmitted along the trend line toward basic research, participate
in the formulation of the general concept of economic development of advanced
socialism. An integral part and prerequisite for this involvement is the
critical examination, correction and further improvement of outputs of higher
research spheres. if applied research is to behave in this way. it must have
something to examine, correct and investigate. This means that scientific
research must constantly bring up new initiatives and ideas as verified or
unverified hypotheses about the effect and potential utilization of economic
thought and conditions governed by them.

|13R (NHHCJAI.I£5EZCMHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All this, however, does not depend on researchers alone. Of considerable, one
can say of fundamental. importance to discharging their function is the under-
standing and attitude of ministry officials in charge of advancing scientific
research. It should never happen that researchers, instead of their specific
expertise, would perform work or services ofan office clerk, such as compila-
tion of data for the preparation of reports or statements. In other words,
they should not become involved in the work of skilled workers, technicians
or administrative personnel whose number are excessive anyway.

0n the other hand, challenging conditions desirable in every way should be
created for scientific researchers.

Marxism-Leninism teaches us that the world is knowable but infinite at the

same time. It also requires that the knowledge of objective laws and condi-
tions of the world development, that is, the subjective activity of people must
increase and become broader and more general because only in this way-
although our knowledge will never be complete or final-—can conditions be
created for an objectively conditioned development of the socialist society

or of the world relatively without disturbing phenomena, that is, without
unrestrained manifestations of the objective laws and conditions.

The difference between the effect of economdc laws and conditions and their
utilization becomes more pronounced in developed socialism. It becomes evi-
dent, and it is confirmed by practice, that the objective laws and conditions
act as developmental trends and are recognized and utilized as such. Thus,
intervention by society and its authorities in the society's economic life, in
instances when economic theory could not be "tamed," produce unexpected and
socially irrational consequences (the theory is in conflicc). This only con-
firms that the degree of socially desirable effects of the economic theory
depends primarily on the depth of knowledge and a consistent use of the cumu-
lative effects and interaction.

Awareness of laws and conditions as developmental trends places a particularly
important role and significance to basic research because, as the basic intel-
lectual current in science, it underlines the “downward direction"--£rou the
general to the particular. This reality has an important gnoseological
aspect.

The acme of economic science is represented by the most progressive thought
superceding habitual and lingering views and ossification and dogmas which
hinder the more rapid advancement of social revolutionary practice. This
top level thought is, quite logically, a high abstraction and deals usually
with the most general issues and conditions of the development of socialist
production relations. The changes in the approaches to these general issues
condition the thought development at the lower levels of scientific thinking
where they are applied to the various specific areas of economic life and
economic policy, and are thus indirectly transmitted to economic practice.

All social progress is gained by the successful settlement of contradictions.
The same thing happens in economic thought. Every change encounters resis-

tance, opposition, frequently based on lack of understanding, sterility, and
stereotyped thought; sometimes also on realism, in the knowledge of deeper

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and broader contexts. This opposition performs an objectively negative reac-
tionary role in some instances, and a socially positive function at other times.
when it comes to differentiationofrealistic ideas from utopia of every kind.
The dissemination of every new scientific idea along either the horizontal or
vertical line of scientific thought is from the general to the particular and
is. in fact, the verification of its real nature and progressiveness. Every
such idea is necessarily accepted with reservation in the light of the reci-
pient's own knowledge and experience. This way to learning and its critical
acceptance is very demanding and responsible. The more revolutionary [the
idea] and thus the more of the vestiges "reinforced" by the past but no
longer valid experiences have to be overcome, that much more time and effort

as well as steadfast determination is required on thepart of the idea origina-
COPS.

In short, general theoretical findings, tested, developed and concretized by
applied research are not turned over to real life implementation in form of

directives. The agencies and personnel who use them must be convinced that
they are correct.

The act of persuasion itself requires expertise. It is an art of proving,
arguing logically and, on this basis, winning over economists and other per-
sonnel. Persuasion is not easy for many other reasons. The greaterinnovation
research introduces, the more difficult it usually is. The researcher who
comes up with something really new, frequently encounters negative, impolite,
and frequently, emotional reactions, criticism not based on historical exper-
ience, the silent treatment and so on. Sometimes those, for whom the research
results are addressed to, appear indifferent because the acceptance of the
research may mean changes in work methods, in work approach, a necessity to
change old habits and routine as well as an amount of uncertainty as to the
outcome of the implementation of research findings, and so on.

If we sometimes hear complain a about lack of basic disputes between the
theoreticians and practitioners during adversarial scientific conferences and
similar occasions, we must look for reasons not only in the incompetence of
some research projects, when there simply is nothing to discuss; and not in
the forbearance ofpotential critics caused by coyness or personal or other
considerations. The reason is sometimes due to fear that principled discus-
sions will reveal the weaknesses of the extant practice and bring up the
question of responsibility or that it will uncover loopholes in the arguments
on which the practices are based. I can show this from my own experience as
chairman of the 907 SPEV program council, in the area of external economic
relation problems. The important results of a recent research, highly rated
by experts both here and abroad, representing, in the final analysis, con-
siderable interference in the current practice, were received in an "analytical
discussions" as if such problems or new research findings were nonexistent.

Based on such views, we must approach the frequently discussed question of
whether or not research should advise the implementing economic agencies.
It is difficult to find an unequivocal answer to this question. The issue
should rather be what advice should the agencies ask of research. The re-
search should make recommendations and advise only in questions in which it
is competent. Its outputs should be requested in advance by the implementing

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agencies as recommendations which do not fall in the category of proposals

for tactical, operational decisionmaking. Other recommendations by research,
particularly various clear-cut and, therefore, "reliable" precepts for deci-
sionnaking processes are, in my opinion, of very problematic value to society,
although--as the recent discussion in HOSPODARSKE NOVINY demonstrated--those
who use it in practice sometimes ask for them and the researchers are occa-
sionally glad to offer it to them. I want to make this point absolutely clear:
system incompatible, incomprehensive, theoretically and conceptually groundless
and conflictless proposals are worthless in social practice. At the present
time, and also in the immediate and a more distinct future, when qualitative
changes in the economic system will take place, proposals based on mere
generalizations of past experiences are inapprOpriate and, in fact, harmful

for practical applications. 0n the otheihand, very necessary and increasingly
more valuable are the proposals of theoretical concepts which correctly re—
flect the historical conditions of the new phase of intensive development of
the socialist economy.

Placing emphasis on the basic route to knowledge of economic conditions "from
the top downward," which is typical of the period of developed socialism, does
not mean in the least that we should underestimate the analytical functions of
science. 0n the contrary. Only a science armed with a theoretical concept
possesses the prerequisites for uncovering contradictionsin economic develop-
ment-~a concept based on the analysis of negative phenomena and aspects, or
resulting in the positive, predominantly systems, proposals for changes in
given conditions. of much less value is "analysis for analysis' sake" or,
better stated, an impartial and uncommitted description of the givensituation
which does not reflect clear tneoretical-conceptual approaches.

, Its special offshoot, in my opinion, is the analysis of so-called factual
problems of economic development which leads to even deeper, economically
(that is, by the development and improvement of socialist production relations)
unfounded proposals for changes in material ratios, sectoral structure and so
on. During the restructuring of the capitalist to the socialist economy, such
research findings were logica1-—they increased the number of alternatives for
the best possible decisionmaking. Now, that a capital asset base of socialism
corresponding to its needs has been built, however, the proposals for
macrostructural changes are justified only in those instances when they bring
about high level innovations or significant changes in securing natural re-
sources. All others, insofar as they are not a form of self-criticism of
certain central agencies and their employees of an earlier decision, they
should be the outcome of the effect of the economic mechanism on the lower

levels of decisionmaklng.

Those research findings which had to pass a struggle for real life recognition
and whose unprejudiced correctness, topicality and feasibility were accepted
by the public to such extent that they become a generalized economic thought.
They usually enter the public domain as the determinants of economic decision-

making processes.

The higher the phase of development the socialist society attains, the greater
the causative effect of economic decisions by the known objective conditions

12

FOR‘OFF"JAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and categories, and higher is the ratio of such [causative] decisions in the
economy. Such decisions are essentially invariable, thus they represent
optimal solutions. of all the greater significance, of course, are the
alternate methods for justifying the adopted solutions.

In this respect, economic theory has not yet resolved two key practical
problems.

The first one is the theoretical elaboration of criteria of economic efficiency
for selection of optimum alternatives at different levels of management which
will objectively reflect the economic interests of the given level of manage-
ment (and, therefore, will be consistently implemented). At the same time,
these interests should correspond to the real needs and interests of society
as the owner of the means of production. The second task is to develop and
implement socialist economic categories to such a degree of science that the
society could use them on an ever-increasing scale as objective tools of
planned central management of development of the national economy. This will
make it possible to gradually free central management from using various indi-
cators strongly effected by subjectivism (in determination of their levels,
simplicity, in its effect on the managed organizations and so on) making
possible their circumvention or ignoring their mandatory nature with all the
negative implications for society. This will also increase the scope, as well
as the rate, of optimal decisions.

Naturally, economic problems will exist even in developed socialism, their
solution--due to lack of the relevant information determining optimal deci-
sions--will require substitute alternatives. Making a selection from these
will be possible only on the basis of more or less qualified estimates, intui-
tion and so on. It is obvious that in such instances, the decisionmaking of
-the economic agencies cannot be completely objective. In this sense, it will
be "imperfect," and will leave room for subjectivity. The practical decision-
making in these cases will be a creative activity making use of management's
practical experience, knowledge of broader contexts, developmental tendencies
and so on. Economic theory cannot provide help in this type of decisionmaking.
It can only inspire, supplement management information availability or define
the scope of correctness, that is. the desirable effects of the adopted
resolution.

It is a big advantage of economic research that it is not linked to the deci-
sionmaking jurisdiction. Otherwise it could not give free rein to imagination
and search in unexplored areas. If by its concepts and suggestions it hits
the nail on thehead, if it locates and reveals the painful spots of real

life, it can provoke those very desirable relevant arguments which our
society, like Soviet society, will only welcome.

Society thus demands that economic research perform on a large scale its
specific, relatively independent and its irreplaceable perception function.
This means, in the first place, that it should completely free itself of
"innovation posturing," so typical of a considerable part of the research and
development base, and concentrate on the solution of the critical economic
problems from principled theoretical or strategic positions.

13

F0R10FFKWAI.USEIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] In conclusion, let me ask you a brief question without which the
topic of the interview would not be fully covered. what specific lessons of
the 16th CPCZ Congress do you regard as particularly important for better
management of the research base, if it is to perform the demanding tasks which
you have discussed?

[Answer] First of all, it is necessary to review the specification of goals
assigned to economic research by the congress:”...to put emphasis on better
knowledge of objective socioeconomic laws on the basis of creative Marxist—
Leninist approaches..." ..."The improvement of management will be also in

the future a continuous creative process to which the economic research is to
contribute."

These two tasks constitute a singularity. The contribution of economic research
to the improvement of management as its principal contribution during this
5-year plan must be based on better perception and knowledge of objective eco-
nomic laws and conditions than in the past. As to the creative Marxist-Lenin-
ist approaches, I want to emphasize again that, in my opinion. no other

Marxist theoretical concept of further development of the socialist economy
exists but the above concept of developed socialism and that its creative
content is far from having been utilized or developed. It requires a profound
change in economic thought in comparison with both the past and the present.

For this reason, ”...it cannot do without creative discussions, critical cli-
mate, without a bold search and particularly without a principled party
approach." Yet, promotion of creative discussions and a critical climate in
economic science is not an easy task. Such discussions actually do not exist
today. Just think of how many people complained about lack of principled
clashes of views recently! This lack was always merely stated, yet it never
led to meaningful arguments. Our economists either do not know how to or do
not want to engage in discussions. If occasionally criticism is expressed.
everybody is more interested in knowing who was criticized and how he was
labeled rather than what view was refuted.

The effort to provoke discussions and arguments for the purpose of a bold
search in which there is only one authority--the objective truth--should, in
my opinion, constitute if not theprincipal, then definitely one of the princi-
pal directions of improving research management. The work results of team,
department and institute leaders should be judged according to their success
in stimulating a creative critical climate. Thus, if the researchers learn

to hold discussions, to counter one argument with another, they will transcend
their own shadow. Here is the biggest reserve of scientific labors revealing
both everyone's real capabilities and the possibilities of their utilization.

The congress documents also lay down veryclear and unequivocal guidelines for
management methods: to eliminate egalitarianism in remuneration; to reward
good results and particularly initiative and willingness to take personal
risks which increases in research in direct proportion to how far ahead of
time is the contribution. We must not tolerate that people who want to solve
problems encounter lack of understanding and bureaucratic indifference. He
who is familiar with the present situation in research and in its relations

14

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to the environment, will appreciate the importance. but also the difficulty,

of these principles as well as of thcanrits of translating them into reality.
The fact is that their full application depends not only upon the directors of
research, but also on the conditions which the regulations create. I assume,
in this context. that the congress resolutions also apply equally to the insti-
tutions which issue these regulations.

In the complex conditions in which our economy is developing and will continue
to develop in the future. it is definitely worthwhile to bring together all
forces for the maximum utilization of the intellectual reserves so that not

a single socially beneficial suggestion be wasted.

COPYRIGHT: ACADEMIA, Prague 1981

10501
CSO: 2400/198

15

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬁﬂCLALlJSEIDNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

METALLURGY, HEAVY ENGINEERING TASKS FOR 1981-1985 DISCUSSED
Prague HUTMIK in Czech Mo 2, 1982 pp bl-b3

[Article by Eng Antonin Radvanovsky. Federal Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy
Engineering. Prague: "Main Tasks of the Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy
Engineering in the Seventh Five-Year Plan"]

[Text] The tasks of all enterprises and organizations in the Czechoslovak
national economy during the Seventh Five-Year Plan stem from the document
"Main Directions of Economic and Social Development of Czechoslovakia in 1981-
1985," which was adopted at the 16th congress of the CPCZ.

This document lays down the state economic policy for 1981-1985 as follows:

'ﬁhe general line of building a developed socialist society is the basis of
the further economic and social program of the CPCZ for the Seventh Five-
Year Plan period."

"The central objective of party policy is, in spite of considerably more dif-
ficult external and internal conditions, to maintain and improve the high
standard of living that has been achieved by the populace and its social
security, and to do so in keeping with the results that will be achieved in
the development of the national economy. Fulfilling the provisions of the
Seventh Five-Year Plan in such a situation requires a consistent effort to
greatly increase the intensiveneas of the economy, an increase in the effi-
ciency and quality of all work, effective structural changes. primarily
through acceleration and maximum utilization of scientific and technical
progress developments, a deepening of Czechoslovakia's participation in in-
ternational socialist division of labor, particularly with the Soviet Union.
and improvement of planned management with increased participation by the
workers."

Our economy has gradually used up the initially large, but increasingly less
favorable, resources of an extensive nature, in addition to which there have
been considerable sales and price changes on world markets which have pro-
duced unfavorable consequences for our economy.

The further development of our national economy through 1985 is thus largely
subordinated to the requirement of restoring our external balance by limiting

16

FOR OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imports and increasing exports. He must also plan for a much slower increase
in usable national income as opposed to total national income created. i.e.

for decreased amounts of investment funds, lack of growth in certain components
of consumption for production purposes and the like.

The Ministry of Metallurgy and heavy Engineering [FNHTS] has a key position

in the Seventh Five-Year Plan and in the entire decade of the 1980's as regards
resolving this situation. On it depends higher-quality construction, renova-
tion and modernization of the production technology base of our economy. as a
precondition for an increase in social labor productivity. The machinery out-
put of this ministry is a progressive element in the development of the social
productive forces and a vehicle of technical progress in all other sectors
which it supplies with equipment. This function is also magnified by the fact
that it has an inescapable role in expanding external economic relations and
in creating most of the exchange needed to cover our economy's import require-
ments.

Accordingly, mechanical and electrical engineering are now considered to be
critical sectors. The 16th CPCZ Congress has established the preconditions
for increasing the output of these sectors by 33 to 35 percent nationwide.

The tasks regarding increasing output and the improving of its structure with-
in FHHTS are largely determined by the Czechoslovak economy's need to expand,
renovate, modernize and reconstruct the production technology base of the in-
dustry's customer sectors, particularly the fuel-energy and metallurgical-
mechanical industries and the chemical complex, by the concept of integrating
the Czechoslovak economy into international division of labor among the so-
cialist countries, and by the concept of improving the foreign exchange posi-
tion of this country vis-a-via the nonsocialist countries. In addition, the
Czechoslovak heavy machinery industry must systematically structure itself,
giving priority to the development of the branches and products in which we
have a realistic possibility of equaling the world state of the art, and which
will be highly effective in providing the critical funds for both domestic
consumption and export. Thus the manufacture of power-production, chemical,
foodstuffs. tire-manufacturing and railway transport equipment, and areas
associated with these products, take on particular importance in the produc-
tion structure of our heavy machinery industry.

We need to maintain a rapid pace in overall production volume. achieving a
level of about 135 percent of the 1980 figure. The critical part of our pro-
duction structure is determined by obligatory assignments which stem from
long-term trade agreements for exchange of commodities within CEHA. as well

as compulsory tasks regarding deliveries for domestic capital construction

and the reconstruction and modernization of basic power-production, extraction
and metallurgical equipment.

The 16th CPCZ Congress assigned the mechanical and electrical engineering in-
dustrics the task of increasing total export by 50 to 55 percent during the

Seventh Five-Year Plan. At the same time, particular stress within the export
selection must be laid on turnkey projects. which are the final product of

17

INDR 0F1ﬂCJAI.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USF. ONLY

our heavy mechanical engineering industry. FHHTS will account for more than
28 percent of total export to the socialist countries, a larger share than
any other sector of the national economy.

The export program of the ministry is extremely broad. It includes not only
turnkey prrjects and individual machines and pieces of equipment for an ex-
tremely wide range of industrial uses, but metallurgical production as well.

The enterprises of FHHTS are included in international socialist integration
within CEMA in accordance with their production tasks and in keeping with the
assignments handed down by the 16th CPCZ Congress. It will continue to be a
basic principle that one of the most important factors in developing the
Czechoslovak economy is cooperation with the CEHA member states, particularly
the Soviet Union. The ties between the Czechoslovak heavy machinery industry
and the economy of the Soviet Union during the Seventh Five-Year Plan are
based on the fact that about 60 percent of the total planned export of ma-
chinery and equipment to socialist countries is earmarked for the Soviet
Union. This export includes particularly chemical and petroleum machinery.
heavy machinery and transport products. electrical engineering equipment and
food processing equipment.

Domestic needs dictate an extraordinary pace of delivery of equipment for
modernizing the industrial technological base, particularly equipment fox
opencut coal extraction, for the construction of electric power facilities,
and for blast furnaces, coke plants and rolling mills. here the primary
tasks are delivery of large-capacity machinery and long-distance belt con-
veyor equipment for the Podkrusnohorsky Brown Coal Basin, and mastery of ex-
traction equipment for surface mining. In addition it will be necessary to
assure the operating reliability of all equipment supplied, i.e. maximum
possible failure-free operation and sufficient spare parts.

Some 15 billion th of the total 1985 electric energy output of 80-83 billion
kWh will be produced by nuclear power stations. FHHTS is providing critical
cooperation in the commissioning of the two generating units of the nuclear
power station at Jaslovske Bohunice and others in Dukovany. In addition it
will be necessary to start the construction of new power stations so as to as-
sure a smooth increase in power output after 1985.

Also important are the ministry's deliveries for its own capital construction,
particularly for metallurgical production. Investment activity in this area
is directed primarily at reconstructing and modernizing metallurgical facili-
ties, particularly blast furnaces and the main metallurgical production units.
The main tasks in this area include the construction of batteries of coke
ovens, equipment for continuous casting of steel, a medium-light section mill
train at Kladno, an oxygen converter steel plant at Trinec, and a 3, SOO-mm
four-high mill at Ostrava.

The metallurgical sector plans to maintain its metal output during the
Seventh Five-Year Plan at approximately the 1980 level. Only better utiliza-

tion of domestic reserves for metal production, particularly scrap metal,
will allow some increase in steel output.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In pig iron production it is planned to further improve processes so as to
improve yields and decrease specific fuel consumption. The expansion of steel
output will be aimed at expanding modern, more economical processes, e.g.
production in oxygen converters, the introduction of continuous casting and
out-of-furnace steel refining and the like. In the production of rolled stock
it will be necessary to improve the selection by increasing the output of
medium and light shapes, shapes for economical construction, annealed plate
and dynamo sheet. Increased attention must also be devoted to the effective
use of metal charges. In keeping with the censtruction of continuous casting
equipment. the dismantling of obsolete rolling mill trains and the startup of
new rolling mill capacities, by 1985 it will be necessary to decrease fuel
consumption by 17 kg per ton of rolled material compared with the 1980 figure.
To assure economical utilization of metallurgical products in the associated
processing industries we must unconditionally assure that dimensions, toler-
ances and quality are unconditionally adhered to.

Thus PHHTS will lay increased stress on the qualitative aspects of development
of metallurgy, to the making of fundamental changes in its structure, and on
persistent efforts to maximize the upvaluing of metal and to use scrap metal.
He should note that the ministry's main tasks in this regard stem from its
function as manager of the State Special Program for Increased Efficiency in
Metals Consumption. This program calls for a saving of about 2 million tons
of ferrous metal and about 64,000 to 50,000 tons of nonferrous metal during
the Seventh Five-Year Plan.

Directly connected with the assignments regarding the saving of metal and
energy is the task of technical development. The fact that the main raw mate-
rials and fuel and energy reserves will remain essentially at the level of
the initial year of the five—year plan and that there will be Only limited
increases in manpower and investments underlines the necessity for comprehen-
sive improvement of the economic activity involved in technical development.
Accordingly innovation work must aim primarily at introducing production pro-
grams which will increase the effectiveness of production processes and as-
sure a decrease in metal and energy consumption, thus also increasing the
exploitability of products. Therefore scientific and technical development
capacities and facilities will be consistently concentrated on the most im-
portant assignments. using the potential contained in international coopera-
tion, in systematic purchase of licenses, in extensive cooperation with the
scientific research base in the user sectors, and in the academy of sciences
and the advanced schools.

The orientation toward quality and efficiency must be implemented by further
consistent implementation of the Set of Measures for Improving the System of
Planned Management of the National Economy. Improved planning, the incentive
system and the comprehensive program for management development are aimed at a
rapid increase in social labor productivity, at consistent adherence to plan
priorities, and particularly at assuring export, improving the quality and
reliability of equipment and products delivered, and systematically increas-
ing the percentage of products with a high technical level.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL, Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury, Prague, 1982

8480

cso: 21.00/208 3"”

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY