FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10646
8 July 1982

USSR Report

PHYSICS AND MATHEMATICS

(FOUO 5/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MB

ms publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Beadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original informtion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘Ihe contents of this publication in no way represent the polio
ciea, views or attitudes of the 11.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNBRSHIP OP
MTBRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J?RS L/lo
8 July 19

USSR REPORT
Puvsms AND MATHEMATICS

(P000 5/ 82)

Courem's

CRISTALS AND SUIOONWCTGIS

your.kve moulmlwtronic Interaction eeeoeeoeoeaoeeeeeeo.ooeeo 1

FLUID DYNAMICS
Subsonic Radiation wave: in moo...neeooooaaeeeooeaevoooecooeoee 1‘

Nmerical Stuw of Vibrational Relaxation Hith Turbulent
Jet ms in Supersonic "03313 eeeoooeeeeeeaoeeoeoeooeeooeeoee 9

Methods of Solving Simplified Steady-State Viscous Gas

nations O'COOUIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO‘OCOOOnCOOOIOOIOOOOOOOQOOOOOO 17

was ANDHASHIS

Theoretical and Experimental Detenlination of Vibrational
Temperature: and Gains in andynanic 002 Laser hath Additives
of CO and N0, Part 2: Experimental Technique and Research

”salts 0....00.0.0000...IOOOCIOQOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOOOOOCOOOQC 51

High-Efficiency motoiniﬂated DZ'FZ'COZ L889? a a e e e o e e o e o e a o e e a a 58

Influence of Specific Ptmping Power on Working Efficiency
of Atnoepheric-Preeeure Electron-Dean Controlled 002 Laser...” 60

Investigation of Chemical HF Laser Baeed on High-Pressure
“2.3!.6 Mime 0.0...O0.0.0.0000...00.000.000.000.0.0.0.0000... 6h

Feasibility Stow on Haxinizing Specific mission Parameter:
of Chain ”action HF Mr 0.0...OOOOe.0...OOOOOOOCOCCOOOOCOOOO 69

Influence of Starting Initiation on Ila/h Laser Parameters ...... 73
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New Phosphate Class for Lasers Hith High Mission Pulse
Recurrence Rate o0000OOODOOOOeeeeseseeseeoseeeoeeeeeeeeeeeOO

Picosecond Pulse Generation in Alexandrite Laser in 0.7-0. 8 pm
Me mm Passive "0d. ”king 0..GOO....OOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOU

Estimating Possibilities for Using Phase Conjugate
Adaptive Systems To Components Laser Beam lI'hernal

mfocusmg 00.0eOOOeOOoOOOOeOeeeseoonOesesseoeeesooeeeeesoo
”fiC1ency of Copper vamr Mora eeeeeeeeseeeseeeoooeeoeoeoes

’mernoelastic Action of Periodically Pulsed Laser Radiation
0n &11d surface OOOOOOOOOOOOIQO0.0.09000OOOIOCOOOOOOQO'OOO.

Regenerating working Mixture of Iodine Laser Uith Open-
machu‘g. Mug 0.0.0.0000...0000000000..IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Influence of Sound Waves on mlsed Gas-Discharge Laser
“8810‘" PO“, COOCOO...O...00.0.0000.00000000000IIOOOOOOOO.

New Working Substances for Photodismiative Iodine Laser ....

OPTICS AHD 8W?!

Theory of Observation of— Underwater Objects Through "ave-
covered 3°. sm'fme CO....OOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOCOOOOO000.000....

Wavefront Reversal by Pour-Have Mixing in Emma-Nonlinear

"061m 0.0000000000000000estototoloooeeeoooesoooc0900.000...

SteaW-State mac” of Optical striations eeeeeoeseeoeeoooeoee

Wavefront Reversal Theory for Radiation With Spatially
Inhomogeneous Distribution of Average Intensity ............

Stimulated Many-Photon Effects on Diffraction Grating ........

Laser Dispersal of Polydisperse water Aerosol ................
HATHWTICS

Operative Identification of Control Objects ..................

Methods of Synthesising Low-Sensitivity Linear Control

Systalla .00...oooooesoooeeeoeooooooioeteseseeeosooeoooseseeo

mptive control .0.00....00.000.000.000000000IOOOOOOOOOOOO...

POIOFFICIALUSBWLY
me OFFICIAL (SE ONLY

CRYSTALS MID ”WNW

mun-mm WSW!!! mum

Leningred PIS'HA v 2mm. nmrcmsror rum in Rueeien Vol 8. no 3.
12 Feb 82 (eenuscript received 1) Sep Bl) pp 133-136

[Article by L. A. Slevutekiynnd 1. Yu. Bolodov. Hoscow Stete University
ieeni H. V. Lononosov]

[Text] Mouetoelectric nonlineer effects ere the beeie for electronic devices
used in convolution. correlation end other (one of signal processing Inst. 1].
Such effects ere usuelly studied on the teeie of equere-lew nonlineerity of

a nediue with cuneideretion of only three-weve interection of scoustic waves.
A report wes given in Ref. 2 on the use of four-weve interection oi surface
waves with en electric field for eignel storsge. Our peper is the first to
report expert-«tel observetion of four-weve interection of surfece end body
acoustic waves enebling reelisstion of new functionel operations: triple
convolution end correlation of redio signele.

w
1

   

Fig. 1. art disarm of triple convolution (s) end correlation (b)

Fig. 1e shows en ur-k diesrel of four-wave interection of ecoustic surfece

and body waves. The two dispersion brenches of the discus correspond to
body (longitudinel) end eurfsce weves with phese velocities thet setisfy the
spproxieete condition °ebw' 2cm. In the presence of the piezoelectric ef-
fect, the exis k-O of the disgrsn is s third dispersion brench of the systen
in which electronegnetic perturbstions eey occur. Conditions of synchronis-
with four-weve interection teke the fore k.-k1+kz+kg. we'u1+u1+us. end

FORWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with consideration of the possibility of interaction of opposed acoustic waves
are illustrated in Fig. Is. It is clear fron the disgran that when «12- u;-
2m; and calm! 2c." we have k~-0 and cog-5m. Consequently. when a surface
wave interacts with an accompanying body wave [Ref . l. 2] and with an opposed
surface wave lief. 3]. for which «a; -u.- 20);. a spatially houogeneous electric
field is formed with frequency Sm. Such interaction can be realized under
conditions of cubic nonlinearity of the aediu. or through two sequential
three-wave processes on a quadratic nonlinearity.

The reverse third-order nonlinear effect - generation of a surface wave with
frequency to; [Ref. 6] as a result of interaction of an electric field on fre-
quency Sun [Ref. 1] with opposed longitudinal (Ref. 3] and surface (Ref. 2]
waves (mg-«lg. 2m) - is shown in Fig. lb. The conditi ns f synchronise
for this process can be written in the following form: k..-%1 -kz-k3.
mg-ul-w-wg.

The described four-wave processes were experilentally observed under condi-
tions of acoustoelcctric nonlinearity of a laminar LiNbOg-Si structure. Acou-
stic surface waves with frequencies of 15 and 30 m: were excited in ya-LiNbO;
by interdigital transducers in the pulse node (conversion losses of the order
of 10 dB. band 3-5 ﬁlls). A 30 mt. longitudinal acoustic wave pulse was excited
by half-wave resonant transducers ends of the seas natsrial and cemented to
the end face of the specimen (losses I15 d8. band '3 ﬁle). To accomplish
interaction of acoustic body and surface waves. the end face of the backing
was cut at an angle of 310° to the axis y-LiNb03. In the region of the trail
of the longitudinal wave on the surface of the backing between the surface
wave transducers was a p-Si specinen measuring 5:: 20: 2 m with conductivity
of 310" (rt-ca)“. The resultant electric field was taken off by using solid
netal electrodes on the upper surface of the semiconductor and the bottoa
plane of the backing; the signal free the electrodes went to the input at

an anplifier tuned to a frequency of 75 tile. Upon latching of tine synchroni-
zation of the pulses to correspond to nesting of three interacting waves under
the semiconductor. the signal of their interaction (triple convolution) was
registered at the amplifier output.

Pig. 2. Triple convolution

voltage as c function of the

voltage across the transducers:

l~transducer for 15 h'Bz surface

waves; 2-body-wave transducer;

3--transducer for 30 MHz surface
waves

 

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 2 shows the experimentally obtained dependences of the triple convolution
signal voltage anplitude on the voltage across each of the acoustic wave trans-
ducers (with voltage across the two others held constant). We can see from
this figure that at an input voltage of 317 V. the output signal of the triple
convolution has an alplitude of the order of 300 w and varies linearly with
increasing input signals up to 5 V. that there is a region of saturation

of the curves on Fig. 2 can apparently be attributed to effective energy ex-
change ss a result of three-wave interactions. Typically. since the efficiency
of such processes is higher for surface waves [Rah 3]. it is for waves of
this type that saturation regions appear on Fig. 2. we should also take note
of rather high efficiency of the triple convolution process. At input voltages
of 15 V. external losses to convolution 3- 201g lit/U; do not exceed 90 d3.

He used the experimental technique described above to observe the third-order
inverse nonlinear effect - generation of surface waves as a result of four-
wave interaction. Since the signal of the inverse surface wave is a function
of acoustic correlation of the interacting waves. such a process represents
triple correlation. The dependences on input voltage levels in this case

are analogous to those shown on Fig. 2. and have characteristic saturation
regions. External losses of triple correlation are cooperatively low (11.. I 1 IV
at U. ~Uz~03310 V), and amounted to :80 dB.

This level of effectiveness of four-wave interaction is cohpletely acceptable in
practical acoustoelectronics. Therefore the observed third-order nonlinear
effects say find practical application in electronic devices that are associ-
ated with reciprocal processing of several signals.

REFERENCES
1‘ Ray”. Go. TIIER. V01 64. 19769 P [88.
2. Ralston. R. l. Stern. 2., APPL. PHYS. 1.311.. Vol 35. No 2. 1979. p 150.

3. Bozhenko. V. V.. Lyanov. V. Ye.. Solodov. 1. Yu.. ZHURNAL TEKIINICIIBSKOY
FIZIKI. Vol 51. No 3. 1981. p 650.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Wauka". "Pis'na v Zhurnal tekhnicheskoy fiziki". 1982

6610
680: 1862/1239

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FLUID mmcs

UDC 621.373.826:533.951
SUBS“!!! RADIATION WAVES 1“ AIR

Moscow KVANTOVAYA mmum in Russisn Vol 9. No 3017). Mar 82 (nemecript
received 6 Her 81. after revision 25 Jun 81) pp 615-618

[Article by ‘l‘. V. Loeeva and I. V. Neuhinw. Institute of Physics of the
Earth ineni 0. Yu. Sluidt. 088! Academy of Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] It is shown that fast laser enission absorption
waves (with pressure in the shock wave generated by the
expanding plane much higher than atnospheric) with pre-
dominant role of plasna self-radiation in the sechanieu

of propagation can exist at flux densities at least an order
of eagnitude lower than those at which they have been ex-
perinentally observed heretofore. The evolution of such
subsonic radiation waves free the initial plea-a layer is
traced by nunerical calculations of the corresponding spec-
tral radiation-gasdynanic problan. and the authors detsnine
the way that their najor para-stars depend on tine (up to
the quasi-steady stage of propagation) and on flux density
of sore than 0.1 Inf/ca: for a C0; laser and l HH/cn’ for

e neodyniuI laser.

In Ref. 1. 2. an experinental and theoretical exaeination was nade of the
propagation of a laser spark in air-of noml density in the slow-burning
node at rates of the order of 10 rule. It was asst-ed that fla-e front propa-
gation is due to ordinary heat conduction. For enall radii of the laser ball
(of the order of 1 an) plans radiation leads only to energy losses free the
plasma layer.

It was shown in Ref. 3. ’0 that with a sufficiently large irradiation spot
size. plasne propagation relative to the barrier at which it arises will be

- determined by a hydrodynalic nschanisl: as the plane is heated. it expands
and produces a shock wave. The rate of expansion of the hot plane. which
in essence displaces the cool air. say be fairly high. and pressure is corre-
spondingly appreciable '

s'-l.0a"-’d"”. ,_ 15:3’3‘6'". u)

ﬂare v is plasna velocity. b/lo (Is is laser mission flux density. HIV/cs2.
6 is the ratio of air density to its nornal value. p is pressure in bars.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the pressure in the plssna say be much greater than atmospheric. the
optical thickness of the plane layer will be large (for geometric dines-
sions that are not too snail). and the self-radiation of this layer will de-
termine the process of capture of gas particles by the plasma -- ease flow
through the absorption wavefront. and with it the maxim:- temperature. The
ideas of subsonic radiation waves [Rah 3. lo] have been experinentally con-
firmed [Bef. 5-9]. Past absorption waves (with velocities of more than 1 Isle)
have been studied at q.) 10 I'll/ca2 for radiation with wavelength x- I III
[sens-1] and at qo>l HH/cn' for A- 10 in [Ref. 8. 9]. Our estimates and
calculations have shown that fast absorption waves generally speaking nay
exist at even lower radiation flux densities.

The probl- of propagation of a subsonic radiation wave was solved by a nethod
analogous to Ref. 3. lo. Detailed consideration was taken of the spectral
makeup of the radiation. and detailed tables of absorption coefficients were
used [Ref. 10]. Since analysis of Ref. 1. 2 shows that heat conductivity
at low radiation flux densities nay play an appreciable role. in contrast
to Ref. 3. 1., molecular and electronic thermal conductivity were taken into
consideration in addition to energy transport by hydrodynaic nesns and by
radiation. using coefficients deternined from tables of Ref. 11. 12. The
process of plasma origination was not considered in this work. It was asst-ed
that at the initial instant in the air above the barrier there existed a plans
layer with initial teaperature of 1 eV at a pressure determined by relation (1).
The initial optical thickness of the layer for radiation with A- 10 an at
a mass of 20 ug/ca2 is approxinstely 0.2-0.3.

T. eV

2 10
m :mI'Mus T-OV

 

Pig. 1

The spatial distribution of temperature I at different tines t is shown in
Fig.1 for a CO; laser at tag-0.1 (a) and 5 Mil/en: (b). The qualitative pat-
tern of the process of please heating and absorption wave advancement is the
sane for these values of on and for intermediate values. Laser radiation

is absorbed in s cooperatively narrow zone. The gas is heated at temperatures
below 1.1 all by radiation of the continuous spactru emitted by the plans.

At higher temperatures. absorption of laser radiation plays a aajor role.

It was found that heat conduction does not play an appreciable role. which
was determined both by analysis of profiles of tenperature and energy release
due to heat conduction and radiation effects, and by direct comparison of
calculation with and without consideration of theml conductivity. Radiation
effects play a decisive part in advancement of the absorption wave.

5
me omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pressure and velocity in the steady state at q.- 0.1-5 luv/cu: are detersinsd
by relation (1) with accuracy of 1201. The spatial maxim- of temperature
1.. continuous-spectra: radiation flux density de-escited fro. the plane

to the wall q”. and also the flux density enanating from the place toward
the laser are siailar functions of the specific energy 8 supplied up to
the given instant t for all values of no in the range considered. Pig. 2
shows curves of ‘1'.(B) for various q..

1' eV
'" At 32. 20 J/cn’. the pattern becoaes quasi-steady.
Harin- taperstures in the quasi-steady stage
change cooperatively weekly with m:

15- n+o.2513 (qo/l mom-"nu r. (2)

Mass flowrate H is nearly proportional to q.:
et Qo-OJ W/cnz we have H-OJ glen: 0s. Total
energy losses fron the plasaa layer to radiation
increase with decreasing laser eaission flux
density and reach 1.52 at q.-o.1 Mule-2. m
values of 11 and '1'. at (lo-0.2 I‘ll/cl2 (1.3 g/cnz-s
.- ' and 1.9 eV) and at «10-5 miles2 (27 g/cuz's and
Pig. 2 2.8 eV) differ soaewhat from the values given
in Ref. 6. The differences can be attributed to
the fact that in Ref. 6 for these values of q. the problen was solved only
in the nultigroup approximation. At on 1-5 MF/cla2 the calculated values of
the para-eters of the subsonic radiation wave are fairly close to the experi-
aental values (Ref. 8. 9]. especially if one considers the influence of the
spike at the beginning of the CO; laser radiation pulse and the corresponding
effects of uneteadiness. In the experiaents of Ref. 13 at qo>0.2 tilt/ca2 with
millisecond pulses emitted by a 003 laser. propagation of slow conbustion
waves was observed. This is due to the seall size of the irradiated spot
(<1 cn) and the correspondingly strong influence of two-dinensionality in
expansion of the plans jet. leading to nearly atmospheric pressure.

 

For large spots and shorter pulse durations after coepletion of the stage

of plasaa origination. the pattern should be close to that described by our
calculations. which are in the nature of a theoretical prediction for such
low flux densities and conditions of plane geometry of places expansion. In
the case of pulses of anooth shape. the stage of plasma origination looms
large for low laser radiation flux densities. according to calculations of
Ref. 16 and experinents of Ref. 13. And in addition. if the saplitude of

the spike is great enough. the specific energy of plasma initiation is corre-
spondingly low (let us say. of the order of 2-3 J/cn’). and absorption waves
propagating due to the radiation nechenisa say be observed right down to quite
low flux densities in the nain part of the laser pulse and up to the stage

of quasi-steady pulse propagation. for exanpls. at a flux density of 0.1
mlcn’. the thickness of the plasma layer by a tins of 100-200 us does not
exceed 2-lo ca5 i. e. at a spot area of the order of 50 cn’ and specific energy
of 10-20 J/cn . which is quite sufficient for reaching the quasi-steady stage
of propagation. the total radiation energy of the 001 laser is approxisately
001-! U.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Estimates and calculations like those described above show that for a neo-
dyniun laser the threshold of naintaining quasi-steady fast laser radiation
absorption waves is higher than for the co, laser. but such waves can also
exist at flux densities nuch lower than in the experiments of Ref. 5-7. and
specifically at least at go) 1 m/cn’. Qualitatively. the pattern of propa-
gation of fast absorption waves for needy-1m laser radiation is analogous

to that given in Ref. 3. b and above for the 00; laser. The pressure and
expansion rate found in the calculations also agree with relations (1). how-
ever. the ingition tenperature (1.3 eV) is higher than for the 00; laser.

and accordingly the sexism tenperature of the plane is sonewhat higher than
given by relation (2). Of course. in this case as well at low no special
plasna ignition is advisable. and the initial stage of developsent of the
effect depends on the para-eters of the "initiator." At laser radiation flux
densities lower than those given in the calculations. the reduction of pressure
in the initial plasns layer due to hydrodynamic expansion. and the correspond-
ing cooling due to the amplified radiation nay lead to transparency of the
laser plasna and to a change in the nature of the processes occurring there.
"Stalled" (decelerated) and "rushed" (accelerated) waves becone possible. as
well as pulsating nodes of wave propagation with inconplete absorption of laser
radiation.

Subaonic radiation waves propagating fron a barrier under conditions of plane
geometry have been considered above. however. such waves (with please pressure
much greater than atnospheric) are possible in an unbounded gas nediun as
well when they propagate fron an initial plasaa layer that is initiated for
exanple by an optical breakdown or electric discharge. The parnseters of

such waves in their quasi-steady stage are not such different fron those of
waves propagating from a wall. For exanple, velocities are only 21” tines
less than those given by relations (1) for expansion in both directions rather
than to one side only. The naxinun tenperature difference is even less #518-
nificant. The only noticeable difference is in pressures - they are 2

tines lower. The threshold of naintaining such quasi-steady fast absorption
waves is correspondingly sonevhat higher. BOUQVCI’, all the sale they nay
exist in the flux density region where only comparatively slow waves were
observed under the conditions of the experinents of Ref. 1, 13. 15 (with pres-
sure close to atnospheric). although hydrodynamic effects had already begun

to play a part in their propagation as well.

REFERENCES

I. Bunkin. P. V.. Konov. V. 1.. Prokhorov. A. M. et al.. PIS'HA V 2mm
ESPEIHENTAL'NOY I TWICHBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 9. [969. p 609.

2. Rayzer. Yu. P.. "Lasernaya iskra i rasproetraneniye razryadov" [Laser
Spark and Discharge Propagation]. Moscow. Nauks. 1975.

3. Bergel'son. V. 1.. Loseva. 1'. V.. Neachinov. I. V.. ZRURRAL PRIMNOY
menu: I mmmuzsror FIZIKI. llo lo. 1976. p 22.

b. Kozik. Ya. A., Loseva. ‘1'. V.. Reachinov. I. V. et al.. KVAN'IOVAYA
ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1978. p 2138.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S.

6.

7.

9.

lo.

11.

12.

13.
1b.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kozlova. N. 11.. Harkovich. I. 8.. Inchinov. I. V. et a1.. KVAN‘I'OVAYA
mrmm. Vol 2. 1975. p 1930.

lorchsnko. A. You Sobolev. A. P.. Pedyushin. B. '1'.. KVANTOVAYA
Emma. Vol 6. 1979. p 1556.

Besssrsb. A. V.. Dolgslsvs. G. V.. Zhidkov. N. V. ct s1... PIZIKA W.
Vol 5. 1979. p 558.

lahysv. A. A.. Vssil'yev. 1.. A.. Nikolsshkins. L. N. er s]... KVAMOVAYA
Emm. V01 2’ 1975. P 1278.

Bsksysv. A. A.. Nikolsshkins. 1.. 11.. Prokopenko. 11. V.. KVAN'NVAYA
nmmm. Vol 7. 1980. P 1236.

Avilovs. I. V.. Kibemn. 1.. 11.. Vorob'ysv. V. s. at s1.. "Optichsskiys

svoystvs goryschego vozdukhs" [Optical Properties of Hot Air] . Moscow.
Nauka. 1970.

Stupochsnko. Ye. V.. Dotssnko. B. 3.. Stakhsnov. I. P. et 31.. in:
"Pizichsskays gszovays dinuika" [Physical Gss Dynnics]. Koscow. Izd-vo
All 8883. 1959. p 39.

Kslitkin. N. 8.. Kuz'sina. L. V.. Rogov, V. 8.. "stlitsiy
tenodinnicheskikh funktsiy i trsnsportnykh kosffitsiyentov plsay"
[stlas of Thorsodynslic Motions and Transport Coefficients of Plans].
Roscov. Izd-vo IP11 AN SSSR. 1972.

Klostsrssn. E. 1... Byron. s. 11.. J. APPL. ms., Vol 1.6. 1974. p 4751.

Golub'. A. T.. Nachiuov. I. V.. KVAI’TOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980.
p 1831.

Bufstov. I. A.. Prokhorov. A. 11.. Pedorov. V. 3.. Patio. V. K.. PIS'HA
V MAL KSPBRW'NOY I mnmcuzsxOY FIZIKI. Vol 32. 1980. p 281.

COPYRIGHT: Isdstel'scvo "de“ i svysz'". "Kvsntovays alskrroniks". 1982

6610

CSO:

1862/1105

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.373.826.038.823

Hinsk INZWNO-PIZICBBSKIY mm. in Russian Vol 62. No 6. Apr 82 (manu-
script received 27 Jan 81) pp 586-592

[Article by A. V. Lavrov and V. A. Pospelov. Leningrad Polytechnical Institute
ineni H. I. Kalinin]

[Text] The paper gives the results of a coeputational study
of the influence that different working parameters have on
the characteristict. of s co; gaedynaic laser with selective
that-a1 excitation. -

Calculation of supersonic jet lining with consideration of vibrational relaxa-
tion is of considerable interest in connection with the developnent of hyper-
sonic wind tunnel equipment (Ref. 1]. investigation of spontaneous enission

in jet engine flows (Ref. 2]. and creation of gsadyn-ic lasers (GDLs) with
selective thernal excitation [Ref. 3-18]. Experimental research in recent
years [Raf. 3-1!) shows the possibility of using nixing in lasers to get higher
gains and specific energy outputs than in Cuba with preniung. Alongside

the further develop-ant of experimental research. a problen of some topicality
is develop-ant of an adequate mnerical model of the laser and using it as

a basis for both parastric studies and analysis of the influence of separate
factors on em. operation. however. up until now the only extensive theoretical
research that has been done on the sixing co, out has been based on an instan-
taneous eixing model [Ref. lZ-llo]. Clearly, calculations using this nodel
will agree well with experimental data if nixing takes place in the nozzle
asseably [Rah 6] or the mixer unit proposed in Ref. 5 is used. However.

if the Goa-Hie is nixed through a central plug. where the injection itself
takes place free a flat profiled noxxle (Ref. 11] or free circular orifices

in the central plug (and the distance between orifices is approximately equal

of the laser characteristics. Furthermore. in designing the optical cavity.
data on density and gain profiles are needed.

There are currently examples in the literature on calculation of jet mixing
in CO; cm: with selective theml excitation both on the basis of a systen
of boundary layer equations (narrow-channel) (Ref. 15-17]. and with the use of

9
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sinplified Ravier-Stoltes equations Ref. 11. 18]. In particular. in Ref. 17
the solution is based on using a ssni-espiricel nodal of turbulence relying
on an equation of pulsation energy balance with a universal eat of nunericsl
coefficients. which had been successfully used previously in analyzing free
shear flows [Ref. 19, 20]. Satisfactory agreenent between the results of
calculation [Ref . 17] and experinental date [Ref. 4] on distribution of anall-
aignsl gain g. co, concentration Y and lasing power provides a basis for using
the proposed technique in nuaerical psruetric investigation of 003 GDLs with
selective thsrnal excitation. -

Caaparieon with Rxperinsntal Results. Ref. 10 gives abundant data on the
influence of temperature and pressure in the gas generator chnber obtained

by using a nozzle with central plug analogous in design to that of Ref. lo.

In doing the corresponding calculations. it was seemed that the half-height
of the 002 supply jet was so. - 0.2 m. height of the hot nitrogen jet
(A.g-A.1)-0.8 a, ratio of output cross section to critical cross section
ABIAog- 15.7. length of the supersonic part of the nozzle xc- 60 III. The
nozzle contour was taken from Ref. 21. which gives the results of calculations
of nozzles of nininue length with a corner point (the contour for Each amber
H- 6.5 was used with ratio of specific heats ”my-1.5). The Hach nubers

at the beginning of the calculated region were equal to no; - ng- 1.2. coupo-
sition of the nixture of the secondary jet coves-1:1. (by value). initial
temperature 300 R. and the values of the other paraeeters‘ are given in the
table. The flow length of the cavity was taken as :1,- 24 ca. distance between
nirrors L- 17 cu. coefficients of absorption of the mirrors urea-0.02. coef-
ficient of t; -0. and t; was deter-ined in an optimization process.

    
   
 

Fig. 1. Specific energy output and
optimu- traneniseion coefficient of I, ,
output nirror as a function of the
stagnation pressure: I-oexperinent
[Ref. 10]; Iii—calculation. ("0.02; 3
III—(n+ 6L) - 0.05; nitrogen stag-
nation tenpersture: l-‘l'. - 2000;
2--2500; 3-3000 K; but (10- 2500 R). a
II. Hg; 1’. we
5'0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Results of conparing experimental data with calculations are shown in Fig. l.
The sonewhat higher value of the specific energy output obtained in the cal-
culation can be attributed to the fact that in the first place no consideration
was taken of losses of vibrational energy during flow in the subcritical part
of the nozzle. and in the second place the actual losses in the cavity

were not considered (see Ref. 22). For exaqle when the overall coefficient

of losses per pas. (11+ 61.) was increased to 0.05. the calculated curves agreed
such better with eotperinental data. Fig. 1 also shows the results of conputa-
tional optiniration of the coefficient of transnission of the senitransparent
nirror, evidencing the necessity for selecting t; in s nultifactor optimisation
process. It is important to note that the t; obtained in the calculation

lie in the range of mirror trans-lesions used in the experiment of Ref. 10.

Results of ﬂuerical Paraletric Study. Calculations were done using the
nozzle contour taken from Ref. lo. Mach nubers Hal-Hm- 1.2. static pressure
at the beginning of the conputational region 1’; Iva-0.2064532 HPe. which
corresponds to pressure in the gas generator ch-ber of 0.5-6 “Pa. taperature
and flow velocity are given in the table. and the values of other para-eters
are given in Ref. 17. In order to reduce the umber of parueters to be varied
in the given section, the calculations were done for conditions of laser oper-
ation in the amplification node, i. e. without consideration of the losses

on the nirrors. The field intensity of the master laser was 10 w/a’. and
the flow length of the cavity was 8 and 60 on.

 

Pig. 2. Specific energy output (a. b) and average anall-

signal gain (c) at the nozzle tip as a function of CO; con-

tent in the secondary flow (aux -60; b—B on); 1-3-4.-

2500: 5'6“”00 R; l. 5—? '13 o 5-4; 3. 6--3 “Pa; 1-
gain g<0 at xp<60 ca. 3. a"

Pig. 2 shows the results of calculation of specific energy output and average
If
gain g=£ “wag/,4, at'the nozzle tip for different values of working

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLV

paraneters. Let us note that for ease fairly large values of y. the gain
drops to 0 at xp< 1.0 CI. As we can see from the figure. the optim- cospo-
sition of the secondary jet depends appreciably both on pressure and on ten-
perature. an increase in P and 'r entailing a reduction in the optinue value
of 7. It is ieportsnt to note that in operation of a laser with working paran-
eters Po. 3 We. T.- 3000 K. the optieu eixture from the standpoint of maxi-
nising energy output is 602 die-1:9. and transition to the 1:10 nixture nest
often used in experiment reduces the energy output by 25!. It is interesting
that for both short and long cavities the reduction in N with increasing 7 at
y>y t is weaker at To -2500 K. This is because in the given case there

is acteduction of gas tenperature in the cavity. 1. e. greater relaxation
losses are possible. which increase with increasing CO; concentration. The
results given on Fig. 2 show that for all working parneters the value of 7
that is necessary for attaining maxi-us g is much greater than is necessary
for naxinising the specific energy output. In application to GDLs with pre-
nixing. this fact has already been repeatedly nentioned in the literature
(see for example Ref. 23). The results show that for the short ca rity the
specific energy output is about half that for the long cavity. prarently
increasing the field strength (by increasing the spacing between nirrors)
does not appreciably increase it at xp- 8 on. since in addition to the limiting
influence of the rate of transfer of vibrational energy from N: to woo“ it
is essential for the given aixing unit that mixing continues in the cavity.

The given results do not allow us to evaluate the influence of various factors
on specific energy output. Therefore Pig. 3 shows data on the efficiencies

 

Fig. 3. Dependence of nozzle efficiency. mixing efficiency

(a). cavity efficiency (b. c) and null—signal gain on the

output of gas fro. the cavity (1!) on co; content in the sec-

ondary flow; luxp- 8; 11-40 on; Ill-mixing efficiency 8
on nozzle tip; l-6—sane as Fig. 2

of the nozzle nc and the cavity np. nixing efficiency BIC": (y-O):cn2 (y-Ag)
and on the average gain as the gas leaves the cavity. As can be seen froa this
figure. “c decreases with increasing co; concentration. and in all cases ex-
ceeds the value nc-0.65. However. for cuts with eixing this quantity does

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not cospletely characterize nozzle efficiency. for the closeness of nc to
unity is evidence of poor nixing of N2 and 002+Bs. Therefore Fig 3a also
shows the values of nixing efficiency 8 on the nozzle tip and at tue end of
the cavity. It can be seen that 8 increases with increasing CO; concentra-
tion. This is explained by the fact that at a fixed value of II“ an increase
in 1 leads to a reduction in the velocity of the secondary flow (see table);
consequently there is an increase in the difference of velocities of the flows
of I; and 003+ne and accordingly in the effective coefficient of turbulent
viscosity. The points of inflection on the curves can be attributed to the
conplexity of the process of turbulent listing in the presence of a strong
negative pressure gradient. Mixing efficiency does not exceed 60%. which
shows the necessity for further improving the nozzle units used. Increasing
the pressure leads to a slight drop in B. and a rise in nitrogen teaperature
causes soeewhat of an increase in B. which is due to an increase in velocity
V3 (see the table).

Fig. 3b and c show data on cavity efficiency. The efficiency of the cavity
at x -8 cu does not exceed the value np-0.35. At .40 an, efficiency
reaczes 651 for the flow node with paraeeters To-ZSO K. Po -1 ma, y-0.25.
As we can see froe coapsring Fig. 2a and 3b. c. at xp- 40 can. similarity is
observed in the curves for I and as a function of 7. However. at x - 8 cu,
such sinilarity is not observed. or exanple at xp-8 a. Po -2 We. 0'
2500 K. II reaches a naxinu at 78 0.2. whereas np continues to increase at
even higher values.

Cavity efficiency can also be evaluated free the gain on gas output free the
cavity. Therefore the corresponding calculated data are shown on Fig. 3d.

We can see fro. the figure that for nodes with maxi-In energy output a further
increase in the gas-outlet gain is possible either by reducing the length

of the cavity or by increasing field strength.

Pig. 6. Influence of stag-
nation tenperature and pres-
sure on cm. characteristics:
l-Po - l; II--3 “Pa; 111--
‘l‘o- 2500; “"3000 K; 1-
N. J/g; 2-np;3--nc; lo-y-gain
on nozzle tip; S—gain at
cavity outlet

Results of investigation of the in-
fluence that initial nitrogen tee-
perature has on cm. characteristics
are shown on Fig. 10. It is important
to eephasize that at Po- 3 “Pa the
energy output at 19- 3500 K is little
nore than half the value at the _opti-
nun temperature of 2500 K. and at

the sale tine the gain at the nozzle tip at the maximal tenperature is slightly
lower than the naxieun gain. Analysis of the way that nozzle and cavity

 

13
I-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

efficiencies depend on 1'.) shows that the reduction in N is due mainly to an
increase in up as a consequence of rising gas temperature in the cavity.

It is of considerable interest to study the way that specific energy output
depends on stagnation pressure since increasing P. simplifies the problem
of restoring pressure in the flow to atmospheric level (see for era-ple Ref.
11). Results of corresponding calculations are shown on Fig. lo. He can see
that for ‘r.- 2500. ”00 K the misuse energy output is reached at pressure
of l. 0.5 We respectively. 0f considerable interest is the fact that when
P.) 2.2 We the energy output for ‘l'.- 2500 K is higher than for 3000 K. In
this case. the reduction of energy output is also caused chiefly by a drop
in cavity efficiency. firstly due to the increase in gas temperature there,
and secondly due to an increase in relaxation loeaee.

Thus the results given above show the feasibility of achieving high specific
energy output in GDLs with selective thernel excitation when all working param-
eters are appropriately optimised. The computational data enable us to evalu-
ate the aixing efficiency. as well as the nozzle and cavity efficiencies.

and to lake reco-endationa on improving than. The influence that nozzle

shape and mixing cross section have on the energy output. and comparison of

the CO: and mo GDLs are beyond the scope of this work and will be covered

in future research.

Symbols

cunass concentration; gusmall-signal gain; t-mirror transmission coeffi-
cient; wry-length of supersonic part of nozsle; at -length of cavity; Aor-
hslf-height of 003+Be supply jet; Aoguhalf-heig t of initial cross section
of the nozzle; Ag—half-height of output cross section; L--spacing between
mirrors; H—Hach umber; N—specific energy output; P—prsssure; Tntenpera-
ture; Po. 'ro—nitrogen stagnation pressure and tenpereture; v-dvelocity;
u-mirror absorption coefficient; sunning efficiency; y--voluetric concen-
tration of 003 in secondary flow; 6-—:--.—-$S.‘icient of linear attenuation of
radiation; nc-nosrle efficiency; np’-~:.-.-.vity efficiency.

REFERENCES

l. Muchnaya. h. 1.. "Calculating Flow of Viscous Gas in Hypersonic Nozzle
Hith Consideration of Vibrational Nonequilibrium". IZVBSTIYA mam
MIX SSSR: manna ZHIKOSTI I GAZA. No l. 1979. PP 165-168.

2. Jensen. D. 8.. Wilson. A. 8.. "Prediction of Rocket Exhaust leae Proper-
ties". 001311811101! AND rune. Vol 25. No l. 1975. pp 103-109.

3. Korshko. V. N.. Soloukhin R. 1.. "Optiaum Conditions for Obtaining In-
version uith Thermal Excitation by Mixing in Supersonic Plow". DOKIADY
MADE}!!! W 8853. Vol 211. No lo. 1973. PP 829-832.

6. ‘l'aren. J. P. 8.. Charpenel. It. Borghi. 1?... "Investigation of u Mixing
CO: 801.". Am PAPER No 73-622. 1973. 9 pages.

11;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10a

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ktauklia. A. V.. lmahko. V. 11.. Soloukhin R. 1.. Pain. l. A.. ”Laaing
Conditione in am. With Thermal Excitation and Mixing in Superconic Plow".
P121“ WA I VZRYVA. Vol 12. 1‘0 5. 1976. pp 792-795.

Canady. P. 2.. levton. 3.. Race. P.. "A New Mixing Gaadynenic Laaer".
AIAA PAPER 110 76-363. 1976. ll pagee.

Schall. 17.. llofhan. P.. Hugel. 3.. "Perfornance of “3/00; Gaadynalic
Mixing Laeera". J. APPL. PHYS” Vol ‘8. Mo 2. 1977. pp 688-6”.

Yeti-av. I. 6.. Zaklyac'ainakiy. L. A.. "Experinantal Btudiea of the In-
fluenca of Mixing Conditiona in Laval Nozzle on Gain in Supersonic 11w".
FIZIIA MRI I VZIYVA. Vol 15. No 1. 1979. pp 97-102.

Oatroukhov. ll. 11.. ‘l'kachenko. 8. 1.. ”Bfficiency of CO; Excitation in
Gaadynanic Laeer With 0.. Mixing". “MAYA autumn. Vol 5. No 6.
1978. PP 926-926.

Vyakubenko. 8. A. at al.. "Experimental Studiee of Mixing Gaedynaic
CO: Laaer“. WY MI?! IA"! 8888. Vol 248. 1979. pp 81-83.

Ahab-0v. I. V. at al.. 'mgh-relperature cv Mixing 631.". in: "Kinctika
khinicheakikh reaktaiy" [Kinetica of Cheaical leactiona]. Chernogolovka.
matituta of Che-ice]. Physics. 0883 Acadeny of Sciencee. 1980. pp 69-52.

Breyev. V. V.. Kukharenko. A. '1'.. Mapartovich. A. P.. Sharkov. V. P..
"Pcaeibility of laproving CD1. Efficiency". mmnzm WWI!!! mm.

Achaaov. 0. V.. Soloukhin R. 1.. Poain. N. A.. 'mnerical Analyeie of
cm. with Selective Theml Excitation" in: "Probleny teplo- i
“ambient-77” [Problems of neat and Mace Exchange 77]. Minsk. Institute
of Heat and Man Exchange. 3883 Acede of Sciences. 1977. pp 81-84.

Valikanav. A. 6.. Gorahunov. N. M.. Kunin. Yu. A.. Mcniahchenko. 0. P..
"Optinixing Gain in Supersonic Plan by Mixing II: with Goa-Be". [VANTOVAYA
mm. Vol 7. No 9. 1980. PP 1869-1874.

Charpenal. M.. Texan. J. P. 8.. Borghi. R.. "Laeer theraique a Delange".
LA RECI. AMOS?” No 6. 1976. PP 189-197.

Markachev. Ye. 8.. "Iteration Algoritha for Calculating Steady-State Flow
of Viacoua Gee in Laval Nozzle". 011151.311“?! MINDY WEI SPLOSHNOY
sum. Vol 10. No S. 1979. PP 75-80.

Akatnov. N. 1.. Lavrov. A. V.. "turbulent Mixing of Relaxing Jeta in Super-
conic Moxxle". WHA M9111 “MK 8583: mm 21110110er I cm.
N0 2. 1981) Pp 156-160.

Golovicluv. V. 1.. Manchi. 811.. Soloukhin. I. 1.. Putin. M. A.. Nautical
Modeling of Mixing Proceaaee in Obtaining Invaraion by Gaadynanic Methods"
in: "Chialennyye netody reaheniya aadach perenoaa" [Mmrical Methods of

15
no: option us: on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Solving transfer Problem]. mm. Institute of neat and Haas Exchange.
3583 Acad-y of Sciences. 1979. PP 3-66.

19. Akatnov. ll. 1.. "Influence of External Turbulence on Develop-ant of Turbu-
lent Jet". {MS‘I‘IYA MN! m 8888: mm ZIWI I GAZA.

20. Akatnov. ll. 1.. Lavrov. A. V.. "Influence of ‘l'uperature Puloatlono on
Phyatcochonical Processor 11: ugh-rmerature Jet". mtonzm "8011!!!
mmm. Vol 16. No 5. 1978.91) 1005-1011.

21. Verkhovakly. V. P.. "Nucrical Calculation of Flat Supersonic Nozzles
with a Break in the Contour". RUDY rsmn'nooo mo-GIDBODMICEBSKOGO
nusrmm nm N. Ye. ammo. No 1980. 1975. 62 pages.

22. Couch. A. P.. Kullkov. 8. V.. Hamlin. c. 3.. "Calculation of Energy
Characteristics of Hultlconponont Working mm in 001 cm. Dung Coebuo-
tlon Products". mm. PKWY mm 1 rmzcurstor rum.

“0 b. 1919. PP 11-160

23. Louv. 8. A.. "Gazodinallchooktye laury" [Gaodyn-lc Laura]. Moscow.
_ Nauka. 1977. 335 pages.

COPYRIGII‘I: lrdatel'atvo "Mania 1 tokhnika". "Inhenerno-ttrtcheakiy rhurnal".
1982.

6610
(:80: 1862/13!

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 518.517.9006
muons 0P 801.va SIMPLIFIED STEAM-STAT! VISOOUS GAS EQUATIONS

Bovosibirsk man manna STATSIONW unosncnemm WWI? WAIKOGO
GAZA 0mm no 52) in Russian 1981 (signed to press 1 Nov 81) pp 1-52

[Preprint No ‘2. Institute of Theoretical and Applied liechanics. Siberian
Departaent. 0883 Acedesy of Sciences. "Hethod of Solving Siaplified Steady-
State Viicous Gas equations". by V. Di. Kovenya and 8. c. Chunyy. 200 copies.
52 pages

[Text] The authors consider nuerical nodeling of problaaa
of aerodyn-ics in the approxiastion of siaplified viscous
gas equations. They discuss problus of choosing coordinate
systeas and unknown functions. and investigate the correct-
ness of paraboliaed equations. An economic iteration schene
is proposed for solving sinplified Navier-Stokes equations
that is based on decomosition with respect to physical
processes and spatial directions.- The accuracy of the method
is studied. and nautical solutions are coapared for simpli-
fied and couplete Ravier-Stokes equations.

Introduction

The principal difficulties in nmerical nodeling of nultidiaensional super-
sonic steady-state viscous flows based on couplets Navier-Stokes equations

of colpreesible heat-conductive gas are due to considerable expenditures of
coaputer tins and asaory. Therefore in addition to complete equations. ex-
tensive use is aade of simplified aodels obtained free these equations by
various assulptions about the nature of the flow (see Ref. 1). The advantage
of simplified models is the possibility of finding solutions for steady-state
probleas by a nultistep aethod along soae coordinate direction. This reduces
expenditures of coeputer tile and ae-ory. and enhances efficiency of mnerical
soltuion.

The siaplest and nest thoroughly studied si-plified lethod is provided by
boundary layer equations for which effective solution nethods have been devel-
oped (e. g. see bibliography of Ref. 2). The use of boundary layer equations
requires breaking down the region of flow disturbed by a solid into a zone

of inviscid flow and a boundary layer. which is not always feasible.

1?
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another approach is based on considering a unified systsn of sisplified equa-
tions that are valid throughout the region of flow. but at the seas tins have
an evolutionary type relative to one of the spatial coordinates. The viscous
shock layer nodal is such a systsn in which the initial equations are split
into two subsystem: parabolic equations and inviscid equations of first
order. The for-er are solved by finite difference nethods developed for solv-
ing boundary layer equations. The inviscid equations are solved in the blunt-
ing region by the asth of straight lines (Ref. 3]. and further down by a
nultistep finite-difference nethod. Davie was the first to use s viscous
shock layer nethod to calculate flow around a paraboloid of revolution (Ref.
s]. and this nodal was subsequently used by various authors to calculate flow
.m‘md b1“: bod‘u [ﬁfe 5P8].

The nodal next in conplexity that describes viscous supersonic flow is ob-
tained by elininating the second derivatives along the flow fro. couplets
llavier-Stohes equations. The resultant equations are called parabolised
“ﬂier-Stokes equations. Raving an elliptical nature relative to transverse
directions. they enable calculation of flows with the presence of lateral
separations (across the flow). This nodel was first used by Lin and Rubin
to calculate three-dinensional flows (Ref. 9-11]. They proposed a sani-
isplicit nethod of solving parabolised havier-Stohes equations using an iter-
ation process. The systen of resultant difference equations is resolved or.
each ray nor-a1 to the solid by vector sweeps that require inversion of 5r 5
nstricss at each node of the grid. The nethod was used by the authors to
calculate three-dinsnsional flows at a longitudinal corner [Ref. 9]. around
a cone (Ref. 101 and near bodies of the fuselage-ﬂing type [Ref. 11]. Sub-
sequently a similar approach was used by Lubard and Rslliwsll to calculate
lainar flows without axial separation at angles of attack around cones [Ref.
12. 13] and solids of coupler shape [Raﬁ 14]. In Ref. 16 an approach is
suggested in which the step coordinate is chosen in a direction close to a
streaaline. and the transverse coordinates are selected orthogonal to the
step coordinate in the region of appreciable influence of viscous effects.
which enables expansion of the region of applicability of the nodal of parab-
olissd hevier-Stohes equations. a siailar approach that is nore general than
that sectioned is proposed in Ref. 15.

Since the given nethods of solving parebolised Navier-Stohes equations are
s-i-i-plicit, they have lieitations on step size in the direction of improve-
nent. To elininate this inadequacy. an inplicit nethod is considered in Ref.
16 that is based on deconposition with respect to spatial directions and is
realised by vector sweeps. The nethod is applied to the problen of flow around
a plate of finite width at an angle of attack. The Briley-HcDonald Isthod

[Ref . I7] is used to realise the nonlinear difference ache-e.

a conbination of the viscous shock layer nodal and parabolized "evict-Stokes
equations is considered in Ref. 7 for flow aromd a blunt cons at an angle

of attack. The viscous shock layer equations are used in the region of blunt-
ing and on the windward side. while the parabolised Navier-Stokes equations
are used on the leeward side. This cuts down on coaputer tins.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the use of simplified Nevier-Stokes equations by appreciably reducing com-
puter time and memory volume enables nuerical computer simulation of an ex-
tensive class of problems of importance for practice in supersonic viscous
flow around solids over a wide range of flow perm-stars. however. the problem
of developing asymptotic methods of solving signified viscous gas equations
remains topical.

This paper is devoted to questions of nuerical modeling of aerodyn-ics prob-
lems in the approximation of simplified viscous gas equations. The problaa
of selecting coordinate systems and unknown functions are discussed. and an
investigation is made of the correctness of parabolised equations. An economic
iteration method is proposed for solving simplified “evict-Stokes equations
based on decomposition with respect to physical processes and spatial direc-
tions. An investigation is made of the accuracy of the method and numerical
solitions by simplified and complete Nevin-Stokes equations are compared.

5!. Selecting the form for recording equations

The principal assumption in deriving approximate models is that of smallness
of the longitudinal components of the viscous stress tensor as competed with
normal and azimuthal components. Therefore the coordinate system in which
the principal equations are being considered must satisfy a nuber of require-
ments (see Ref. 13). chief among which are the following:

a) the family of coordinate lines q‘ that is selected as the direction field
must coincide insofar as possible with strealines;

b) the normal q: and azimuthal q’ families of coordinate lines must be orthog-
onal to family q1 in the tone of appreciable influence of viscous effects;

c) the surfaces of the solid and of the head shock wave must be coordinate
surfaces.

To satisfy these requirements it is necessary to write the principal equations
in an arbitrary curvilinear coordinate system.

Consider the problem of choosing the components of the velocity vector. The
simplest form of recording is exemplified by simplified equations *with co-
veriant or contravariant components of the velocity vector. Let e1- 33/3q1
(i- l. 2. 3) be a covariant basis. ind v-v1e1 be the resolution of the ve-
locity vector in this basis. here is the radius vector of a given point

of space. v1 are the contravariant components of the velocity vector. and
pairwise egation of like indices conventional for tensor analysis is assumed.
The vector v is the diagonal of a parallelepiped with sides coinciding with
the moving basis e1. e;. e, and having length /g_1_1v1 (there is no emanation
with respect to i). where g“ are diagonal elements of the covariant metric
tensor. ‘In the case of appreciable curvatures of the coordinate lines, the
vectors a; will change appreciably both in direction and in length. leading

to non-physical changes of quantities v1 when there is a change of position
in space even for a homogeneous vector field. Consequently the use of contra-
varisnt components of the velocity vector will introduce additional errors
into the algorithl in finite difference approximation of equations.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For orthogonal coordinate systens close to rectilinear. it is pose ble to

use as conponente of t velocit vector the physical conponents v 1') intro-
duced by the iornulas v 1) - lguv? (there is no su-etion with respect to i).
The physical coeponents of the velocity vector have di-ensionality coinciding
with the physical dinensionality of the velocity field. and are conponents

of the +resolution of the velocity vector in the noving orthonoreelized unit
basis v-v“)e NEE. This enables use of physical velocity coeponents for
such systems 0 coordinates as for ex-ple spherical. cylindrical. natural.
noraally fixed to the surface of the solid. However. for coordinate eystens
that satisfy the require-eats fornulated above. physical contravarient can-
ponents selected as unknown functions say not neet with success. He illustrate
this statenent by the following emple.

Consider a region in which a coordinate systen is plotted (Pig. 1). which

is s nodel representation for nany flow problens. Let the left-hand boundary
1'. of the given region be assigned by the equation x-O. the upper boundary

r. by y-2+x. the right-hand boundary 1'. by x- l. and the lower boundary

1‘. by y- 1. Let us introduce the coordinates E. n related to cartesian coordi-
nates x. y by the formlas

5'3, 23%}

In such an assignent of the coordinate systen. values n-O correspond to

the lower boundary. and n-1 — to the upper boundary. The coordinate lines
n-c. where 0<c<l are straight lines that diverge iron the lower to the
upper boundary. Coordinate lines E-const for. a fanily of curves perpendicu-
lar to the lower boundary. If we take boundary 1‘. as the surface of the solid.
1'; as the surface of the head shock wave. and 1‘; as the boundary on which

the flow is incident. the coordinate systea t. n satisfies the requirements
fornulated in the beginning of this section.

Let u‘, u’ be conponents of the velocity vector in the csrtesian coordinate
system in directions on the axis 0: and 0y respectively. Consider the contra-
variant components v1. v‘I of the velocity vector for homogeneous flow parallel
to boundary r..
We have

v‘ - uni. .

where

1:.1‘.

Since (u‘. "2). (l. 0). we find

 

(at 13):? a g

Wu . a. - 3-27 )2.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Setting t;- 0 for the sake of definiteness. we find that the contravariant
conponent v - -n varies along input boundary r1 fro? 9 on I" to -l on r,.
Let us find the physicel contravariant cowonentsv ‘ , v0. The matrix
of the coefficients of the covariant netric tensor is

In In) (“2‘ l‘l‘n)
3.. In mu) cw‘

VIItm'I; W ’ val..rz:’v| '

Thus even for a nodel region with the sinplest coordinate systen the contra-
varisnt velocity coeponents (physical and mathematical) of a homogeneous flow
are strongly changing functions of coordinates E. n. and in the first place
cannot directly characterize the flow. and secondly they introduce additional
errors in finite-difference approxiution of equations.

Then

Therefore in this paper the velocity vector caponents are taken as those

in the cylindrical coordinate system. Density and pressure are taken as the
other two dependent functions. Such a choice of therlodynuic quantities
enahles solution of the equation of continuity separately fron the other equa-
tions (of nonentus and energy). and on this basis a sore econonic algorith-
can be constructed (see ﬁlo).

To derive ainplified equations. let us consider the conplete equations of
notion of a viscous heat-conducting gas written in the cylindrical coordinate
syste- z. 6. r (Pig. 2) in non-divergent fora:

u?s‘¥9s“9g secllpg’ev‘ o?) .o,
«w¥«~~«vn=.t—.<r«..aq-.w.
W‘s-vaoi-rv‘i'! 5%(f‘t-I'.”t r015“).
“‘95 ‘9'! #7"; =;;(fi“og-r.“ot,“o£?-— ).'
"h IP-‘Vhwrcv-oi‘sow¥)-' “kl-1.)" " .

#(fkkth. Egg“ . g . Pig. 2

. . “(Rosz‘sg-V. . w, y 3,”.
t“.au. 0 “24-35% mg. , ﬁ-‘Lw

 

man. 4 iiv, . (My-w, . 21v,

21
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂaw“! “)2; “I“rrmwg) s t“'ﬂ%’“"¥
*8 Wu. 2.0!. 0V) ot“V, v
. F[ (I'M' . «ff. any] .

Here a is dc vsity; u. v. v are the couponents of the velocity vector in direc-
tions z. e, r; p is pressure. x-p/o. A-u' -’Isu. u‘ is the second viscosity
coefficient. u is the dyn-ic viscosity coefficient. To close the syste-

of equations. the equation of state of s perfect ges p- (7- Do: is given
together with the power-lav for: of dependence of the dynamic viscosity coef-
ficient on internal energy u/u.- (c/c.)“’. where 0. 5<u<l, y-c and cv
are the specific heats of the gas at constant pressure and volugecv re< tive--v
1y). u... c. are the values of the dynamic viscosity coefficient and internal
energy of the undisturbed onconing flow.

In converting to dimensionless fore. all lengths are referred to the charac-
teristic linear dimension of the solid 1.. velocities u, v, v are referred

to the velocity U. of the oncoming flow, pressure is nor-sliced to the quan-
tity 9.03,. and density end viscosity ctefficients are referred to p. and u .

The Reynolds nuher Re and Prendtl number Pr we defined by the foraulas
RQ‘U.L D . P, grep/Q .

where r is the thermal conductivity coefficient.

Let us introduce the coordinate trensfornetion
Q‘ =‘1'(3,.9,!). Qi'h’u3). 9
that converts cylindrical coordinates z. 6. r to coordinates q . q’. q satis-

fying requirenents a)-c) considered at the beginning of this section. The
derivatives in the initiel equations are transforned by the formulas

Qt ‘z‘igﬁit ”gahal 9 a. 13%! s
where

3% 1's -
that-law; .

Eli-insting from the resultant equations ell viscous terms that contain deriva-
tives with respect to q . we get e system of Nevier-Stoltes equations consist-
ing of the equetion of continuity

“To; 51% 2:. ’ 9“ '0 (I)

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

and the equations of no-entu- and energy

A}? Obiicrﬁ'DT'G-{O QYJ'. , (2)

In writing equations (1) and (2). the following notation is introduced:
e‘nuz‘. (v? our,” ,

Ixuitov%.wz‘. .
c-unov 5:.wn ,

6
c o 0 82/9 h - 0 o o o
C: o c o S'Vg 2 .D' O 3 g p
0 0 C 33/? 0 .i o O ,
rrr‘. rrg'xruc o o o 1?
54 ~ at 'a u
'. G: , a. . 3. '2 v
GS (”self 0“,; r." v.
c o... r. ' r

The quantities Gk and 05: include respectively the viscous tens with iterated
derivatives with respect to q2 and q of the functions: u for k- l. v for

k- 2. v for k- 3, and p/o for Ink. The renaining viscous terns with i erated
and nixed derivatives with respect to q: and q’ are included in vector

§2. Pomletion of the problem
1. The correctness of for-ulation of the initial boundary value problem rela-

tive to coordinste q for the reeultsnt si-plified equations is investigated
on the basis of the two-dimensional nodel system of equations

Ag‘bﬁ '33:}; . m

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHIO“. USE ONLY

where .
“9 00 V090
“oust/9 Movoo
Oouo’ oovl/e’
Orr o-u OO'rV
odd) g
0.00 - a
c'oono.l'v.{"'§%-
000%" t

For equations (1) we formulate the Cauchy prohlen with initial data on line
at - xo

ix.“)l¢.3. ‘ Yew) . (2)

that deter-ins the solution for x>x.. |y|<~.

He rewrite system (1) as

and consider the tvo subsystem of equations
" '4' '3? ..
3g. 55-“ :9 . <3.)
- 4 '3"
3552= C5?» ' (3»)

that correspond to flows in two limiting cases: negligibly snsll forces of
viscosity (ls-v“). end lsrge forces of viscosity (smell Reynolds nusber).

'rhe eigenvslues of utrix A"B

' “V 3
‘Ce‘ '§ . a‘)~. w -C

(c- 'v’yp7p is the speed of sound in s perfect gas) are reel, and the corre-
sponding aysten of equations (3a) is hyperbolic when condition

11‘ oV‘ >c‘

is set. In this case, Cauchy problen (3a). (2) is correct (e. g. see Ref. 1).
and may be solved by s nultistep nethod of integration along coordinate x fro.
cross section to cross section. In doing this. it is necessary thst the line

2h
FOR omcm. use any
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of initial data x- x. and the lines of sdvancenent of the solution x-const
have the spatial type of Ref. 18. i. e. that condition H‘Iu/c> 1 be net.

In the case of subsonic flows. systen of equations (3a) becones elliptical.
and Cauchy problen (3a). (2) because incorrect. Since there are always local
subsonic flow zones in supersonic viscous flow around solids near a wall.
systes of equations (3a) suat be regularized near these zones. In this paper.
the sinplified havier-Stokes equations are regularized by the nsthod proposed
in Ref. 19. 20. In accordance with this nethod. we introduce one of the pos-
sible ragularising functions in the equation of nonentun in the projection
of systes (3a) on the 0x axis. after which natrix A assmes the form

n Q 0 0
w 323?.
orpou

where i is a regularizing function (see Ref. 20) such that

i'.‘ "he“ Ma>l (6)
i-e-O “h.“ Ne<ln

Let us consider the eigenvalues of natrix KID after regularisation (5). (6).
No of the four eigenvalues A; and A: will reasin as before. equal to v/u.
The others will take the foul

1.3.: e _ . ('7)

Expression (1) implies that problem (3a). (2) is correct in the subsonic zone
as well if condition

: ‘ .
non-21.) < . W

is net. which can be realized by appropriate choice of function i.

Let us now consider the eigenvalues of matrix [‘0 of systen (3b):

1.:0 , them/u .
lmhsﬁis[0.5uﬂe*)g{ogsmu. ‘3. E J . (9)

Systen of equations (3b) is not conpletely parabolic (see Ref. 1). and problen
(3b). (2) is correct if eigenvalues (9) have non-negative real parts. It

is ilpliad by (9) that x; and x; are real and non-negative when u>0. ligen-
values A; and x. will also be real and positive when Hx> 1. since in this case

oasMZG-ﬁ)‘ o-% < oasMiueﬁ)‘

25
roe omcm. use own
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however. if II;< 1. then A,<o and problea Mb). (2) is incorrect. Let us in-
troduce regulariring functions a and i in the second equation of syst- (3b).
after which astrir A will be written as

u'eoo
A.o"§1|0"/$"

OO‘IIO

orfou

The eigenvaluss'of eatrix A"C in this case are equal to

M - WET) Eamoﬁinm‘wﬁi-{miﬂ f”)

Choosing functions 3 and i such that when la) 1

«VI,

‘3
i-vg,

‘-
3 < N.
we find that eigenvalues (10) will be real and non-negative. Systea (3b)

regularised in this way will be everywhere not coapletely parabolic. and prob-
len (3b). (2) will be correct.

andwhsn Ik<l

Thus Cauchy problsa (2) for cysts. of equations (1) with corresponding regu-.
larisstion in zones where Ii,< l is correct and the equations can be integrated

by a lultistep lethod.

The given analysis of correctness of for-elation of Cauchy problaa for nodal
systea of equations (1) allows us to hope that the initial boundary vslus'
probl- for-slated relative to coordinate q‘ for general systea of equations
(1.1). (1.2) with regularization in subsonic cones will be correct. The va-
lidity of this assuption has been confined by numerous calculations and
comparisons with results by other techniques. Thus. the following initial
boundary value problun is foraulated for siaplified three-dieensional equations

(1.1). (1.2).

2. Initial data - distributions of density. velocities and pressure -- are
assigned on coordinate surface ‘1‘ "II: which is a surface of spatial

(except for a narrow tone near the body). 0n coordinate surface 112- q . which
is the surface of the body. we have the conditions of sticking

\IIVIw no

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and one of the nodes of heat exchange:

thernal indulation ac/aq2 -0
or wall cooling c - t...

In choosing the external boundary qz- gin. two cases are possible. In the
first. the external boundary is situate in such a way that perturbations

iron the body do not reach it. and conditions of undisturbed flow are assigned
on this surface:

L
“4:.

share a is angle of attack (Pig. 2). and H. is the hach umber of the un-
disturbed flow.

9.1, u‘ coed ,v- smasheﬁvﬁnmﬁ. r

In the second case. it is sensed that the head shock wave is a surface of

discontinuity. and it is taken as the external boundary. On this surface
we have the lankine-llugoniot conditions

91v” . *3.le a.
3‘94“: ‘ ﬁ‘ gave- a

7&g.%aég.¥. (m

w ' Var e

where subscript "1" corresponds to values in front of the shock wave (undis-
turbed flow). and ”2" - to paraeters behind the shock wave; subscript "n"
denotes the velocity vector conponent nornal to the wave surface. and "r" -
the tangential coqonent of the velocity vector. At comparatively low Reynolds

nubers conditions (11) nay be replaced by generalised lankine-Bugoniot re-
lations that account for viscous effects (see Ref. 21).

Maia-ant of conditions of the "side" boundaries of the integration region
depends on the nature of the flow to be simulated. In the case of flow around
any-etric bodies or around bodies at a non-zero angle of attack. the flows

do not have sy-etry. In such cases. it is necessary to consider the re n
of flow near the body in its entirety. i. e. to assume that boundaries q ”IR
and q’- qﬁ coincide. and to assign on these boundaries the cyclicity conditions

“we: " 3 '«r-s'.

where vector E has conponents (o. u. v. u; p); If flow is synetric relative

to a plane of sy-etry. then boundaries q “1“ and «lug?! coincide with the
plane of sy-etry. and conditions

QV z-Q-ra 3 (
{lif'é'ﬁ'en v” 0 12)

hold there. where n is the nornel to the plane of sy-etry. Va and v1, are
the velocity vector components nornal and tangential to the plane of may.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this fornulation. the problen is solved by a finite-difference iteration
method. in which equations (1.1), (1.2) are integrated from one coordinate
surface ([1 -conet to the other. beginning with the initial data surface q’ oqi.

the equations are regularized in the subsonic wall tones. In doing this. the
regularising functions are introduced into each momentum equation. since in
the curvilinear coordinate systee q‘. q’. «1’ each of these equations contains
terms with gradient aplaq‘ that describe propagation of perturbations upstream
in the subsonic zones.

53. Scheme for two-dimensional equations

Let us introduce a difference grid Qh into the computation region Q with steps
h} and h: in directions at and y respectively. We define values of grid func-
tions at the nodes of the grid (n. j). i. e. we take -f(rn. y ). where
superscript n denotes the nulher of the node of the gr din dir tion at. and
the subscript denotes the node ntder in direction y. Let us introduce dif-
ference operators A3. A2: that approximate derivatives 3/3y and 31/3y2 respec-
tively at grid node (3). As operator A; we can take sy-etric A} or any-etric
ﬂ operators that approximate the first derivative with second order or with
order I.

Consider the difference scheee

NILE-Z" 6 [8A: ‘ WARE“. «43mm , (I)

that approximates system of equations (2.1) with order O(hf+h§). where k- l. 2
and r-2 at 0-0.5. and r-l at “‘06. and is nonlinear at oio relative to
n+1 layers. here A". 3*. 0* are grid matrices coinciding with matrices A.

l. c at grid nodes a(n+1)+(l-o)n. J. To simplify the notation. subscript

1 will henceforth be omitted.

To realize scheme (1). let us consider the iterational difference ethane

vex-51%..(6n-C‘MHM0 0-6;?1‘0, .(2)

that approximates system of equations (2.1); the convergence of the iterations
has the one order in igtial scheee (1). Scheme (2) is derived from

(I) by adding terns ( V“ ~ )/1’ that are equivalent to fictitious tine deriva-
tivas. hare r is an iteration parameter. v is the iteration nuber in section

n+ I. i. e. {mum-n)". Matrix operators A“. 3". c" are taken at grid nodes
o(n+ l)+ (1- o)n. j. i. e.

45‘ “no“? . a- 043,"

where D is any of the eatrices A. B or C. Iteration scheme (2) is linear
relative to iteration v0 1. and its solution can be found by vector sweeps.

Let us write system of difference equations (2) as

new; 1" .—. -é“ I 1(3)‘

28
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where B is the unit natrix.
ﬁ‘ ; s . E.” mum - cm.
*s ‘ in? ‘ I " 1
Q. .A T o(bl\.-C‘I\.)[6{ «was 1 .

4.

Let us factor operator ll" approxisstely. representing it as

W“ 11‘ 4 “1111““ (6)
where
l'l'nE o E‘A..ﬂ‘.-Eore(b.; ' -C‘Au),fktt~rebt.lﬂ ,
‘u' g: o o v' o. o o‘
x. z 1: w. m. :1 3.21%
o r o u‘ o'o o v‘
o o 45‘. o o o. o o
t o o o- o i, o m o o
“'0 cot/{A}: C oom‘o‘
o orﬂf. o o °£d

Representation of operator ii“ in for. (6) corresponds to deco-position by
phy ical processes: operator A" accounts for seed c terns in direction x.
BYA accounts for transfer tam in direction y. B A accounts for terns with
pressure in direction y. and OVA“ accounts for viscous terms. Here A} is

a unilateral operator. and A3 is s ayuetric operator. Decomposition of this
kind enables us to construct iteration ache-es that are realizable by scalar
sweeps. With consideration of representation (1.). iteration schene

* a -.
ﬁL%J:-Q , (5)

or its equivalent in fractional steps

"5‘“ ' FMS, . (6)

approximates systen of equations (1) with ccnvergence of iterations with order
0(h{+h§). Let us discuss realisation of schene (6) in fractional steps.

0n the first step. the systee of difference equations can be resolved ex-
plicitly. since operator 111' does not contain derivatives. and its inversion
is equivalent to finding an inverse bx lo aatrir. 0n the second fractional

step. each difference equation of the system is solved independently by scalar
sweeps. since operator II? is diagonal.

29
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the third fractional step the difference equetions
M " ' " . m
’9 "‘9‘? ' 3e 0
M ‘ a

e o
M f M. 0‘)
sum, 3.,
M e m
are solved in the following sequnce: using the third equation to elf-inete

£3“ free the fourth equation. we get a second-order difference equation for
determination of £3“:

‘9‘ I ‘ ‘ g ‘h' ' ' ‘
C t -
z, ( dqmﬁleﬁ‘; - 3,, "M9".
which is resolved by a eceler sweep. with respect to the known discrepancy
of ex”. we find £3“ from the third equation. and then £3“ fro. the first.

'l'hus resolution of systen of difference equations (6) reduces to a sequence
of scalar sweeps end direct recelculetione by explicit fornules. which results
in e considerable savings of nechins tine when this nethod is conputerised.

After finding vector
PM . Te . 1.1..“

the cycle of conputetions is reputed. The iteration is continued until the
specified norm of the quantity

(7“ 3P) /z-

is less then a predeternined positive umber : that characteriree the degree
of emergence of the intention process.

Let us consider the queetion of convergence of iterations in eection mi» 1.
For the sake of sinplicity in the presentation. here and below we will take
weight 0 es equal to 1. Taking the coefficients of netrices A. B. C as con-
stant (principle of froren coefficients). let us subtract systen of equations
(1) frog (2). As a result we get the systen of difference equations

M*‘€“‘M:W' chuﬁl’“, (e)

where
17.. *N ' "
I l - I] - ’1 ”d

is the difference of solutions of iteration ache-e ( ) and difference schene
(1). Let us study the behavior of deflectionvector with increasing v for
a solution of the fore

- e ' -
71' ' E ‘eu‘m . (9)

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Ol OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Substituting (9) in (8) we get a systen of equations
. '9
(‘5‘! o tA 94.15. “Lab. ~J.IC)V. .o . no)
that iaplies the characteristic equations

Jella(2*£h°d«h'dc5r?J‘C)-'Ell=0. m)
where
Ava: 4' . if Yeo " a “haul. .9305

, (a. if V<o TnT'
«aw»? . a. . . gswib .

Vith regularisation (2.5) and seeming y/Pr- 1. the roots of equation (11) are
e i

3" u is rum: ’ 1" icguorvd: "an"
ku‘ t . -
’ Manna: ~tmgzzcicdd .57:

This iaplies that 'le <1. The the solution of iteration ache-e (2) converges
to the solution of systea (1) on each layer 11- const.

Let us consider the stability of difference scheme (1) with transition froa
section to section. The characteristic equation corresponding to (1) takes

the form .
let“? 9 lab“ 4.7M ~40“ .- o . (12)

The first two roots of equation (12) are

;.__L_ ,1. ___2....__.
‘ hunt}- ‘ “Mtg-tee

and obviously le|<l (1.- l. 2) for all u>0. ‘l'he renaining two roots for
y/Pr- l. v-a-O (flow weakly diverging from 0): axis at high Reynolds nuhers)

3s,£'l/[lt 1*]

are also less than unity in absolute value with regularization (2.6). In
the case where the effect of the treneverse pressure gradient in the stress

is sell (Py-O). we have the following values of the third and fourth roots
of equation (12)

i

1* 510’." - chm)
€04.21?)

 

1"]. I

31
POI omau. USE ONLY
F0! OFHGAL USE ONLY

that also are no greater than 1 in absolute value if condition (2 6) is net.
Consequently difference schene (2) for system of equations (2.1) with ap-
propriate regularization in the approxination of "frozen" coefficients is
stable relative to iterations and advance-ent of the solution in the direction
of isprovenent (direction x in our case).

G4. schene for three-dineneional equations

Let us go on to construction of an iteration difference ache-e for e systen
of three-dinnaional equations of viscous gas (1.1). (1.2) in curvilinear
coordinates q (i-l. 2. 3). By analogy with the two-dinenaional case (see
53). we consider the inlicit difference schenea
. U
o."‘£‘m3- o (P‘A‘. o (9%, . 4'“)¢'“- o, m

AMT. . (3“,. c“'-‘;r‘- ark “3‘5?“ (2)

that spproxinate equations (1.1) and (1.2) with order 0(h‘+h!+h§). here
and below we take the notation of 3 (difference operator A approximates
differential operator a/aq . and A approximates a/aq; ). where possible.
we onit the subscripts for grid nodes in directions 1] and q3 . Since ache-es
(l) and (2) are nonlinear relative to layer n+1. for their realization we

consider iteration scheses

i a “an ".n - ~ ‘ .
35F. RLF'J -. 8. ante .a‘fé‘, m

that are resolvable on each iteration in two stages. On the first stage the
equations of mum and energ (3) are solved. In doing this. the densities
are taken froa the preceding iteration. Then using the resultant velocities
and pressure the density is fond fron the difference analog of the continuity
equation (6). This marks the end of the iteration, and the cycle is repeated.
last us consider the solution of the equations on each of the stages.

He rewrite systen of equations (3) as

i? M; ‘ '- - a?

t
where

ﬁ°-t .gA at we .21). :63. 1Q

_., *o." a
Q‘di—T‘ocb‘m‘d-c? - 41‘” m

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let an (actor operator ﬁ" approxieately. representing it on
Was 11‘ =' n‘. n’. 0', ff. n: . (a)
lere
'tﬁﬂ-Eh ~- ‘3.“0‘ 111- Web. «3, u. s: «6.
ﬂy ﬁne} «Q. 11,- two.

I. o o o- '0 o o 2:4
0 6, o o o o o W
b? o o 6 o .263 o 'o o M ‘.
o o o I rrdrr‘t'rfdo
c o o o\ o o 0:34
. o c o o ‘ o o 0%
C" o o c o/Ahc‘. o o o "
o o o? ~ “WE-“WM

and A1 are unilateral and tric difference operatora that approxinete
tie diffirential operatora a/aq (1- . 3) the representation of operator
II“ in for- (8). which correaponda to decoupoeition with respect to phyaicel
proceaaea and apatial directione. enablea reeolution of acheue (5) by acaler
eweepe. with conaideration of repreaentetion (8). the iteration echane

[Pi-7:41. 2 -53, '(9)

or its equivalent in fractional atepe

(EoﬁAoTD)3mg "Q '

(E.tb‘-t fvem iv.

(E . as) 20;“ «we (to)
t ' 1'
(E . ‘ 3:??? d’o/s
(5‘ tea.)

approx ayato- of equatione (2) with convergence of iterationa with order
0(h1+h +h )'.‘

bet ue consider realisation of ache-e (10). In order to start couputation

in a "new” aection n+1. q -conet. we have to aaaign a teroth iteration.
using one of the following extrapolation for-alas:

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

?. ' F ' od‘d}
V ' l?- I“ + 063.) .

Calculations ahoved that either of theae formulae givea the ease rate of con-

vergence and raaulta. and the firet formula wee uaed in further cgeputationa.
Realization of acheae (10) atarte with calculation of the vector f the

right-hand where at internal grid nodea. After coaputing the right-hand
ae-har. the firet fractional atep ie realized

. .. ._ __
(2.1.1; . rD) a" = -C2
which is equivalent to the ante. of algebraic equatione

ill

.(:.3-_:.)an;’£_:1‘2"_}?‘

0n the aecond fractional step the eyetea of difference equationa
. 4' _.‘
(e um 49.)?“ a 3 "

is resolved by acalar three-point euaapa. aince B1 and G are diagonal opera-
tore.

(12)

The third fractional etep
MI. 5
(E * Tb1)} : $06
correaponde to the following system of difference equations

a: 1%”‘943, r!" .

:3" ~ am 27' :ﬁ‘u.
%
236‘ ’ $194?“ "’ . <13)

tli-ineting the quantities Eu”. (3‘. {:5 fro. the laet equation of ayatel
(13). we get a three-point difference equation relative to 5

31;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

g“ -wﬂm AtﬁAQ” 13x.“ A13“

“§'A‘}f ]' h -“r<“/‘§>~‘
. 'ﬁA“ M, V‘ ¢ blag”

that are solved by a scalar sweep.

The fourth
_ .. .. a.
(s we. -rQ.)}"" : ‘V‘ (n)
and um. .. ‘
a “Nu/s

fractional steps coincide in structure with the second and third steps. and
can be realized by analogous foraulas.

The new values u‘H". VVH. 1"""._p"h are cosputed by the fornula

'1» . 5 “i“ (16)

The resultant velocity field satisfies sticking conditions on the surface
of the body since it is seemed that

i = h‘il ’w" . :0 (17)

to calculate pressure on the surface of the body, we use one of the following
fornulas:

. Pad ' KS (18)
P; :fzj" £2[8%L‘ ML ’10)
Maqui‘ﬁ—m - . ‘ "
- (w): M1, ' ’

153 .
v . m: s v33 “in: , «n.2,:

or

that are difference spproxinations of different orders for the equation of
nonentun in the projection on the nor-a1 to the solid.

After realizing schsne (10) by one of the above-mentioned fornulse. we cal-
culate the pressure on the surface of the body. The choice of representation

35
m omcm. use ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of preesure on the body depends on the nature of flow (detached. undetached)
and on the necessary accuracy. As an ample. for undetached floue near bodies
of the sphere and cone type representation (18) gives coapletely satisfactory
results even for considerable angles of attack (up to: 20').

Let us consider the second stage of the nuerical method of solving eystea
of equations (3). (4) - solution of continuity equation (lo).

Let ua rewrite equation (10)

~"w‘ - 3 ' _
“c ‘74 = ‘ Q;- , (a!)
where '

(21)
:2, no?“ 915‘" “I?“ 2.8%; “WW. (22,
lat us factor operator ﬁg“ approxi-ately.
ﬁt‘zng‘ (U “ha!“ ”433; * t9“!\i‘)(hftw ‘)
and replace equation (20) by the scheme in fractional atepa

new 0-
“*3 i e :3“ etgklﬁ e "3“”; 9 rd)“ ,

(i .1 3‘“ 97“.) 9‘6‘”A‘1) {‘1 = - 99",
N m

Qvté;‘l\'s)$? =33 ' (23)
g“ a? st ' .

Scheme (23) is realized on each fractional step by scalar sveeps. ‘l'he valuee
of coefficients a; and 81 in the sweep formula

on the first fractional step depend on the given node of heat exchange. and
are equal to:

for thernal isolation

a.“ 3 he: 3.
4.-—‘.L,-‘.Pue.3( ”. - ”j 3
ti Pei h
for cooling of the wall
i '4»

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the upper bound is chosen in the region of undisturbed flow. calculation

of a single iteration concludes here. If the outer bound of the calculated
region is the head shock wave. the gasdynanic quantities there nust be recalcu-
lated after coeputing values inside the region on each iteration. and in the
sane way with transition to the next cross section q‘ - coast.

55. Algorithm for isolating head shock wave
The head shock wave is isolated in the following sequence:

I; the position of the head shock wave on the n-th layer of cross section
q - const is extrapolated to the n+ l-th layer and taken as the outer bound
of the coIputational region;

2) free the knovn configuration of the wave and paraneters of the onconing
flow. the para-stars behind the wave are deternined frat the Rankine-llugoniot
conditions and taken as the values of the gasdynanic functions on the outer
boundary on the "zeroth" iteration;

3) gasdynanic parneters are calculated inside the region by the scheme de-
scribed above;

lo) pressure on the outer boundary behind the wavefront is determined by ex-
trapolation fro. the values calculated inside the region. and the values of
the reuaining gasdynanic functions behind the wavefront and the position of
the wave itself are determined fron the Rankine-hugoniot relations.

Let us consider points 1), 2) and 4) in more detail in the algoritln for iso-
lating the head shock wave.

1. Coordinate system q‘. qz. (13 that is used in finally writing out the prin-
cipal equations is adjusted by successive coordinate transfornations, the
first of which

ii" -§"(!,B,2) , 'u ii,1,'5 m

transforas the initial cylindrical coordinates a. 0. r to curvilinear coordi-
nates i1 satisfying requirements a) and b) of £1. Besides this. coordinate
i2 is the length of a segment of a coordinate line of the second family in-
cluded between the surface of the bod and a point of s ace. The surface

of the body is a coordinate surface a '0. Let iz-ﬂi . i’) be the equation
of the surface of the head shock wave. Transformation

I‘i‘ ‘3‘ o 1‘? ' §‘/§G‘a~‘) , 3’ ‘ a... (2)

converts coordinates i1 to a) in which the surface of the head shock wave
is a coordinate surface «13-1. Finally. the third transformation

a M 0 ~

‘\ “I . 1‘= ‘1‘“1‘) , q‘ -1’<1‘) (3)
enables us to crowd coordinate surfaces a1- const and 7|"- const in regions 1
of high gradients while leaving the difference grid uniforn on coordinates 1 .

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the equation of the wave surface enters into the coordinate transfer-a-
tion coefficients 2 . and it out be assigned on a new cross section before
starting the iterst ons. Let us set

'iq‘ﬁ‘j- iti‘ta‘).'i‘q’)) * xii‘n’) .

Than the initial position of the head shock wave surface is assigned by
extrapolating the wave position fro. preceding cross sections q1 Iconat
using one of the formulae

1;“ . x3 .— o‘ck) . .. “(.0

2“ - 2x3 - x‘s“ . 06.) m

(j is the node nunber in the direction of coordinate q’).

In extrapolation. we .ust meet a requiruent
3r steIning fro. the properties of the conpresaion
shock that is as follows. The nornal co.ponent

of the velocity vector of the incident flow

i to the wave surface. and the outer nornal to
" this surface .ust be opposite in direction (Pig.

V... Y‘ 3). i. e. we met satisfy the inequality
.M‘h ,

v... if ‘0 , (a)

ghere $1 is the vector of the incident flow.
Fig. 3 n is the vector of the outer unit noraal to
the surface of the shock wave. The results of
calculations and rates of convergence of iterations with the use of extrapola-
tion formulas (lo) and (5) when condition (6) is net were nearly the sane.
noreover. no appreciable differences were observed in results or rates of
convergence when :3“ was taken as the position obtained fro. 1:3 by formula

x?“ ax]. + C!" a (7)

where c is sons non-negative quantity selected in accordance with condition (6).

2. After deternining the position of the upper bound 3 1. s new distribution
of nodes of the grid is assigned in cross section n-O- 1. The initial values of
gasdynanic functions in the inner nodes of this grid and in those lying on
the surface of the body are taken (see £6) fro. the corresponding nodes of
cross section n. To deternine the quantities on the outer boundary of the
cross section. we use the Rsnhine-Bugoniot relations (2.11) fro. which we
get an expression for the gas paraneters behind the wavefront

"".' o ._
- r-

a: 293;, f m. ‘ .m
. i _ ,
¢.- Q‘KTT-T, -. ‘9’
s e eh in _
V“. 4V“. . (10)

9t
38

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
me OMCIAI. USE ONLY

The nodulua of the normal coqonent of the velocity vector 3m in equal to

Van ‘ ‘¥£°W‘ . (1'1)

fie t nor-a1 vector 3 is determined fro- the known wave equation. Let
1. z. {a he the orthonornalieed haeie in the cylindrical coordinate eyetea
:. e. r. ‘rhan. having the inlicit equation of the wave aurface

WSW) = T? MW) -
= .ﬁ‘(‘;"‘"\) _ o; (‘1’ $) . 5(‘l’ 1" ‘s) = (12)
2 I; (1-,efz). ‘0 7

a.
we get an expreaaion for vector n

- l ”1' “-9 A -.~
“g‘ﬁlk’ kg 0 ‘51 to)
where K 5‘ ? N ' (13)
K: 5. c (59)“ + 5, , (14)

Since the equatione are integrated in the etandard netheeatical doaain of
variation of variables q1. the derivativea with reepect to other variablee
uuet be converted to derivativee with respect to qi. Let ue aet

ar- mm = ﬁ‘m‘ﬁﬁ‘fa‘ni’q‘b- us)
2 ancq‘, ‘) x “Jr (151‘, 1‘) -
with conaideration of (12) and (15) we get

A t ' i ' 3' ' e ‘

$1313... §1\15973! - n“ -x.ZX ’

A

50"“ “wit: ‘1‘13 “xtz‘e ‘ 7‘th 3 (16)
A

$32111; {T335 «132,; “Al‘s - “$2.3 ,

where . 01
thagq; )‘.‘D"$ ‘ 1“;¢ 9 ““,3 0

To find the velocity vector conponenta ug. v;. w: behind the wavefront, we
use the geometric decoapoaition

V: s V... a Vt . (I?)
This. and the obvious equality

‘ a. -9'
V1 - V. -Vu|
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imply that

-s - .
Vs‘vt ’Vu ‘ in 'v4 dud“ * Ward?“ (18)

 

8V2. (l‘ﬁnl-Wunﬁ -
Substituting (10) in (18). we get
a ' ' Q
i - v. . Nam-$1)" ,
fro- which we finally find
. A
1h ‘ “t * $2: .
V. ' Vs ’ 3.5g . (19)
m .V‘ o ‘z‘ .
where
8- “1;" “‘ 1‘.) '

and the absolute value Ivml Iis found fron (11) and is equal to

w..." : i‘uﬁ‘ . v.‘;‘ 0 mi, \ ,

The algoritl- for calculating quantities (16) uses the following finite-
difference fornulas

Function n(qz) that sets the crowding of coordinate surfaces a2. const. and
its derivative are defined and analytically calculated by the formulas

1

~ .1115: 'emgce') - 1.

where B is a parameter that deteminee the degree of crowding of surfaces
toward the body.

ho

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. The unknown functions on the outer boundary on each iteration (with the
exception of the first) are 02. 01. v;. w;. pg. 3. Re have five Rankine-
augoniot relations (2.11) to deter-ins these six unknowns. To close this
systea. we extrapolate the newly calculated pressures inside the region to
the wave. the extrapolation for-ole is

‘°$ \vk '
(1.3 ' 5 < (14.1" (34,3) ‘ he»; . (20)

Using the known pressure p, behind the wavefront. we find fro. the Rankine-
ﬂugoniot relations (2.11)

r".
9.‘9.§. 7:} - (21)
51*”
f V-
« TFR[’F'.’1771] - (22,

Iron (11) we have the expression

’-

'.= I [1kg 0 Vs? vV‘Zd‘

V ‘ p
“a . ods)‘ o 2:

Substituting for-ulna (16) and (22) in this expression gives us a quadratic
equation relative to x;

atm‘ - 231; . €36 . (23)
where

~ 3.. v.13“ - vu‘ ,
62‘” «(1; '“ - m“) 9‘0 V‘ -m ).
8=v5<1€§21;3”-m3"x.)- (19319” ,

 

t " 1
‘s ' :toti‘ 1;}. 0 2:13 3
~ I
G“ ‘ 11.7.} c v‘ 2T. ‘ "it;

Since vector 3‘ tangent to the wave surface for-s a positive angle with the
direction of improve-cut. and the quantity

~

Q.<.O ,

the following root of equation (23) is chosen:

L. a- t
8% (a)

1:1

FOI‘OFFNJM1.USE(NULY
I70. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculating the right-hand neeber of (24) by using the quantities conputed
on iteration v. and replacing the derivative of x; with the unilateral differ-
ence. we get a formula for calculating the position of the wave on iteration

n+1:
'- "-33?
r.r.k*—<T;r——.

taking 3"” as the new outer boundary of the cross section. we find the coef-
ficients of transforaetion of variables (a )V”. after which the cmnts
of the velocity vector behind the wavefron on iteration M»! are calculated

free for-Ilse (19) .

This concludes calculation of all gssdynanic functions on iteration v+ l.
and we go on to the new iteration v+2.

96. Results of calculations

As the initial nodal we take sinlified Nevin-Stokes equations in which only
the iterated derivatives along the nornsl to the surface of the body are re-
tained free all the viscous term. In the first part of the section we cone
eider flow around a plate. sphere and blunt cone. Based on the solution of
these problns an investigation is nade of the accuracy of the proposed nethod.
its effectiveness. and the applicability of the given nodal. In the second
part an examination is nada of the flow around a spherically blunted cone

at a non-zero angle of attack.

1'. The problea of longitudinal flow of a conpreasible heat-conductive gas
around a flat plate has nuneroue nuerical and analytical solutions that agree
well with experimental data. Therefore we verified the proposed technique

by applying it to solution of this problem. which at Pr-u-l reduces to

an ordinary third-order differential equation lief. 22]

24" . 55' so - . in

with boundary conditions

Infeo .m-. 4.10

s‘ii when S'”' (2)

where u- f '(t) is the longitudinal coeponent of the velocity vector in Dorod-

nitsyn variables
I a . _ ,
5 ' d 5% ’ (a)

‘i '-' STdt . (0

Here x. y are cartesian coordinates. y-O. x>0 is the equation of the plate.
‘1'- l/p is absolute tsnparature related to internal energy by the axpreesion

112

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6 =ch

rsnperature is reduced to dimensionless fore by nor-slisation to its value
in the undisturbed flow. and the other notation is the sue as in £1. The

profile of the longitudinal cmonent u of the velocity vector was determined
fron the solution of problem (1). (2) taken fron the table in Ref. 23. and
the distribution of tsqerature T was calculated fron the fornulaa:

for a cooled wall
T ' (1’ 1'3“:- " a)?“ 1%. ' 7%":3. (e)
for a heat-insulated wall

1‘ . 1 a 914W. (1- 11‘) . (s)

The transverse conponent v of the velocity vector was found by using the

equation of continuity
’3 u ‘3 V _
at: + 5% - ° .

The resultant par-eters were assigned as the initial data in cross section
x- l. The calculation was done up to the control cross section x-const.

and the results were conpared with data found for this cross section frcn
solution of equations (l)-(6). In direction y. 50 nodes were taken. and the
grid was considered as uniformly crowded toward the surface of the body. the
step along the 0:: axis was assigned as uniforn and equal to [ix-0.01.

u

  

ﬁtment-ram
"Arlyn--
lIlM!---
[maul--
%----

0 6.3 0.6 0.! L1 L5 3

 
   
   
      

Pig. lo. Distribution of longitudinal conponent of velocity
vector on heat—insulated plate

Fig. 10-7 show the profiles of the longitudinal conponent of the velocity vec-

tor snd the teqerature in the boundary layer on beat-insulated and cooled
plates at different Mach numbers in cross section x- 1.1. The solid lines

correspond to the solution of (l)-(6). and the crosses show the results by

113

ml OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
    
 

  

Iv—ml----
Q-E---
=‘-“-:

  
 
  

Pig. 5. Taperetnre distribution on bost-insulsted plete

  
   
     
   

 
 

“mm
[mm-
MIA--
' ﬁl--

   
  

,, IIA‘II-
[Islam-

a;
--- t
o a, a. v f m
_ _ 0 Q3 M ‘3
Fig. 6. Distribution of Fig. 7. Tapersturc distri- '
longitudinsl conponent of bution on cooled plete (IV- 1)

velocity vector on cooled
plete (rv- l)”

 

Pig. 8. Distribution of friction coefficient
elong beet-insuleted pletc

Pig. 8 shows distributions of the friction coefficient along e heet-insulsted
pletc for different Mscb nunbers es obtsincd st u- l fron the spproxinste

formula that. 22] (solid lines)

end by our netbod (crosses).

c’ ‘ '65:“
I

MOMCIALUSEONLY

These figures show thst the difference in results
incrcsses vith increasing "sch naber (the nail-m relative error at Hurl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is -0.32. and at H.- 9 it is about 101). which can be attributed to two causes.
In the first place. as the Mach ntder increases there is an increase in the
gradients of gasdynslic functions in the boundary layer. and this leads to

an increase in the error of the difference approxination of the schene. This
is confined by fig. 9. which shows a graph of the change in friction coeffi-
cient as a function of the par-star B in the fornula (see 55)

(‘)= 25‘ (“5"
u 1,

    
 

as
as '

OJ!
osoeoeouop

Fig. 9. Friction coefficient

as a function of crowding paren-

eter B (u.-10. -- approxinate
fornula fron Ref. 22)

 

With increasing parameter 8 there is an increase in the degree of crowding
of longitudinal coordinate lines near the plate. In the second place. as
the gradients of the functions in the transverse direction increase. there
is an increase in the influence of convective terne in the equation of nonentu
in the projection on the tunnel to the plate. ‘l'heae terns are nissing in
the bomdary layer equations. but are present in our nodal. Their influence
on the reeults of calculations is clear fron Fig. 10. which shows the density
profiles obtained fron (l)-(6) (solid line). by the given nethod (crosses).
and also by this nethod but without consideration of convective terns in the
equation of nonentul in the projection on the manual to the plate (circles)
for H.310. r‘,- l. x- 1.3.

The next series of calculations was done for axieynetric flows around a sphere
and a spherically blunted cone. In the forner case. data were used fron Ref.
21. obtained on the basis of couplets Kevlar-Stokes equations by the nethod

of integral relations. A table of gasdyn-ic paraneters of flow around a
coolad ”Mr. ("o-6e 7.1“’ a...35509 ".007, (0.005. “.0el‘2) 8.”

the profiles of parameters in cross section s-0.9625 (s is the length of

the arc neaaured along the outline of the sphere). which were taken as initial
data for the given nethod. Calculation was continued to cross section a-
l.5708. and the solution there was conpared with tabulated data. On raya

1:5
roe omcm. use ONLY
POIOFFICIALUSEONLV

  
  

  

II".-
II..-
1 t s q

 

0
Fig. 11. Distribution of density lig. 12. Distribution of
and pressure across the shock velocity coeponents across
layer at a sphere (— data froe shock layer at a sphere
let. 21. x -- data by our nathod)

P

0.13

or

0.6

M

0.05

.05 0 05 l I.

Fig. 13. Pressure distribution on
spherically blunted 10' cone

s-const between the body and the shock wave there were 26 nodes of the dif-
ference grid crowded toward the body with crowding parneter (see 55) B- 100.
The profiles of density. pressure and velocity coeponents are coepered on Fig.
11 and 12. Hui-u- relative error is ~21. occurring near the upper boundary.
rather than near the body as eight have been asst-ad fro. incorrectness of
the problem in the subsonic region near the wall. This can be attributed

to the fact that strong crowding of the grid in the transverse direction was
used in the calculation (the nini-ul step in this direction near the body
being of the order of I! of the sari-ma step at the upper boundary).

Fig. 13 conperes pressure distributions on a cooled spherically blunted 10'
cone at m-ls. Re.-10". 7-1.4. Pr-0.72. «300.75. aroma. Plotted on
the axis of abscissas is the distance along the axis of the body reduced to
dinenaionlees torn by reference to the blunting radius (center of the sphere

at 0). The initial data and pressures for comparison (shown by the solid
line on the figure) were taken from tables in Ref. 21.. The crosses show the

pressures on the surface as determined by our netbod. The naxinun relative

1:6
l-‘Ol 0mm]. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm: was ~52. Cmputing tine on the given interval of the axis of the body
was no nore than 6 ninutes on a ”814-6 for a grid with 20 nodes across the
shock layer and a step Art-0.05 in the direction of inprovenent.

The resultant data show that the method considered in this paper can he suc-

cessfuly used for calculations of supersonic viscous flows stand a wide class
of bodies.

2°. Calcufationa were done on supersonic viscous flow around a cooled spheri-
cally blunted cone at angle of attack a. Conical surfaces orthogonal to the
surface of the body in cross sections r-conet were taken as the cross sec-
tions 011- const (Fig. lb). The surface of the initial data was selected on
the blunted section. Initial data on each ray of the surface were assigned
fro- solution of the problem that is axisy-etric relative to the direction
of the incident flow (Fig. 15). Initial data were taken tron Ref. 21 for
calculatione of axisyuetric flow of a gas with parneters IL- 6. y- 1.5.
Btu-3550. Pr- 0.7. u-0.5. cv- 0.162 around a sphere. The angle a and the
uni-aperture angle of the cone were given as 20' and 15’ respectively.

 

h?
ma omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE MIN

'1

.II-_-
M--ul-
m-'A'--
-I:---
o 15--
2 3 '0 9 o .
O. o. ‘5. ’00 w 9
Fig. 18. Pressure distribution
on surface of cone in azimuthal

direction in cross section s- 0.6
(— h: '0.24. X -- h .0006)

   
     

    

 

Pig. 1?. transverse density dis-

tribution on windward side (plane

6-0°. Pig. a) and on the leeward

side (plane 6-180'. Fig. b) in

cross section 2- l (— h; - 0.06.
X "' bl - 0s2)

 

Fig. 19. Surface pressure distribution
along the body

Fig. 16 shows a plan view of the geonetry of the body and the position of

the head shock wave at various angles 9. Since the results of the calcula-
tion could not be compared with the paraneters of analogous calculations ob-
tained by other methods (due to absence of the latter in the available litera-
ture) . calculations were done on different grids to check accuracy and the
influence of par-eters of the scheme. Fig. 17. 18 compare the density dis-
tributions across the shock layer and pressure on the surface of the cone

in the azimuthal direction obtained at different values of the step in the
direction of improvement. Pig. 19 shows pressure distribution on the surface
along the body at different angles 6.

REFERENCES
l. Kovsnya. V. H” Yanenko. R. 11., "Herod rasshchepleniya v radachakh garovoy

dinamiki" [Hethod of Decomposition in Problems of Gas Dynamics],
"Ranks". 1981.

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

k.

5.

6.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

[2.

13.

lb.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shevelev. Yu. 0.. "rreklnernyye sadachi teorii laninaronogo pogranichnogo
sloya" [Thee-Disensionsl Problens of Laninar Boundary Layer theory).
Hoscoi. "Raulu". 1977.

Gilinskiy. 8. 11.. relenin. 6. L. ‘l'inyakov. 6. P.. "Method of Calculating
Supersonic Flow Around Bodies with Departing Shock Have". IZVBS‘IIYA mm:
NAB! 8883: M I WWW. 30 ’0. 1964. pp 9-28.

Davis. 'wc-erical Solution of Equations of a Hypersonic Viscous Shock
Layer”. MMYA mumm I ROMAVTIKA. No 5. 1970. pp 3-13.

Voronkin. V. 6.. ”Calculation of Viscous Shock Layer on Blunt Cones".
IMS‘I’IYA WI W 88511: MIRA IBM! I GAZA. No 6. 197‘.
pp 99-105.

Ankudinov..A. I... "Viscous Shock Layer Near Paraboloid of Revolution”.
TRUDY Tsm'm mo-cmoomamcmsxoco nlsrrnm, No 1648. 1973.

Gogineni. P. 11.. Levis. C. 11.. "Hypersonic Viscous Shock-Layer Flows
Including Leeside Separation". J. SPACBCRAFT. Vol 17. No lo. Jul-Aug 80.
pp 316-322.

Karyakin. V. Ya.. Popov. P. 0.. "Calculating Three-Diseasional Supersonic
ﬂow of a Viscous Beat-Conductive Css Around Blunt Bodies". 2mm.
WCKISLITIL'NUY MTEHNHKI I HAWTICHBSOY FIZIKI. Vol I7. I»: 6. 1977.
pp 1565-1555.

Rubin. S. 6.. Lin. '1'. 6.. "Nuarical Methods for m- and Three-Dinenaional
Viscous Plow Problem: Application to Hypersonic Leading Edge Equations".
mew. 0? COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS. Vol 9. No 2. Apr 72. pp 339-3610.

Lin. ‘1'. 6.. Rubin. S. 6.. "Viscous Plow Over a Cone at Moderate Incidence-
1: Hypersonic 'rip Region". J. COMPUTERS AND FLUIDS. Vol 1. 1973. pp 37-57.

Lin. '1'. C.. Rubin. S. 6.. "A Numerical Hathod for Supersonic Viscous Flow
Over a Slender Reentry Vehicle". AIAA PAPER. No 19-0205. 1979. pp 1-10.

Lubard. S. C.. Bellivell. H. 8.. "Calculation of the Flow on a Cone at
High Angle of Attack". AIM JOURNAL. Vol 12. No 7. 197‘. pp 965-9710.

Belliwall. U. 8.. Lubard. S. 6.. "An Implicit Hethod for Three-Disensional
Viscous Plow with Application to Cones at Angle of Attack". 301mm. 0?
mums AND FLUIDS. Vol 3. 1975. pp 83-101.

Bellivall. U. 8.. Dickinson. R. P.. Lubard. S. C.. "Viscous Plow Over
Arbitrary Geo-etries at High Angle of Attack". ALAA PAPER. 80-0064.

Cbarnyy. S. 6.. "0 vybors sistely koordinat dlys chislennogo reshoniya
uravneniy Nav'ye-Stokss earshevyll netodon" [Choosing Coordinate Systan
for Nulerical Solution of Navier-Stokes Equations by Multistep Hethod].
(in press).

1.9
ms omcul. use ONLY
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Li. c. P.. "A Conputstioml Procedure for Supersonic Flows Governed by
the Psrsbolic Nevier-Stolnes Equations". 3mm. or emu-1m PHYSICS.
198305). In: 365-380.

Brilsy. H. 3.. HcDonsld. 8.. "Solution of the Unlti-Dinsnsionsl Gonpres-
sible lsvier-Stokss Bquntions by e Generalized Implicit Hethod". Joann.
0P CMUTNHORAL PHYSICS. Vol 26. 1977. PP 372-397.

Gebenko. K. I.. Voskresenskiy. G. P.. Lyubinov. A. A.. Russnov. V. V..
"Prostrsnstvennoye obteksniye glsdkikh tel idssl‘nyn geson" [Three-
Dinensionsl now of Idesl Gas Around Snooth Indies]. Moscow. "ﬂanks".
196‘.

Kovenys. V. 8.. Chernyy. S. 0.. Yamaha 1!. IL. "smlified Equations for
Describing Viscous Gss nous". mum MIMI m 8889.. Vol 265. No 6.
1979. pp 1322-1321..

lovenys. V. 14.. Chernyy. S. 6.. "Solving Simplified Bqustions of Viscous
Gas by Multistep Ketbod". cmsmer W mum SPLOSHNOY sum.
Novosibirsk. Vol 10. no 1. 1979. pp 71-87.

lelotserkovskiy. 0. 11.. ed.. "Chislennoye issledovsniye zsdsch gszovoy
dine-in” [ﬂusricsl Investigation of Problem in Gas Dyn-ics]. Moscow.
"Hanks". 1976.

Abr-ovich. G. 8.. "Priklsdnsys gerovsys dinniks" [Applied Gas Dynsnics].
Moscow. monks". 1969.

Shikhting. 6.. "Teoriys pogranichnogo sloys" [Boundary Lsyer Theory],
Hoscov. "Nsuh". 1976.

Kokoshinsksys. P. 8.. Psvlov. B. 11.. Psskonov. V. IL. "Chislennoye
issledovsniye sverkhsvukogo obteksniys tel vyssm gszon" [limericsl Study
of Supersonic Viscous Gss Plow Around Solids]. Moscow. Moscow State Uni-
versity. 1980.

Contents ‘ page
Introduction 3
1. Selecting the fore for recording equstions S
2. Pornulstion of the problsn ll
3. Schene for two-dimensional equations 16
lo. ache-e for three-dimension“ equations 21
5. Algorithn for isoleting heed shock wave 27
6. Insults of cslculstions 34
References 38
Figures 61

COPYRIGHT: Institut teoreticlnskay i priklsdnoy nskhaniki. i981

6610

(:80:

1862/13?

50
non omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

WARDEN

THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL Wino“ 0P VIBRATION“. mums AND
GAINS IN GASDYNAKIC 002 LASER VIN ADDITIVBS 0F 00 AND NO. PART 2: BURMA].
TECHNIQUE ARI) “SEAR“ RESULTS

Novosibirsk FIZIKA WIYA I WA in Russian Vol 17. No 5, Sep-Oct 81
(manuscript recein 25 Sep 80) pp 56-61

[Article by V. H. Doroshenho. N. N. Kudryavtsev and 8. s. Novikov. Hoscow)

[Text] Rzperinsntel Results. Vibrational tenperatures and gains were nea-
sured in a quasi-cw gasdynanic laser on a shock tube with nozzle on the end
of the low-pressure section. The inside diameter of the shock tube was 7!. n.
A flat Laval nozzle was used in which the hypersonic part consisted of an

arc of a circle with radius of N I- suoothly joined to a senicircle with
radius of 2 In in the region of the critical cross section of the nozzle.

The height of the critical cross section of the nozzle was h*- 1.5 In, degree
of expansion of the flow h/h*- 38. The neasurenents were nade directly at
the output of the supersonic nozzle.

The gain on wavelength of 1- 10.6 us was determined by the method of probing
the flow with a power-stabilized electric-discharge €02 laser been. The total
power of the probe laser emission was neasured 0.5-1.0 as after beginning

of the gas discharge process. For this purpose. the radiation of the probe
laser was shut off by an electro—opticel shutter. The intensity of spontaneous

emission of the gas flow was neasured simultaneously in two spectral regions.
The optical systens for recording the intensity of infrared radiation were

a coebination of a flat and a spherical nirror. They focused the radiation
of the flow on the sensing elenent of photoresistors.

The necessary spectral regions were isolated by infrared filters with the
following passbsnds: for the 2.7 on band-A-2.9io.5 an; 10.3 un—lo.37:
0.05 us; 6.7 ur-6.7S:0.lo us: 5.3 ul-S.3$0.6 ms; in neasurenent of gain on
transition 00'1+lO°OCOz-10.6:0.6 us. The transmission curve of the filter
used in the radiation intensity channel of the 4.3 us band is displaced sons-
whst relative to its central part toward greater wavelengths. A filter with
such a transnission curve was selected to suppress radiation of the lost in-
tense rotational lines of the nain vibrational transition that are situated
in the central part of the 4.3 u- band. According to Ref. 16, the coefficient
of absorption in the central parts of these lines under the conditions of

602 laser cavities reach values corresponding to total absorption of the

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

incident radiation at distances of 1-5 In. Therefore. absorption of radiation
of rotational lines of transition 00’l+00°0 in the wall layers of the super-
sonic flow may have an appreciable effect on the results of determining vi-

brational temperatures .

In measurements of emission intensity in the 00 hand of («.7 um and the N0
band of 5.3 ms, the investigated radiation vent past the filter through a
cell with mixture of CO: and N20 at atmospheric pressure. This totally eliti-
nsted transmission of emission of the 10.3 vs hand through the filters used
in the channels for measuring radiation intensity in the lo.7 and 5.3 us bands.

In calibrating the channels of infrared radiation intensity. the cylindrical
channel of the shock tube was extended to the viewing ports. In this way.
all components of the optical systems could be kept the same as in the nessure-

ments.

5.13.72;

    

Fig. 2. Gain in mixture of 0.1 6024-
(OJ—(co)?! +:-coco+0.lolle. Experimen-
tsl conditions correspond to Fig. l:
0 ,0": 0" lea XL-results of gain measurements by the
laser probing method; [Horresponding
1’18. l. Vibrational temperatures Of values reconstructed for the center
C02 ﬁnd C0 in 0 011““ 0f 0'1 002+ of line P20 of the laser transition

(0-5- €co>“z+ £co¢°+0Jo lies sac oo°1+ 10'0 co, from measured 1'. and
parmters in front of the nozzle: 1,, 1,1” nusbering corresponds to the
Po - 9,4: 0.5 8cm and To ' 2°00 3 80 K3 version of calculation

1', is the teeperature in the criti-

cal cross section of the nozzle; '1'

is translational temperature of the
gas at the nozzle outlet

Results of Studying Carbon Monoxide Additives. Results of measurements of
vibrational temperatures of asymmetric (T3) and collective (1'1) modes of CO;
and the vibrational tenperature of CO (T5) when carbon monoxide is substituted
for nitrogen in mixture 0.lcoz+0.5N¢+0.loHe are shown in Pig. 1. It can

be seen that the vibrational temperature of CO is 200-250 K higher than 1'3.
The vibrational temperatures of carbon monoxide and the asymtric mode of

CO; are considerably lower than the gas teepersture I". in the critical cross
section of the nozzle. when carbon monoxide is substituted for nitrogen,

there is a monotonic drop in r, and n.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0 0'2 0" {no

1’13. 6. Gain in Iixture 0.lCOz+ (0.5-

Euo)llz+£uolo+o.lolle (sylbola as in
Fig. 2)

 

Pig. 3. Vibrational temperatures of

002 and 1'0 1n ﬁxture 0.1602+(0~5- The collective node of carbon dioxide is
Em)l‘2+ 530m” 0" 3° “ 8“ ”1'3." characterized by excitation considerably
etera in front of the nozzle 90' in excess of equilibrium; m. mr.t1°-
10-93 0-5 “l 3" 70'22509 10° ‘ nel tenperature T2 is sore than 200 K
higher than the transluional gas tenperature. As the carbon nonoxide concen-
tration increases over a range of 0-0.5. '1': increases by approxinately 200 K.

The results of theoretical calculation of the vibrational tenperatures of

CO (T3) or NO (T5) and CO; (1': and T;) when rate constants and character-
istic tines are chosen in accordance with data given in Ref. 1 (tables 1 and
2) are represented on Pig. 1. 3 by curves 1, l' and 1" respectively. The
nubers 1-6 on Fig. 1 denote the results of calculations of the vibrational
temperature of CO (No on Fig. 3). while l'-lo' and l"-lo" on fig. 1 and 3 denote
the results of calculations of the vibrational temperatures of 002 - T. and
T2 respectively. The nuerical designations of the curves on Fig. 1-5 define
the versions of selecting rate constants of the relaxation processes described

below.

It is clear fron the data of Pig. 1 that the theoretical and experinental
dependences of vibrational tenperatures on carbon nonoxide content correlate
well with each other. The values of the theoretically calculated vibrational
temperatures of co; are 100-200 1 higher than the experinantal values. In
most cases this exceeds the error of neasurenents of vibrational tenperatures
in this research. The calculation of T, coincides with the results of the

experinent within the linits of neasurenent error.

Vibrational telperatures of CO; and 00 were calculated at doubled rate con-
stants of the processes of V-V' exchange of asylnetric and collective nodes

of co, (Qnaz) and V-T relaxation of the collective node (Q20'2). The results
are shown on Fig. 1-1. by curves 2 (curves 3 -- calculation at 0236 and

0;.o2). The data of Pig. 1 show that satisfactory agree-cut of experinental
neaaurenenta with theoretically calculated vibrational tenperatures of CO;

(T1) is observed with an increase in 029 by 30-70: depending on the co content.
Doubling and quintupling 02, brings theory and experi-ent into agree-en: in the
region of higher co contents Eco) 0.3.

53
ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The inf luenca that the possible uncontrollable water vapor content in mixtures
considered hu on vibrational temperatures of CO; and co is illustrated by
curves lo on Fig. 1-10. The calculations were done for 5.120- l.005. In this
calculation version. the 1'; coincide with experimental data. and the theoretical
values of '1'; are souwhat higher. as before.

Thus if consideration is taken of the attendant uncertainties in the rate
constants of relaxation processes (see citations 32, 36 in Ref. 1). possible
uncontrollable trace amounts of water vapor in the investigated mixture. and
errors in measurements of vibrational temperatures. the agreement between
calculated and neasured values of vibrational temperatures of co. and 00 can
be considered satisfactory. An exception is the discrepancy for '1'; at “(K 0.2
that cannot be attributed to these factors.

The results of measurements and calculation of gain for the investigated mix-
tures are shown on Fig. 2. Based on results of measurements of 1'; and 1:2.

we can determine the gain in the center of the rotational line of laser tran-
sition 00'1-010°0 of carbon dioxide from the intensity of spontaneous infrared
emission in the 5.3 and 2.7 m bands

K: am: %(Nﬂ'l.l’ — ﬁA'IO'IJ)VSE ”(at 0)] (1)

where a- 0.187 s'l is the probability of spontaneous emission on the laser
transition; a-ltVIIIZ/u; H(a, 0) is the value of the Voigt function in the

center of the line; Mr”. - (21' '+ 1)'Nco.0:‘0;‘3ibl— 9 '11-, .. £,(J’)Ile. Nut” .-

(2J+ i)N°o:Q;'Q;‘exp[——OTJ; —B+‘;.Q are the populations of the corresponding

vibrational-rotational levels; Nco2 is the number of CO: molecules in a unit
of value; 93- 3380 K. 01- 1997 K are the characteristic tenperatures of vi-
brational levels 00'! and 10°0; Qv and Q; are respectively the vibrational
and rotational statistical sums of'COz; lit-(J) is rotational energy. In this
paper. the gain was reconstructed for the most intense line P20 of transition
00°1+10°0. which corresponds to J' ~19. J- 20 in (l). The theoretical cal-
culation of gain was done with the use of calculated values of vibrational
tasperatures 1‘3 and '1‘; for the center of line P20 of transition 00°0+ 10'1

by relation (1).

Using the estimates given above for the error in determining T; and 1'2. we
can establish that for the bounds conditions of the given paper. the ac-
curacy of reconstruction of gain K is approximately 20.1 m' . The loss of
sensitivity of the given method of determining gain in the region of maall
values of [Re] (0.1 is due to a reduction in the population difference of
laser levels Nun-Nun to values comparable with the error of measurements
of “90‘; and Ngs'o.

The data of Pig. 2 confirm the good correlation of values of KL and K§ measured
by two independent methods. A monotonic reduction of It. is observed as nitro-
gen is replaced by carbon monoxide from the carbon monoxide content with
“-0.5 m'1 at Eco-0 to near-zero values at Eco-0.5.

5h
roe omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of theoretical calculation of gain when the rate constants of
vibrational relaxation processes are selected according to versions 3 and I;
agree well with measurements. Calculations by version I somewhat understate
the values of K0. and version 2 overstates them.

The data of Pig. 2 show the relatively weak influence that a symbatic change
in relaxation rates of upper and lower laser levels of co, has on gain. The
difference in results of K. calculations for versions 2-6. characterised by
appreciably different process relaxation rates. approximately corresponds

to the experimental error of gain measurements - 20-1): [ﬁsh 3].

Measurements of vibrational temperatures of 00; and co showed that the reduced
amplification when nitrogen is replaced by carbon monoxide is determined by
two factors: an increase in the rate of relaxation of vibrational energy

of 002 (w) molecules in process (7) and consequently of 00 and N; as carbon
aonoxide is added to the nixture. since stOi- CO)>Q“(H-Nz) (see table 2
from Ref. 1). and development of an additional channel for relaxation of vi-
brational energy of molecules of 002(V3). II; and co (see formula (10) in

Ref. 1). These factors lead to reduction of vibrational temperatures of

00 T5 and the any-etric mode of co, T3. and to an increase in vibrational
tmsperature of the collective mode of 00: T2.

The experimental and theoretical data shown on Fig. 1. curves 1-6. indicate
approximately identical effectiveness of molecules co and It, in the process

of relaxation of the collective mode of carbon dioxide gas (6). Actually.
when nitrogen is replaced by carbon monoxide up to concentrations CCO' 0.2,

T3 remains practically unchanged. This result agrees with the data of measure-
ments of rate constant 02. with NICO (see citations 60. 61 in Ref. 1), and
contradicts studies Inst. ’0] in which it was established that the quantity

029 when H-CO is approxinately two orders of magnitude higher than when
“-“ze

Results of Investigation of Nitric Oxide Additives. The nitric oxide molecule
has a lower vibrational quantum than the carbon monoxide molecule. The defect
of the first vibrational level of N0 with the first level of the asyI-etric
mode of co, increases to 650 cm'1 as compared with the 00 molecule (263 cm").
For the N0 molecule. just as for co. quasi-resonant exchange may take place with
the collective mode of CO: in (10).

The results of measurements of vibrational temperatures of NO ‘1'. and C02 T,

and T: when nitric oxide is substituted for nitrogen in mixture 0.100¢+0.5N3+
0.6Be are shown in Fig. 3. The reduction in ‘1'; and T; as nitric oxide is

added is more appreciable than with the addition of carbon monoxide (see

Fig. l. 3). An increase is noted in the rate of vibrational relaxation of

(:0; (w). R; and NO as compared with mixtures that contain carbon monoxide.

This is evidenced by the reduction of vibrational temperatures: ATg'Tg (Em-
0) - 15(E'o- 0.5) 2 500 K and AT; - Ts(£no' 0) - hum. 0.5) = 500 I when nitrogen
is replaced by nitric oxide as compared with corresponding quantities A1; I

200 K and AT. 8 300 K with analogous substitution of carbon dioxide for nitrogen.

fliers and below. reactions are nusbered as in Ref. 1.

55
not omcm. use onur
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Just as in aixtures with carbon aonoxide. the calculated values of ‘1'; are
overstated by 100-250 K depending on the “0 content. To correlate calculations
and experinents on detenining 13. the rate constant 03, out be epproxiaately
quintupled. ‘l'he calculated values of teaperature ‘1'. coincide with experinent
in the concentration region EmSOJ. and are 150-250 K higher than the ex-
periaental values at {not 0.2

An increase in ‘1': is observed theoretically and experinentally with syste-
aetic substitution of 110 for 112. The theoretical calculation of r, is also
overstated (see curve 1" of Pig. 3). to bring theory and experinent into
line. it is necessary to approxinately double the rate constant of reaction
(6) 03001-30). or to have water vapor in the aixture in an snout of

£320 a 0.005.

Results of neasnrenents and calculation of gain with the addition of nitric
oxide are shown in Mg. 6. Addition of nitric oxide leads to a reduction

of R. free 0.6 can" at Ego-0 to 0.1-0.15 a" at Ego-0.5. which corresponds
in order of nagnitude to a reduction of gain with equivalent substitution

of carbon nonoxide for nitrogen. Good agreaent with experinent is obtained
with theoretical calculation of K. when the rate constants of relaxation pro-
cesses are taken according to versions 3 and 4. Choosing the rate constants
in accordance with version 1 gives understated values of I. as conpared with
uperinents. Use of the rate constants of version 2 overstates K. in region

£30303.

0n the whole. the influence of N0 noleculee on the kinetics of fornation of
population inversions in the active nediua of a CO; gasdynaaic laser is in
large neasure analogous to the influence of co eolecules. Just like 00 ecle-
culea. the ID nolecules cause a reduction in stored vibrational energy of

the upper laser level of 602(va). MW) and N0(v) as a result of an increase
in the relaxation rate of this this energy in the process of MI exchange

(7) in 003 and as a result of develop-ant of an additional relaxation channel
(10) that in fact couples the antisy-etric and collective nodes of 001. The
relaxation rate of the collective node (6) and consequently of the lower laser
level is not considerably increased as conpared with collisions of CO; nole-
culea with nitrogen. The noted factors considerably reduce the gain when
nitric oxide is added to the co, laser nixture. just as in the case of carbon
aonoxide.

The following co-enta can be nde concerning the discrepancy between experi-
nent and theory in determination of vibrational temperatures. In nost cases
these discrepancies can be attributed to attendant uncertainties in choosing
the rate constants of processes of vibrational relaxation of the nulticonponent
media of the co; laser. or to the presence of uncontrollable trace anounts
of water nolecules in the ﬁxture that appreciably accelerate processes of
vibrational relaxation. The nore appreciable discrepancies noted in sons
cases in the given paper for vibrational teaperaturee of the asyuetric node
1'. nay apparently be due to the occurrence of atonic coaponents such as oxygen
in the aediua at high tenperatures. Such conponents are strong deactivators
of nolecular vibrations [Rah 5]. It is also possible that the explanation
of this discrepancy under conditions of considerable vibrational excitation

56
me omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Ioleculea requirea animation of a note detailed ache-e of vibrational
relaxation in the active nediu- of the 002 laser that taken consideration
of occurrence of additional channela of energy exchange.

I.

2.

3.

be

S.

Doroahenko. V. H” Kndryavtaev. N. 11.. lovikov. 8. 8.. ram MA
I V231". Vol 17. 1981. p 2.

Biryukov. A. 8..Vollwv. Yu. A. It .1" “MAYA autumn, Vol 3.
[976. p 1758.

Solo‘thin. I. 1.. Yakobi. Yu. A.. 21mm nmm mm I
mum mm. ISO 3. 1976.

“'1'. "a. um.t°1np Lon mm. RES. COW. We PAPERS. NO 129‘!
London. 197‘.

Buchwald. H. 1.. "Olga. G. J.. J. cm. PHYS.. Vol 62. 1975. p 2828.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatal'atvo 'ﬁanka". "Pizika goreniya i varyva". 1981

6610

080:

1862/153

57
m omcw. us: own
POI OMCIAL USE ONLY

WC 62!.373.826.038.823
arm-rmcmcr Paomtmrnm 0345-003 LASER

Moscow IVANTOVAYA mmm in Russian Vol 9. No 3011). Mar 82 (nanuscript
received 2 Jul 81) pp 626-625

[Article by A. 8. lashltin. N. P. Vagin, L. V. Kulakov. A. ll. Orsysvsltiy.
Yu. P. Podur'hov.‘ 0. Ya. Porodinkov, H. I. Prishchepa and a. II. Yuryshev,
Physics Institute ineni P. N. Iabedev. 088R Acadeny of Sciences. ﬂoscow]

[Text] A report on investigation of a photoinitiated Dg-Pz-coz
chenical laser. A specific energy output of 37 J/liter. cor-
responding to a technical laser efficiency of 18: is achieved
on a nixture of hummus.- l:5.5:6:9.5 ([0;]/[P;]-0.03.
p-l atn) st degree of initiation AIP;]/[Pa]-0.051.

One of our preceding papers [Ref. 1] reported on sttainnent of high technical
efficiencies n; in a large-wolune [lg-Pg laser with photoinitiation by standard
flashler IPP-20000 Our 362 at specific energy output e- 25 J/liter). The
results of cooperative uperinents on initiation of urn-co, and lz-Pz lasers
with call values by a been of fast electrons has shown that the energy per--
eters of these lasers are approximately the seas Inf. 2], which leads us

to hope for high n‘ in the photoinitisted urn-co; laser as well. As pointed
out in Ref. 1. the high values of n; and e in chsnical lasers based on the
fluorine-hydrogen chain reaction can be realized only when using a media
with large cross sections that assure effective capture of eeission of the
photosource (disaster of the laser cell must be of the order of 150 s. er
nore for the usual partial pressures of fluorine of the order of 200 II Hg

or less). Therefore the experinents were done on the sun laser cell as in
Ref. 1; active value was about 7.3 liters.

Operation with the 03-23-002 laser requires the use of m1 windows. which
could not withstand more than one use under the conditions of the experinents
done. therefore we were unable to work with laser windows of 0 160 - as

in the case of the Ila-P2 laser. Bowever. this is not inportant for determining
the energy paraneters of the urn-co; laser since special studies on the

Ila-P; laser showed uniforeity of laser energy distribution over the cross
section of the cell (cell dis-star was 150 In) throughout the entire range

of fluorine working pressures ($200 - Hg). ‘rhis deaonstrates the possibility
of investigations of the Dz-Pz-W; laser with the use of nediu-siaed optics
and subsequent scaling of the results to the full cross section of the laser

cell. Therefore all experiments were done with optics of O 70 I- and laser
be- dinetar of -60 III.

58
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The purpose of our research was to detarnine the feasibility of getting high
technical efficiencies and specific energy outputs on a chemical nz-rz-oo.
laser initiated by flashing: mission. In the course of the experilents.

the ahove-eentioned laser output parameters were optimized with respect to
col-position and pressure of the nixture. oxygen content. degree of initiation
and Q of the optical cavity. The best result was attained on a eixture of
03:3: : 002:!!a- l:5.5:6:9.5 ([021/[le-O.O3) at atnoepheric pressure. Spe-
cific energy output r- 37 Jlliter was attained at a degree of initiation
anal/[1'1] -0.051. Considering the above state-ant regarding the possibility
of scaling up to the entire cross section of the call. we find that the given
specific energy output should correspond to energy fro. the entire active
value of the laser of 270 J. The energy of a capacitor bank supplying the
necessary degree of initiation dual/[F2] '0.051 was 1.5 U. Consequently.
at the attained energy output of 37 J/liter. the technical efficiency of the
laser 1‘ 182.

It is interesting to note that on the given facility in experinents with the
Ila-r2 laser an energy output of ~60 J/liter was achieved at efficiency of ~19!
(mixture B::P¢:Be:02-22:150:15:563. p-l arm). This shows that under certain
conditions the photoinitiated 01-32-00; laser is on a par with the photo-

initiated Ila-1'1 laser with respect to specific energy output and technical
efficiency.

1. lashkin. A. s.. Orsevsky. A. IL. Pariuk. V. 8.. Porodinkov. 0. 3..
Yuryshev. Ii. N.. Vagin. II. P.. "Investigation of a Large Voluae Ila-P3
Laser with Plashlanp Initiation". Lectures. Synposiun Optika-Bo. Budapest.
Novuher 1980. p 106.

2a “ﬁnn' As Se. OIRYOVOkiy. As “a. Tmahov. v. "a, YMOuV. “a no.
KVANTOVAYA “MIRA. Vol 7. 1980. P 1357.

COPYRIGHT: Irdetel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika", 1982

6610
080: 1862/lw5

59
ron omcuu. use ONLY
MWMUSEONLY

DIX: 621. 373.826.038.823

mum O! SPRIPIC PUMPING m (N MIG EFFICIENCY OF AWO-
PIBSSURB ELECTRON-83AM CONTROLLED 003 LASER -

Moscow “MAYA macaw in Russian Vol 9, No 2016). Feb 82 (manuscript
received 16 Apr 81. after revision 17 Jul 81) pp 613-615

[Article by V. G. Vostrikov. V. G. haunov and L. V. Shachkin]

[Text] An experinental study is done on the influence that
specific pining power has on operating efficiency of an
atmosphericdpressure electron-bean controlled co, laser

at fixed near-optima values of other perseeters that in-
fluence laser output energy. It is shown that an increase
in specific puping power fron 2 to 7 kH/ca’ leads to an
increase in the output energy by 1.01 for s nixture of
emanate-1:15:14.

The problem of 'the influence that specific punping power has on the working
efficiency of electron-beam controlled lasers is a tinely question when se-
lecting optimu- duration in pulse-periodic laser systeas. It is evident from
general argments that a reduction in pulse duration r (while retaining the
specific pulping energy c that is limited by heating o? the gas mixture) should
lead to an increase in the efficiency of the electron-bean controlled laser
due to reduced collisional relaxation as conpared with radiative. and on the
other hand the reduction is linited by complication of the ionisation device
and its supply systen, as well as by an increase in the radiation power density
on the target. leading to gas breakdown at its surface. Besides. when the
puping power is increased. there is an increase in the rate of electron losses
in proportion to the square of electron concentration. which leeds in turn

to e reduction of efficiency in utilisation of the electron hen.

Theoretically the probl- of complex optimization of the excitation pulse
par-esters was considered in Ref. 1. 2. Research has now been done on experi-
mental investigation of the way that emission energy Pa and efficiency n depend
on the normalized electric field strength BIN and conposition of the working
nixture lief. 3. 6]. However. in all these papers. sinultaneous variation

of several parameters that influence 1’, and n (such as e. 3/“. specific pulping
power and so on) has precluded a detailed analysis of the influence that any
para-eter has at fixed values of the other parameters near optinun.

To determine the influence of specific puping power on output emission energy
and efficiency on an electron-be- controlled laser using carbon dioxide. we

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

did an experimental study of the way that 9, depends on n and q at fixed values
of pumping energy and BIN for nixtures of 003:I¢3:11e- 1:6:3 and 1:5:5 (in parts
by voh-e) at pressure of 1 atnosphere and initial temperature of the gas
aixture ~300 I. The experiments were done on a facility described in Ref. 5.
The source of ionization was an electron beam with initial energy of ~200 keV.
coupled through an aluinue foil 35 I. thick into the gas-discharge chamber.
To guarantee constant composition. the working mixture was continuously circu-
lated through the aixing chamber. The discharge current was measured by a
Rogowski loop. The research used a two-pass telescopic unstable cavity with
aagnificstion 11- 1.3. the length of the active zone along the optical axis

of the cavity was Lc-ZXOJS n. Radius of curvature of the output mirror
was 33 I. and of the opaque nirror -- 43 m. Reflectivity of the nirrors

x I 0.985. Output energy was measured by a matrix of 0-40 cells. basing
pulse shape was recorded by an PSG-223 sensor with signal fed to the 88-11
two-beam memory oscilloscope; the signal fron the Rogowaki loop was sent to
the same oscilloscope. The energy input in each pulse was deter-ined by ap-
proxiaate nuerical integration over the course of the pulping pulse. Since
the pulse shape for the specific pumping power is practically the same as

that of the discharge current. this recording technique enabled us to deter-ins
the time of termination of the lasing pulse relative to coapletion of the
pulping pulse. Pig. 1 shows oacillogrns of current and lasing pulses. The

re. J/l

 
 

III-III.-
I'd-III“.-
IVIIIIII‘II
Ill!w_l‘ll .
I'll-III. -
II'JIIIIII
II ISLE-III
IIIIIIIEII

 
 
   
   
   
     
     
   

IIIIIIIII
Pig. 1. Typical oacillo- Fig. 2. Mission output
grams of discharge current energy as a function of
(top) and lasing pulse (bot- specific pulping power
ton)

Variation in specific pulping power with fixed electric field and energy input
was achieved by varying the beam current and pming puls“. duration. The
voltage across the discharge chm-bar (and accordingly the value of the elec-
tric field) was the asthma: permissible for each sixture with consideration
of stability of the working node at which no breakdowns were observed in the
discharge chnber either during the pulse or after its coapletion.

Fig. 2 shows how specific energy output depends on the puping power density
for a aixture of COz:N2:1h- 1:6:3 at B/N- 1.5-10'” H-cmz. Output energy
was measured at two fixed values of specific energy input £90.25 and e;-
0.30 J/ca'. Under our conditions. lasing practically ceased at the end of
the pumping pulse at :1. and therefore a further increase in specific energy

\

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
input to s; does not increase energy output. (A similar effect was observed
for the nixture cognizan- 1:4:5 as well.) As can be seen from Fig. 2. an
increase in specific puping power fro. 2 to 7 kit/ca: leads to an increase

in output energy by approximately 60-50:. The aaxinu attained output energy
was Phax' ‘2 J/Z. For a eixture of cannon-1m: the dependence of output

Pig. 3 shows how laser efficiency
depends on specific power input for
both nixtures at two values of spe-
cific energy input. The curves were
obtained by averaging experinental
data. As we can see from Fig. 3,
the lost effective of the investigated
mixtures was s nixture of comma:-
l:6:3 (curves 1, l'). The maxim.
value of n- 152 is attained at E; -
tion of specific pulping power: 0.25 J/ca’ and q = 7 kH/cn’. The
l. l'-002:Nz:lle- 1:6:3 (BIN-1.540-" higher value of n for nixture cozznz:
H'cnz. l-c;-0.25 J/cs'. 1' “-0.30 as- 1:6:3 cannot be attributed to the
J/ce’); 2. 2'-00;:N2:Be 1:4:5 (B/N- fact that the volt-attic heat capacity
1.3.10‘" w-cn’. zue. -o.2s J/cn’. (J/Z'deg) for the mixture with volu-
2'-c2-0.30 J/cn’) netric ratio of conponents of 1:6:3

 

pletely possible that the decisive factor is that the optical axis of the
unstable cavity was situated near the cathode (at a distance of the order

of l on) and other things being equal (due to conparatively greater inhono~

In conclusion the authors than]: A. V. Korneyev and I. D. Dahigaylo for assist-
ing with the experiments. and A. G. Kraoyukov and P. A. Svotin for constructive
discussion of the results.

“WES

I. Avrov. A. 1.. Glotov. Ye. P.. Danilychev. V. A.. Cheburkin. N. V..
KVANTOVAYA KLEKI‘RDNIKA. Vol 7, 1980. p 1979.

2. Avrov. A. 1.. Glotov, Ye. P.. Danilychev, V. A.. Kanenets. P. F..
Krasovskiy. V. H” Soroka. A. M., KVANNVAYA macaw. Vol 8. 1981.
p 426.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

5.

S.

6.

7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“M. us Go. mailycmv, V. As. loam. A. ‘0. m.h. I. 3.. Sobolev. V. As.
Sucitov. A. F” Orin. B. H” KVANTOVAYA “mm. Vol 2. 1975. p 2458.

Sam. ll. 6.. Dsnilychsv. V. A.. Ionin. A. A.. Kovsh. I. 3.. Sobolev. V. A..
Suchkov. A. 1.. 11:111. 3. 14.. KVANTOVAYA WM. Vol 1. 1975. p 2529.

Krssyukov. A. 6.. Ram. V. 6.. Shschkin. L. V.. Shaollkov. V. H..
FIZIKA mm. Vol 7. 1981. p 100.

bobsnav. A. 11.. Orlov. V. L. Suchkov. A. P.. Otis B. H.. Preprint 80 199.
Lebedcv Physics Institute, )ioscov. 1977.

Karlov. II. V.. Konsv. Yu. 3.. Kochstov. I. V.. Psvgov. V. 0.. Prcprint
No 91. Lshsdsv Physics Institute. lbscov. 1976.

COPYRIGHT: destsl'stvo "Radio 1 svysz'". "Kvsntovsys slektronihs". 1982

6610

(:80:

[862/133

63
Iron omcw. us: ONLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“DC 621.373.826.038.823

INVESTIGATIG! OF CHEMICAL I! LASER BASED on HIGH-P8388033 Ila-83‘ MIXTURE

Moscow KVWAYA mounts in Russian Vol 9. No 3(117), Mar 82 (manuscript
received 7 Jul 81) pp 625-628

[Article by A. S. Baahkin. A. N. Orayevskiy. V. N. Tomeshov and N. N. Yuryshev.
Physics Institute imeni P. N. Labedev. USSR Acadeny of Sciences. Moscou]

[Text] An investigation is made of the energy character-
istics of a chemical HE laser using a nixture of Ila-SP;
excited by a relativistic electron beam. Effective lasing
is achieved at a mixture pressure up to 6.5 stm. Specific
energy output of 50 J/liter is obtained at a mixture pressure
of 1.5 arm. The authors note the capability of continuous
tuning of the lasing frequency over a range of 2.2 cu" about
the center of each of the vibrational-rotational lines,

which enables development of a powerful tunable laser neces-
sary for laser-chemical research.

The solution of laser-chemical problene has necessitated development of pover-
ful lasers that suit radiation over a wide wavelength range. Radiation with
wavelength near 3 um is needed for resonant excitation of molecules that have
hydrocarbon bonds. Quite promising in this band is a chemical HP laser based
on a mixture of Stu-ll; that has a broad lasing spectrum. The use of a stable
gas nixture as the active medium of the laser enables reliable operation at
high pressures. which not only shortens the duration of the lasing pulse.

but also enables expansion of the continuous tuning range.

Ref. 1 arperinentslly demonstrated the feasibility of tuning the frequency
of the HP laser in a range of 0.5 cn" around each vibrational-rotational
transition. however. the energy characteristics of this laser were very low.

Besides. expansion of the continuous tuning band of the laser is quite de-
sirsble.

The possibility of operation of the laser using an SPc-Hz mixture at pressures
up to 10 atn was demonstrated in Ref. 2. However, the explanation of the
abrupt drop in energy characteristics of the laser at mixture pressures above
3 atm by' relaxation of vibrationally excited HP molecules by II; and HP mole-
culea is unconvincing. Therefore the question of getting efficient lasing

on an Sir-32 mixture at pressures of several atmospheres remains open.

6h
roe omcut us: omx
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In high-gain lasers. including chemical HP lasers. a reduction in energy char-

acteristics say be caused by "parasitic" lasing or superluinescence Inst.
3. lo]; however. direct observation of parasitic lasing and the possibility
of overcoming it have apparently not been described in the literature as yet.

Our research is dedicated to solving all these probl-s. The Sig-ll; mixture
was excited by an electron been from an accelerator described in Ref. 5. Trans-
verse excitation was used because of the low electron energy (200 keV). The
use of an external magnetic field of 6 His intensity elilinated electron scat-
tering. increased current density in the laser cell. and also permitted more
exact deter-ination of the active volume of the laser and the input energy.

The electron energy lost in the laser gas median was measured as previously

in Ref. 5 by a noving angle calorimeter. ..

I

 

l’ig. l. Lasing energy as a function

of pressure of a mixture of SP5231 - 7:13

‘a) and general diagram of the experi-

ment (b): B--direction of external

aagnetic field; the axis of the "para-

sitic" cavity coindices with the di-
rection of B

‘r-~

    

B
0Q

3

  

B1... rel. u nits

till 8g

§

 

Lb
W" /

iv
-w‘lﬂ “In”

e-bean b

Developnent of parasitic lasing was checked on the experiment diagramned in
Fig. 1. Laser output energy was neasured at different mixture pressures.

The occurrence of a "dip" at the top of the curve can be attributed to para-
sitic lasing. Since emission was not observed in the presence of the opaque
mirror alone. it can be assumed that in the given case there was no super-
luninescence. Aluminum surfaces spaced 2.5 cm apart and parallel to one another
could serve as the mirrors of the "parasitic" cavity. The electron bea- from
the accelerator was coupled in.through one of these foil sheets. and the bean
was extracted from the laser cell for measurement of its paraseters through
the other foil sheet. Of course. the Q of this cavity was lower than that

of the main optical cavity. but since it had a short base (2.5 cm) compared
with the main cavity (120 cm). the field was established in such shorter times.
The occurrence of the dip at the top of the curve is due to the fact that

it was at the top that the lasing threshold was surpassed for the parasitic
cavity. The situation is aggravated by the fact that the length of the laser
active zone in these two directicns was about the same (see Fig. 1).

To check out the above arguments. the length of the main cavity was reduced
to 60 ca. When this was done. the laser output energy at a mixture pressure
of 500 I- llg nora than doubled upper point 0 on Fig. Is). Also to suppress
parasitic lasing for a cavity base of L- 120 cm. a screen was introduced into
the active aediun bent into a cylinder 2.5 cm in diameter. which strongly

65
roe omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reduced the Q of the parasitic cavity. The current of the electron bean in
the gas medium showed insignificant change. In this case as well. a sharp
increase was observed in the lasing pulse energy (lower point 0 on Pig. 1).

thus the given experiment was a kind of imitation of conditions that say arise
in lasers with large active volumes. In such lasers. large transverse dimen-
sions nay lead to spurious emission even with much lower gain than in this
case.

To eliminate the further possibility of parasitic lasing. the shape of the
cathode was altered: the circular form was replaced by a strip measuring
63xb In. The track of the electron beam [photo not reproduced] and the

general setup of the experiment are shown in Fig. 2. Laser output energy

Pig. 2. General diagram of ex-
periment with strip cathode (a)
and track of electron beam on
surface of tin-plated sheet lo-
cated directly in the gas nedim
of the laser cell (b) [photo not
reproduced]

Fig. 3. Output energy of laser
using mixture of SFuliz- 5:1 (1),
20:1 (2). 56:1 (3) and 100:1 (h)
as a function of nixture pressure
for entire lasing cross section
(a) and for a layer of G I. III
closest to the point of entry of
electrons into the laser gas (b)

 

was measured as a function of the pressure
of mixtures with different 5173/82 ratios
(Fig. 3). At pressure of 1.5 stn and - A41.—L—
ratio sum; -20:l. the lasing pulse energy -0 ’ 7 Plan atm
reached 0.6 J. Considering that the cross s’ "1' ““1“
section of the lasing spot as determined
fro: the burn left on blackened photo-
graphic paper corresponded to the cross
section of the electron beam. we can assume
that the active volt-s of the laser was , 7 J Pm atn

about 8 cm’. However. because of the

small laser dimensions. the accuracy of

determining the active volume is no better than 20-252. Thus the specific
lasing energy is :1“- 50 J/liter. Such a high value of the shows that high
energy parameters are attainable even when a chemical reaction of other than

chain type is used under conditions of intense initiation.

   

The level of initiation of the mixture was determined on the basis of data
on measurement of the electron beam energy contributed to the active volume
of the laser. and also with consideration of the fact that energy of 19.5 eV

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is expended on formation of a single fluorine atom [Ref. 6]. These estimates
give a concentration of atonic fluorine of (1.1:0.2) 10" cm" at SF; pressure
of 1.5 ate. with laser efficiency ne of 6.61 relative to the electron energy
contributed to the active value of the laser. Defining the chemical ef-
ficiency “chem of the laser as the ratio of the laser pulse energy to the
energy released in reaction of atonic fluorine with hydrogen. we find that

at p-1.5 atm and a ratio of SFszﬂz -20, new-212. Increasing the ratio

of SF; :11; from 20 to 100 while naintaining the pressure constant at 1.5 atm
causes a drop in laser energy to 0.3 J (see Fig. 3a). There is a corresponding
drop in “e. However. since such a reduction in the hydrogen content of the
nixture causes a sharp reduction in its energy reserve. there is an increase

in "chem Por eque. at Shah-54. new-291. and at spun; - 100, "chem
is 60:. Increasing the pressure of the mixture above 1.5 are (see Fig. 3a)
causes the output energy of the laser to drop for any nixture conposition

that is used.

In principle. this effect any be caused by the influence of relaxation of
excited are molecules upon collision with hydrogen nolecules [Ref. 2]. How-
ever. an estimate of the characteristic tiles of the process (k--2.b'10~

(s-II 11g)"1 (Ref. 6]) at nixture pressures of ~1.5 atm shows that the drop

in output energy of the laser cannot be entirely explained by relaxation of
El" molecules. In these estimates we have assuaed that lasing pulse duration
is co-ensurate with the duration of an electron bean current pulse [Bef. 7].
The fact that the naxinun laser Output energy is observed at the sane pressure
(see Fig. 3a) regardless of mixture composition is likewise indirect proof

of the weak influence of relaxation of In" by 1!; nolecules. Apparently relaxe-
tion begins to have an effect at note appreciable values of mixture pressure.
This is possibly nanifested by the intersection of the curves on Fig. 3 at

a pressure in excess of 3 atm. The abrupt drop in output energy with pressure
at p>1.5 atm to all appearances is due mainly to the nonunifornity of initia-
tion. which shows up nost strongly at high pressures. To check out this asst-Ip-
tion, 2 diaphragns were introduced into the cavity with aperture of lo In.
producing lasing in a narrow layer closest to the point of entry of the laser
beam into the laser cell. The output energy of the lasing pulse was plotted
as a function of the pressure of a nixture of 8175:112 - 20 (Fig. 3b). In this
case. the maxi-um output energy was no longer observed at 1.5 star. but at

2.5 atm. An increase in pressure to 4.5 atn causes a drop in laser output
energy by only 1.5 times. A further increase in the pressure was linited

by the nechanical strength of the foil through which the beam was coupled

into the laser cell.

The attainment of effective lasing at such high pressures nay be of interest
fron the standpoint of tuning the laser frequency over the line width of the
vibrational-rotational transition. The laser line width Av in the given case
is determined by inpact broadening and is related to the pressure of the nix-
ture by the expression “-453an6 (Ref. 1]. Line broadening by hydrogen
can be disregarded.

Since 5ﬂe/GSP5'0'2 (Ref. 8]. increasing the pressure of the nixture by SP.
is nore advantageOus than by using a buffer gas such as helim. Since
6517‘! 0.5 (cnvstm)“. under the given experimental conditions (p i 6.5 ate)

6?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

laser frequency can be tuned over a range of 2.2 cn'1 around the center of
each of the vibrational-rotational lines in the saission range of the laser
(1- -.2 7-3.0 nu). Increasing pressure by scans of the principal reagents (SP;
and 111) without the use of buffer gases also produced lasing with rather high
pover (-10 a") despite a stall active value of the laser (-8 en ’).

The electron bean technique provides the capability of considerably increasing
the active value of the laser not only by increasing cathode area. but by
increasing the electron be- energy. The latter also gives the possibility
for increasing the pressure of the gas medium

REFERENCES
l. bagratashvili. V. N.. Knyazev, I. 11.. Kudryavtsev. Yu. A.. Intokhov. V. 8..
PIS' HA V ZEURNAL EKSPERIHBNTAL'NOY I TEORBTICIESKO! FIZIKI. Vol 18. 1973.
p 110.

2. Vol'nov. A. 11.. Dovbysh. I... Ye.. Kazakevich. A. T.. Hel'nikov. s. P..
Sinyanskiy. A. A.. KVAII'NVAYA umm. Vol 6. 1977. p 626.

3. Suchard. s. 11.. Karber. R. I... Elanuel. C.. H‘hitier. J. 8.. J. cm. 91178..
' Vol 57. 1972. p 6065.

lo. Chen. H. I... Taylor. R. 1... Wilson. J.. Lewis. 1’.. nys. 11.. J. cum.
PHYS.. Vol 61. 1976. p 306.

5. Bashkin. A. 8.. Konoshenko. A. P.. Touashov. V. IL. Yuryshev. N. 11..
KVANTOVAYA amm. Vol 6. 1979. p 2166.

6. wilson. J.. Chen. H. I... nye. H.. Taylor. R. 1... Little. 3.. Lowell. 11..
J. APPL. PHYS” Vol No. 1973. p 5667.

7. Patterson. B. In- Gerber. R. A.. Blair. 1.. 3.. J. APPL. PHYS" V01 65.
1976. P 1822.

8. Higgins. T. A.. Griffen. II. C.. Arlin. B. 11.. Keretetter. D. I...
J. ml” SPECTR.. Vol 37. 1970. p 77.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 mar”. "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1982

6610
080: 1862/1105

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 621.378.33

FEASIBILITY sum 03 HAXD‘IIZM SPECIFIC D4188!“ mums 0P CHAD! metros
I? LASER

Moscow KVAMOVAYA manna in Russian Vol 9. No 3017). Mar 82 (manuscript
received 7 Jul 81) PP 628-6”

[Article by A. s. lashkin. A. ll. Orayevskiy. V. N. Tomashov and N. N. Yuryshev.
Physics Institute imeni P. l. Lebedsv. USSR Academy of Sciences. lioscow]

[Text] An examination is made of the energy paraneters

of an 83/15 laser excited by electron beam at a pressure
of the active volume of up to 3 atm. A specific energy
output of 180 Jlliter is achieved at efficiency of 5002
with respect to the electron bean energy contributed to
the active volume. An increase in initiation achieved by
substituting sulfur hexafluoride for helix-I gave a specific
energy output of 600 J/liter at efficiency of 4601 and
chemical efficiency of 221 on a mixture at atmospheric
pressure.

The development of pulsed chemical lasers is inseparably connected with in-
creasing the pressure of the active gas media. In principle. increasing

the pressure enables us to raise the specific energy output both by increasing
the energy content of the gas mixture, and by initiation. since the concentra-
tion of radicals (such as P) that "drive" the chain reaction of fluorine and
hydrogen increases with increasing pressure of the medium at a constant elec-
tron or photon flux of the initiation source. The rise in pressure also in-
creases the chemical reaction rate. shortening duration of the lasing pulse
and thereby increasing lasing power along with energy output. Shortening

of the laser pulse necessitates the use of a short-duration pumping source.
tron this standpoint. electron bans are nost convenient for pumping the ac-
tive media of high-pressure lasers.

The use of high-current. high-energy beans (55 RA. 1 lieV) gave lasing energy
of 2.3 in! Ref. 1. 21 on a hydrogen-fluorine mixture at pressure of 700 - Hg.
and even 6.2 U at mixture pressure of 1360 '- Bg. The efficiency n. with
respect to beam energy invested in the active volt-e of the laser was 1802.

and maxim-I chemical efficiency was 10:. All these results ahirably
demonstrate the feasibility of ef c nt laser operation on a fluorine-hydrogen
chain reaction at high reagent pressure. Unfortunately. Ref. 1. 2 do not give

69
FOR OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

data on specific energy outputs. initiation level. or the way that laser pars-
eters depend on mixture composition. All this makes it difficult. if not
inpossible. to do an in-depth physical analysis of the research results.

In this paper. we study the possibility of getting effective lasing on a
fluorine-hydrogen chain reaction at high reagent pressure by using a conpara-
tively low-energy electron been (less than 200 keV) as the puping source.
The experinental facility is described in detail in Ref. 3. Let us note that
the use of an external nagnetic field in transverse configuration of the ex-
perinent elininated electron been scattering. enabled exact neasurenent of
the bean energy invested in the active volume of the laser by a moving calo-
rineter [Ref. lo]. and precise formation of the gsonstry of the excited when
in the laser gas necim [Ref. 3].

The size of the active volume was determined on the basis of neamrensnts

of the electron been cross section in the gas nedim and the lasing spot.

the cross section of the lasing spot corresponding to the electron be- cross
section in the appropriate direction. On the basis of these neasurenents

we can estimate the active volume of the laser: ~82 2 ca’.

Fig. 1. Laser output energy ' 3?, J '
31“ (1). chemical efficiency 0 51 a.) 0,!“

new: (2) and efficiency ne - ‘
with respect to electron be-

   

energy invested in active ,5; 9m
volme (3) as functions of S M II
mixture pressure . m 500
2
H
0 ”'

-mp’ .IIB '
o 1 2 a}... mu3

ﬂeasurenente were ends of the output energy of a laser on a nixture of
r.:o.:u.:no- 2:0.16:0.b8:5. as well as n. and he}... at different pressures

of the nixture (Fig. 1). As the pressure is increased up to 3 ate. an in-
crease is observed in the laser output energy while n. drops fron 9001 at

a pressure of 1 am to 5002 at 3 ate: with a corresponding drop in rich,- from
6.6 to 3.21. It is interesting to note that the data obtained at atnospheric
pressure correspond alnoet conpletely to the data found in Ref. b for a similar
mixture in a laser with longitudinal pumping by an electron been of the sane
energy.

The influence of the hydrogen content in the mixture was studied at atlas-
pheric pressure (the change in hydrogen pressure was conpenssted by changing
the heliun pressure in the mixture). The results are shown in Pig. 2. Despite
the feet that increasing the ratio Pug/pp to 15 did increase the laser output
energy. subsequent experiments were done for nixtures with puzlp -3: since
increasing this ratio reduced the value of "ch. as well as considerably in-
creasing the pressure developed as a result of the reaction. which often led

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to rupture of the foil and dalage of the
cell windows. Since the active value
of the laser retained a snail fraction
of the electron beam energy even at a
mixture pressure of 3 atn. and a further
increase in the pressure of the mixture
was linited by the mechanical strength
of the laser cell. an investigation was
Pig. 2. Laser output energy as a made of the possibility of increasing
function of hydrogen content in the degree of initiation of the nixture
the mixture by increasing the density of the aediun.
This was~done by adding sulfur hexafluo-
ride. a gas with high nolecular weight that is also a donor of etoaic fluorine
lief. 4]. The total pressure of the mixture (1 era) was not changed. and
the increased pressure was compensated by reducing the heliua content in the
eixture. The resultant curves are shown on Fig. 3. Addition of 600 - lg
of SR led to an increase in output energy by a factor of 2.5. Efficiency

reached a very high value (~162).
m". the increase in 31“ and "chel '4’46 4’5 22'1"

 

   
 

 

was accompanied by a drop in n. to 2001. x
This can be attributed to a reduction in Q!”
the length of the chain reaction due to '1 w
a break in the chain in trinolecular reac- an “
tions of the type P(H)+02+H+ F(B)02+H. ,3 W
where H is is a molecule of 81-}. which is i‘ 0 m
quite effective in reactions of this type. 5”

wig" - "8
Despite the reduction in We: the addition
of SP; may be advantageous from the view- Fig. 3. Influence of 51’;
point of increasing the specific energy content in mixture of
output. cheaical efficiency. and also nore Pg:oz:!l;:SP;- 200:16:‘83psp‘
efficient utilization of beam energy. Be- on 21“ (I). "e (2) and on

sides. the presence of 81’; in the mixture "chem (3)
considerably increases its stability. and

experiments have shown that it reduces the pressure developed as a result

of the reaction. which in turn reduces the require-eats for strength of struc-
tural components of the cell, especially the foil and windows.

By optimising the cavity and increasing the accelerator beam current density
through a reduction in the thickness of the coupling foil, a laser eaission
energy of 3.3 J was attained on a mixture of F;:Og:llg:lle:3h- 200:8:48:100:600
an Hg. Ben energy of 2.1. J was absorbed in the active volume 02’ the laser,
which corresponds to a concentration of 1.25-10" fluorine atone per on3 that
are formed during initiation at cp- 12 eV [Ref. 5]. The value of n. was 1602.
and ncm~222. As the fluorine pressure in this aixture is increased to

400 In ﬁg. laser output energy rises to 6 J. hasnrenents of laser beam di-
vergence mads'for a cavity with base of 36 cm forned by an opaque nirror with
radius of curvature of 10 m and a flat output airror gave a value of lo mrad.
which is ten tines the diffraction limit. however. no experiments were done
on imporving the divergence as this was beyond the scope of our research.

71
FOB OFHCIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

The results denonstrate the feasibility of getting very high specific energy
outputs of ~600 J/liter at 11.21002.

The use of an external magnetic field in transverse configuration of the ex-
periment gives high initiation of the active laser medium even at lav electron
bean energy. The nain i-pedinent to increasing the pressure of working nix-
tures at present is the proble- of increasing the strength of laser structural
cowonenta. whereas the active values of the laser can be increased both

by increasing electron ba- ensrgy and by enlarging the cross section of the
bell. which is coupletely feasible considering the current state of accelerator

engineering.
mess

I. Gerber. R. A.. Patterson. B. 1... Blair. L. s.. Greiner. I. L. APPL. PHYS.
1.3118. Vol 25. 1975. p 281.

20 Patter.°ng la La. Gerber. Re As. 1328. V01 Qg'll' 1975. p 642.

3. lashkin. A. 5.. Orayevskiy. A. It. Tonashov. V. 11.. Yuryshev. N. IL.
KVANTOVAYA mm. Vol 9. 1982. p 61).

1.. Bashkin. A. 8.. Konoshenko. A. P.. Tonashov. V. 11.. Yuryshev. N. N..
[VAMOVAYA MTRONIKA. Vol 6. 1979. p 2166.

S. Wilson. J.. Chen. a. l... Pyta. w.. Taylor. R. 1... Little. 11.. Laval. I”
APPL. PHYS” Vol 64. 1973. p 5447.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyar'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1982

6610
080: 1862/165

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! omcm. use on“ ! i_

000 621.378. 33
mum 0P STARTW INITIATIG' (RI [lg/P; LASER PARAMETERS

Moscow KVAIITOVAYA mm in Russian Vol 9. No 3017), Mar 82 (manuscript
received 7 Jul 81) pp 650-632

[Article by A. S. laahkin. A. N. Orayevskiy. V. N. Tomaahov and N. N. Yuryshev.
Physics Institute imeni P. N. Lebedev. USSR Leads-y of Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] Par-eters of a chenicsl Ila/P; laser are studied
as a function of the level of starting initiation of the
mixture by electron hen. It is shown that conditions of
maxieising efficiency do not coincide with conditions of
maxiniaing output energy.

The principal initial parameters that deteraine the characteristics of the
emission pulse of a chenical laser are eixture coeposition and initiation.
Knowledge of the starting initiation enables prediction of lasing parueters
as well as verification and correction of known theoretical nodels of cheeical
lasers. Therefore it is of considerable interest to study the way that such
laser par-stars as specific energy output :1“. laser efficiency "e. chenical
efficiency "chen and lasing pulse duration 1 ” depend on starting initiation.
i. e. the concentration of fluorine atoms [P at different pressures of working
mixtures. Unfortunately. the question of the influence of initiation level
on the lasing parameters of Ila/P: chenical lasers has been practically un-
touched in experimental research.

We have carried out such research with a relativistic electron ban for disso-
ciation of nolecular fluorine. Since in the given case 11n1t<<flasn the in-
vestigation of the influence of [P] on lasing parueters becomes simpler and
clearer. The degree of dissociation of P2 was varied by changing the electron
be- current density with the insertion of nesh filters in the path of the
electron beam. The use of foil of different thicknesses to do this any cause
a change in the energy spectrum of electrons. and therefore is undesirable.

The general setup and parameters of the accelerator are given in Ref. 1. The
use of an external magnetic field prevented scattering of electrons and enabled
more accurate neaaurement of been energy by an angle calorimeter. The active
volt-e of the laser was -8 ca’ . Based on calorimetric neasurelents of been
energ absorption in gas media. the initiation energy was determined. The
initial concentration of atonic fluorine was calculated free these neasurenents.
assuming that 12 eV is used to produce a single fluorine aton [Rah 2].

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

0 405 0,0 0,15 42d.42531n.J

Pig. 1. Lsser emission energy 31“ (1-3) and efficiency
n. (4-6) as functions electron be- energy invested in the
active when: uxcun-razozmemz-zoouszsoous (1. lo).
150:12:376:_36 (2. S) and 100:8:250:26 - Hg (3. 6)

A nixture of P;:0;:lle:ng- 2:0.16:S:0.68 was selected for the experiments.

A sixture of similar composition hsd been studied previously. At s pressure

of 0.8-1 at: this nixture gave :1“! 100 J/liter st efficiency ms 900! Ref.
3]. Sale decresse of hydrogen in the mixture. es ahovn by the experinent.
increased n he: with a slight reduction in energy output. At the sus tine.
there was s so e reduction in the possibility of duage to structural cowonente
of the laser by explosion of the nixture.

The experiments were done st s total pressure of l. 0.75 end 0.5 atn. Fig. 1
show both the lsser mission energy and efficiency (m) as functions of the
energy 31“ invested in the active volue. An incresse in the level of ini-
tiation increases the output energy of the laser. slthough there is s tendency
to saturation of this dependence in the region of high input energies. This
effect shows up nost strongly as the pressure of the working nixture decreases.

71“! ‘1. "char 1

Pig. 2. Ch-icsl efficiency "che-
(curves) snd lasing pulse duretion
11.. (points) as dependent on the
e ectron he. energy invested in
the active value of the laser
(notstion as in fig. 1)

 

7h
me omcm. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Specific energy output of 155 J/liter is attained at the nearin- possible
initiation in the given experinents on a nixture with pressure of 1 eta. It

is interesting that in the region of low values of initiation the lasing energy
is higher on nixtures of lower pressure. Efficiency "chan behaves sinilarly
(Fig. 2). This nay be due to the fact that the length of the chedcal reaction
chain is greater for low-pressure nixtures at low-level initiation. Increasing
the pressure of the nixture while retaining the concentration of initial centers
leads to an increase in acts of chain breaking. which in turn reduces the
lasing characteristics.

Pig. 2 also shows the dependences of lasing pulse duration at different pres-
sures on the level of initiation of the mixture. They are characterised by
weal: dependence of r1” on the pressure of the working aixture and are steep
only in the region of low 313. The behavior of u; (see Fig. l) is character-
ized by a animal with position that depends on the pressure of the working
nixture. and shifts toward increasing initiation levels for the higher-pressure
nixtures. The new values of "e for all nixtures used are 800-9001. The
specific energy output for a nixture at atmospheric pressure reaches 110
J/liter.

Since it was inpossible to increase initiation by raising the current density
in the given experinents. we sttenpted to increase the initial concentration
of fluorine stone by substituting sulfur hexafluoride for none of the heliun
[Ref. 3]. A specific energy output of ‘las' ‘00 J/liter was attained at

he: [‘02 on a nixture of F; :02:llz‘:lls:8Fg -200:8:48:100:600 - lg. Here the ‘
energy input to the active nixture was 2.1. J. If these results are conpared
with those of our research obtained on a nixture of atnospheric pressure at
Bin) 0.075 J (see l’ig. 1). it can be seen that the product M81“ changes

by a factor of only 1.7 as B n is changed by a factor of 30. This shows that
the optinun conditions of initiation are appreciably different for nan-icing

"e and elas-

Thus our research has led us to the following conclusions. 1. with increasing
initiation energy there is an increase in output energy and cheaical efficiency
of the laser. although there is a tendency toward saturation that is nost
pronounced for low-pressure aixtures. 2. The optinn- values of laser effi-
ciency 11; are reached at certain values of initiation energy Bin, and as the
pressure of the working nixture is increased. the optimal region of B n shifts
toward higher values. 3. At low initiation energies the efficiency of the
chemical chain reaction drops with increasing pressure of the working nixture.
leading to a reduction in ne. ﬁche. and the laser output energy.

REFERENCES

l. Bashltin. A. 8.. Orayevsltiy. A.N.. Tonashov. V. IL. Yuryshev. N. N..
KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 9. 1982. p 628.

2. Wilson. J.. Chen. a. I... Fyfe. l. Taylor. R. I... Little. 11.. Lowell. L.
J. APPL. ms.. Vol lob. 1973. p 5667.

3. Bashkin. A. 8... Konoshenko. A. P.. Orayevskiy. A. 11.. Tonashov. V. N..
Yuryshsv. N. EL. KVANTOVAYA mmm. Vol 6. 1979. p 2166.

COPYRIGT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". ”Kwantovaya elektronika". 1982

6610

(280: ”62/165

75
roe omcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 621.373.8.038.825.3
In! PIDSPIIATB GLASS FOR LASERS Hm HIGH EMISSION PULSE ammo; RATE

Moscow “MAYA 31mm in Russian Vol 9. No 3017). liar 82 (manuscript
received 1 Jul 81) pp 622-624

[Article by N. Ye. Alekseyev. A. K. Gronov. A. A. Izyneyev and V. B. lravchenko.
Institute of Radio Physics and Blectronics. USSR Acaday of Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] The paper gives some lasing characteristics of new
LGs-T phosphate glass based on lie-Al that has higher thermal
conductivity and heat resistance than known grades. as well
as a rather high coefficient of thermal expansion. staking
it suitable as a base for synthesizing athermal glasses.
The authors demonstrate absence of concentration quenching
of neodymium luinescence in such a base at a content of

up to 6 wtd M203. Average lasing power of more than 20 U
at a frequency of 15 Hz is attained on active elements with
G 8:: 100 u. The glass has good technological character-
istics and can be produced in large voluee.

Active elements made of phosphate glasses are used in pulse~periodic lasers
due to high efficiency and low lasing thresholds. The possibilities for in-
creasing the lasing power taken from the active elaent are limited for a
predetermined sire chiefly due to thermal stability of the elements. Which
can be inch either by hardening [Ref. 1-3] or by improving the mechanical
characteristics of the glass and improving its thermal conductivity.

Use of the first method on heat-treated active elements measuring d 10:: I!) as
made of 61.822 athernal glass has yielded a free lasing power of 15 W lief. 3].
An output power of 8 H in the free lasing node and S H in the Q-switched mode
has been attained on hardened active elements measuring 9 8x 100 use made from
LGs-l athernal glass on a frequency of 10 8: (Ref. 6]. At the present tine.
we have obtained a free lasing power of 96 W at a frequency of I II: at ef-
ficiency of 31 on a hardened rectangular active element with size of

10x 60:: 300 I: made of 138-1 glass. Rwever, the hardening of active elements
involvee an additional technological operation that increases cost. Therefore
the second method of improving thermal stability of glass is preferable for
high-power process lasers.

It is known Ref. 5] that the thermal stability of an active element increases
with a reduction in the coefficient of linear thermal expansion n, which for

76
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phosphate athermal glasses lies in a range of (105-13))010'7 K" Ref. 6. 7).
Laser glasses are known with lower values of a. including Li-Nd-La ultraphos-
phate glass. Laaing power of 15 v at frequency of 6-8 B: has been attained
on an active element with G 6.3: 100 III eade of such glass [Ref. 8]. In this
paper we give some results of investigation of the laser characteristics of
active eluents node of a new lie-Al glass that has elevated thermal conduc-
tivity Inf. 9] and thermal stability. The value of a for glasses of this
type is (nos-120)-10" a". and consequently this base (LGs-T 31m) can he
used to nahe athernal glasses.

The glasses were founded in platinum crucibles with value of 3 liters with
botton branch pipe; the concentration of “d203 was 3 and 6 wt.2. Cylindrical
active elenents with no.0. concentration of 3 wt.X measured 0 8x 100 In. and
with 6 wt.: — s 5: 100 .- (e-108-10'7 r“). “a” luminescence lifetime
for both concentrations was 270-280 us. which shows the possibility for further
increasing the neodymium content in the glass. The half-width of the Nd’
luainescance hand for transition 1712— Imp is 18 nm. The lasing character-
istics of the glasses were studied in a nonoblock quartz illuminator with
eirror coating. Puping was by an ISP-GOO strohoscopic flashlasp. capacitance
of the capacitor bank was 200 u?. the lamp and the active element were cooled
by a 0.22 solution of new. at a flowrate of at least 30 liters/minute. pup-
ing energy in a pulse was 100 J . The transmission of the output mirror was
taken as the optim- for each type of active elenent. and was 30% for an ele-
nent measuring 0 81100 am. and 501 for 0 5x100 1-. The average power was
measured by the 110-2 instrument with wedge-shaped reflecting plate serving
as a be- splitter. The results of measurements of the output power as a
function of the pusping pulse recurrence
rate are shown on the Figure (curves
1. 2). Given here for comparison are
the parusetera of a hardened LGS-I
glass active element 0' 8x 100 In (curve
3). It can be seen that on a frequency
of 15 ll: at pumping energy of 100 J
we get an average lasing power of sore
than 20 H with the active element
0 8x100 an. and more than 15 H with
Radiation power as a function of 9 51100 III- It should be “0"“! that
the 9mm; Pill“ recurrence rate; the active elements were not subjected
1.4.63.1: 31“. (3 “,1 “203); 2..- to any hardening operations other than
LGS-T (6 «.2 n.0,); 3-hardened ordinary pickling. and that they Were
155-1 31.33 capable of operation at a pulping power
of 1.5 It" for an arbitrarily prolonged
time. As a rule. deterioration of Output parameters was caused by sputtering
of the lam electrodes and reduction of light output. The elaaent with
0 5x 100 mm was tested in the sane illuainator with the LTI-PCh industrial
laser as the light source. Under these conditions. an average enisaion power
of 9 H was attained at a lasing pulse recurrence rate of 50—100 Ila.

 

Thus. LGS-T laser glass is a quite promising naterial for use in lasers with
eeission pulse recurrence rates at least up to 100 a: and average enission
power of 100 H or note. In addition. it has good technological properties
and can be made in large volmes.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

9.

FVHICMﬂﬂCJAl.USIZ(MVLY

REFERENCES

ﬁsh. A. A.. Hit'kin, V. H.. Polukhin, V. N.. Stepanov. A. 1..
Shchsvelev. 0. 3.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. V01 2. 1975. p 850.

Hit'kin. V. H.. KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRORIKA. Vol 8. 1981. p 684.

Buz-akov. A. 6.. Kovrishkin. V. 5.. Hit'kin. V. 8.. Polukhin, V. N..
Stel'lskh. H. V.. Stepsnov. A. 1.. Pozdnyskov. A. Ye.. Chel'nyy. A. A..
in: "Teaisy dokladov ns Vtoroy Var oyuznoy konfsrentsii 'Optika lazerov'"
[Abstrscts of Reports to Second All-Union Conference on Laser Optics].
Leningrad. G01. 1979. P 7.

Alekseyev. N. Ye.. Gruzdev. V. V.. Izyneyev. A. A.. Kopylov. Yu. L.,
Krsvchenko. V. 3.. Hilysvskiy. Yu. 8.. Hikhaylov, Yu. N.. Roz-an. s. P..
Fisher. A. H.. KVANTOVAIA ELBKTROﬂIRA. Vol 5. 1978. p 2356.

Hit'kin. V. H.. Shchavelev. 0. 5.. Zheltov. V. 3.. OPTIKO-HEKHANICHBSKAYA
PROHYSELBNNOST'. No 9. 1978. P 39.

Avakysnts. L. A.. Buzhinskiy. I. H., Koryagina. Ye. 1.. Surkovs. V. P..
KVANTOVAYA ELZKTRONIKA. Vol 5. 1978. p 725.

Alekseyev. N. Ye.. Gapontsev. V. P., Zhsbotinskiy. M. Ye.. Kravchenko.
V. 3.. Rudnitskiy. Yu. P.. "Lazernyye fosfstnyye stekls" [Laser Phosphate
Glasses]. Moscow. Hanks. 1970.

Avanesov. A. 6.. Basov. Yu. 6.. Garnesh, V. H.. Denker. B. 1.. Il'ichsv.
N. N.. Hsksimovs. G. V.. Halyutin. A. A.. Osiko. V. V.. Paehinin. P. P..
Prokhorov. A. H.. Sychev. V. V.. KVARTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 7. 1980.

p 1120.

Alekssyev. N. Ye.. Volkonsksys. T. 1.. Izyneyev. A. A.. Kravchenko. V. 3..
Kulikovs, I. N.. Parfenova. L. 8.. Smirnov. I. A.. "Tezisy dokladov Pystoy
Vsssoyuznoy konferentsii 'Piziko-khimicheskiye issledovaniys fosfatov'
('Posfsty-Sl')" [Abstracts of Reports to the Fifth All-Union Conference

on Physical-Chemical Phosphate Research (Phosphates-81)]. Leningrad. 1981.
part 1. p 10.

COPYIIGBT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elaktronika". 1982

6610

680:

[862/165

78
INDR OFFICIAI.US£§(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.385.3325

PICOSECOND PULSE GENERATION IN ALEXANDRITB LASER IN 0.7-0.8 um RANGE um
PASSIVE NDB me

Moscow KVANTOVAYA WRONIKA in Russian Vol 9. No 3(117). Her 82 (manuscript
received 6 Jul 81) pp 607—609

[Article by V. N. Lisitsyn. V. N. Natrosov. V. P. Orekhova. Ye. V. Pestryakov.
b. It. Sevast'yanov, V. I. Trunov. V. N. Zenin and Yu. L. Renigaylo. Institute
of ‘rheraal Physics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of Sciences. Novosibirsk;
Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Siberian Department, USSR Academy of
Sciences. Novosibirsk; Institute of Crystallography, USSR Academy of Sciences.

Moscow]

[Text] A report on picosecond pulse generation in an alexan-
drite laser in the range of 0.7-0.8 um on vibronic transitions
”Tz~> 'Az+ hon in passive node locking using saturable
absorbers ns and ms. The pulse duration with Us! in

the range of 0.725-0.7loS um was 8 ps, and with pm in the
range of 0.75-0.775 um - 90 ps.

Of particular interest anong new laser materials that have now been synthesized
is alexandrite BeAle~:Cr’+ [Ref. 1. 2]. A distinctive feature of this asteri-
al is lasing on vibronic transitions ‘Tz-v ‘Az-thwphon. and as a consequence
the capability for continuous tuning of the lasing frequency in the region

of 0.7-0.8 an at room temperature [Ref. 2. 3]. Relatively low thresholds.
high efficiency with lup pumping and a considerable increase in efficiency
when the active element is heated to 70°C. as well as the capability for con-
tinuous-wave operation or with a high pulse recurrence rate open up extensive
possibilities for its use in science experiments and engineering. and in par-
ticular for generating ultrashort pulses with tunable frequency.

As we know (Ref. 4], ultrashort pulses can be produced in a laser with node
locking if the spectral width of saplification is wide enough. In alexandrite
the amplification band with lasing on vibronic transitions is 100 mu. The
situation is analogous in organic dye lasers, which enables generation of

sub-picosecond pulses with tunable frequency.

In this paper we are the first to report on frequency-tunable picosecond pulse
generation in a solid-state alexandrite laser with passive node locking by

aaturable organic dyes . \

79
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 1. Diagram of the
experimental setup: 1—-
oscilloscope; 2—spectro-
graph; 3--m-o9; lo--output
mirror; 5~Lio filter; 6--
diaphragn; 7—active element;
8--cell; 9—opaque nirror;
10-correlation device for
measuring pulse duration;
11--photouu1tiplier; 12--
peak-to-peak voltmeter; 13P-
two-coordinate chart recorder;
on the right is the correlation
function of the laser pulse in
vector generation of the second
harmonic

 

The diagram of the experimental setup for mode locking is shown in Fig. 1.
The active element with 0 6x 70 In with chroniu concentration of 101 (31'3
and antireflection-coated end faces and an IN? 5/60 fleshlamp were placed
in a nonoblock quart: illuminator. The ultraviolet part of the pulping (shorter
than 350 mn) lying in the region of inactive absorption of alexandrite and
detrimental to the efficiency of laser operation due to the development of
photochemical and thermal processes in the active element was cut off by an
aqueous solution of sodiul nitrate and a thin pyrex tube so that laser ef-
ficiency during operation was not decreased. The axis of the active element
coincided with direction <001> of alexandrite. and stimlated emission was
polarized along <010>. The laser cavity with length of 0.5 m was formed by
an opaque mirror with radius of curvature of 3 m and a flat output mirror
with transmission Tr- 32.

Measurement of the threshold characteristics of the active medium in single-
mode operation without frequency tuning or selectors showed that the threshold
of free lasing is 68 J. whiCh coincides with the value given in Ref. 2. Let

us note that the measurements made in our research were done on the crystal
used in Ref. 3. The high values of lasing thresholds in Ref. 3 can be attrib-
uted to the fact that the design of the illuminator for studying the tempera-
ture dependences of lasing characteristics did not give high pumping efficiency
or optimization of lasing parameters. In the illulinator used in our research.
at a pulse recurrence rate of 12.5 112 and pumping energy of 80 J (1P- 250 us)
on wavelength of 70 n- the average output power was 1.1 H at output mirror
tranuission Tr - 82. The dependence of output energy on pulping energy is shown
in Pig. 2. 1n the mode of generation of the mom mode with spectral selector
(Lio filter) and diaphragm of 0 1.2 II. tuning was accomplished over a range
of 718-780 a- (Pig. 3).

It is to be noted that at high levels of excitation in the active element.
considerable thermally induced stresses arise that give rise to a heat lens.
The dependence of the effective focal length of the heat lens on the average

pulping power is approximated in our case by the expression NP”) - 1.5]?
[kw]. With consideration of this. the design of the optical cavity was c anged

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE v-ILV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l’av- '9

   

an a -mBP.J 47! l” '4” Mun
Pig. 2. Free lasing output energy of Pig. 3. Spectral dependence of free
almndrite as a function of puping lasing output power for laser with
energy for A- 750 nl: rod tenpera- Lio filter at Tr- 3X

ture T-SO (O) and lS’C (0)

to compensate for theml effects. Induced thernal birefringence was dis-
regarded since it was less than the natural level of An=0.002. which was
confirmed by polarization interference in crossed polaroids. As a result

of using the geonetry optima for our case (the concave mirror with radius

of curvature of 300 on was replaced with a convex airror with radius of curve--
ture of 200 cu), the output power was increased to 2.5 U.

node locking in the alexandrite laser was accoupliehed by two saturable ab-
sorbers -- 081 and om - with relaxation tines of 22 and 130 ps respectively
in ethanol solutions [Ref. 6]. The absorption spectra: of 081 in ethanol

is shifted relative to the center of the lasing band of alexandrite (750 on)
into the short-wave region. and hes a maximal on 709 u with half-width of

40 me. which sakes it difficult to use this substance as a saturable absorber
in the 700-750 ma band. Because of this. the as: absorption line was shifted
by replacing the ethanol with dinethyl sulfoxide by 8 n- into the longer-
wave region. ms in ethyl alcohol. despite its considerable relaxation tine.
is admirably suitable with respect to absorption spectrua for node locking

in the long-wave part of the alexandrite lasing spectra (>750 Ill).

The cell with seturable absorber oriented at the Brewster angle was placed

in front of the opaque nirror; the dye solution was circulated at a rate of
10 liters per ninute, enabling operation at a pulse recurrence rate of 12.5 Is.
All the studies described below were done in this node. wavelength was tuned
by a 1.10 filter. and the mooq node was isolated by a diaphragm. The end
faces of the active element were turned through an angle of 2-3' relative

to the axis of the optical cavity. Mode locking was latched by changing the
density of the saturating absorber and the pv-ping level. The envelope of
the pulse train and the node locking were checked by an FER-09 coaxial photo-
cell and an oscilloscope with overall tine resolution of 3 ns. The average
duration of uStrashort pulses in the train was measured by the correlation

81

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

technique of vector generation of the second harmonic in L110; [Ref. lo]. In
the two-threshold mode [Ref. 5] with D61 in dimethyl sulfoxide. the duration
of the pulse train was 200-300 as with average duration of a pulse in the
train of 20 pa; in the mode close to autostabilization [Ref. 6]. in a some-
what modified cavity geometry. where shaping was done fron a series of free
lasing spikes. the average duration of the pulse was shortened to 8 ps. and
considerable modulation of the train envelope was observed. Hith D81. tuning
was accomplished in the range of 725-745 nm at a spectral width of 0.2 an.
The absence of structure in the emission spectrun at high contrast of the
correlation curve shows that there were no additional pulses on the axial
period [Ref. 7]. 0n Fig. l we have shown the correlation curve for generation
of the second harmonic on a wavelength of 730 na. and have indicated the
pulse duration as adjusted for a gaussian profile.

With use of an ethanol solution of DTTS. ultrashort pulses with 90 ps duration
were generated in the 750-775 nm range. Average output power of the laser
with nsl on a wavelength of 735 nm was 20 a“. when the temperature of the
active element was increased to 50°C (checked by a differential thermocouple
on the rod). node locking became lore stable due to increased gain of the
active medium.

There is no doubt that when the concentration of active centers in the alexan-
drite aatrix is increased. we can count on a considerable increase in the
output power of the laser in mode-locked operation.

Our research was not aimed at getting ultrashort pulses in the isolated pulse
mode at high pumping energies. Our principal attention was concentrated on
the feasibility of operation at a high pulse recurrence rate (up to 100 Hz).
enabling active use of the alexandrite laser both in spectroscopic work and
in technological devices.

REFERENCES

l. Bukin. G. V.. Volkov, 5. Yu.. Matrosov. V. N.. Sevast'yanov. B. K..
Timoshechkin. H. 1.. KVANTOVAXA ELEKTRONIKA, Vol 5. 1978. p 1168.

2. Walling. J. C.. Peterson. 0. J., Jenssen. B. P.. Morris. R. c., O'Dell.
B. V.. 1888 J.. Vol QE-l6. 1980. p 1302.

3. Sevast'yanov. B. K.. Remigaylo. Yu. 6.. 0rekhova_ V. P.. Hatrosov. V. N..
Tsvetkov, Ye. G.. Bukin, G. V.. DOKLADY AKADEHII VAUK SSSR. Vol 256, 1981.
p 373.

4. Shapiro. 8., ed.. "Sverkhkorotkiye svetovyye impul'sy" [Ultrashort Light
Pulses]. Moscow. Mir. 1981.

S.— Zherikhin. A. N.. Kovalenko. V. A.. Kryukov. P. 6.. Hatveyets. Yu. A..
Chekalin. s. V.. Shatveraahvili. 0. 8.. KVANTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol I.
1W6.p3U.

6. Milenkevich. A. V.. Savva, V. A.. Samson. A. M.. ZHURNAL PRIKLADNOY
SPBKIROSKOPII. Vol 25. 1976. P 618.

82

FCN!(HUHC]AI.USE¢)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. Sychev. A. A” RUDY PIZICBSKOGO lNS'l‘I'l'U‘l'A DWI P. ll. LEBEDBVA MADDHI
NM! 8883. Vol 86. No 3. 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatcl'otvo "Radio 1 maz'", "Kvantovaya elektrontka". 1982

6610
080: 1862 INS

83

FOR omml. USE ONLY
Foe OFFICIAL USE ONIN

UDC 537.876.23.029.7:551.510.5

medium as an extended aberration-free heat lens. the author
calculates the process of compensating defocusing by phase
conjugate adaptive systems. Use of such systems is effective
only in the case of weak thermal nonlinearity when the length

1. Recently there has been extensive discussion of the question of feasibility
of compensating the distortions of laser beams that arise on propagation in

the atmosphere by using adaptive coherent optics systems lief. 1-4]. Generali-
zation of the results of numerical calculations and experimental research

has led to the conclusion (Ref. 1) that these systems nay satisfactorily cor-
rect distortions introduced by turbulence. but are poor at correcting thermal
defocusing. An exact solution for the problem of compensating thermal defocus-

of beam propagation to the target and propagation of the reflected Have to

the reception aperture. This does not permit calculations with sufficient
accuracy and over wide changes in parameters. Therefore it is advisable to
consider simple models of propagation and coepensation that give an analytical
solution of the problem. One such model consists in replacing the action

of the nonlinear medium on beam propagation by the action of thin aberration-
free lenses located at different distances from the input aperture (Ref. 5].
It has been demonstrated that it is not always possible to coepensate even

the defocusing of such lenses. The given model has the disadvantage that

the results depend strongly on the position of the nonlinear thin lenses on
the propagation path. It is not clear where to place them in the case of

an extended nonlinear medium. In this paper, an investigation is ends of

the possibilities of using a phase conjugate system to compensate for defocus-
ing by an extended heat lens. It has been shown by various examples that
coepensation is impossible uhan the extent Z of the nonlinear medium is greater
than the characteristic length L, of thermal self-stress.

811
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. l. Qualitative pattern of correction: luthickneas

of nonlinear layer; R+ Z—distance to the target; P—initial

radius of curvature of the wavefront; !'+ A-distence at

which focusing to correction occurs; P-oradius of curvature
of the reflected wave

2. The following problem is considered (see Fig. l). A been with radius

of curvature of the phase front 1' on boundary 2- 0 is incident in the direction
of the s-axie on a nonlinear aedim occupying layer (0. l). Due to theraal
nonlinearity. the distance at which the bean is focused behind the layer (if
such is possible) will differ froa F by an .ount d. A diverging wave passing
through the nonlinear layer is reflected fro. a target located at distance

R froa the layer. The reflected wave will have radius of curvature —P. If
there were no change in perturbations of the index of refraction in the layer
with tine. focusing on the target could be realised by changing the radius

of curvature of the incident wavefront from F to F. however. in a nonlinear
sodium a change~in 1' leads to a change of the Iediu. and as a result. when
P is changed to P the focal point nay shift away free the target. Our task

is to deter-ins conditions under which repetition of this procedure leads

to focusing on the target. and to find the number of repetitions of the pro-
cedure (or the tine interval required to adjust focusing) to get the desired
focusing accuracy.

Assn-ling that the thickness of the layer Z is much less that the diffraction
length Ln-lta’. where k is the wave umber. a is been size. and disregarding
attenuation of intensity due to absorption. we will describe beu propagation
in the layer by the equations

0.1 :_ '1
(i) 20: +(Vyo) e.\.).
01
(2) 33+ vrovlmrw—o.

where O is the eikonal. J is the light field intensity. cu in the nonlinear
part of peraittivity. which in the general case is some functional of J(x. y.
z. t).

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Let us first consider coupenect ion in a sedi-m with nonlinearity of the
form

(3) 33(1) --"llv

where the coefficient s: and intensity J may depend parnetrically on tile.
‘l‘his dependence aay approxiaate the integral

(4) e.( -;—;-p—:-f 1(2. warm

when intensity J changes slowly in tine (t(3J/at)<<J). In this case.

:2 - -(acla‘l‘) -(ot/ocp). For reasons of sinplicity. a dependence of for! (3)
is often used in thermal self-stress problems (e. 3. see Ref. 2, 5). Its
applicability to conpensation problems will he discussed below.

In the aberration-free approximation [Ref. 6]. solution of equations (1).
(2) reduces to solution of equations for curvature s of the phase front and
bean rsdius a. which in the case cﬂ--t¢J will have the fore

(5) 3’_S'-—.__.. a'u—QS,

where LT-aol/Sdo. a. is heat radius. J. is intensity at the center of the
been at the input of the nediun. The initial curvature s. of the phase front
nay be arbitrary. We determine 3. iron the condition that 8(1) -R" on the
output of the layer. 1. e. so that focusing takes place on the tsrge:. The
solution of equations (5) will be
_ .- _. . . . ‘1
.(6) cam-«.1 (1-s.z)'+ 3-].
:
(S.-S.‘l-TF-) .

a.’
a‘ (3)

 

8(2)-
l'ron condition 8(2) - ll" we get

21+R(i$Yi-4P(R+l)'ﬂ"br")

.(7> 8" 310+)»

Formula (7) iapliss that focusing at distance I behind the layer is possible if

13+: 1
(8) 2777‘?-

Let us conpare this condition with the analogous expression

n. (n+1)
R-H-Il. ‘ "

obtained in Ref. 5 on the basis of a thin-lens nodal; R; is the distance to
the nonlinear lens fro- the transnittins aperture; 8,. is the lens power, which

(9) (S.

 

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as implied by (6) is equal to s..- all}. At l<<ll and 1!;- Z. i. e. when the
thin lens is located at the end of the nonlinear nedius. there is insignificant
difference between (8) and (9).

Let us note that condition 8(1) - R" may be satisfied at two different values
of so. It is natural that condition (8) is necessary for convergence of the
compensation scheme. However. in the general case it is insufficient. To
demonstrate this. it is necessary to calculate the compensation in accordance
with the achae described in the previous section.

The change in curvature of the phase front 5 of the wave from a point source
situated at distance R from the nonlinear nedima is described by the first
equation of systen (5) with given function a(z)

“.6
AW (3)

(10) S'-S‘--

 

and boundary condition 5(1) - -R'1. Let us make the substitution of variables
8- -b'/b in (10). Then for function b(z) we get the linear equation

 

(ii) b”— b-O.

I ’a‘

Considering that function (1(2) is a solution of the equation

“.5

f—W-O,

the solution of equation ([1) can be written as

(12) 6-H!) [C.+C:Ircts 3(3) 1.
where

I(S.. z)-a(So. z)/a.: ((30. z)--L.[I‘(S.. z)S(S.. 2));

Functions (1(a) and 5(2) are defined by formlaa (6); C1. c; are arbitrary
constants. Considering condition s(Z)- -l/R. we get

_ _ ram—n50)!
(1;) 5“” 8' R+L.ran_1—nswum'mamnnwam’

The phase conjugate cgnpensation scheme corresponds to an iteration scheme
for finding solution 8(0) "so of equation (13). Pig. 2 gives curves for

Fig. 2. Qualitative dependence of the

curvature 8(0) of the phase front of

the reflected wave on curvature 8(0)

of the incident wavefront at l/L-r>’§

(I): Z/LT- ‘5” (2); Illa-<5 (3) and
8(0) - -So (4)

 

87
roe omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

§(0) as a function of 8.. The iteration series converges to solution so, if
1‘ to- (LT/2) (R/(R+ 1)) and So<Soz. where S“. s“ are solutions of equation
(13) that are determined by fornula (7). Thus, in the general case, satisfac-
tion of condition (8) alone is insufficient for convergence of the compensation
scheme; the iteration series will diverge even when (8) is satisfied if the
initial curvature of the phase front s.>s.z. The umber of iterations neces-
sary for finding a solution with given accuracy increases strongly as 1+ lo.
For example. at l<<R (lam-0.5), the accuracy of findings“ equal to 11

is attained in lo iterations with corresponding numbers of 6 at “LT-0.6.

15 at Z/L-r-OJoS. and 30 at "LT-0.48.

lo. Let us consider compensation of thermal defocusing in a moving media.

If the time change in the field is sufficiently slow, beam propagation in
a nediun moving at constant velocity V directed along the x-axis is described
by system of equations (1). (2), where

(m ..-__;c—jua'.y._uw.

In the aberration-free approximation (e. g. see Ref. 7). nonlinearity of the
nediun has no effect on bean broadening along the x-axis. ﬂwever. the equa-
tions for curvature of the wave front and bean radius along the y-axis take
the form

2L7ﬂaa I a'-—as'

 

(15) S’—S‘--

where

 

9¢,Va.
L n-
" V (-ae/ar)a1.ﬁ

 

is the characteristic length of thermal self-stress in the moving medium.
The solution of equations (15) can be written as

70pm" : 1 —'
t , Cg-Zvr-E{ﬂc.-I/I‘I

1 _ ——
+E_'-1n[/(1c,+rc.-1/n 1 },

 

(16) 3L" "

where

!_ a (z)

a. .

vc.—1 +1n(v?.+vc.—1)
c. cm '

I cu-I+Lrv’so'3

 

C.-

 

The value of the initial curvature s. at which S(l)-R" will be determined
by the relation

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sabre-IV -‘T+f%,

where f is the solution of the second equation of (16) at 1- l.

cram-$4524: c.-c.(c.(m.

Numerical calculations for the case l/R<<l show that under condition

(17) l/L?"00836 "

this equation has two real roots. and it has no real roots if inequality (17)
is not satisfied. Therefore it should be expected that the conditions of
convergence of the iteration sequence simulating the conpensation scheme will
be analogous to the conditions of convergence in the case of local thermal
nonlinearity. i. e. in addition to satisfaction of (17) it is further required

that s.<8n. where so: is the value of curvature corresponding to the snaller
of the roots f1. f1.

Let us compare the results of the aberration-free approximation with the re-
sults of exact calculations of stability of the phase conjugate algorithm

for conpensating thernal defocusing in a moving mediu éllef. 3. 6]. These
calculations for length of the nonlinear layer 1- (1mm (Ir. is the wave umber)
showed that the algorithn is stable at values of the parameter 34,- kza'o’Js-lL-fq
of 7 or less. In cur notation. this condition can be written as Z/Lw<0.99.
which agrees well with (17).

S. In considering the previous problems. we have assumed a slow time change in
beam intensity and tenperature field. This asst-ption is valid for compensa-
tion of defocusing in a noving nediun if the time interval tk over which com-
pensation takes place is much greater than the time of settling of the steady
temperature field in the beam region (rpm/V). Applicability of the asst-sp-
tion that intensity changes slowly requires special consideration for conpen-
sation of nonstationary defocuaing. Clearly. the characteristic time of in-
tensity variation in this case is determined by the magnitude of nonlinearity.

To resolve this question. let us study the time process of defocusing compen-
sation in a nediun with intensity dependence of penittivity defined by re-
lation (A). For phase front curvature and bean radius we have the equations

0 .
i i add: I IS
’— -— _ . -—
(18) S 5" '—-z . r§_—a‘(1.t') ‘

with boundary conditions a(0. t) -ao, 3(1. t) - l/R, where r is pulse duration.
0‘ t ‘ Ts

L"- ( -di;pcfz:' ) A
89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is the characteristic length of thermal self-stress. which is related to the
quantity L1. introduced in section 3 by the expression

In-i'r/TLN

The solution of systee of equations (18) is found numerically. In doing this,
a computational scheme is used that corresponds to a discrete conpensation
schsee consisting in the following. At the initial instant t-O, the curvature
of the phase front at the inlet of the nediun was assigned equal to s.- 0+1)“.
Then the tine change in quantities a(z, t). 8(2. t) at constant 8(0. t) was
calculated up to the instant 11- 1/8 when correction of the curvature of the
phase front occurs. Curvature of the phase front at inlet of the nediua at

the instant of correction was taken as equal (with reversed sign) to the cur-
vature of a wavefront fron a point source situated at c’istance R upon trans-
mission through a medium with index of refraction formed by the bean up to

the instant of correction. A sinilar procedure was then repeated.

    

0 0.1 0,2 9.5 0,0 0,5 0.6 f/vr

Fig. 3. Tina change in curvature of phase fronts of bean

at output of layer 8(1) and of the reflected wave at the

input 8(0) at Z/L-ro- 2 for different intervals 11‘. Solid

limo-1’k/T' 1/10. Aunt/r - 1.40. Owl/80, ' -l/200 (only

the values of s and S at the end of interval Tk are shown

for rk/1<60). The dotted line shows 8(2. t) without com-
pensation

Fig. 3 shows tine dependences of the phase front curvature at the outlet from
the nonlinear nediun for case l/R<<l. Z/L-ro-Z. Under condition ZlR<<l. the
optiaun phase correction should be such that a collinated been 8(1) - 0 is
produced at the outlet of the layer. Condition 3(1) '0 is satisfied exactly

at instants of correction. For the rest of the tine. compensation is not
complete. there is some error that depends on tine t, length 1. of the nonlinear
layer. and interval ‘l’k. Dependence of the compensation error on ﬁt is of
interest. Hith decreasing up the compensation error decreases for t$t*-0.l931

90
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and increases for t) t”. Calculations show that as layer length Z increases.
there is a reduction in the tine interval t* in which reducing 11,. reduces
the compensation error. Dependence of interval t* on 1 can be approximately
written as

(19) 1‘I180.8(L"Il)' or l/L7(‘.) 80.9.

Let us note that when

.1. .....'__ .‘—<0.5
['1’ Lu' “'

The time dependence of curvature §(0. t) of the phase front (as n+0) is
linear with good accuracy (at least 51)
' l 1
(20) S(0. t)-—-——.

lm’

whereas when Uta-(0.5. using the approximation of section 3.

 

(21) Mo :)-—(1-V1—4—

I," 1

Ratio s.(t)/§(0. z) is equal to 1.11 at 5-0.3; 1.25 at 90.4; 2 at 5-0.5.
where 5- 1/1“... Hence we can conclude that in compensation probleas. the ap-

i
plicability of the integral approximation Ildt-I! is limited to the case of
weak nonlinear effects.

Conclusions. Phase conjugate systems can provide bean focusing behind a layer
of nonlinear medial upon condition that thernal nonlinear effects are small
(Z<L1~). The capability of focusing at a given distance does not mean that
the influence of nonlinearity can be completely compensated. Since the bean
dinensions at the outlet of the nonlinear nediun in the presence of compensa-
tion are less than its dimensions with focusing in a linear medium, the dif-
fraction divergence behind the layer is increased. and consequently the maxi-
aun intensity in the focal plane is reduced.

Calculations of thermal defocusing also show low effectiveness of compensation
at discrete instants of time. Apparently compensation will be more effective
with continuous correction of the phase front using infomtion on derivatives
of the process 8(0. t). the noreso as the dependence of g on t is linear at
small tines.

In the stationary case as well. with nonlinearity of fern (3) or (M). the
nmber~of iterations can also be reduced if infornation is used on the deriva-
tive ds(0)/ds.. e. g. in e cospensation scheme that corresponds to solution
of equation (13) by Newton's iteration method

.n_s:-'

3:" 1-8..- (80'+S'(0) ) W'

91
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where n is the number of the iteration. This_lattar sun has the additional
advantage over the iteraction scheme S;"--S"(0) used in section 3 that it

guarantees convergence to the solution even at initial values 50> $02. if
condition (8) is satiafiad.

I'he author thanks V. I. Tstarskiy. A. P. Sulthorukov and H. A. Vorontaov for
discussing the results and constructive criticism.

‘0

S.

6.

7.

REFERENCES

Bakut. P. A., Ustinov. K. 1).. Troitskiy. I. 1.. Sviridov. K. 1., "Methods
of Handling Light Fields With Observation Through a Turbulent Medium:
Part 1.". ZARUBEZHNAYA RADIOBLBKTRWIKA. No 3. 1977. PP 55-86.

Karmin. Yu. 1.. Sukhorukov. A. P.. "Nonlinear Adaptive Optics". IZVES‘I‘IYA
MADD‘III “AUX SSSR: SERRA PIZICHBSKAYA, V01 42, No 12. 1978. PP 25107-2559.

Vorontaov. H. A.. Chesnokov, S. 8.. "Optimizing Light Bean Focusing in
Moving Nonlinear Media". IZVBS‘I‘I‘YA VYSSHIKH ucmm ZAVEDBNIY: RADIOFIZIKA.
Vol 22. No 11. 1979. PP 1318-1323.

Akhanov. S. A.. Vorontsov. H. A.. Kandidov, V. P. at a1.. "Thermal Self-
Stress of Light Beans and Compensation Methods". IZVBs‘l'lYA VYSSHIIOI ucmmn
zavnnzurr: RADIOYIZIKA. Vol 23, No 1, 1980. pp 1-37.

Hermann. J.. "Property of Phaae Conjugate Adaptive Systems", J. on.
80C. We, V01 67. NO 3. 1977. pp 2”-2950

Aklnanov. S. A” Sukhorukov, A. P., Khokhlov. R. V.. "Self-Focusing and
Diffraction of Light in Nonlinear Medial". USPEKIII FIZICIIlSKIKﬂ “All.
Issue 93. No l. 1967. pp 19-70.

Vorob'yev. V. V.. Shenetov. V. V.. "thermal Self-Focusing of Laser Beams
in Moving Media". IZVESTIYA WSSHIKH UCHEBNYKB ZAVEDENIY: RADIOFIZIKA.
Vol 22. No a, 1979. pp Abl-hba.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "ﬂanks". 'hdiotekhih i elaktronika". 1981

6610

080:

1862/152

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.375.826
EFFICIM OF COPPER VAPOR LASERS

Moscow TBPLOPIZIKA VYSOKIKH TMERATUR in Russian Vol 20. No 1', Jan-Feb 82
(nanuscript received 10 Mar 81) pp 177-180

[Article by V. H. Batenin, P. A. Within. 1. I. Klimvskiy and L. A. Selezneva.
Institute of High Tenperatures. USSR Acadeny of Sciences]

[Text] Copper vapor laser research has dealt with both theoretical [Ref .

l. 2] and experimental [Ref. 3, lo] analysis of efficiency. The theoretical
papers consider the coefficient of conversion of electric energy introduced
into the discharge up to the point of cessation of the lasing pulse to lasing
energy (up). while the factor in experimental papers is the coefficient of
conversion of the energy available in the storage device to lasing energy--

the so-called practical efficiency (nn ). It is obvious that because of energy
losses in ca—utating elenents (e. 3. Ref. 5). noncorrespondence between the
durations of excitation and lasing pulses and so on. n", is always less than
up. Thus it is incorrect to conpare these efficiencies.

In this paper, an attempt is ends to conpare the results of calculation and
experinent with consideration of losses associated with the discharge loop,
leading to a reduction in "HP as compared with np. In addition, we give re-
sults of theoretical analysis of the feasibility of increasing the up of a
copper vapor laser to values in excess of 10%.

Pig. 1. Oscillograns of pulses Relative units

of current (1), voltage across

the electrodes of the discharge

tube (2) and lasing (3). Neon I
pressure-~13.3 kPa; power con-
suned free the supply source--
1.8 kw. Haunt-I current and J

voltage—260 A and 8.6 W

f. 200 WM:- f, na

The facility on which the studies were done is described in Ref. 5. 6. The
measurements of np were trade under the acne conditions as those used for gas
temperature measurements on the discharge tube axis in Ref. 7. Fig. I shows
typical oscillograns of the pulses of discharge current i. voltage U across
the discharge tube electrodes and the lasing pulse on two wavelengths A, -
510.5 an and A2. 578.2 nn. He can see fron these oscillograns that the

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬂClAl USE ONLY

discharge is inductive. i. e. the voltage across the discharge gap is divided
between inductance l. and resistance R of the discharge as

U-IIHIuIl/dl. (U

Conversion coefficient up corresponding to the theoretical value in Ref. 2
should be calculated free the relation

m-o/ Jpn 43:. (2)

where Q is lasing energy. r“ is the instant of cessation of the lasing pulse.

The quantity in was calculated from equation (2) with the use of measured
currents and voltages. assuming L- const. the value of L being detersined
by using equation (I) for the instant 1' (see Fig. 1) when i-O.

 
  
     
   
 
   

Power ﬂu

  
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
 
 
 
 
  

13:31:? Ne buffer Electron
Mode charge B” P209 tempera-
sure p.
per unit
of length. ld’a eV

H/cn

Results of calculating np using experimental data in accordance with (2) in
different nodes of copper vapor laser operation are suIIIarized in the table.
Also gicen here are the values of "np' vhich for laser operation in the periodic
node are an»:1 to t»: .atio of the average lasing power to the power consumed
fro- the source of supply. He can see that the values of “up are appreciably
different free the values of np.

To compare the results of the given experinent with calculation. it is neces-
sary to know such parameters as the concentration of copper and neon stone
in the discharge. and also the average value of electron energy over the
lasing pulse tine. The concentration of neon atone nu, averaged over the
cross section of the discharge tube was calculated from the pressure neasured
in the marines; and the gas tesperature in the discharge tube. whose value
was determined froa curves given in Ref. 7 for the gas temperature on the
discharge tube axis ‘l',(0) as a function of the level of power invested ”in
the discharge per unit of length of the discharge tube v“ (see table).

Under the conditions of this experisent. just as in Ref. 8, copper stars are
coupletely ionized in tne psraxisl region of the discharge by the end of the
excitation pulse. Therefore the concentration of copper atoms in the parexial
zone can be detersined fro. the known electron concentration n¢(0) on the

9h
roe omcm. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

discharge axis at the instant of termination of the excitation pulse. He
should point out that it was established in Ref. 9 that ionization of neon
atone during the excitation pulse is negligible compared with that of copper
stone.

The value of new) was calculated free the resistance R of the discharge as
detersined from current and voltage pulses in the following sequence: dis-
charge conductivity was calculated from the current and voltage pulses. and
then the average electron concentration ne over the cross section of the dis-
charge tube was calculated fron the conductivity. Hith consideration of the
date of Ref. 8. n.(0) was defined as n°(0) I Zne. Considering the difference
of the tslperature ’1‘, of heavy particles averaged over the cross section of
the discharge tube from 13(0), the average concentration of copper atone no“
can be estimated free the relation

no. - Tr (0) n,(0) [1}. (3)

The average value of electron energy durin the lasing pulse was calculated
fron data of Ref. 10 for the ratio 3/ “Cu “He averaged over the given time
interval, where E is the field strength in the discharge.

Dependences of up on the ratio

ngu/n were calculated by the method
0 Re . 2 with consideration of

the fact that lasing occurs on two
wavelengths. Pig. 2 shows the con-
parison of results of the calcula-
tion and experiaent. It can be

seen that agreeaent between calcu-
lation and experiment is totally
satisfactory, frola which we can con-

". 'Ia

  

’0 ”7 ' ”tin/7,” clude that in a copper vapor laser
at 1'. ~ 5 eV with ratio hen/nae ~ 0.1
Fig. 2. Dependence of hp on the ratio the coefficient of conversion of
“C Inge. Calculation according to energy invested in the discharge
Re . 2: l—-'l'e-5 eV; 2--'l'°-6 eV. to the energy of induced eniasion
Experiment: 3--IOd8 l; low-II; 5-- nay reach ~71.

111 (see table)
Let us note that the results of cal-

culation and experinent given above apply to the case where the lasing energy
from a cubic centineter of active medium is the naxinun possible, i. e. where
the naxinua m-ber of copper atone part icipatc in lasing. Given below are
the results of calculation of up for conditions where fewer than the maxi-tan
possible nusber of copper atone participate in lasing. In this case. within
the for-alien of the nodel of Ref. 2 that assumes aiaultaneity of termination
of the lasing and excitation pulses. the specific lasing energy on one wave-
length is deternined by the relation

nc
w,-I.v ——‘i 4"
1r"WIo

 

[exp(-uq.F)-- cxM-M‘H.

" '

. I:

I'I-J‘n,1ll. :--—'—' ”-1.5-..“
s

l'n t

95
roe omcuu. use on“
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where hv is the energy of an induced quantun;

“Cu is the concentration of

copper atone; q” ([99. Qp are the rate constants of dissolution of the ground
state. excitation and dissolution of the resonant level of the copper ato-

reapectively; g,. g" are the statistical weights of the resonant end nets-
stable levels: r, is the instant of ternination of the lasing pulse.

The specific energy input to the discharge is deteraiwad by the relation

- mud-crux): -2 (1mm. ,u-.,,).! .4ou, (5)
I

Mu'-'Ce".". A -2 em.
I

where in addition to the conventional eyebols. the j - l. 2 refer to levels
WI and P12 respectively of the copper atoe; nae is the concentration of neon

atone; c1. «11 are respectively the energy and rate constant of inelastic inter—
action of the i-th electron with a neon atoe; I is the ionization potential

of the copper atoe.

_‘”c.L
9 5"") ”Ge

\
m \ 5-10".
71h\..

- a 2-10! q-m' t-m‘
ﬂora"

Pig. 3. Dependence of (1-6) and

the fraction of stone participating

in lasing (5) on I (Te-5 eV) at

ncu/ng. of: 1--; 2-40“; 3—2-10";
I.-1o"

rip-I.
I!)

i

The dependences of on paraserer P
were calculated vith consideration

of (lo). (5) (Fig. 3). Given on this
sane figure in the P-dependence of
the percentage of atone participating

w
in lasing. calculated as «1-2 H .
’

Mung.

 

From the curves shown on Fig. 3,

we see that coefficients of conversion
of energy invested in the discharge

to lasing energy‘can be achieved

on the 202 level in copper vapor
lasers at specific energy outputs

that are an order of eagnitude less
than the sexism. possible. It should
be noted that the increase in np ob-

served on Fig. 3 with a reduction in the mnber of stone participating in the
lasing is due to a reduction in energy losses by electrons associated with
excitation and ionisation of resonantly excited copper atone.

REFERENCES

ls Y¢1.t.k1ye ‘0 Vs. mt.°v. Yu. Ks. M1“. A. Va. Starcstin. A. “a, "Opti-
nul Characteristics of High-Pressure Copper Vapor Laser". NY M31411

NAIR 8883. Vol 220. 1975. P 318.

2. Voklnin. P. A.. Klinovskiy. I. 1.. ”Ultiaate Characteristics of Lasers
Based on Self-Uniting Transitions". mwuzm W80”!!! momma.

Vol 16. so 5. 1978. 9 mo.

3. Isayav. A. A.. Lanemn. 6. Yu. . "Investigation of Copper Vapor Pulse
Laser at Elevated Powell". KVAN’I‘OVAYA mum. Vol ’0. No 7. 1977.

p 1413.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bokhan. P. A.. Boloaonov. V. 1.. Shcheglov. V. 3.. "Inveatigntion of Energy
Charocteriatica of Copper Vapor Loser With Longitudinal Discharge".
KVAWIOVAYA WM. Vol 5. No 8. 1977. p 1812.

Klimvokiy. I. 1.. Seleenevo. L. A.. "Soue Particulara of Operation of

a Circuit With Storage-Capacitance Reaonont Charge Exchange Uaed for Bx-
citation of Laaera Based on Salt-Limiting Tranaitiona”. TBPLOI’IZIM VYSOIM
1mm. Vol 17. lo 1. 1979. p 27.

letenin. V. 11.. lunekin. V. A. at al.. "Caa Teaperature in Copper Vapor
Loser". TIPLOPIZM VYSOKIKH MIRA“. Vol 16, No 6. 1978. p 1145.

latenin. V. 11.. Klinovakiy. I. 1.. Selezneva. 1.. A.. 'mtinate Average
hiaaion Povere of Copper Vepor Laeara". WFLZIKA V180!!!“ mm.
Vol 13. Ilo a. 1980. p 707.

Batenin. V. 11.. Kliaovakiy. I. 1.. Laanoy. H. A.. Selezneva. 1.. A.. "Plane
Parmtara in Diecharge Afterglow in Copper Vapor Loner". KVAR’I’OVAYA
macaw. Vol 7. No 5. 1980. p 988.

Batenin. V. 11.. Bur-akin. V. I... et a1.. “tine Behavior of Blectron Con-
centration in Copper Vapor Laser". KVAN'NVAYA nmm. Vol «'0. No 7.
1977. p 1572.

Hnetaekanyen. A. Kt... ﬂaydie. G. V.. Shternov. N. V.. "Electron Energy
Diatribotion in nixtureo of Copper Vapor With Moon and Benn".
KVAII'I‘OVAYA WORM. Vol 5. No 3. 1978. p 597.

Winkler. 8.. "Die kinetiechen Eigenechaften der Blektronen dee
enieothernen honogenen etationnren Neon-Pluses in Ionioierungo
gradbereich von 10"!»1010‘2". MN. ms.. Vol 29. 1973. p 37.

COPYRIGHT: Izdotel'atvo "Nauka". "Teplofizikn vyeokikh tenperatur". 1982

6610

coo:

1862/169

97
roe omcm. us: on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 621.373.021.7.Wl.5
W16 A8110“ 0' PERIODICALLY PULSBD LASER RADIATION ON SOLID SURFACE

Moscow “MAYA mm in Russian Vol 9. No 2016). Feb 82 (manuscript
received 12 Aug 81) pp 3&3-353

[Article by v. V. Apollonov. A. H. Prokhorov. V. Yu. Khaich and S. A. Chstltin.
Physics Institute ilsni P. N. Lebedev. 083! Academy of Sciences. Moscow]

[Test] The authors consider the pheno-enon of thenoelsstic
action of powerful pulse-periodic laser emission on the
surface of a solid. The analysis is based on relations
between the characteristics of the heat-stressed state under
the action of cw and arbitrarily tine-variable laser radia-
tion that are analogous to Duhaeel integrals. Relations
are calculated for the sexism intensities of laser radia-
tion that lead to inpernissible elastic distortions of the
surface. plastic flow of the estsrial with fonation of
residual stresses. fatigue fracture and nelting of the sur-

face layer.

Various fields of science and engineering are now snaking extensive use of
laser systens that generate powerful unsteady radiation flutes. The approxi-
nation of uncoupled thermalasticity is used in Ref. l-b to mine the quasi-
static problen of the action of laser radiation on the surface of a solid
with deternination of the unsteady fields of tenperatures and stresses in

the process of reaching the steady heat-stressed state. A topic that is quite
tinely is generalisation of the problan of thernoelaatic behavior of a solid
when its surface is acted on by laser radiation that varies arbitrarily in

tine.

1. Description of the Beat-Stressed State of a Body "hen Laser hission Acts
on its Surface

Consider an isotropic body with fixed teaperature at tine zero. Axiey-etric
radiant flux of variable intensity is incident on the surfece (with coeffi-
cient of absorption A). It is assumed that the intensity distribution in

the cross section of the laser been conforms to Cause law: 100-10”? (-Korz).
where K. - 2/r3. and energy absorption takes place directly on the irradiated
surface. since the depth of the skin layer is much less than the depth of
penetration of the telpereture field for characteristic tines of change in

be- intensity tr

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘l'he probles of deter-ining the telpereture field is treated in the linear ap-
proximation: it is summed that the thenophysical and nechanical character-

istics of uterials are independent of tesperature. and the energy losses
due to radiation and convection are disregarded.

Under condition that the characteristic dimension of the bean r.<l.. end tins
of energy input ri/a2< t<l.1/a2. the sodel of a half-space can be used in

solving the probles. Then the heating of the naterial is described by the
equation of heat conduction

ar
7".” (I)

with the following initial and boundary conditions

Jot—I”... _-’{-‘—f(l)exp(—-K.r’).
1|.-.-.-=o. Ilm’l‘ <M.

LI".

where a”. A are the coefficients of theml diffusivity end heat conduction

of the material respectively. 14 is a finite quantity. f(t) is the tine func-
tion of laser intensity normalized to unity.

Solving the fornulated probles by the nethod of sequential Rental and Laplace
transfornations. us get

G
0

0+}. -. H
“411”.“ ”W? o._-‘.-‘Nn)wd”)§+ “"e-"J.(er)d:. m

where p and z are the parameters of the Laplace and Bankel transforms.

12- 52+p/a2. 0(p) is the Laplace transforn of f(t). The given expression
enables us to describe the thermal state of a solid with surface exposed to
laser radiation that varies arbitrarily in tins. and also to get a solution
to the uncoupled problssl of cheruoelasticity in integral fore.

In the general case. analysis of phenonena of thermoelesticity is based on

consideration of a systen of equations of coupled thermalasticity [Ref.
5-7. 10]. When the inequalities

' . f—iT‘ . ,. l—T—g‘
man (1%, “$3 [3/ ﬂ)!” ‘ki/ ﬁa'ﬂlim'

are satisfied. the description of the resultant heat-stressed state of the
elastic half-space can be based on equations of quasi-steady thernoelasticity:

itv'u+(l’+ n) and div u—o,(3).’+2'p)v'r=:o,
V’7‘--a'1--"a5--°» (a)

where A'. u are Lane coefficients. 3 is the strain vector. p is density.
n1- is the coefficient of linear thernel expansion. 8 is Young's nodulus.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Elastic perturbations in solids propagate at the speed of sound c. and there-
fore to attain a "steady" stressed state it is necessary that the rate of
attaiment be greater than the rate of attaiuent of thermal equilbrium. i. e.
v’aTt-«ct. For real solids that have finite dinensions there is a set of natu-
ral frequencies of mechanical vibrations. Consequently the conditions of
quasi-steadiness also include the stipulation that frequencies that are nulti-
ples of the laser pulse recurrence rate aust not coincide with the natural
frequencies of the solid to avoid consideration of resonance phenomena that
cannot be analyzed without accounting for a term pa'u/at’ in equilibriu
equation (3).

The gener'al form of the components of the stress tensor has the representation
oh—mj' 5'1. (M‘ME) tr "—e- "u -I-z(:-- made.
0

0%, -2GDE¢(§){J. “(Him—2) (ﬁ—Y) C' I: .5. E! e— g: .. y’e'V'l +
+ i‘li’L lic— n— {(E—v) (18-2 (I —v)) + g}.— "'1‘"
“5 ”2603“) 1. (V)Iv(e“"—-e-") —£z(£— 7) e-l'l a,
0

at. -2606|' we) { J. (t we —7’)e- " - 2v: (a — we- "1+

+—’I—,“—"—t<«—maz-2a - v»+a)e-u_5e-..,}d§' m

where c is the shear nodulus, Jn is a Bessel function of n-th order.

0- 3;- :i: ﬁr' Twp): we) =.- —f,— e-J'W‘o

 

A distinguishing feature (as a consequence of cylindrical sy-etry) of the
problem is equality of the components a". and a“ to one another. and

0r:.o on the 2 axis. The given expressions describe the nature of the un-
steady stressed state of the solid. Analysis of expressions (’0) enables de-
terninstion of the nature of these changes in tine for any point of the half-
space.

The stressed state that arises in a solid is sccapsnied by deformation. the
greatest strain being reached on the irradiated surface. In the formalism

of the halt-space nodel. the amount of displacement of the surface as a result
of laser action takes the fern

0-! l.

“(.7 F0 - gm!)
”-1.7..me '— m “5:.” " x
x!c""”1.(V-;6,) “+3775”; ° du. (5)

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll "if“ ‘Ml. US". ONLY

where ha 250:. I’O- Icha’t. The resultant expressions enable us to trace
the change in shape of the surface during exposure to laser action.

Thus we have coepletely described the nature of the thermal. heat-stressed
and deforestional states that arise in a solid as a result of surface irradia-
tion by a powerful laser bean that varies arbitrarily in tine. In this situ-
ation. the following relations hold between the quantities that characterize
the heat-stressed state in the cw (9(p) - Up) or any other unsteady state

of input of laser energy to the solid:

dt.

3‘ I—r (6)

l a" . l
01s.": = §’(‘) 0 n d" Vsm = 5 [(1) We:

 

which is a consequence of for-ulss of the Laplace transfore type for coupo-
nents of the heat stress tensor and the heat strain vector:

i. (03") = p v (p) 1(ch ). Z (W'ﬁ') =- M (p) 1 0-7").

where I. is the Laplace transforlation operator.

These relations are analogous to relations of the Doha-e1 integral type that
are known fro. the theory of heat conduction. The non-triviality of the given
fact for quantities that characterize the heat-stressed state consists in

the following: tine t figures in these equations as a par-aster rather than
as an independent variable with respect to which differentiation is carried
out (as for exaaple in the equation of heat conduction). which is a conse-
quencs of the uncoupled nature of the quasi-steady problem of theraoelasticity.

0n the basis of the developed technique we have Iade a conparative eunination
of effects of theraal deforaation of an elastic half-space in the cw. pulsed
and pulse-periodic nodes of action of laser radiation on a solid surface.

2. Action of Continuous Laser Emission on Solid Surface

If the tines of laser exposure satisfy inequality ri/a":<t<<1.’/a2 a steady
teaperature field say be set up in the solid. In this case. the process of
sstablisbent of this field in the center of the sons of irradiation is de-

scribed by the expression T‘a Vaaarcth/Fb).

Pig. 1. Telperature on the sur-
face of a specimen in the center
of the zone of irradiation as
a function of tine (nwer P0)
under the action of cw radiation

This expression iwlias (Fig. 1) that

for tines such that YO<6. the instantane-
ous tenperature differs by no sore than

101 free the steady-state value. Therefore

 

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-3 ONLY

we have seemed that a steady thernal state is set up in the material when
Po) ‘0

The expression for the temperature field in the half-space last. 12] is

rajmnm exp(- V3(V‘u+6.))-1‘+;. m

where az-z/ﬁz. Analysis of the expression shows the local nature of the
temperature field. whose intensity drops off sharply with increasing distance
from the center of the zone of irradiation over the surface and into the ma-
terial. The half-width of the intensity distribution is several times narrower
than the half-width of the corresponding temperature profile on the irradiated
surface. In the very center of the zone. the maxi-In value of v’; is reached.

In the steady stressed state (p+0) only conponenta on. and a“ of the heat
stress tensor are different from zero:
1 n

”3" “'2“ MO \'¢Xp(—W(V3+5,))_JT_’ ‘3’?“ do.
6

‘3" -2('-V)Eexp(—V7r(ﬂ+ a,» [Lu/7,5,)-
-——v=—’;EV‘;°"]%- (a,

where OL-AVKO—v) a,./I,A6a,(l+v). The depth of penetration of on into
the material is ~r.. 0n the surface. the steady-state stress field is

a; - - [ﬁg-Jim, (-;., 2.411).
‘ n(|-v) F 'I .,, 63 2 F (I 63 (9)
0...!Lr— | 3 .-2—-o ..—T .. l 'kT' I'_T .

The maximun of the heat-stress field is reached in the center of the zone

of irradiation: 1- -/;(l - v) [2. The steady stressed state is characterized
by the relation (P g. 2)

P (I I ﬂ

o“- -ﬁ-[F0( arCtg-17IF5_—1/_‘1'_6}F% arcthFD],

Pig. 2. Settling of steady stressed state
on the surface of the specimen in the center
of the zone of irradiation

 

The mount of thermal deformation of a reflecting sur-
face in the steady state in the half-plans nodel ap-
proaches infinity. which can be attributed to the

102
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OI-‘I"I(‘IAI. USE ONLY

infinite vole-e of the region of affective heating of the uterial (Pig. 3).
It is of interest to evaluate the that-a1 defornation within the liaite of
long laser heaa exposure tinee (170»1):

w.__+l FOexp (-%)-(-‘r¥fg--2ln(v'm+m) x

X‘f‘(.%.. |;-- 32.)]12 .— {Fl—3.. l;—%)ln2VPU. (10)

Pig. 3. Settling of quasi-steady

defornation state on surface of

apecinen in the center of the cone
of irradiation

 

. . Defamation surface profiles for different
a I 5 f0 tines are described in Ref. 1. 3.

3. Action of Pulsed Laeer hission on Solid Surface

we will an mm with u.“ of action for which 701 - 4K.a’1«l. which 1.

often the case in practice when studying the interaction of pulsed laser radi-
ation with letter.

At short exposure time. the depth of penetration of the taqeratura field
is proportional to Elk”. and therefore redial heat leakages can be dis-
regarded. and the tenparatura distribution over the surface followe the pro-
file of laser he. intensity distribution:

T"'172:[°(‘°) arcth o,:°_oa-_narcth‘rbT‘—F. ! - )]x
X“? (- KJ‘)- (II)

where 001*) is the Beaviside function. t*- t/r. ‘t in pulse duration. P01-
lalga’r. prreasion (ll) reaches a maxim at the instant of ternination of
the action of the pulse in the center of the zone of irradiation:

r°-2 «dummy 2.

The conponente of the stress tensor in this case have fora (6) with represen-
tation of par-eter y’ no p/a’ becaune when inequality F01<<l in net. the
process of heat propagation in a eolid is ”quaci-one-dinaneional" and radial
heat runoffe can be disregarded.

The lazin- valuee of conponente a}: and a“ are reached on the surface. and
take the for-

. o;-o;.- - Vin-lo (1W Tb".t°—o(t'— I) V FIT—i" .(v - )lexp(-K.r').

i. e. the dietrihution of components 011 on the aurface follows the dietribu-
tion of laser been intensity.

103
FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The behavior of heat stress tensor coeponents oh and oh is sore calpliceted.
0n surface z-O. coqonent 032-0. and it reaches its nearin- value at soee
z- z.. sfter which it approaches zero. The value of on is zero on surface
2-0 and on the 2 axis; noreover. art-v0 as r. e-Hn. Therefore this caeponent
reeches its nexim value at cernin velues of :3 and r8.

Let us eveluste egg“ and o‘g". and also 2.. r8. :3. utilizing the feet that
the per-eter rolro<<l at r6,«1. end expanding the expressions for 0:! and
0!, in a series with respect to this perueter. The values of 2.. rs. :5
for a}, and og are detereined fro. c itions ecu/Moo: for 01,. so- 717.

and for Q3. sf-Z/a’r and r.- (2A.) . lere
o}."“.=°/.V'T;PO‘_ a?" -FO.I2. (I?)
where e is the base of natural logeritbs.

The expression for theml defornetion of a reflecting surface in the case
of exposure to e pulse of arbitrary shape (Ref. 11] is

W°=—'/,ro.[o (PW—0 (rump—1)! exp (—KJ'W. hi)

The distribution of deformation over the reflecting surface follows the dis-
tribution of laser been intensity. and the estim- is proportional to the
Pourier nwer.

Io. Particulars of Thermal Deforution of a Solid by Pulse-Periodic Laser
Radiation

Analysis of thermoelestic behavior of a solid exposed to pulsedperiodic laser
action is based on our relations of the Duhaasl integral type (6). The tine-
varieble redietion flux takes the fore of a train of square pulses of duration
r with period 1' (frequency 1/1“) end off-duty factor SQV- r/‘r. It is sssuned
that PO; - ﬂgaz'kd.

At initial instants 00(1).
features of the pulsed node

ere typical of the pulse-periodic
node of laser action. Actually.
the geonetric sense of integrals
of type (6) is characterized

by the area of the sheded figures
on Pig. 6.

l’or long tines (P0) 1) the ten-
perature end thereal stresses

 

t. '5 I; t. : reach their quasi-steady values.
1. e. there is a constant con-
Pig. lo. Geoeetric interpretation of inte-~ ponent of these quantities just
grels of Duheeel type as for the cw node of energy

input with adjusted intensity
1080‘! (l. is the nexiemn of intensity for a separate pulse) and against the
background of this component (in tine with the change of laser been intensity)

10h
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we observe a peak in tewerature and stress of approximately the sane shape
(accuracy ~SQV) as for pulsed action.

For the quantity R. an individual "pulse" of thermal detonation of the re-

flecting surface appears against the "steady-etate conponent" approaching
infinity. The expression for tha te-perature field in this case

10-SQV3-Mgaiup(—V7(V-v-I- 6,))dv+%up (-g) X

x 5: low—n) arcth PU,(!‘-«n)-0(!‘ —n—SQV)X

xercth—Fr—S'GV—g(i'-n- ) I0(n-!—l—!') (I4)

is obtained directly from generalized expression (2). since for our seemed
train of laser pulses

_ _ (I-exp(— 1))(I—el (— (N I- [)1’)
N!) NP) ——f'—-Tl-P(——I%;'

where N is the number of elapsed pulses. In the center of the zone of irra-

diation where the tenperature reaches its no a1 by the tine of termi-
nation of the next pulse. T'nSQVVn+2 arclg |/

Analysis of the heat-stressed etate shove that the maxi-m values of the radial

and peripheral stresses are reached in the center of the zone of irradiation
and can he represented as

 

ot;"""—_._ I-I_V- lFO(erctg-W3— W): |T EwardgVFU] (l5)

"hen the quesi-steadyv state is reached. the expression for 011(0. 0. PO) is
considerably simplified:

02:""-—-Z;[(I—v)SQV+: —— V FFV [ow—nn/t': h.—
—0((°—n—SQV)V: :'—n—36V|0(n+|—-t‘)]. (Is)

and the distribution of the stress field on the surface by the instant of
ternination of pulse action

I) ' (2)

0‘" I: a!“ 'l a“

0:3".- TEL—5M [.F'(' (T' 2;——z'-)_2IF (412 _.:i)]. (I?)
oﬁl’m ~40 - v)SQV r, (—. -_“T).

0;;"_ = of“, = —2V FOi/n eXp (—63“)-

105
roe omcuu. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the steady stressed state qz-ogz-O (as s consequence of axial syuetry
of the problee). and therefore their values in the case of pulse-periodic
laser action will be the same as for pulsed radiation.

The seount of displace-ant of the solid surface in the pulse-periodic node
has steady and pulsed conponsnts:

W‘-SQVW“"+ 17“". 08)

w' m - —+[F0exp (—5310— (+91} _
-2 lg (Win/m) .F, (-3-, u—aiuﬂ,

r0 "
w- m a _ .Tl-e-KI' 2 am +l—l‘)[9(t°—n) (!°—-n)—
Ila-0

_e(1o_n—SQV) (!'—n—$QV)]-

For the quasi-steady heat-stressed state in the center of the zone of irradia-
tion. the amount of thermal deformation is

N
V0: —[SQV1n2m+ 421-2 0(n+ l—t‘)[o(1‘—n) x
x(:-—n)—0(t°'—n—SQV)(t-—n—sovn]. (19)

Conclusions

Thus we have completely described the nature of the heat-stressed state that
arises in an elastic half-space when its surface is exposed to cw, pulsed
and pulse-periodic laser radiation. Let us note the typical peculiarities
of the process of thereal deforeation that are inplied by the expressions
derived.

1. The process is localized. The characteristic dieension of the localization
of fields of stresses. temperatures and strains is of the order of the charac-
teristic dimension of the zone of irradiation ro.

2. For short tines of laser bean exposure in the on and pulse-periodic modes.
and also in the pulsed mode (PO;<<1). the rates of increase in tenperature,
thermal stresses and defornations are proportional to laser beam intensity
Io. whereas for no> 3-4 these quantities (in the cv and pulse-periodic modes)
reach their "quasi-steady" level in the general case, which is proportional

to Io.

3. The resultant expressions enable determination of the laser beam parsn-
eters 1.. A. Ko. t. t. SQV that typify the stage of elastic behavior of the
material characterized by total recovery of the initial surface state when
the laser bean is switched off. However. in acne cases with cv and pulse-

periodic laser action. the thermal deformation of an optical surface becomes
inpermissibly large (H>'l/20). Accounting for deformations is extermely

106

FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important for such laser systems as quosioptical transaission lines. tele-
scopes. stable and unstable optical cavities. focusing systems.

a. This analysis enables us to determine the laser beam intensity at which
the material goes into the inelastic region as a result of stresses that arise
during exposure that exceed the yield stress of the material in the cw and
pulsed modes. or that exceed the fatigue limit in the pulse-periodic mode.

The values of the naximun intensities lugs. 19.11" [TM is the melting point]
with cw laser action are

I," - 21 V72; 1...; (VIA). 1., - mf'k‘, o,/ [V35 (1 + was «,1.

lua= Mateo. / [20 (l + WM In (2 mm. (20)
If the physical characteristics of metals satisfy the inequality
ovll(1+V)G¢JuKl. (21)
then l.,< ’1'". If the times of laser exposure are such that
In (2 VF6)>VSTICAm.G/40o,. (22)

then lxm< ’01"

In the case of pulsed action of radiation. the expressions for the aaxisnn
laser beam intensities take the form

1,... - V72» r". m rm.
1., (on) = 1/?(1 —v) lo,/(2 Vi? AGa,(I + mini).
1.. (0..) - (ac/(2 VFW“! —~v) 0. Homer. (1 + v»). (23)

1., (an) - when )(I —v) log/MG“. (I + m.
[was MCOJHO (l + vM a,a’r|.

In this case. we have I.,(a,,)>l., (o,,)>l.,, (on). since ls, (org),lo' (0.,)..V§/(3nc).
I.,(o,,)/l., (duh-VT; If the physical characteri‘tics of the material satisfy

inequality 'V5Ga,(l+v§T.J[(l—v)d,l>l (for reference. Clef-10’), the quantity
I,”> 10'. and for time

r>3iéo,6l[400na’(I-V)’03]. (24)
in addition I°v>lhco.n°'

In the case of pulse-periodic action on the solid surface, the maximal inten-
sities are determined from the relation

(I?")"-(SQVI?"')" + (Ir')"- (25)

where lie” is detenined froa (20), and 12"" is deternined froa (23).

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of the unsteady. cyclically repeated stressed state that arises
with irradiation of the material. irreversible fatigue changes may occur if
the .plitude of oscillations of one of the components of the heat-stress
tensor on exceeds the fatigue limit 0:13.}. as determined for compression or
bending respectively.

The expressions for limiting intensities determined for each of the components
01k:

 

 

(l—vﬂa‘” VT
I!" (0,, _-—q—..u¢a’7$vs 0 V 5):). '
(I—vm‘" VT gyr-
Ivor (0,.) 3" W f" (26)
"""u’m “° 9 (F0,)-'.

”"(°“’='_m—(ﬁT—av7

If the duration of an individual laser pulse is such that 0.02-81/(512u) <
F01</3'/81-0.62 [sic]. then l,..(o,,)< 1mm“) <1,.,(o,,); if ”I‘M/(512's).
then I,.,(o,,) < I,.,(o,,) < I“... (on). and if l>POl>9/3-/81. then I,"(o,,)<

I," (a,,)< I," (0"). In this connection. since age ~0.lo.l.. fatigue fractures
of the irradiated surface (formation of micro- macro-cracks. peeling of the
surface layer. structural and phase changes of matter) will occur at laser
beam intensities an order of magnitude lower than those at which the eaterial
passes into the inelastic region [Ref. 16-17].

However. it should be borne in mind that the resultant estimates are true
for ideal surfaces in vecuua since the presence of air. slight contmsination
of the irradiated surface, microcracks that arise as a consequence of stress
concentration on grain boundaries and the like may lead to breakdown of the
gas near the surface. and consequently to destruction of the surface at laser
emission intensities much lover than the calculated values.

6. Smary

. The results enable us to evaluate the role of the thermoelastic mechanism

of destruction in the process of interaction of intense cw. pulsed and pulse-
periodic laser fluxes with the surface of solids. The temperature. stress
and displacement fields have been defined in fairly general form. 0n the
basis of the resultant expressions. an investigation has been made of the
typical features of thermal and stressed states that arise in a solid upon
laser exposure of its surface; a system of parameters of stability of the
heat-stressed state has been introduced for different mechanisms of destruc-
tion.

Appendix
The expressions derived in this paper for characteristics of the heat-stressed

state of an elastic half-plane with surface exposed to the action of cw. pulsed
and pulse-periodic 1“" radiation have been represented as functions of

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coordinates and tine. However. in axparinents involving the interaction of
laser radiation with setter. the magnitude of thernal stresses and strains
is deter-ined free the aagnitude of temperatures.

The relation between stresses in the center of the zone of irradiation and

teeperature in the process of establisbent of the steady state in the case
of continuOus irradiation of the surface by a laser bean takes the far-

V?"'( "’(“T— "(1:11“) (Vi—7))"

‘3 '-

(ﬂ. 1)

 

As tenperature 1* approaches its steady-state value v’;
a}, = —(|—w)1‘°l2. ' (n. 2)
The expression for the aptitude of theraal strain as a function of tenparaturs
w- .-. —ln raga/71m». (“~ 3)
A distinguishingfeature of the stressed state that arises under pulsed action

is that the components of the thenal stress tensor on the surface in the
center of the zone of irradiation

01;, - -T.. (n0 0
0;,"‘-_2J°/_T_nf'g1do:,"‘- — Vat—Lg. (n. 8)

The relation between thernal defornetion and teapereture

w .-. -— —’5‘- r“. (11.6)

The difference in signs of o 1. «Q: and at, is due to the fact that contes-
sion of the naterial takes p ca on the surface in the center of the none
of irradiation. whereas conponent at: at distance :. expresses tension.

1n the case of pulse-periodic action of laser enission on a solid surface.
by the instant of teraination of pulse action

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

‘s

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

[0.

ll.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«3. -‘I. Wu -l- v) sov —- r' (M)
«:.-= «3"- - +597 - va)’.

(ll!)

.w_ n 1"

0;: 0,, m(W—_ 1/7.)” .

Apollonov. V. V.. Sheftsr. 3. M.. Preprint lo 105. Physics Institute mm
P. N. stedev. USSR Acsdely of Sciences. Moscow. 1976.

Apollonov. V. V.. Barchukov. A. 1.. Konyukhov. V. 1.. Proklwrov. A. M..
Pls'MA V zuumm. BSPIIIMBMTAL'MOY I mmmmsxor uznu. Vol 15. 1972.
p 268.

Apollmov. V. Vs, Bltchlkov. As Is. Prokho:°v. A. “a. In“. To Vol 03-10.
1975. P 505.

Barchukov. A. 1.. Konev. Yu. 3.. Proprint Mo 158. Physics Institute ineni
P. 1!. Lebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences. Moscow. 1973.

Mslsn. 3.. Parkua. 6.. "Ternouprugiye nspryazheniya. vyzyvsysnyye
statsionarnyni tenpsraturnyni polysni" [Thernoelsstic Stresses Caused
by Steady-Stste Tenperaturs Yields]. Moscow. Pimtgiz. 1958.

Parlcus. G.. "Meustanovivshiyesys taperaturnyye napryazheniya" [Unsteady
Temperature Stresses]. Moscow. Fimtgiz. 1963.

Novatskiy. V.. "Voprosy temuprusosti" (Problens of mmlssticity].
Moscow. lzddvo All 8881!. 1962.

Doetsch. 0.. "lulwvodstvo k praktichssko-u prinsneniyu preobrasovsniy
Laplass" [Handbook on Practical Use of Laplace Transfer-s]. Moscow.
Pimtgiz. 1958 [Getaan edition: ”Anleitung n- prsktischen Gebrauch
der Leplsce-Trsnsfornstlon". Oldenburg. Munich. 1956].

Gradshteyn. l. 8.. Ryzhik. I. M.. "'Tablitsy integrslov. em. rysdov i
proimdeniy" [Tables of Series. Products and Integrals. (English transla-
tion. Acsdenic Press. New York. 1964)]. Moscow. lauka. 1971.

Kovalenko. A. 1).. "Tsrnouprugost'" [Thor-oelaaticity]. Kiev. Nsukova dunks.
I975.

Apollonov. V. V.. Bunkin. F. V.. Khonich. V. Yu.. Checkin. 8. A.. PIS'MA V
2W mmmnsm FIZIKI. V01 1973. P 1017.

Mach. 1.. Jshnke. L. lads. F.. "Spotsisl'nyye funktsii" [Specisl Punc-
tionsl. Moscow. Msuks. 1966.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

Id.

ls.

l6.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Krylw. V. 1.. Shul'gine. L. 'r.. "Sprevochneye huge po hislennoen
integriroveniyu" [Whack on Nautical Integration]. Moscow. Nam. 1966.

Yekorbt. ‘l'.. "rum 1 ukhenike rezruehentye 1 prochnoeti tverdykh tel"
[Physics eud Hechuuce of Destruction and Strength of Solda]. Hoecov.
Mir. I971.

Welov. Ye. 6.. Droedov. V. 14.. ‘l‘yevlovouy. H. D.. "Dindchuluye
prochnoet' utellav" [Dyna-1c Strength of Metals]. Min-k. Neuke 1
tekhnike. 1969.

Iveuoiv. V. 8.. "Untalounoye remehenzlye utellov” [Pettgue Fracture
of Metals]. lbecou. GTI. 1963.

Apollonov. V. V.. Betchukav. A. 1.. Kerlov. N. V.. Prokhorov. A. IL.
Mich. V. You Shefter. 3. IL. “8’!“ V MAL mmcmsrov ".2111.
Vol 1. 1975. p 522.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'etvo "Radio 1 evyez'". "Kventoveye elektronike". 1982

6610

090:

“62/133

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

0130 621.378.8
WING ammo MIXTURE 01’ moms LASIR um: OPEN-DISCHARGE MING

Hoecow KVAM‘OVAYA nmmm in Rueeian Vol 9. Bo 2(116). Feb 82 (nanuecript
received 6 Aug 81) pp 368-369

[Article by L. K. Gavrilina. V. 8. Zuyev. V. A. Katulin. h. n. Korehavina.
Yu. 8. Leonov. Yu. I. Noroeov and A. L. Petrov]

[text] A chroeato-naee-epectronetric enalyeie ie done on
the depleted nixture in an iodine laeer and an iodine enpli-
fier with [It-ping by an open high-current diecharge. It -
ie ehown that there ie a difference between the driven node
(enlifier) end free-running node (laeer). Thie difference
ehould lead to eccuulation of large aeounte of I: in the
driven node. which nay lead in turn to a difference in de-
eigne of the regeneration eyeten for theee two nodea.

Ref. 1 reported on e ehort-pulae iodine leaer with repeated uee of the regener-
ated nixture. Anelyeie of the producte of photolyeia of euch a laeer ehowed
that the nain poieoning conponent of the depleted mixture ie 13. which wee
renoved in purification end regeneration. Similar iodine laeere with high
output energy (~10’ J) can operate in the free-running node ee well. The
queetion ariaee ac to how the coepoeitiona of the depleted gee nixture will
differ when the powerful iodine laeer ie operated in the uodea of free running
and enplification of ehort puleea (driven node). 'l'hie problem ie topical

for developing a purification eyeten for the cloned gee loop of a powerful
iodine laeer. A prelininary enewer to the queetion ia given in Ref. 2. 3.
where it ie ehown that nuch leee 1; ie acctnuleted in the free-running node
than in the driven node. however. the reeulte of theee papere cannot be di-
rectly trenaferred to iodine laeere with pulping by aiaeion fron an intanae
open electric diecharge (Raf. lo] eince the pming power and epectral makeup
differ coneiderahly from low-power leap pueping lief. 2. 3].

In pulping by an open diecharge (without a quartz diecherge tube). the active
euhetence ie alao abaorbed by hard UV radiation (K 200 nu) with eubeequent
diaeocietion (Ref. 5]. In principle. all thie nay coneiderebly alter the
kinetics of proceeeee coepered with lanp peeping.

Bxperinente were done on a facility deacribed in Ref. 1. 6. A powerful iodine
laeer wee ueed with value of ~1 n puped by an open electric discharge with

capacitor bank energy of 270 1:3 in both nplification and free laeing (1800 J
at the output).

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In laser operation in the free-running node. the optical cavity was foruad
by mirrors with reflectivities of [00 and 301.
of the gaa aixture were taken and the final products were analyzed. The de-
pleted mixture after one-tine laser action was condenaed in a natal tank that
had been pro-evacuated to a pressure of l Ill ﬁg; condensation was done at

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

liquid nitrogen teaperatura.

The SDI-8 ("Varian") Iaaa apectronetar was used for analyzing the photolyaia
products after doing laser experiments in the two nodes.
eter can be interfaced with a chronatograph. enabling isolation of individual
coaponenta of the aixture that are than introduced directly into the ease

apectroneter so that each coaponent is analysed separately.

length of 3.6 n was used in doing the chroaatogrsphic analysis.

 

Coupoaition
of mixture

 

 
   
   
   
 
 

Concentration of total umber
of noleculas. X

In photolysis products

   
 

In init is].
lixture

  

    
    

Free-naming
operation

“mount of I; deterained by titration

 

Chronatogrns of photolysis products in free-running (a)

node and driven (1)) node:

1“c’~o 2“3P60 3"”?1. ‘--c;P51. 5-C5Plht er‘yl

113
IN)! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After each discharge, ample:

This aaaa spectros-

A colt-1 with
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of the chronatographic analysis are presented in the table and
the figure. As cnnpared with the initial eixture of SFs-Cghl after laser
operation in the two nodes. new products appear: 01.. 80h. 0.11.1. ca...

It can be seen froe the table that the qualitative composition in both nodes
of laser operation is the one. being a sixture of the initial substances

and products of decowosition. although when the laser is operated in the
free-running node the anount of reacted can. is loss than in the driven node.
In accordance with this. there is also a reduction in the quantitative acct-u-
lation of the above-esntionod products.

The aeonnt of I; that is forsed cannot be analysed by the chromatographic
method because of the high absorptivity of iodine. Therefore we used an ana-
lytical method that we had developed previously in application to our own
conditions lief. 2]. Just as we had assmd. such less solecular iodine was
foreod in the free lasing soda (see table).

Thus our results are analogous to those found in experiments with lamp puping.
although with certain stipulations. Their gist is that in the case of pulping
.by an open discharge. 81'; is entrained into the region of chenicol inter-
action. which apparently does not occur with law pmping. This is proved
first of all by the formation of 801’; that takes place only in puaping by

an open discharge. Let us note that binding of oxygen in 80?: nay be quite
useful as oxygen is also a strong quanchant of excited iodine stone and is
practically always present in the nixture.

It see-s to us that the najor processes loading to fornetion of CF. and can
proceed analogously with pulping by an open discharge and by leaps. This
becOIes clear if we take consideration of the strong dilution of the working
gas with tho 8!. buffer gas that has a high specific heat precluding pyrolysis.
and self-shielding of hard radiation by the working gas as a consequence of
the larger absorption cross section in the UV region (by a factor of 10-100)
than in tho pulping band.

The process of I; fornation in the two sodas is described in Ref. 3. The dif-
ference can be attributed to the different lifetinos of the excited iodine
in the driven node (100 pa) and in the free lasing soda (0.1-1 us).

In the free lasing node. where stinuloted onission brings about rapid transition
of the atonic iodine to the ground state. the reaction of reverse reconbination

takes place at a high rate _(c.r-,+ I+CgP1l). the initial substance is restored.

and nolecular iodine is not occululated (there is partial "self-regeneration").

The reaction of reverse recoabination of excited iodine occurs such more

slowly.

In the driven node with prolonged existence of excited iodine atone. the radi-
cals reconbine rapidly C.P;+C.I5+C¢!u. since there is practically no atosic
iodine in the ground state. Therefore at the and of pulping when a short
pulse passes that transfers iodine fro- the excitod to the ground state. there
are no ca; radicals. and reverse reconbination does not occur. The (ls-excited
iodine stone in this case are constrained to recoebine into eolocular iodine.

11h

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'hue. cloud-loop annotation ayatm for iodine lasers in free-running and
cavity Q-uitched (driven) nodee say be quite different. It is clear from
what ve have eeid that a great deal of molecular iodine ie eccmlatad in

a powerful iodine leaar in the driven node. which neceuitatee additional
purification for oubeequent nae (Ref. 1]. In the free lacing node. reverae
reconhination takes place. and purification of the initial aatctiel need not
be no thorough.

names

1. Gntilina. L. K.. btulin. V. A.. lorzhavina. ll. 11.. Leonov. Yu. 8..
Horoaov. In. 1.. Roach. V. Yu.. Petrov. A. I... KVAIWOVAYA mmm.
Vol 6. 1979. p 1695.

2. new. I. 6.. Gmilioa. 1.. 1.. Leonov. B. 8.. Sautldn. V- A.. ”8'!“ V
2mm. NPHW'M I MMICEM FIZIKI. V01 8. 1968. p 178.

3. Andreyeve. G. I... Halyahav. V. 1.. Haalov. A. 1.. Sobel'aan. 1. 1..
Sorokin. V. A.. PIB'HA V MAL “PERMAL'KOY I mmlcm I'IZIKI.
v01 10. 1%99 P ‘29.

1.. Zuyav. V. 8.. Katulin. V. A.. Noeech. V. Yu.. Petrov. A. 1... mm
nucnsmco mmm mm P. I. LEEDIVA mm: W 8833. I‘D-com
Vol 125. 1980. p 3.

5. Iorovich. B. L.. Zuyev. V. 8.. Ketulin. V. A.. Hikheyev. L. D..
Nikolayev. F. A.. Koaech. 0. Yu.. nozanov. V. 3.. "(hi-icheakiye
laury" [musical Laura]. 11061 NAIR! 1 mm. sum mmrnmm,
Vol 15. Hoocw. VINI'II AN SSSR. 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Iadatel'atvo "Radio 1 evyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronike". 1982

6610
CSO: 1862/11”

115

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.373.826.038
mom 0? 800!!!) HAVES ON PULSED GAS-DISCHARGE LASER MSSIW POUR

Moscow KVAM'OVAYA alumna in Russian Vol 9. No 2016). Feb 82 (eanuscript
received at 2W MICE!” FIZIKI 25 8ep 80. and at KVAN'IOVAYA
amounts 12 Her 81) pp 270-276

[Article by V. P. Krevchenko. B. K. lerabut. A. A. Gudhov and V. Ye.
bogoslavskiy. Scientific Research Institute of Physics. Roatov-na-Donu State
University]

[text] It is shown that in pulsed gas-discharge lasers

at high specific energy inputs in the pulse. acoustic oscil-
lations are excited in the active eediu. It is dnonstrated
that when working the pulse-periodic node. the buildup of
acoustic oscillations leads to redistribution of the density
of the active eedim in the discharge tube. which is respon-
sible for resonant dependence of the average lasing power

on the recurrence rate of the stieulating pulses.

l . Introduction

One of the important probl-s in the investigation and design of pulsed gas
discharge lasers is raising the average emission power. Solution of this
proble- by simultaneously increasing the pulse power and pulse recurrence
rate runs up against a umber of difficulties. along which sons of the eost
ieportant are the low rates of cooling of the active eediu end deioniration.
It is known [lef. l. 2] that increasing the excitation mrgy leads to gas-
dynanic forces that acconpeny transmission of the current pulse in the dis-
charge cheater. causing shock and accustic waves and associated ease transfer.
which nay have an appreciable effect on the laser output characteristics.

The sound waves that arise in the gas when the current pulse passes through
it were first used to accelerate cooling of the active eedit- of nitrogen
lasers in Ref. 3. and convective carbon dioxide lasers in Ref. 6.

In the case of periodic pulse energy input. depending on the pulse recurrence
rate there say be oscillations of the gas density in the discharge gap. which
is associated with excitation of standing waves [Ref. 5). The influence of
these effects on operation of pulsed gas discharge lasers has not been studied
up until now. although it is known that the foreation of a standing sound
weve in the discharge gap leads to low-frequency oscillations of radiation

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

intensity lief. 6]. and consequently nay cause changes in the eeiaaion power
of pulsed gas discharge lasers.

In this paper we investigate the influence that sound waves arising in two-
pulsa and pulse-periodic operation have on the eniasion power of atrontiu
and copper chloride vapor lasers.

2 . lxperinental Tacility

Bxperinenta with an ionic self-linited atrontiu vapor laser used a discharge
tube of alundu cer-ic with inside dinner of lO I and length of 65 ca;
the distance between electrodes was 20 cn.. The atrontius vapor pressure op-
tin- for lasing was set by the tenperature of an external heater. blim-
at pressures of. 1.3-2.0 kPa was used as the buffer gas. Discharge excitation
was either in the doubled pulse node with delay between pulses adjustable
over a wide interval. or in the pulse-periodic node. In the latter case to
prevent overheating of the active nadir. the discharge was switched on for

a short period (10-20 s). A storage capacitor of 1-1.5 n! was discharged
through a Ell-500]“ thyratron. Change in lasing power on line 8r II with
A- 1.03 us was sonitored in the two-pulse node by an I'm-28 photomultiplier
with_output fed to an oscilloscope; in the pulse-periodic node the radiation
receiver was a calibrated PSD-l photoresistor.

Expert-en" with the copper chloride vapor laser were done in a sactionalired
quarts discharge tube of disaster I) with internal cylindrical water-cooled
electrodes. The sepents were ceramic inserts of thickness d and inside din-
eter of 6 :- separated by distance Z. Paraneters D. d and Z in the different
tubes were varied. The discharge was excited by a Bluslein circuit with
ran-1000125 thyratron as a co-autator. The capacitance of the storage capaci-
tor varied froe 220 to 1500 n?. The tube was filled with neon in the pressure
range of 5.3-8.0 hPa. CuCl vapor was introduced into the discharge by self-
heating of the tube in the pulse-periodic node. The average enisaion power '
on the green (AI-510.5 m) and yellow (1-5783 nn) Cul lines was seasured

on the 110-2 instrunent.

It. all experinents the shape and amplitude of the voltage across the discharge
tube and the current through the tube were sonitorsd by non-inductive capaci~
tive divider and shunt with output signal sent to the input of a Vii-£50
oscilloscope.

3. Bxperinental Results and Discussion

In double-pulse operation of the Sr-lle laser. periodic changes are observed
in the lasing power in the second pulse as the ties delay between pulses is
changed (Pig. 1). The nagnitude of changes in lasing power increases with
increasing input of electric power to the discharge and with increasing buffer
gas pressure. Stepwise dependence of average lasing power on stinulating
pulse recurrence rate is observed in the pulse-periodic node (Tig. 2).

In the investigation of the OuCl-Ne laser with aectionalited discharge tube.
the average lasing power shows mltiresonant dependence on stinulating pulse

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       

a 4: {a a... 44 mu 2 0 Midi:
Pig. 1. basing pulee power P. and Pig. 2. Average lasing power of Sr-lle
intensity I of spontaneous eeission laser as a function of pulse recur-
on 8: I line x- 1.60.7 on in the pulse rence rate; 5-0.3 RE: is the lower
node as functions of the tine delay resonant frequency

between pulses

_n._.
0 a n [has

Fig. 3. Average lasing power Pc
of Cum-Na laser as a function of
pulse recurrence rate

recurrence rate (Fig. 3). On a frequency of 16.5 kHz at discharge gap length
of [lo on. the overall average lasing power on both lines was 1.1 w. efficiency
was about 0.332 with respect to energy stored in the storage capacitors. It
was established that the frequencies of observed resonancea do not depend

on the length of the discharge zone. the geoeetry of the end sections of the
tube. thickness or nt-ber of sepenta. but are detarnined solely by the para--
eter D of the expansion none. A change in D fro. 2 to 1.2 cu increased the
amber of observed resonances; the nature of the behavior of average lasing
power reeained analogous to Fig. 3. with a further reduction in the ratio

D/d. the .plitudes of resonance peaks decrease so such that the emission
power is no longer a resonant function of the recurrence rate. and the relation

between then because nonotonic. The aeplitudaa of the resonance peaks increase
with increasing ratio Nd and power input to the discharge. and also with
decreasing neon pressure. 0n high romance frequencies one observes stabili-
zation of the discharge along the axis of the tube. and contraction of the
discharge colun and lasing spot. this is eoat noticeable when the active
eediu is overheated. During heating. the lasing spot is at first annular

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI, USE ONLY

in structure. and then gradually fills the whole cross section of the discharge
channel. Hith underhoating. the structure of the spot on resonance frequencies
abruptly changes fro. annular to a unifora cross section of stellar diaeeter.

Before going on to analyze each of the results. let us note that in a gas
discharge in cylindrical tubes at large specific pulse energy inputs. density
oscillations nay arise Ref. 5]. These oscillations have the nature of shock
waves Ref. 7] and sound waves [Ref. 2]. Analysis of the above results has
shown that the intensity of the fluctuations is detersined by the parueter
H/p. where H is specific energy introduced in the pulse into the discharge.
and p is the pressure of the active nediua. An increase in the value of. H/p
leads to buildup of strong oscillations of gas density in the discharge tube.
Also of ilportance is the geoaetry of cool and hot (pla-a-filled) zones of
the discharge tube. Particles of netal dust are configured lengthwise of

the discharge tube in periodic clots that change position with a change in
geometry of the discharge tube and recurrence rate of the stiaulating pulses.
The frequency band of lasing power oscillations. absence of fluctuations in
voltage across the discharge tube and current through it as the pulse recur-
rence rate changes. and also the behavior of metal dust particles in the tube
show the acoustic nature of the observed oscillations.

The observed dependence of oscillations on energy input to the discharge sug-
gests that the principal mechanism of buildup of sound waves can be attributed
to the weak shock waves that arise upon thermal expansion of the plasma calm.
Actually. the energy released in the value occupied by the plans causes

an abrupt increase of pressure in this space in a process that can be consid-
ered isochronic. in virtue of the considerable inertia of the process of

heat transfer. the equalization of pressures occurs gasdynaically as a conse-
quence of the shock wave. ‘lwo cases are possible.

1. Snell energy input (W/P<0.7S). Gas expands isentropically. The size
of the zone of expansion can be detersineq’ fro. the expressions VJV.=K;"
for longitudinal waves and V.lV.-K',"lVdK."-1)/V.]“ for radial waves. where
K,=l+(?—l) le; yscplcy; V... V. and Vc are the volumes of the heated zone at
the end of the flare. the discharge channel and the discharge tube respec-

tively.

After equalization of pressures in the hot and cool zones of the tube. the
directional pulse acquired by the gas propagates as a sound wave.

2. Large energy input (w/p>0.75). In this case. as established in lief. 7.
the shock wave causes a periodic change of gas density in the discharge region.
As the gas intermixes. equalization of pressures takes place. and subsequent
processes in the tube occur analogously to the propagation of sound waves.

The sound waves in propagating along the discharge tube are reflected fron

its walls. In this process. they may be either damped out by interference

and absorption. or built up due to establisluent of a standing wave. In the
case of strict consideration of the process of sound wave propagation. it

is necessary to account for itereflection at interfaces of different tenpera-
ture zones of the discharge tube. the reflectivity at such an interface

119
FOR UPI-TOM. USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

depends on the t-perature ratio of gas in the hot and cool zones of the tube.
Under condition typical of pulsed gas discharge lasers 1'. s 300 1. 1‘3: 2-6 1:1.
reflectivity in this case is about 0.3.

It is known that a cylindrical cavity has a set of eigenfrequencies that can
be found fro. the expressions fn-nc/(ZL) for longitudinal nodes. and fa-
rmc/ (21h) for radial nodes of oscillations. where rm is the root of the equa-
tion Jain-0; c is the speed of sound; J. is a Bessel function of n-th order.

If the radius of the cylinder R<0.293l. where A is the wavelength of the
sound propagating in the cylinder. then radial wave nodes do not arise. and
longitudinal waves have a planar front. At 100.293) the excited node of
radial waveforss depends on gsonetry and location of the source; if the source
is in the niddle of tin cylindrical tube on its axis. Iainly longitudinal
waves with odd n and radial waves of type fon will be excited.

”hen the cavity is subjected to an exciting force with frequency f“. forea-
tion of standing waves is possible on frequencies fu- fen/e. where fan
is the lower frequency of the cavity. s-1. 2. 3....

The proposed nodel readily explains observed experimental data.

In the case of the Sr-lla laser in the double-pulse node. a week shock wave
arises. As it expands. the hot gas radiates an acoustic wave to both sides.
the pressure of the active nediu falls. and lasing is interrupted. With
the arrival of the reflected wave. the pressure of the active nediu in the
active zone increases. reaches a sexism. and then falls off.

The behavior of spectral lines of neutral strontiu atone excited by direct
electron impact agrees with the usuned nodel of redistribution of density

of the active nediua of the laser due to formation of longitudinal standing
sound waves. The intensities of ionic lines of strontiun and stimlated esie-
sion of the laser in virtue of the stepwise sechanisn of excitation (Ref. 8]
have different series depending on strontiun vapor pressure. For exane

at the Sr vapor pressure that is optim- for lasing. stinuleted enission has
two lexina since the system passes twice through optimal conditions during ,
a half-period. In the regular pulse node. excitation of odd nodes of longi-
tudinal waveforls is observed (see Fig. 2).

In the case of the CuCl-Ne laser. the expanding discharge channel (which is

a linear sound source in virtue of the chosen geosetry of the tube) pups

up standing sound waves on resonance frequencies that are sultiples of the
fundnental radial wave of node f”. The frequency dependence on Fig. 3 is
given for the case where c- (1-7.5)0102 n/s (which corresponds to the value
of the pre-pulse temperature of the gas in a range of 700-800 K). 0- 2.5 en.
ru- 3.83 lief. 2]; the frequency of the fundsnental radial node is 34-36 Hit.
It can be seen that the set of frequencies of observed resonances fits into

a series fu/s. where s-2. 3. a. S. 6. 7. The distance between the dust
clots (nodes) for-ed in operation on resonance frequencies in the extended end
sections of the discharge tube. which is equal to the wavelength of the stand-
ing sound waves. is stut l on. which corresponds to a wavelength of the

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fundamental node A- c/fu. The change in structure of the lasing spot agrees
with the change in density of the active nediua for the given node of oscil-
lotions.

The observed frequency responses of the CuCl-lle laser are due to selection
of conditions that are optinu for ming up sound waves. In particular.
the paraeter U/p was in a range of 1—2. whereas published data on the opera-
tion of netal-Ivapor pulsed gas discharge lasers give typical values of w/p<
0.1-0.3.

Thus when operating pulsed gas discharge lasers in the pulse-periodic node

at large specific energy inputs in a pulse. sound waves are puaped up in the
active nediun. leading to redistribution of the density of the active nadir.
in the tube. which causes coaplicated dependence of the average lasing power
on the recurrence rate of the exciting pulses. By taking the recurrence rate
as a nultiple of the (Manual radial node of the mud waves excited in

the discharge tube. it is possible in my cases to increase the average power
of stinulated emission of pulsed gas discharge lasers with segnented active
elenent.

“WES
l. Stricher. S. D.. Stewart. A. 5.. PHYS. REV. LBl'l‘S, Vol 11. 1963. p 527.

2. Kozlov. Yu. 6., Shukhtin. A. 11.. 21mm. mmmsssror nznu. Vol 38.
1968. p 1465.

3. Kravchenko, V. 17.. Il'yushho. V. 6.. Hikhalevskiy. V. 8.. Polunin. V. A..
IZVBS‘I'IYA smoco uvmawco NAUCM rams VYSSHEY SHKOLY. SMA
mam “ADI. Vol 3. 1977. P 36.

lo. Vedenov. A. A.. Drobyazko. s. V.. Knishnikov, V. N.. Turundaysvskiy. V. 3..
TBPLOFIZIKA VYSOKIKII mess-run, Vol 13, 1975. p 1.25.

5. Barmv. V. Yu.. Lyubinov. 8. Ya.. Niz'yev, V. 6.. Pigul'skiy. S. V..
KVAN‘IWAYA MGM. Vol 6. 1979. 1) 186.

6. Reznikov, G. P.. Pugol', N. Yn.. Shevchenko. Yu. P.. “18'!“ V 211mm.
mm'nor I TBOIIBTICIIBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 8. 1968. p 66.

7. Skrebov. V. IL. Bykhval'd. A. 1.. TBPIDPIZIIA WWI“ mm. Vol 17.
1979, p 711.

8. “rebut. E. K.. Kravchenko. V. P.. Mikhslevskiy. V. 8.. OPTIKA l
SPBKTROSKOPIYA. Vol 68, 1980. p 668.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvsntovays elelttronika". 1982

6610
CS): 1862/133

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 621.378. 325
m WING SUBSTAICBS POI WISSOCIATIVB mum LASER

Hoscow KVAM’OVAYA mm in Russian Vol 9. No 2016). Feb 82 (manuscript
received 5 Feb 8!) pp 253-259

[Article by G. A. Skorobogatov, B. N. Haksinov. V. G. Selernev. 0. N. slesar'.
N. D. Torbin and L. N. Kostyreva]

[Text] The following fluorinsted iodies are tested as work-
ing fluids for an iodine laser: C.P.I. cant. chocrzcrzr
and 0,1’7001'16151. Energy output of 80-85 mJ/cm’ was attained
for stinulated emission on perfluorobutyl iodide (without an
inert diluent). which is conparable with the energy output
attained on n- and iso-perfluoropropyl iodides - the nost
effective of known working fluids in iodine lasers. A theo-
retical analysis is done on the mechanism of quenching of
stimulated emission in a laser using ch91.

The photodissocietion iodine laser [Rah 1] shows the greatest promise along
with neodymim glass and carbon dioxide lasers for accoaplishing laser-driven
nuclear fusion [Ref. 2]. However. at present the naxinun attainable efficiency
of the iodine laser is only 0.5-1.4! Ref. 3. lo]. which is comparable with

that of neodyniun glass lasers. Since the attained efficiency of utilizing

the working substance in the laser cell of the photodiesociation iodine laser
does not exceed 192 for Chit. 282 for C3P1I [Ref. 5] and 251 for ca. 31 Ref.
6]. there are considerable reserves for improving the efficiency of such lasers
by finding nore favorable working mixtures. There are also reserves for in—
creasing efficiency by a fundamental change in the meaning arrangement [Rah 7].

Since the tine of publication of Ref. 1. stimulated mission in photodissocia-
tion iodine lasers has been realized on the following iodides: 017,1. 011,1.
CaygI. 03,71. CzngI. anyI. CngI. 1-Csngl Ref. 1]. 1-Cgryl [Ref. 8]. C031
Info 9]. (CP:)3CI [Refs 10]. 1-C5Y111. C‘P1.1 [R¢f. 6], (”3):”Ip
CPa(CzPs)A81o “3(C1P1MII. (Capshhln (Cahhhl. (CF;)¢PI. ““0230”.
CFﬂCshN’I. (CsthPIo (C377):Plu "“630“. Chum“). “3(CF201)(CFH)PI.
P.PI. 01’le and (CP:)szI (Ref. 11]. Attenpts to achieve lasing with such
gases as 243371. E1. 13' [Ref. 1]. (ClahAsI [Ref. 12] or with conpounde that
contain the 8-! bond Ref. 12] have been unsuccessful. Among all the tested
iodides. just as before. the maximu- specific energy output is observed for
14.9,: (80-85 nJ/cn’ (Ref. 6]) and cm: (80:3 mJ/cn’ without diluent. and

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

125: s u/en’ when diluted with 31?; met. 51).
Therefore it ssene logical to look for sore
effective'working fluids for photodissociation
awe“: iodine lasers along heavier perfluoroalkyl
' w" iodides, or song near analogs of car-,1. In
accordance with this. the lasing properties
of the following series of iodides have been
studied in this paper: can. Csrnl.
Cpgmzazl and 03Pm32CF21.

  

5
J
1 These iodides were synthesized by nethode
described in Ref. 13. Before the laser tests.
W 25’? m 3' “I the iodides were purified by vacu- distil-
lation 5-10 tines. with collection of 6/5 of
P18- 1- Absorption spectra of the volune of the substance each ties in the
raucous fluctuated iodides at niddle of distillation. The test for purity
20'0 of the substance was absence of spurious
peaks on gas chronatogrlu. The spectra
of the iodides (Pig. 1) were taken on e Perkin-Bleer-‘OZ spectrophotoneter.
Table l sun-arias spectral properties (obtained free the data on Fig. l)
and ease other properties of the iodides used in the work.

TABLE I
Sane properties of gaseous fluorinated iodides RI’)

 

1“wars are nor-eel; ”15293 K; ”A is width of the
hand at level 0.5.

The laser tests were done on a facility described in Ref. lb. with the differ-
ence that each of the four 10-5000 leaps was placed in its own grid of return
wires (Ref. 15]. which increased the steepness of the pulse edge and the power
of the puping radiation in the first 5 us (coware curve 3 of the figure

in Ref. 16 with curves 1 end 3 in Pig. 2). The overall dimensions of the
laser cell were reduced sonewhst: inside di-eter 5.220.l .. irradiated
length and volt-e 255 II and 5.21 0.! II respectively. The reflectivities

of the cavity nirrors (100 and 10! on A-1300 III) and their radius of curve-

ture (l I) were as before. The and windows of the laser cell were also placed
as before: at an angle of 90' to the axis.

123

FOR ommx. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

Pig. 2. Typical pulse shapes of pump- 3
ing radiation (x- 250-350 nm) (1. 3) 1n
and atiaulated emission (2. 4. 5):

a -2310 (1) and 1300 J 53); :1..-

97‘73). a7 (4) and 42 nJ/cn (5); work-

ing fluid 0.”! (p- 123 (2) and 76 - Bg

(4)) and i-Cgl'yl (p- 76 - 8g (5)) 2
1
In!
KPH-9'
1.2 16
M alas"

2 W 5

3 w I . t

3 u

n:

0 0 m 20 50 t
2 .413
a 2 .' 31”.!" In)

Fig. 3. Specific energy output “In of RI Fig. 2 shows sons typical
lasers as function of ”ping niaeion for oscillogras of lasing
cell with inside dineter of 5.220.l II: pulses. demonstrating
l--123 u lg can; 2—71; - hg Ctl’gl; 3- that with all of the fairly
74 In ﬁg 143111; 6—100 - Hg CgoFyl; 5- high pulping radiation
lob III llg 050F311; 6-37 - lg CsPnI. The powers that we used. lasing
upper scale of KPH-P refers to curves [-3. was cut off due to quench-
and the lower — to curves 6-6 and the black in processes rather than
circles on curve 3; displaceeent of the upper merely by the termination
and lower scales for Elm-P is determined by of the pumping radiation
registration of the black circles with curve 3. pulse. Therefore the data

that we have obtained on
the lasing properties of iodides reflect not only their spectral-optical prop-
erties. but also the physicochenical processes that take place in the iodide
undergoing photolysis.

Pig. 3 shows the specific energy yield of stinuleted emission as a function
of the electric energy fed to the pumping laps. 'l'he umber of points on
each curve is not large. The trouble is that under the severe conditions
that we used the luminous enittance of the 10-5000 laps as well as the trans-
parency of the laser cell fall off noticeably after every 10-20 operations.
Therefore to get undistorted results the entire experiment lust be done with
a minimum mnber of operations. Besides. under severe conditions there is

a high probability of explosion of the laps. It is for this reason that
curves 1-3 on Fig. 3 were plotted with some lamps. while curves 6-6 and three
points (dark circles) on curve 3 were plotted with other laps (with poorer
luinous elittance).

Fig. 6 shows the specific energy yield of stimulated emission as a function
of pressure of the iodide in the cell for some fixed values of pulping energy.
The data of Fig. lo show that of the four newly tested iodides. only 0.79!

12h

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a in ’
1“. [cl p13. 4. Specific energy tmtlmt 31.. °f M

7 lasers as function of working gas pressure for
$ cell with mu. Master of 5.220.: m:
Working fluid Cngl (1); 1-0311I (2. 3, 5).
7 (3501511 (4). 030??! (6) “d can! (7):
amp-2310 (1. 3). 2700 (2) [Ref. 6] and
20 e 1300 J (4-?)
I

s w "I'm-a;

shows 31“ about 10% greater than that of the most effective iodides that
are currently hum: Cs")! and 1-C3P71. Since the vapor pressure of can
at roo- temperature (123 - lg) is less than that of Cgl’1l or i-Cgl'yl (380
II llg). the actually attainable maxim- energy output of 80-85 miles:3 is the
fame for undiluted 0.1"! (see Fig. 3 and lo). i-Cﬁ'ﬂ (Ref. 6) and can!

hf. 51s

In preceding papers ﬁsf. 6. l6-18] we established that for the high pumping
rates that we used («>103 a"). stiaulated emission of photodissociation
iodine lasers based on iodides Chi. CgPyl. can! after reaching a nearin-
0.“) drops by a considerable factor (or even to zero) due to photoinduced
radial gasdyna-ic nova-ants (oscillations) of the working gas in the laser
cell. The instant of final cutoff of lasing tc is deternined by chemical
quenching processes that develop in the laser cell [Ref. 19]. The contribu-
tion of radial movements of the working gas to the quenching of stimulated
emission of photodiasociation iodine lasers was first experimentally observed
in Ref. 20. and experimental confirmations of the photodissociative mechanis-
of onset of radial nova-ants of the working gas in such lasers were obtained
in Ref. 21. 22. Since the iodides CePgI. csPuI. 030911 and c.0151: used

in our research are analogous in physicochsnical properties to 0.171 or 0.17; .1.
for then as well one should expect an appreciable contribution of gasdynamic
radial oscillations to quenching of lasing. In this research we have not
brought up the problem of studying the nechani- of quenching of stinulsted
emission of the photodissociation iodine laser (therefore the pulping radiation
pulse is not square as in Ref. 6. l6. and has irregularities. while the lasing
pulses suetimss have a spike structure). but will nonetheless atteqt to
extract information on the “cheni- of emission quenching in the photodissoci-
ation iodine laser free the resultant experinental data. e. g. for can.

First of all. let us estinate the tenpersture rise in the laser cell due to
photodissociation and subsequent ghaical reactions. tor curves 8. d of

Fig. 2 the absolute puping rats as averaged over the cross section of the
cell and the iodide absorption band was evaluated by the method of autophotoe-
etry Inst. 23] (Table 2). To check the correctness of autophotonetry. the
lifetine r. of stone Ramp) with respect to the stimlated transition
mewwvfm ua)+I(3P$)+2hv(l.3 u.) for the instant cu, of am
lasing is calculated in the seventh colt-n of Table 2 by formula (2) fro.
Ref. 6. Since r t is 5-5 tines less than tn“. we can be sure that the auto-
photonetrically determined punping rate is understated in conparison with
the true value due to this factor by no lore than lOO!-e'~- 21. By tine

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE 2

Temperature rise in working value of can laser
by the time t.“ of the first appreciable drop in lasing power
and by the time tc of lasing cutoff

 
     
   

0.":0.“
. ﬂit...

 

0.22:“ “02'
0.1.10." 3|

”0.19“.th is the pumping rate averaged over

 

* —( -

09 I) 2 dc.
the cross section of the cell and over the absorption bend of
the iodide; evaluated by the method of autophotometry.

“Calculations done for rate constant of thermal dissociation
ktd-Aexp (-23650/1‘) with two values of A: 10" or 10’5 cm".
r; is the integral euantt- yield of stimulated mission (see
formula (1). Ref. 23); r?! is the same calculated by formula
(68) of Ref. 29. i. e. w thin the formalism of a kinetic
model that accounts for only one quenching reaction-therma1
dissociation (2).

‘nsx' 2-3 "a we should also not have developed processes of inversion annihi-

lation due to dark reactions I(’PW)-k&v-'>RI or 21(2P¢)+RI£3>12+RI.
[(2P¢)+Iz+ 1(3P3q)+lz. since according to the data of Ref. 26-26 the cor-
responding characteristic half-reaction times (tRli' l/kn. “(ah/.013” us
end t12 - 1/11: [RI][I(2P¥2)] :15 us) are an order of magnitude greater than
tn“. Since autophotometry is fundamentally approximate (up to 3501) as a
method of determining absolute pulping rate. we have disregarded (averaged
out) the spikes on cu_rle 2 of Pig. 2. and have not made corrections in the
determined values of so for the possible understatement (up to 15! [Ref. 27.
28]) of the measured intensity of stimulated transitions due to losses of
stimulated radiation within the cavity, or for possible overstetement (hp
to 20-30:) of the intensity of stimulated transitions due to the dark reaction

R+ I(’P$)—knkl. (Rate constants It“ I 10"11 cm'lnole-s [Ref. 210. 25]. which
leads to a characteristic half-reaction time of tRI' llku[l(2P3/¢)] =1 us.
which is comparable with tan).

Under the conditions of our experinents for reactions [(#415th and

R+ 1(3p$)m|u, characteristic half-reaction times t; . l/nglRl and
cM-l/kum’pym do not exceed l us (see RR and lqu in Ref. 24. 25).
Therefore in the region up to 1200-1300 K. analytical expression («'05) from
Ref. 29

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r(:)-r.+-&,—[I-exp(—5ﬁwdt)] (I)

gives the same law of temperature rise in the photolysed iodide as the (funda-
mentally more exact) differential expressions of type (lo) from Ref. so or

(16) fro. Ref. 31. The rise in temperature of the working gas in Table 2

was calculated by formula (I) for (1- b eV and cc“, - 62 call! mole (see Table
l) (q-b.ozo.z eV is the nount of energy converted to heat in a single act
of photodisaocistion as calculated on the basis of thermodynmaic data Ref.
32-3“ wig consideration of the fact that the characteristic pulping time

t W. 1/0.: 65 us is nearly two orders of magnitude longer than the charac-
tgristic tines th I tn! 1 us). The tgd of thermodissocistive lasing cutoff
was calculated by formula (67) from lef. 29 on the basis of approximation (1)
for rate constant ktd-Aexp (-AB/k'r) of thermal dissociation

c..F,I+ c.r.+ 109$). (2)

where ve have assused AE/k- 23650 K and A- 101 '40” a" in accordance with
current concepts [see Ref. 32-35].

It can be seen from the data of Table 2 that the experimental values of time
tc of lasing cutoff and especially time tu,“ of the appreciabl drop in lasing
power are several times lower than the theoretical value of t8 . For the

less exponential curves 4 and 5 of Pig. 2. ‘min' 7 us. although it nearly
coincides with the time tim- 8 us. where the pming pulse has a slight mini-
mu. b_ut lasing power (Khan) is only 11-13: of can“). whereas the pumping
rate 06“.“) is 502 of a“ ). Therefore, just as in lief. 6. 36. we have
come to the conclusion that n our experiments the rise in temperature of
perfluorobutyl iodide undergoing flash photolysis has an effect on the inten-
sity of stimulated emission and chemical reaction rate that is much stronger
than directly implied by formula (1:5) from Ref. 29. or by formulae (6) from
Ref. :1) and (lb) from Ref. 31. It was shown in Ref. 16 and 17 that the reason
for such intensified action of temperature increase (leading to acceleration
of quenching chemical reactions and considerable attenuation of lasing power
far before tc) is to be found in radial gasdynamic oscillations of the working
gas of the photodisaocdation iodine laser caused by the temperature gradient
that arises in the iodide undergoing photolysis. Actually. in a first approxi-
mation in each eleaent of value of the working gas undergoing oscillations.
density fluctuations'are accompanied by tewerature fluctuations around an
average value (I). Since the rates of strongly endotheml (e. g. (2)) or
exothermal reactions are exponentially (sharply nonlinearly) dependent on
temperature. all processes of pyrolysis of iodide take place at a rate that
corresponds to a noticeably higher temperature than (1). In a second approai-
nation. corrections can be nade in (1) that account for absorption and release
of heat in the periodically accelerated chemical reactions and so on. “sever.
we did not undertake a quantitative accounting for the temperature contrihu~
tion of gas dynmaics to the reduction in amplitude of fluctuations of lasing
power or a comparison of the contribution due to periodic misalignment of

the optical cavity as a consequence of fluctuations of optical density of

the gasdynamically oscillating gas. (The development of radial optical

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLB3

Theoretical and experimental permtere
of radial oecilletione of 0.391 leeer

 

*l'iret period
“hperinentel value of firet period of redial oecille-
tione; 9 ie the ineide rediue of the laeer cell

inhonogeneitiee in the working fluid of photodieeociation iodine leeere wee
firet experinentelly obeerved in Ref. 37. end the poeeible gaedynenic nature
of euch inhonogeneitiee wee firet pointed out in Ref. 20).

In contreet to preceding pepera lief. 6. 16]. the uee of a grid of return
wiree in thie peper led to irregularity of pining redietion pulee ehepe.

and coneequently to edditonel irregularitiea of the puleee of atinuleted nie-
eion. lawyer. ell three puleee of eti-ulated elieeion ehown on Fig. 2 ehow
e firat epprecieble linin- at t- 7-8 ue correeponding to the phaae of mini-
coapreeeion of the working gee on the exie of the cell. a aecond linin- for
t- 15-17 ue corresponding to the pheee of mi.- deperture of the working gee
free the exie of the cell end (on curve 2) a third einimn for t-23-25 ue
correeponding to the eecond unim- of conpreeeion of the working gee on the
exie of the cell.

Couperieon of the experinentel (by data of Pig. 2) end theoretical paranetere
of rediel oecilletione of the 0.1.1 laaer ie eunerired in 'l'ehle 3. The
aenae of r. and 42 ie given in lief. 17. The veluee of the reroth (1.). firet
(1;) end eecond approxieetione of the firet period of rediel oecilletione

of the iodide undergoing photolyeie were calculated by foraulea (9). (10)

end (ll) respectively froa Ref. 17. Since To. r1. 1'; converge to the [experi-
nental value] 1,. it can he expected that exect eolution of the correeponding
equetione of gee dynaeice will yield totel egreenent between the theoretical
end experinental veluee of the period of oecilletione. Time the experinentel
date of Fig. 2 are deecribed by the very einple theory [Ref. 17] of nonlinear
redial oecilletione of the gee undergoing photolyeie. eo thet we can take

it an proven thet there ie e eignificant contribution of radial oecilletione
of the working gee to attenuation end cutoff of leaing of the 6.8.1 laeer
under the conditione of our erperinente.

l. Keeper. J. V. V.. Pinentel. G. 0.. APPL. ms. um. Vol 5. 1966. p 231;
Keeper. J. V. V.. Parker. J. 8.. Pinentel. G. c. c.. J. can. PHYS”
Vol 4.3. 1965. p 1827.

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.

6.

s.

6.

7.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Buov. 1|. 6.. “1300A. 110 6. 1978. p 26.

Iohu. L. laps. K. 1... Am. ms. 1.31.18. Vol 22. 1973. p 177,
Antonov. A. 8.. lolouoova. 1. 11.. Goran-av. V. A.. Dmﬂov. 0. 8..
Zinvlakov. A. P.. Sapclkin. 11. V.. Yochnov. 1. 1... ”8'!“ V W
mom P121“. Vol 6. 1978. p 1163.

M11079 0. 3.. Y.1.ung V0 V9. “1". I. 11.. !.Chm. I. Inc. 2m
“10113810! PIZIKI. V01 35. 1975. P 1923.

storehogntov. 6. A.. Selunov. V. 6.. mot-av. I. 11.. Slcur'. 0. Il..
mun. WINS“)? PIZIKI. Vol 65. 1975. p 2656.

81:11:31.. J. 6.. Turner. c. 8.. Murray. .1. 9... George. B. V.. M. P1118.
1.3118. Vol 28. 1976. P 387.

Bohla. 1.. Konpa. K. I... 2. 11mm” Vol 270. 1972. p 938.

P1131... I. '0. “V1... C. 6.. ”fulmp I. An. cm. m8. 10m. '01 ”9
19759 P ”3.

Zalaukiy. V. 111.. Kokulhklll. A. 11.. KVWAYA mm. Vol 3. 1976.
p 1501.

“rich. 6. 11.. Drozd. 6. 1.. 80tok1n. V. 11.. Strut. 1. 1.. PIS'H V 2mm.
nsvnnmrm'm I TWICE!“ 312111. Vol 19. 1976. 1) Mo.

Andr.”v.p To 100. ’1r1ch. G. "a. Sorokin. V. H” stalk. I. I0.
KVWAYA MIMI”. V01 3. 1976. P 1‘62.

Tattoos. l.. U. 8. Patent No 3236296. 20 Doc 62; Rcbfadat. 8.. “twitter.
8.. "out Gonna Patent No 1915395. 26 Mar 69.

Storobogatov. 6. A.. loan-av. V. 8.. Selczncv. V. 6.. zmnm.
mummm 1'1an. Vol 6‘. 197‘. p 1996.

Volkav. V. 3.. Zubarev. 1. 6.. Sorokin. V. 11.. 2mm. Pam
WWII. Vol 7. 1972. p 735.

Skorobogatov. 6. A.. Kmrov. V. 8.. m rmrc'msm P112111. V01 67.
I977. p 1.29.

Bbtoboptov. G. A.. 231mm. TWICE” P121111. Vol 67. 1977. p 1551.

W. 3. P.. Skorobogatov. 6. A.. 2mm. mmtcm 1712111. Vol 48.
1978. p.126.

Belousova. 1. 11.. Gorohlwv. l. 6.. Danilov. 0. 3.. ancukiy. V. Yu..
Yachnov. 1. 1... 2mm. mum'um 1 WICEBSKOY 317.111. Vol 65.
1973. p 517.

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
20.

21‘

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

37.

m OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

colubeV. [to Yes. Zuyev. vs So, “cult“. Vs As. “Ouch. No Yue. "coach.
0. Yu. . ”lventovsys slektrontke" [Quanta Electronics]. edited by
N. 6. BMW. No 608). 1973. p 23.

181111. 8.. Ahlborn. 3.. J. APPL. ms.. Vol 67. 1976. p 1076.

Ahkhin. ’0 Vs. “romp V. Vs. L.‘hmtu" Be Vs. “or-Arman. V. As.
Suthenov. 1.. V.. Ustincnko. V. A.. KVWAYA numm. V01 6. 1979.
p 1968.

Konstav. V. 5.. Selesnev. V. 6.. Skorobosetov. G. A.. 211031161.
umxcnsxm 1712111. Vol Mo. 19710. p 875.

Skorobogntov. G. A” Sleset'. O. 11.. V2811"! “ammo UNIVERSITBTA.
no 6. 1979. p 39.

Seleznev. V. 6.. Skorobosstov. G. A.. VBS‘I'NIK WWW UNIVERSITBTA.
No 10. 1978. p 77.

Dynov. B. P.. Skorobosstov. G. I... Rho-cake. V. Ye.. Shchnketev. s. A..
MAI. ossacm 81111111. Vol 47. 1977. p 868

ZuyCV. Vs 8e. ‘orol'kW. ‘0 Ssh "Ditch. 00 Yu.. Orlav. Y‘s Peg “MAYA
“mm. Vol 7. 1980. p 260‘

Roach. 0. Yu.. Orlov. Ye. P., Ptsprtnt No 7. Lebedev Physics Institute.
Roscoe. 1979.

Skorobosetov. 6. A.. VISTNIK LENGADSKOGO UNIVERSITBTA. No 6. 1970.
p I“.

ZALBSSKIY. V. “1.. Haskelev. Ye. 1.. 21111811“. mmnmmvm I
MIC!!!” P1281. Vol 57. 1969. p 1886.

Zelesskiy. V. You KVANTOVAYA WORM. Vol 1. 1971.. p 1819.
Laurence. G. 8.. ms. P13. 800.. Vol 63. 1976. p 1155.
Tschunikov-Roux. 2.. J. ms. cam. Vol 69. 1965. p 1075.
Grysorcevicz. c.. Laurence. G. 8.. J. PHYS. c3111.. Vol 72. 2968. p 1811.

Vcdsneyev. V. 1.. Kibkslo. A. A.. "Konstsnty shorosti gszofsznykh
none-olekulysrnykh reekteiy" [Rate Constants of Mleculsr Gas-Phase
Reactions]. Hoscov. Necks. 1972.

Sclssnev. V. 6.. Skorobogstov. G. A.. Konsrov. V. s.. zmmw. onsacm
0111111. Vol 66. 1976. p 1293.

lelousave. 1. 11.. Dsnilov. O. 3.. 81n1tsyns. 1. A.. Splrldonov. V. V..
2mm. ESPERWML'NOY 1 11501131101138de 312111. Vol 58. 1970. p 11081.

comment: Izdstel'stvo "Radio 1 svyss'". "Kventoveys slektrontks". 1982

6610

080

[862/133

130
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY

OPTICS AID SPISTROSOOPY

UDC 551.666.32535.31
THEORY OF OBSERVATION OP UNDERWATER OBJECTS THROUGH HAVE-COVERED SEA SURFACE

"oscow IZVESTIYA AIADEHII NAUK SSSR: PIZIKA ATMOSPBRY I OKBANA in Russian
Vol 18. no ‘. Apr 82 (Isnuscript received 9 Dec 80, after revision 6 Apr 81)
pp 608-615

[Article by s. V. Dotsenko. hsrine Geophysical Institute, Ukrainian Acadeny of
Sciences]

[Text] Abstract: The article gives a theoretical
analysis of the distortions introduced
by the wave-covered sea surface in the image
of underwater features observed from the at-
sosphere. It is postulated that the spatial
structure of both observed features and
waves has a rando- character. The quality of
observation is evaluated using the aagnitude
of the error in seasuring the spatial luIin-
osity of the feature. It is shown that there
is an optinun relationship between the stat-
isticsl characteristics of the distribution
of lusinosity and waves and the parsneters
of the leasuring instrument ensuring a mini-
sun of this error.

The possibility of observing underwater features fro. the atmosphere is depend-
ent on their contrast, degree of turbidity of the water and ataosphere, super-
posing of the brightness of air haze, light scattered in the sea and brightness
of the water-air discontinuity on the iaage [1].

He will investigate the joint influence exerted on transmission of the image of
underwater features by the wave-covered sea surface and the averaging effect of
the measuring instrument. neglecting other interfering factors. allowance for
which is possible independently.

A problem siailar in its forsulation was solved in [l]. where the influence of
the sea surface on image transaission was studied by an analysis of the scat-
tering function, the energy distribution in the edge iaage and the frequency
contrast of the transfer function. In source [2] a study was made of the image
transfer of a point through a one-dimensional sinusoidal wave and formulas were
given for cosputing the displacesent of a point and the blurring of an object

131
FOI‘OFFKJMI.UBE(MNLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with an increase in the exposure. An approximate model of image transfer
through the wave-covered discontinuity of two media with different refractive
indices was described in [3], where the author determines the multipoint stat-
istical characteristics of the brightness image of a self-luminescent object
or feature observed through the wave-covered discontinuity.

A feature of this study is that it examines the observation of random spatially
elongated features using optical radiation detectors which perform spatial aver—
aging of the image. Many natural formations on the bottom and in the water lay-
er can be modeled by features of the mentioned structure whose investigation

is possible by optical methods. The spatial averaging of the received image

is a property of any real radiation detector. Accordingly. the combination of
such initial premises makes it possible to obtain research results suitable

for direct practical application. The quality of observation is evaluated us-
ing the mean square error between the initial and measured luminosity distrib-
utions [6]. It is shown that it is dependent on the choice of the degree of
averaging and is the highest when it has a finite value. Here we will examine
observations at the nadir as ensuring minimum image distortion [1].

In order to simplify the analysis we will examine a problem in which the ob-
ject of measurement and waves are assumed to be one-dimensional (Fig. l).

 

Fig. 1. Diagram explaining derivation of principal
relationships.

Retaining the physical essence of the analyzed phenomena. such an approach makes
it relatively simple to obtain final numerical results. The x-axis of the mean
level of the wave-covered surface is stipulated in the figure by the point 0.

132
FOIiofFKJA1.USE¢lVL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The atnosphere is situated above it and the water below. At the depth ll" below
the sea surface there is a diffuse self-luninescent object to be observed. ex-
tending in the direction of the x-axis, whose spatial distribution of luainos-
ity is described by the randon function f (x). ‘At the height I!. above the sea
surface at the point 0" there is a detector of optical radiation whose optical
axis is directed to the nadir. Ii'he difference in the level of the wave-covered
surface fron the lean is described by a centered randon function of the space
coordinate {(8).

An analysis of the process of observation of an underwater feature will be
sade on the basis of the premises of geonetrical optics without allowance for
the absorption and scattering of light in the water. The ray energing fron
the point A of the observed feature and received by the detector at the point
0" travel's the following path. It is propagated in the water nediun at the
angle $0 to the vertical 83' to the point Q at the water surface. The tangent
cc' to the sea surface at this point is slanted to the horizontal at the angle
at. whereas the normal N?" to this surface also is deflected by the angle of
iron the vertical 83'. At the point Q there is refraction of the ray and it
energes free the water at the angle B to the nornal In". The detector at the
point 0" picks it up arriving at the angle 9 to the vertical.

Since the C (3) surface is curvilinear and randon, the picture picked up by

the inatruent differs fron the for) function describing the distribution of
luninosity of the observed object and this difference has a randon character.
He will find the error introduced by the wave-covered sea surface and instru-
nent to the insge sensed by the latter and we will evaluate the limits of ap-
pl icability of such a nethod for observing underwater objects. For this pur-
pose we will first obtain the correlation between the output signal Y of the

neasuring inatruent and the investigated object f (x).

We will find the position of the point A, situated on the observed object. which
is sensed by the instruent as visible at the angle 9 to the vertical. The seg-
sent L0 is the z (I) value. Accordingly. the abscissa of the points I. and B is

 

arm-unmet (I,
Since the straight line cc' it the tangent to the E (3) curve at the point
with the abscissa :1. then “(3) _
‘36- is “$131).
II-

It follows fron Pig. 1 that the distance of the point A fro. the point B is
equal to :3 - [II" + C (2:1)] tg (f . Accordingly, the abscissa of the point A is

h-sﬁ'ﬂ- [”a" (3')] ‘8 0+[ﬂ.+t(1u)l¢s 9n (2)

where if- 0‘4- Y. Equation (1) can be regarded as an equation for finding the
abscissa :1. however. due to the tendon character of the Q (:1) parameter its
precise solution cannot be obtained. We will take advantage of the circunstance
that in actual practice the anplitude of the wave |; | is such less than
the height h. at which the neasuring instrument is sighed. Pron expression
(1) we find that x1 - h. tg 0. and expression (2) assunes the torn

3a- [IL-“H.W9)l!¢°+lll.+t(ﬂ.tlOntﬂ- (3)

133
M OFFICIAL [HWY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, at the angle 9 to the normal the measuring instrument picks up the point
of an object whose abscissa is given by expression (3). The luminosity f(xz)

of the object at this point has the form
1([II.—t(ll.ig0)ltg 0+[Il.+t(ll.t¢0)llsv}. (6)

The argument of this function is random since the parameters g and 90 are ran-
dom. Accordingly. the value (4) is random even for a specific f (x) record. We
will simplify its argument. For this we use the notation 5 . tgot. n. tg 9.
Remote optical instruments usually have a very high angular resolution. Accord-
ingly, it can be assumed that I'll.” <1. The angles of inclination of the waves

are usually also small. that is I‘lmax<1° In this case t8 ‘I’ ' 5" (ll-gﬂn.
where n is the refractive index of water and the distribution of luminosity (’0)

assumes ‘the form

-1
I[A.=.+'-‘-;—H.:(z.)]. _ , (s)
where ' 3.
ll.
. A.—{ +—
[B - w(ater)] ‘ ' ~ (6)

and it is taken into account that ’2 - xllﬂ . Thus, with the mentioned assump-
tions the random character of parameter (5) is determined by the random form
of the function £00 and the random character of wave slope 5; (x) - d6 (x)/dx.

The total signal received by the optical instrument is a superposing of the

signals (5). that is . _ n-i .
— —— dz. '
no “I. h(z)I[A.s+ n 84(2)] (7)

where h(x) is the instruent function of the sensor of this instrument, which
is the projection of the directional diagram of the optical receiver 11(8)
onto the mean sea surface (Fig. l), and characterizes the weight with which dif-
ferent parts of the image are sensed by the instrument. The Y(_$,) parameter is
dependent on the random function 8(x).

If the waves are absent and the resolution of the instrument is infinitely
high. that is, the conditions {(20 - 0 and Mr) - 6(a) are satisfied, the in-
strument output signal is precisely equal to the value of the f(x) function
at the nadir point. that is. Yo - f(0). The difference between the Y(;) and
Y0 value is determined by the presence of waves and a finite resolution of the
measuring instrument. The mean square difference of the Y( 5) and Y0 values

is the dispersion of the measurement error '

c'(2)-[7—7T(t)- . MFG-277'“. mm‘. (a)

dependent on the random function of slopes 50:). In expression (8) averaging
is carried out for all possible cases of the random function f(x) with a con-
stant record of the random function f. (1:). Assuming the distribution of lumin-
osity f(x) to be stationary and ergodic and using expression (7), we obtain

13h
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONtY

370'-lx_(o) -0'0

Y.Y(:)-.jh(z)B[A.z +"n—-1II.§(2) Ids.

 

m- ' f] h(:.)h(z.)8 {A.(z.-=.)+ "—flmts.) -E(s.)l }dz. as“

where 62 is the dispersion of the f(x) function; MP) is its correlation func-
tion. Expressing the letter through the 80:) spatial spectrum of the f (1) pro-

cess. we find

 

. H (9.)
YoY(§)-I!h(8)3(k)sxp{lo[Ao8+-—n-ll.£(z)”414k.
‘r'm- If] h(s.ih(z.)S(k)up{I-[A.(z.-x.)+
+—"-’-‘n.(:(s)-e(.)) dads.“
.. - = l} (9”

Since the 5 (1:) function is randol. the dispersion of nessurenent error £2( Z)
is also rsndon. He will find the lean value of the dispersion of leasurenent
error (E 2 - (82(6 )> for the set of records of the wave process; here the syn-

bol <. ..> denotes such averaging. According to formula (8),
s'-o’-2(Y.7(§)>+.<Y‘(§)>. (10)

we will compute the values of the terns entering here. The distribution of the
probability of rises Z (x) of the sea surface is described by the normal law
[1. 5]. Therefore, the process 500 . § '(x) is also normal and its probabil-

ity density has the torn [S]

 

1 t'
v.6) ogk.f27rup( W -

Here 6:2 is the dispersion of the § (3:) function. the value klz - -B; " (O)/O" 2
- 4!; "(0), and B‘ (P) and R; (p) are the correlation and normalized cor-
relation functions of the Z (3:) process. In accordance with expression (9a) we

obtain a a
'7"- Tar we) -
(nun-j (z . (m

.- jsamwmd— (”223" (”Aka'k'] a.

 

where 110:) is the instrument function spectrus.

135
ms omcm. me my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the computation of the <Y2(£ )>value, in accordance with (9b), requires a know-
ledge of the tun-dimensional probability distribution w2(£1. 52) for the val-
ues E - 8(81) and £2 - 6 (:2). Since the t (1:) process is normal. this dis-
tribution has the fora [6]

1 _ §,’-2Rc(9)§ah+:"
”sat-5). Zm’m °xp{ 2o.‘[i-'t;’(ll)l }.

 

’12)

where 0'52 and R‘ (p) are the dispersion and normalized correlation function
of the 5 (3) process, andp- x2 - 21. Taking into account that 5(1) - C '(x).
we express the coefficients entering into fornula (12) through the statistical
characteristics of the initial wave process

13.0)) “-03'1‘:”(P) . 03"". (0) . (1 3)

Ru(o)--R:"(o)/k.'. oe-keoc.
Thus . . _
' <m‘n5-S ”‘mz'wneuwanm

Substituting here the expression (91)), we obtain
<v'(:>>-ﬂIS(k)h(s.)n(s.)x
n-i n—i "' , (llo)
xo.(-—u.k.s——u.k)e*w 42.41:.“
n n

where 02(v , v2) - (uij (v1 $1 + vzﬁzn > is the two-dimensional character-
istic funct of the random parameters 5 1 and i 2° For a nor-a1 distribution
we have the expression [6]

Mn. a.) -oxp [ - -;-(o.'v.'+2r..o.o.v.vm.'v.') ].

where 612 and 0'22 are the dispersions of the parameters 81 and 5'2, and r12
is their correlation coefficient. In our case 61 - 0'2 -6; and r12 - kg, (p ).
Accordingly, with expressions '(13) taken into account, we reduce expression (16)

to the form -
men- msane.)h<z.)oxp(-tk.'+n.’(z.-z.)1x -)
-. . (15

x (ﬁz—‘aJMY-HAJ (2.43.) } dc. £3. a».

We will assume that the instalment function for the sensor has a bell shape

h(:)--;T.sxp(-.%i.7 .. (16)

where is its characteristic radius, a is the amplification factor. Expres-
sion (1 ) is frequently used in order to approximate real instrument functions
of optical instruments [7]. The spectrun of function (16) MR) - a exp(-k2sz/
1‘ ). Expressions (11) and (15) assume the fort-

136
ms omau. us: our
(Li “DUMP“ d (‘))-¢'¢’P.. (l7)

 

 

"h“. o - Ag. 1. ‘

P-o“ S(lx)erp - +—l'b.' I" db.
' J [ n 2 ) l (18)
- 1 . _ I __-R__ (19)

p. “it“, gﬂkmvl: Nam)? an: :‘Hkmsldsdk.
r-ﬂo‘n“ (20)
ll

e(=)-l+8s”(:)/k.'. , (21)

and fornuls (10) can be written es 82 - 0'20 - 2a?1 + ssz). In the letter
expression the f 2 psrneter is dependent on the e coefficient. It is linin-
with e . P1/P2. end this linim has the value

s.‘-o'(1-P.'IP.) . (22)

Further conputstions by the derived fornulss are possible only when akin; spe-
cific the stetisticel characteristics of the observed object and the wove field.

we will assue that the distribution of luinosity f (3) subject to seasureoent
hes e bell-shaped spectru-

 

. .0.” r}?
“""":°‘P(“T '
where r is the charecteristic spstial scale of this distribution. formulas
(18) end (19) essune the for: 1 -1.
- t _
2. («+4.34 2:) . (23)
1 . 8 Ac. 1 d:
-_ —— +—— s' —. (2‘)
p, 2721!. “p{ 4 [r,'(1+cq(z)) 28.‘ }ii+cq(z)

where s - l‘lrt and c I-aL‘kz/rfz.

He will exeiine a case when inhomogeneities of the sea surface constitute a
sinusoidal wave with the wave nulber k0:

{'(s)-bsin(k.:+a), (25)

the phssecL of which is unifornly distributed in the interval [0. 231]. If- the
snplitude b is tendon, independent of the’phase 0‘ end with'a Rayleigh distribu-
tion. the C (2) function is stationary. ergodic end with s nonel distribution
[8]. Asst-in; thst ell these conditions ere sstisf , we find that the correl-
ation function of the ‘(x) process is B‘(p) - 6; cos (top), the value

klz - 1:02, and expression (21) east-es the for-

137
FOR omcw. USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Niki-oodles). (26)

He denote the wavelength (25) by A0, that is, to - Zn/ﬁo. and we introduce
the coefficient

awn-,0... (27)

showing the ratio of the characteristic scale of the function £00 to the wave-
length of the surface wave. In this case

i ' . A.‘ i 1‘ d1 (28)
p .. . - + _
. 272nm I”p{ [ i+cp(¢) 22‘ iOnx' hid-4(3) '

. 1
where ﬂit) - 1 - cos t. We will transfora the c parsneter in the following

way.

 

 

 

 

_ , n—i '
c (a (—n xW),
where the dinensionless paraneter

urn-£3
[3 - voter)! n r,

is deternined by the depth H" at which the observed object is situated. the
characteristic scale r; and the lean square wave height 02 . Taking into ac-
count that the refractive index n of water can be tonsidered equal to 0/3 [9].

   

we obtain c - 1/m3(1w)2. opt t
‘ Q
m u
n e
0‘
u
10
Q1
0 It
’ t ‘3”,

Pig. 2. Dependence of neasurenent error Fig. 3. Dependence of degree of opti-
on relative averaging scale with A0 - 1. sun averaging on characteristics of

w - l: 1)) - 0.1; 2) 0.2; 3) 0.5; lo) observed object and waves: 1) w - 0.2;
1.0. 2) 0.5; 3) 1.0; 6) 2.0; S) 5.0.

Fig. 6. Dependence of gain in neaeureaent ac-

curacy with optiaua averaging on characteris-
y tics of observed object and waves: 1) w - 0.2;
i 2) 0.5; 3) 1.0.

u

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2 shows an exaaple of the results of conputation of the error in weas-
uring the distribution of luninosity on the basis of the determined relation-
ships. It can be seen that the (80/0)2 value in the case of small 2 with an
increase in s and with the other paranetera reaaining constant decreases, at-
taining a niniaua with sons finite value a - 209:. Accordingly. the aeaaure-
aant error is ainiaua not with an infinitely narrow directional diagraa of the
optical detector. but with sons finite width. Such an increase in accuracy with
an increase in a - Rtlr is associated with the spatial filtering of the ilage
by the detector. An inc‘ease in s leads to an averaging of both the luainosity
distribution of the object f(x) and the observed wave pattern. In the case of
anall s an increase in 2 leads to an iaproveaent of the i-age. but with a con-
siderable increase in t the error increases due to the saoothing of iaage de-
tails with its great averaging. Ihis circuastance is evidently one of the
reasons for the well-known fact of an improve-ent in the inage of underwater
objects with an increase in observation height (to a definite level). here the
radiation detector plays the role of a filter restoring the iaage. In the

case of very great heights the iaage quality again decreases. The effect of

an iaproveaent in the image by an averaging detector is particularly conspic-
uous in the case of large a - rflA (the length of the surface wave is saall
in coaparison with the characterist c scale of the object).

It follows froe Pig. 3 that the optiaun averaging value is essentially depend-
ent on the characteristics of the observed object and waves. This averaging is
particularly great with large R.

It can be shown that with s - 0 (that is, for detectors with an infinitely nar-
row directional diagraa)

(2'). _ c (29)
o 9.. 2+9.

As the gain in neasuraaent accuracy in the case of option. averaging we have
2)) /(f_’_ I

u-( a «no O can .-1n (30)

It shows by how many tines the the square of the measurement error with use of
a detector with an optiaun width of the directional diagran is less than this
some para-eter with an infinitely narrow diagram. Figure b shows that this
gain increases with a decrease in the w paraneter, that is, with a decrease

in the aaplitude of the surface wave and the depth of the observed object and
an increase in the characteristic scale of this object.

Therefore, there is not always Justification for the striving to use apparatus
with aaxiaua spatial resolution for observing underwater features. The cited
results of computations asks it possible to deter-ins in what cases there is
assurance of a greater accuracy in aaaauring their luminosity distribution
when there is finite spatial averaging. to find the optimum value of this av-
eraging and to evaluate the accuracy gain occurring in this case.

139
IIII‘OUFICIAI.IINE(HVLY
1.

2.

3.

5.

6.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hulls-ea. Iu.-A. 3.. ”Influence of the Have-Covered Sea Surface on the Vis~
ibility of Underwater Ieetures," IZV. A10 SSSR: no (News of the USSR Acad-
eny of Sciences: Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), Vol 11. No 2. pp
199-206. 1975.

Levin, I. H. and Litvin, V. lh., "Image Transfer Through a Sinusoidal
Have." 12". All 8881!: no, Vol 16. No 5, pp ‘90-‘95, 1980.

Veber, V. 1... "Statistical Characteristics of Images Obtained During Obser-
vation Through an Uneven Interface Betveen Hedia with Different Refractive
Indices." 12V. VUZov: RADIOPIZIKA (News of Institutions of Higher Education:
Radiophysics). Vol 22, No 8. pp 989-1001. 1979.

Sondkhi. H. H.. "I-age Restoration: Aging of Spatially Invariant Distor-
tions,” OBRABOTKA IZOBWHBNIY PEI PWSWUI ISIFROVYRII WCNISLIm'NYnI
HASHIN (Inge Processing Using Digital Conputers), Moscow. Hir. pp 137-
152. 1973.

Krylov. Yu. M“ srm'mr HBTODY ISSLBDUIMNIYA I MSCHE‘I'A VE‘I'ROVYKH
VOLN (Spectral Hethods for Investigating and Computing Hind Haves). Len-
ingrad. Gidrooeteoisdat. 1966, 256 pages.

Levin. B. 3.. ”OMICRBSKIYB OSNOVY STATISTICHESKUY RADIOTEKHNIKI (Theor-
eticsl Principles of Statistical Radio Engineering). Book I. Hoscov,
Sovetskoye Radio, 1969. 752 pages.

Levahin, V. I... PROS‘IRANS‘IVENNAYA FIL'TRAISIYA V OPTICHESKIKR $151M"
PEMATSII (Spatial Filtering in Optical Direction-Finding Systeas). Hos-
cov, Sovetsluoye Radio, 1971. 200 pages.

Korn, 6.. MODELIROVANIYE SLUCUAYNYKB PRO'ISBSSOV NA ARALOGOVYKH I ANALOGU-
TSIPROVYKI mam (Modeling of Random Processes on Analog and Analog-
Digital Conputets). Hoscow. Mir, 1968. 315 pages.

Yerlov. 3.. OPTICHBSKAYA OMOGWIYA (Optical Oceanography). Moscow. Mir,
1970, 22‘ pages.

COPYRIGHT: Isdetel'stvo "Rauka". ”Izvestiys All 8881!. Fizika atnosfery i okesna"

1982

5303

(ISO:

1865/ 150

11:0
roe OFFICIAL vs: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we 535.37S:621.373
amour WM. 3! “Ill-HAVE name I! smut-mm aroma

Moscow “MAYA am in Russian Vol 9. No 2016). tab 82 (nannscript
received 27 liar 81) pp 229-234

[Article by V. H. lrgorodin. s. 3. Inner. G. G. Rocha-sew. V. D. liholsyev
and A. V. Pinegin]

[Text] A theoretical and experiaental investigation is

sede of the feasibility of wavefront reversal by four-wave
interaction in a anlinesr sadiu. For the case of
planar waves. theoretical relations are found for the re-
flectivity of e four-wave nixer as a function of the incre-
nent of gain. phase detuning and the puping say-etry par-
eter. In experiments with a ruby laser and quesiplanar
waves. a assim- reflectivity of 0.52 is obtained for a
nonlinear nirror. which agrees with the theoretical eatinste.
An experinental investigation is nsde of the quality of
wavefront reversal. and possibilities for improve-ant are
discussed.

Recently considerable attention has been given to the investigation of wave-
front reversal by stinulated Handelstn-Brillouin scattering lief. l] and
four-wave interactions in nedia with cubic nonlinearity (Ref. 2. 3]. as well
as in aadis that are active in stilulsted HandelstaI-Irillouin scattering
(Ref. 11]. Possible uses of this phenoaenon have been discussed in Ref.

6-6. Va have considered the feasibility of wavefront reversal based on cubic
linen nonlinearity. This effect can be used for We coapensstion of op-
tical nonlinearities in stimulated been scattering installations.

The process of scattering in the presence of two puping waves and two Stokes
radiation waves

3.1, - in + Em " Ihe“? Um!) "a“ 9"P (“m ’ V) + 51.! exp (“‘13")- (1)
7, - E" + E. - ‘l, exp ((09,!) [8,. exp (ik.,.r)+ 8,, exp (ilt,,~ m (2)
is described by the equation (Ref. 7]

[viva] — *5. - ck. (51.5.) 5L. (3)

lhl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Ilere g is the .plification parameter in stinulated linen scattering; u. i:
are frequency and wave vector.

Asa-lug 3.:- £1. ﬂ- {0. 0. k,}. for slowly varying s-plitudes we get free

(n-(s)
%" " '5' '0 E“ I, + I Egg?) Eu + ELIEEIEdVexP “6“”; (‘)
-‘5£'-- ---§- l0 5.. I'+I£ul’) 5.2+ Elahmucm- 1AM" (5’
Air—(lu— h“) f- 21:}. (6)

When the synchroni. condition is net. Air-0. and for identical pt-ping
wave .plitudes we have

%Ln+(5sl+_;'£at)3 (1)
%~-—-§—(£ﬂ+‘;—En); (a)
r'EaEL1r+IBLIP)“(’u+lu)’ (9)

Equations (7)-(9) coincide with those found in Ref. 8. In that paper it was
also shown that near the angle of synchronise (Pig. 1)

Orinoco: (n (09,)an (u,)o,) (10)

the threshold of stimulated Stokes radiation
in the cavity decreases by a factor of 1.5.
which is due to four-wave interaction.

 

Solving equations (A) and (S) with boundary
Fig. 1. Have vector triangle conditions

5.. (z-O)-E.. 5,,(1-0u0. (1 1)

at Akt-(ku),—-(k,_.),—2k,z‘nAla. in the approximation of given pulping fields.
we get

E.n==Aexp(1.z)+(Bo—AMNLJ); (I2)

"he“ 5.1"“IAHPW :)+a: (£.—A)exp0.:). (I3)
Ms-‘r—(Mil’hF-F—m): (14)

a- 2am; 9- (IL. — tum!“ + I"); (15)

“m" (In. 0" Van/r W: (16)

A-2./( 1- :' mun-Mm ). (m

The Stokes wave reflectivity and gain with forward Stokes wave propagation
will be defined by the expressions

1h2
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R-|§ﬂ%l'-ﬁlt%%%r'
x-lﬁr-Imﬂmﬁmr' "3’

In the cue of acct pheee Inching. At-t-o. end for identical intensitiee
of the min; bone (1“- 11.2.. 8-0)

R-l - ll-e: rm ’
I-(t- up I'm/(2+ I

_ a in rm) ‘
K |(2+ Vii—a- Bééuuﬂruzd ' ('9)

b

Fig. 2. Reflectivity R

K an function of rl for ~r-0
(e). end I no e function of
detuning 6 er l‘l- 0. 2 (1. 10 ).
06(2.10’R)end2(3. a) (b)

 

Pig. 3. Optical errengeaente for nee-
curing reflectivity of the Stokes 313- c

nel (a). inveetigeting reproduction of
uplitude dietribution (1:) end wavefront revereel (c) with four-wave

interaction (the broken linee elm the Stokee bee-e. end the eolid
lines show the min; bean)

1&3
Iron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 2 shows conductivity and gain as functions of PI for case £3-o. and
I as a function of phase datming 6- lolq, sin 0.66]? (A0- 0- so) at identical
puping be- intensities. An increase in the puping soy-stry par-star
8 fron 0 to 0.2 reduced It in the calculations by no nore than 52.

Thus as a result of four-wave interaction under conditions of phase synchroniu
one should observe conversion of an incident Stokes wave to a cuaplex-conjugate
wave with efficiency deternined by the reflectivity (18). (19). Let us note
that n nay be considerably greater than unity.

kperinental verification of the above argInasnts-waa done in the arrangenent
shown in Fig. 3. The dependence of K and s on the power of the puping beans
and on detuning A0- 0.- e of the angle of synchroni-a was studied in the ar-
range-ant shown in fig. 3a. The source of the input Stokes radiation was

s bensene Ranan laser puped by ruby laser light with pulse intensity of

~25 no. .itting the first Stokes comment of stilulated Ranan scattering.
The resultant bean 3-10 - in “later was focused by lens 1 (f; -0.5 I) into
cell with benzene 13 with length l- 5 n. The pulping beau (XI-0.6963 us)
were latched to the dineter of the input Stokes radiation bean (~3 -) by
focusing with lenses 3 and lo (f-l a).

Focusing was also used to achieve approxinate equality of the angular spectrm
of all beans (0' a 5010" red) since the Stokes radiation and puqing were
nultinods. The puning emission energy in one been reached ~0.6 J. pulping
asynetry 8 did not exceed 0.25. Photographic files 7 and 9 placed at the‘
focus of lenses 1 and 2 recorded the distribution of radiation in the far

zone for the incident and reflected Stokes beans. The energy of the Stokes
radiation passing through the cell was recorded by calorinater 10 and file 9.
The total energy in the incident and reflected bells was determined by inte-
grating the distributions recorded on file. The radiation of the pulping beans
was coupled into the cell at angles of O and r- 0 to the direction of the inci-
dent Stokes been. The angle was set by e 2T2 theodolite with accuracy no
worse than -l'.

The reproduction of nplitude distribution of the incident Stokes radiation

in the reflected bean was studied in an arrangenent analogous to that of Ref.
9. 10 (fig. 3b). A parallel base of Stokes radiation passed through trans-
parency ll nsde in the fern of an opaque letter K (letter size ~l u. charac-
teristic line site ~0.2 II). The inags 12 of the transparency was transferred
by lenses 1 and 2 to files 7 and 8. recording the incident and reflected Stokes
beans respectively.

wavefront reversal with phase nodulation of the incident Stokes been was stud-
ied by the arrengenent shown in Fig. 3c [Ref. 9. 10]. In this case. trans-
parency ll was placed in the canon focal plane of lenses 1 and 2 that forned
a telescope. The distribution of the incident and reflected Stokes radiation
in the far none was recorded by lenses 5 and 6. and by files 7 and 8. In

this arrange-ant. wavefront reversal should show up as rotation of the insge
of the transparency through 180‘ in the reflected been with respect to the
inage in the incident been.

1m.
roe omau. use on“
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 6. Experinantal values
of energy-density reflectivity
R. as a function of min-
total puping power P}. for

0.- 21'36.5'; solid line shows
the approximation by a linear
function plotted by the lethod
of least squares (a). The
experinental values of I.

as a function of o (b) at
PL-ZS (1) and 15 W (2). and
also the theoretical curve

for ”-0.6 in a scale of

1:6 (3)

Fig. lo shows the energy-density
reflectivity B. as a function

of the total pI-ping power
(PEN-PEIelf $.35" where fw-Eilr,
‘I-MM. 9(t) is the puping pulse
shape) for angle 0-21'36.$'.

and also as a function of the
angle 0. The quantity I. was
defined as the rstio of nastin-
energy densities in the reflected
and incident Stokes bans. The
figure also shows the theoretical
dependence of s. on 0 for con~
ditions close to experimental.
The mim- on the distribution
of [(0) is observed at o.-21°37'.

 

This value of Go agrees with cal-
culations by for-ula (10), but
differs sonewhat fro. the value
of o.- 21'2" found in Ref. 8. The total width of the min- A0- 18' corre-
sponds to the width of the angular pulping spectrun. The experinental width
of the narrow naximn in the dependence “(6) spproxinately coincides with
the theoretical value of uu-SOIO". The gain within the linits of error
does not differ fron unity. The-angular distribution of radiation in the
reflected bean is the sees as in the incident bean within leasurenent accuracy
(~202).

The case of amplitude nodulation is illustrated in Pig. Sa-c [photo not re-
produced]. showing patterns in the near tone for the incident Stokes been.
and for the been reflected fron nonlinear and conventional nirrors. It can
be seen that the pattern is quite clearly reproduced in the near zone with
reflection fron the nonlinear nirror; the image of the nodulating letter pro-
duced by the conventional mirror is blurred since the plane of the image does
not coincide with that of the fill in this case.

116
was omcuu. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 5d, e [photo not reproduced) show the patterns in the far none for inci-
dent and nonlinearly reflected beans with phase modulation. It can be seen
that the inage of the letter K is rotated through 180' relative to the image
in the incident bean.

These experilental results in general confirm the theoretical conclusions
about the feasibility of wavefront reversal of the Stokes-wave in the arrange-
nent described above. For the conditions of the experinent where 8:“ is
achieved «3- l'lIOJo). the theoretical reflectivity It: 21. which is four tines
the experinental value. This is due to deviation of the experinental condi-
tions fro. the ideal case of planar waves (mltimodal pumping).

Attainment of higher I, was precluded by the radiation strength of benzene.
The use of a nonlinear nedius with greater parameter of stimulated Roan
scattering gain. with high radiation strength or with snall difference between
the puping and Stokes radiation wavelengths (the latter leads to an increase
in the interaction length) will give 9.21. The use of a waveguide also in-
creases the interaction length [Ref. 1]. which should give an increase in R.

The results given above also denonstrate that there is a component in the re-
f lscted bean that is reversed with respect to the incident wavefront. The
fraction of energy of the been reflected fron the nonlinear nirror in the
angle that contains 841 of the energy of the incident be- fluctuates fro.
63 to 80%; therefore it can be seemed that the fraction of Stokes signal
energy contained in the reversed wave anounts to 75-951. The quality of rever-
sal can be evaluated by a quantity analogous to visibility in evaluating con-
trast of an interference pattern: n- (e-em)/(e+e.). where e and e.'are

the average exposures outside of an element of the transparency and within
its limits. In our experinents. this quantity decreased from n-0.8 in the
incident been to n- 0.2-0.3 in the reflected bean. Better coincidence of
general outlines in the far zone of the incident and reflected beans with
one another as conpared with the details of the transparency is an indication
of better reproduction of the low-frequency part of the spatial spectrum;
quality of reproduction of the high-frequency part is such poorer. This is
apparently due to the poor quality of the spatial spectru of puping radia-
tion. which precludes satisfaction of the condition of phase synchronisn for
the entire spectru- of the incident radiation. Actually. the angle that char-
acterizes diffraction by elements of the transparency that is used is about
15'. and the width of the naximun on the experinental curve for “(0) at a
level of 20: of the base is also equal to 15'.

REFERENCES
l. Zel'dovich. 3. 1a.. Popovichev. v. 1.. Ragul'skiy, V. V.. Fayzullov. P. 8..
PIS'IIA V ZHURNAL BKSPERD‘IBIH'AL'NOY I TBORHICIBSKOY FIZIKI. Vol 15, 1972.
p 160.

2. Stepanov. B. 1.. Ivaltin, Ye. V.. Rubanov, A. 5.. DOKIADY M9411 NM!!!
5883. Vol 196. 19719 P 567.

3. Bellwarth. R. IL. J. on. SOC. MEI!” Vol 67, 1977. p 1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

11.

ml OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Ranch. 0. 10.. Popovtchev. V. 1.. haul'skiy. V. V.. Payzullov. P. 8.,
PIS'M V 21mm mum'um I MICMOY PIZIII. V01 16. 1972.
p 617.

3011.”. “I. "0. “08.11.1111. Y“. 10. Shklyatlk. S. V” PIS.“ V m
NICE!” Yum. V01 ‘. 1978. p 160.

Ptltpctokiy. N. P.. Popovichev. V. 1.. lagul’uldy. V. V.. ”8'!“ V
231mm. WW“!!! I mmlcnm FIZIKI. V01 27. 1973. P 619.

Akbnnov. 8. A.. Khokhlov. R. V.. ”Problay neltneynoy optm" [Prom-s
of nonlinear Optics]. bio-cow. VINI‘I'I [All-Union Institute of Schnunc
and Technical Intrmuon]. 1966.

Vomit. 0. Ho Odtntoov. V. 1.. PIS'HA V 2111mm. MEMO! PIZIKI.
Vol 5. 1979. p 607.

Dolgopolov. Yu. V.. Manny. V. A.. loner. 8. 3.. Koch-um. G. 6..
Kultkov. 3. IL. Hurugov. V. H” Nikolaycv. V. 0.. Sukhu'cv. S. A..
zauum. mum'm I 13033110833110! PIZIII. Vol 76. 1979. p 908.

Sokolovakaya. A. 1.. Brekhankikh. G. A.. Kudryavtma. 1.. 1).. M
mu m SSSR. Vol 237. 1977. p 557.

Beopalav. V. 1.. 30:11:. A.‘ A.. Dyatlov. A. 1.. Kulngtna. 8. EL. mun.
V. 6.. PM. G. A” Shilov. A. A.. 2mm. ESPERIHBN‘I‘AL'NOY I
1mm PIZIKI. Vol 79. 1980. p 378.

comma: Izdatcl'atvo ”Radio 1 svyu'". "Knncovaya elektronika". 1982

6610

cs0:

1862/1325

1h?
m omcuu. us: ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 621.378.325+537.523.9+533.915
STRAIN-STAT! THEORY OF OPTICAL STRIATIWS

Hoscow IVAN'NVAYA mmm in Russian Vol 9. Ho 2016). Feb 82 (nanuscript
received 18 Mar 81) pp 276-281.

[Article by V. V. Breysv. L. A. Knizhnikova and A. P. Nastoyaahchiy. Institute
of Atomic Energy ineni I. V. lurchatov. Moscow]

[Text] An ex-ination is made of a steady-state theory

of the lasinar plasma coluan of a long laser spark. Modu-
lation solutions of the steady-state probl- are found and
their stability is studied. Based on approximate analysis
and numerical aodsling results. general conditions are fores-
lated for the existence of aetastable optical striations.
As a rule. the neat long-lived are states with naximn
possible saplitude of spatial teaperature oscillations.

A nuaerical solution of the probl- is found for the case
of a laser spark in air. when dust notes are present in
air. each of than say become a center of nucleation of a
striation; in this evant't’he configuration of the striations
will be chaotic.

1. Introduction

Let us assume that an extended please colt-n has been set up in a gas. For
the sake of simplicity we will assuna that the column has cylindrical ay-etry
and its length is such greater than its radius. Let us consider the dynamics
of behavior of the plans colon when it is exposed to intense laser eaisaion.
As was demonstrated in Ref. 1, in the case of weak ionisation of the gas

in a plasna coluln. a lengthwise hoaogeneous state of the optical discharge
because isposaible; the instability that arises leads to breakup of the plasna
coll-n into a chain of alternating "hot" and "cool" layers with considerably
differing degree of gas ionisation ("optical striations").

"hen the coefficient of absorption of laser radiation is exponentially depen-
dent on tesperature. the instability is explosive. i. e. formation of the

hot layers is a self-accelerating process [Rah 1). Therefore it is to be
expected that the develop-ant of an instability nay slow down only in the

case of nearly total ionization of the gas. when the absorption of light is
deter-inst! by Couloab collisions, and consequently the coefficient of absorption

11:8
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is a decreasing function of temperature. It is also obvious that the states
that arise should be distinguished by deep modulation of temperature, and
especially of ionization in the direction of laser be. propagation.

It is natural to raise the question of whether the resultant laminar structure
of the plasma colm is stable (and whether the optical striations that arise
are long-lived), and under what conditions. It is also clear that we are
dealing with a strongly nonlinear problem where approximate analytical methods
are ineffective. Therefore it becomes necessary to use numerical methods.
Instead of solving the unsteady problal. a steady-state approach is used below
that consists in finding steady-state solutions for a lmainar colmln and simul-
taneously studying their stability. In doing this. use is made of both ap-
proximate analytical methods based on model representations of the coefficient
of absorption and numerical modeling of optical striations. The combination

of these two approaches enables a more complete understanding of the conditions
of formation of optical striations. and also formulation of fairly general
considerations on stability of a laminar plasma colun in a laser radiation
field.

2. Physical Formulation of the Problem

There are several possible methods of producing a plane channel in a gas:
electric explosion of a conductor, optical breakdown in the gas (or explosion
of dust notes in a laser field with subsequent formation of a "halo" (Ref. 2]
of ionization around each of them) and so on. Let us discuss the second meth-
od. He will seems that the gas is illuinated sequentially by two laser
pulses: a short but intense "penetrating" pulse. and a pulse that is extended
in time (Fig. l).

w In experiments (see e. 3. Ref. b. 5), the laser pulse
frequently consists of a nain spike and an extended
tail in which a considerable part of the radiation energy
t is stored.
Fig. 1. laser pulse Let us recall that to set up a long laser spark in gas
shape one ordinarily uses weakly focused laser beans in which
the power density as a rule considerably exceeds the
threshold value for gas breakdown: w>wn. when these two conditions are met.
propagation of the ionization boundary takes place in the breakdown wave state
(Ref. 2]. which ensures formation of an extended plans coluan [Ref. 3].

The long laser pulse "catches up" with the ionization that arises after passage
of the breakdown wave (or with the chain of ionization foci from individual
dust notes Ref. 5]) in the plans colmn, and maintains this ionization for
the required time. In the case of a long laser spark it can be assumed that
the parameters of the laser be- in the direction of propagation remain un-
changed for distances that are large compared with the transverse dimensions
of the beam. This is in fact the physical definition of a "long spark."

It is useful to note that the laser emission power density needed for main-
taining ionization in the plasma column is usually several orders lower than

the threshold level for gas breakdown [Ref . 2).

1149
ms omcm us: on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us make some estimates. At gas pressures p~l atm. the temperatures of
electrons and ions in the breakdown plasma are equalized in tine rg~l ns.
Therefore with a sufficiently long laser pulse the electron temperature sepa-
ration can be considered insignificant. At the sue time. steady-state elec-
tron temperature separation usually necessitates high radiation power densi-
ties in the auxiliary pulse. Equalization of gas pressure across the plans
calm and cooling of the plasma by heat exchange with the ambient cool gas
take place in times T ~ro/s and tx~r‘/x respectively. where to is the radius
of the laser beam. s s the speed of sound and x is thermal diffusivity of

the plasma. For air at atmospheric pressure at temperature T~ 10 k8. assuming
s~l cm/s. x~lOO cmzls and ro~0.l cm. we will have 19-1 and 1x~100 us.
Thus even at relatively small laser bean radii ro>>100 um plasaa cooling
takes place relatively slowly. During time ~rx noticeable ionization is also
retained in the plasma; upon activation of the auxiliary laser pulse. the
state of ionization in the plans colun can be naintained for a considerable
length of time.

We will assume that gas pressure is equalized across the plasaa colun more
rapidly than heat exchange takes place with the ambient cool gas. In this
case. the equation of heat balance of the plasma column can be written as

T
er a or _ I
C'wu—og- 174-11.!!! Kim. (I)

where Cp is the specific heat of the gas at constant pressure. A is the coef-
ficient of theml conductivity. w is the laser elission power density.

uw- uwmo. 1‘) is the coefficient of absorption of laser emission. he being
the density of neutral particles. heat losses in the direction across the

7
plasma column are accounted for in (l) by model term r;’!ld7‘(r.. is the

diffusion radius). Such an approximation is completely acceptable. at least
for air [Ref. 2]. Model equation (1) is quite convenient for explaining the
physical peCuliarities of the problsn.

The coefficient of absorption of laser radiation in the heated gas as a rule
has a marina at some temperature T*. For air at atmospheric pressure and
neodymim laser radiation the curve of um(T) takes the fora shown on Fig. 2
[Ref. 2]. In principle. there are two possible steady states+ of a plasma
column a ”high-temperature" state with T-T8>T*. and a "low-temperature"
state with T-To<1‘*. The first state is realized with complete ionization
of the gas. and as implied by the results of Ref. 1, it will remain homogeneou
in the direction of laser beam propagation. Otherwise we are dealing with
the low-temperature regime where the degree of ionization of the gas in the
colun is less than unity; in this event the homogeneous state of the plasma
column is impossible. The resultant stratification of the plasma colon is

 

1’In a strict sense. the term "steady-state" applies only to the case
of a plane coluln bounded by material walls with infinite specific heat.
For a plane filament in gas it would be more correct to use the tern "quasi-
steady state."

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

outwardly sinilar to the usual striations in
a positive glow-discharge column. although the

ﬁreﬁ" nature of the instability and the conditions
0,! of arisel of the striations are different.
‘1‘ 3. Steady-State Theory of Optical Striations
Steady-state temperature distribution in a leni-
1! nar plasma colm must satisfy the equation
A (1‘
' ,. w*r+’m=°- (2)
Fig. 2. Coefficient of where the function of the heat source is
absorption of laser radi- r
ation with wavelength of _,
1.06 um in air at atmoe- Fm-l‘om""0 5W (3)
pheric pressure as a func-
tion of te-perature The second term in (3) accounts for heat losses

from the plasma calm to the ambient gas with
temperature taken to he zero for the sake of simplicity. Thus as a result
our assumptions give us a unidimensional model that in addition retains the
main peculiarities of the problem. It is appropriate to recall thataunidinen-
sionsl approximation has been used frequently in the literature: in problems
of plasma "combustion" in a laser radiation field [Ref. 2]. when considering
striations in a positive coluIn (Ref. 6]. in studies of a thernonuclear com-
bustion wave in a bounded plasna (Ref. 7] and elsewhere.

The heat conduction x of an ionized gas is ordinarily a nonlinear function
of temperature. and therefore the coefficient A cannot be brought outside of
the differential sign. In addition to this. by using the elementary substi-

r
tution of variables 0-5'147‘ equation (2) can lead to the equation for the

I
potential of heat flux 9:

d’0/dx'+F (0)-0.

which coincides in form with (2) when X- 1. Consequently, accounting for

the dependence MT) does not introduce anything fundamentally new. Therefore
we will use for sinplicity equation (2) with constant thernal conductivity:

1% +F(T)-=0. (4)
In recording the boundary conditions, we use the cyclic for:

(%).-.’(‘3‘).-L'°' (5)

where x- 0 and x-L denote points at which the temperature reaches the ainim-
(1‘1) and naxilmn (1'2) values.

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FFNJAI.USE|DNLY

We can readily see that the problem of
F ’ finding the temperature field becomes
LUA‘? completely unambiguous only after assign-
: a a a a a meat of space period 2L. However. since
the quantity L itself is also to be de-
V , termined. the problem is not closed;
there are different solutions that are
@7 E distinguished by their space period.
. b Using the phase plane method. let us
map the family of integral curves (Pig.

Pig. 3. Family of integral curves 3) of the equation
of equation (6)

dq/dTu—F (7)/(M). . (6)
where q - dT/dx.

The nature of behavior of the curves on Fig. 3 depends on the form of function
P(T). The points of intersection of curve F(T) with the axis of abscissas

To, 15.... correspond to spat ally homogeneous solutions. States with r-‘t.
(Pig. 3a) and T-‘Tﬂ (Fig. 3b) are unstable with respect to small perturba-
tions.

As we can see from Fig. 3. there is a set of periodic solutions of equation

(4) that satisfy boundary conditions (5), including closed curves that enclose
two singular points (two centers, see Fig. 3a). Thus the question of what
states of the laminar column should be observed in an experiment remains open.
In this connection it is suggested that the steady-state theory be supplemented
by a principle of solution sorting based on studying the stability of laminar

structures .

Tho possibilities can be imagined. 1. Among the periodic solutions that have
been found there are those that correspond to the stable (or metastable) state
of the system. In this case, one should observe stationary striations with
parameters that are constant or slowly varying in time. 2. In the second
case. where there are no stable states. the parameters of the laminar column

will apparently be inconstant in tine.

Let us now turn to investigation of the stability of the laminar column. As-
suming that T; (or 72) is given. we find the space-periodic solution T(x+-2L)-
T(x) from (6), (5). Temperature perturbation can be represented as

1"(x. 0-T'(x) exp (Pt). (7)

After substituting (7) in the equation of unsteady heat conduction (1). we
will have (coefficients Cp and A are taken as constants for the sake of sim-

plicity)

TPoint 13 may correspond for example to the state of the plasma pertain-
ing to the second maximum of the function Wn'“m(r) [Ref. 2].

152
I13R OFFICJAI.IJSEZ(M¢LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d’1"/dx‘+ lE—V (x)l T’-0. (3)

where B- -l‘/x and V(x)--A'1dF/dT. lquetion (8) coincides in fern with the
Schrodinger equation for a particle in a periodic field V(X+ZL) -V(x). the
quantity 1' being proportional to the energy of a particle with the opposite
sign. 3-0 corresponds to the boundary of unstable states.

According to bloch's theoren lief. 8] the solution of equation (8) with peri-
odic potential can be represented in the for.

rim-um e‘”. (9)

where k is the wave vector (quasi-noeentun) of the particle. uk(x) is a peri-
odic function. uk(x+2L)-uk(x). The energy spectra of the particle in a
periodic field consists of s sequence of forbidden and allowed energy bands
("zones"). k-O corresponds to the lower edge of the energy band.

The boundary conditions for function (9) would. generally speaking. have to
be assigned on the ends of the plasma colt-n; unfortunately. this considerably
conplicates solution of the probln. Instead of this. we use cyclic boundary
conditions (Born-“nan conditions (Ref. 8]). It is assumed that the plasla
coluan consists of a large m-ber (N>>l) of sequentially arranged identical
striations. and the influence of perturbations caused by the end striations
extends no further than the nearest neighbors. In virtue of the identical
conditions on both ends of the calm T'(x+2m.) -T'(x) or with consideration
of (9). exp (ZikNL) -l.whence In all.“ (n is an integer). i. s. when N»!
there is a discrete set of closely spaced values of k.

Then in the periodic potential the functions uk(x) should have a certain
parity.

0f greatest interest from the standpoint of instability is the ground state
(with least energy). since the anxious increnent corresponds to this state.
The wave function of the ground state is even Ref. 9]. and hence

(daddx).-.-(dUde).-L-0- (10)
It should be required in turn for odd functions that (In)...- (mun-0.

Thus the stability problem reduces to finding the eigenvalues of equation

(8) with boundary conditions (10). In the general case. such a problae can
be solved nuaerically. At the s-e tine. some general remarks can be made
about the stability of a luinar plasna colt-In. Let us seems that function
P(T) near the point of stable'eq'uilibriun To is linear. i. e. P(T) -a(T-T.).
a>0. Function V(x) in this case is a potential well with constant depth
V.-a/A. Hith accuracy to ~(m.)" for the lower state we have 3-4/1, 1. e.
the fundmental node will increase in accordance with the law

1' =71“) exp (at/0,). (11)

153
~ roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

higher nodes with no rise at a slower rate. As we can plainly see. result
(11) coincides with the conclusions of the linear theory of instability for
a spatially homogeneous state.

Exponential behavior (11) of rising perturbations holds until the teaperature
oscillations go beyond the limits of the linear section of F(‘l‘). with a fur-
ther increase in percentage modulation. the pace of the instability slows

if dzlldT3<0, and speeds up otherwise. Actually. in the former case there
will be sections of less depth ("hille") that arise in the potnetial well.
increasing the energy level; contrariwise. when d’YIdT’>0. "valleys" appear
that lower the energy of the particle. ' '

As the plasna is heated by laser eaission. NT) usually (see Fig. 3) is s
non-onotonic function of tenperature; therefore beginning at some value of

T. dP/d'r<0. and consequently the function V0!) is a sequence of wells of
finite length separated by hills with v> 0. The width of the hills increases
with increasing amplitude of the oscillations. which reduces the incrslents.
It nay turn out that at a sufficiently high percentage modulation the incre-
aents of instability become so snsll that the resultant periodic structure
will be long-lived (metastable). The influence of two-diaensional effects
associted with the finite radius of the plasaa colm ensures additional sta-
bility of the luinar colmn (see below).

lo. Approxf .ute Nodal and Conditions of Arisal of Stable Optical Striations
It is convenient to study the typical peculiarities of the problem on the

basis of simplified nodele. Let us 8380" that the function of the heat source
can be represented by a broken curve (Fig. b), i. a.

rm=_u:(r—r'.). rs<r<A.. (12)
Fm-MﬂT—To). A.<T<Aa. <13)
Fm= —u:(T—T;). AI<T<°°- (11.)

The meaning of symbols ko, k1. k2 is clear
from Fig. l».

 

r' —----

The solution of equations (6) with consider-
l’ig. Io. Model function HT) stion of boundary conditions (5) in the corre-
sponding regions takes the fora

ran-Hr. - Them”. (‘5)
T-T.+B. sin h,(x——x.). (16)
T=T;+(r.—r;)cnu,(x—L). (17)

Coordinate x. asrks the point where the temperature assumes its equilibrium
value To. Fron the condition of continuity of temperature and its derivative
at points (XI-n. T-A1) and (x-xz, 'r-Az) we get six conditions for three
unknown amplitudes and four coordinates so. an. x; and 1.:

Mb ban-Hz. ct: wean-0. (13)

15h
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

m. k.(x,— L) + manna—zone. (19)
F, sin hm—x.)+F,sln hon—X.) 90. (20)
(r. —r;)'—(A. — 1‘3)’+h?ho"[8?—(Au- r.)’l -o. (21)
(7‘. - TS)’ — (A: — Tb’ka?’ [8? -(A.— 1'.)’] -o, (22)
where

B,-(A,—1'.)Iun hon—x.» (23)

in (20) 1'; and F; are the values of the corresponding function at points A“
A2. 1. 0. ’1.2IP(A1.3).

As pointed out above. the stability of the periodic solutions increases if
the tenperatnre oscillations go beyond the limits of interval (A1. A2). An
exemplary graph of the periodic potential
V“, - for this case is shown on Pig. 5. (The
corresponding solid-state nodal is called
the Kronig-Penny nodal Inf. 8]). Pron
equations (8). (10). by way of addition
to systes (18)-(23) we get two nore con-
ditions

13m and-mg It;(x‘—x;)-0. (2a)
kgthk;(x.—L)+k;tg k;(x,—x;)-0. (25)

where x* is the point where the wave function? is naxim. (In getting so-
lutions it is convenient to use the properties of sy—etry of the initial
equations with respect to the operation of inversion.)

 

Pig. 5. Periodic potential for
source function of Fig. 4

The values of ht. Inf and k! in (26) and (25) are related to the energy of
the level 3| by the expressions

*2: '*$.:-En~ W'kHEu . (26)

Let us take note of one inortsnt circunstance. In the equation for tempera-
ture the influence of two-dimensional effects was accounted for by the nodal
tern lT/r”. vhereas this is insufficient for analysis of the instability

of the resultant solutions. In fact. when studying stability it would be
more correct to start fron the very beginning with the two-dinensional forau-
lation of the problu having cylindrical sy-atry:

354— ﬁ—p—+ [£— V*(x.p)1r'-0. (27)
where w-wum/a'r u the two-dinensionel potential.

Boundary conditions (10) must be supplanted by the conditions

 

tUsing quantum-mechanical analogy. for the sake of convenience we will
call the eigenfunctions "wave functions". and the corresponding eigenvalue
1! will be, called the "particle energy."

155
roe omau. us: ONLY
FOI OFFICIAI. USI-Z ONLY

(41%)”. - (To... .,, -0. (28)

Substituting the unknown solution in for:-

T’(X. P)=u (I) R (P) (29)

in (27). we can reduce the problen to the one-dinensional case. where B. will
be replaced by the difference E—E‘, where E ,>0 is the energy of transverse
notion of the particle. which does not necessarily coincide with r'z. In
fact. in the general case. V‘"(p) is negative only in region r1<p r2. where
r; and r2 lure the coordinates at which the telperature takes the values A;
and A, respectively; over the renaining range of p we have V"(o) >0-

Thus the condition of stability within the frueworlt of the one-dinensional
nodel adopted above takes the for-

E‘EII+A£1>O(ABA=EA'-r;,)‘ (30)

It is convenient to solve system of equations (lB)-(25) in the following
order. By assigning sane value of T1. we find T; and 31 fron equations (21).
(22). and then we find hug-x0). k1(Xz-xo). hoxl and kz(lz-L) in sequence
from (23). (20). (18) and (19). This gives the distribution T-T(x). We
get the values of x” and 3| fron equations (21.). (25) together with condition
(26). (The appropriate calculations can be done without using a computer.)
The question of stability of the resultant periodic solution can be answered.
strictly speaking. only if the temperature distribution is given along the
radius of the plasna coluan.

Consider a sinple example. Assming ha -k1 a k and F; .171, we verify that

NT) in this case is an odd function of difference (T-To). At 3. -0 from
equations (18)-(20) and (24). (25) we get x1+x2- 2x..l. and thkox, --thkx
(xz-L). The latter equality is satisfied only at the linit 11*“. xz-L-v m».
while the distance between points x; and x: renains finite. Fran (21), (22)
we also find ‘1'; - T5 and T2 ITB‘. Thus the tsuperature profile T-T(x) consists
of a finite section 2:: - x; on which '1' changes in accordance with (16) free

A, to A2. and of rather extensive "tails." with small changes in the gran-
eters of the plassa coluIn. including for example when 3| #0. the space period
beconea finite.

The nature of the resultant solutions becones clear if we refer to the nechan-
ical analog (see Fig. lc of Ref. 1). Actually. since the potential energy

I! of a "particle" and its derivative disappear at points T1 and T2. the parti-
cle will spend a long tine in the process of oscillations near points T1. T2
(wide soliton [Ref. 12]). In view of the considerable spatial separation
between two neighboring solitons. interaction between then practically disap-
pears; as a consequence. the periodic nature of the laninar con-n will ob-
viously be destroyed in this case.

The given ear-pie is notable in the respect that the stability boundary is
attained even in the one-dimensional approximation. 1. e. without considering

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corrections A8. for the energy of transverse notion of the particle. This
conclusion is derived on the basis of the simplest sodel of the problen.
Together with this. physical argtnents of a more general nature can be given
to support the conclusion. In the case of deep nodulation of tenperature.
when 1'; is appreciably greater than the tenperature at which P(1‘) is maxi-u.
potential function V(x) within the linits of one period will consist of two
separate wells. when there is a considerable distance between walls1 the
overlap of wave functions. and hence the splitting of energy lev ls will be
seen Ref. 9]. Using the Barenblat-Zel'dovich nethod (Ref. 10] we can verify
that the ground state has energy 8. =0. As the wells get closer together.

i. e. as the space period decreases. the energy level splits. one of the half»
levels shifting into region “<0. generating an instability. At the sane
time. when a striation is very long the splitting will be sinor. and conse-
quently the instability will be stabilized. for example through a correction
(35.4.0, Thus the stability of a laminar plasna colmn can be ensured only
with deep nodulation of the tenperature and with a long striation.

In Ref. 11. self-similar solutions of equation (1) for a heat source of type
F (nu-q.” were considered. It can be concluded fro. the argments given
above that stable steady-state structures for a sonotonic source function
cannot arise even if the equilibrium steady state exists. e. g. for a function
of the for: r-q.(r-r.)3. Actually. when qg>0 and B>0. the potential func-
tion V(x)-—Bq.T(x)‘-l will be negative everywhere. and consequently the corre-
sponding state will be unstable since there is always a bound state of the
particle in a one-dimensional well [Ref. 9].

S. Nuarical Modeling of Optical Striationa

To find the steady-state tesperature field in optical striations. we will
start with a one-dinenaional nodel in which heat exchange of the plasua colt-n
with the snbient gas is taken into consideration as above by the nodal tern
AT/r; . in connection with the fact that there is actually a set of periodic
soluttons of the problem that differ in percentage nodulation and space period.
we will use a principle of solution sorting that is based on studying the
stability of the resultant laminar colon. If the optical striations are
formed as a result of instability of an initially homogeneous plasna colum-
the consequent final steady state can be found fro. the condition that the
nonlinear increment is equal to zero. It nay turn out that even with the
deepest tenperature nodulation the increnent does not vanish; apparently in
this case the striations should be irregular. and the state of the lasinar

coluan will be inconstant in tine.

 

tAs a rule. the distance between wells that belong to adjacent striations
is even greater.

t‘l‘he nethod of Ref. 10 is as follows. Differentiating equation (6) with
respect to x. we get an equation for function p-dT/dx that coincides with
(8) at 2' -0. -Since function 1: does not have nodes within the limits of a
well. we can conclude from this that the state with El -0 is the ground state.

157
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our m-ericsl analysis will be based on two equations: an equation that de-
scribes the temperature distribution lengtinaiae of the colt-n.

and an equation for eigenfunctions of perturbation of temperature 1"(x):

$1."- +18. - Van T' -°= (174—).-. ' (45%“ (32’

It is advisable to limit ourselves to solution of equations (31). (32) within
the limits of one half-period, using cyclic boundary conditions and properties
of synetry of the equations relative to the operation of inversion.

If E-E"+A£‘<0. the state of the system is unstable. When 2-0. the insta-
bility stops growing.

Let us present the algoritlu used in solving the formulated problem. The
initial equations are written as a system of first-order equations:

-g—-1|. 1%”: —F(T)'. (33)
1%”. %-(V—E.)T'. (34)

The Cauchy problem is formulated with initial conditions
m.-.=r,. (n).-.=o; (mm-o. (v).-.=o. (35)

For selected values of '1'; and 2 as a result of numerical integration of
initial system of equations (33 , (3b) we find the point x-L>0 at which
the condition n-O is satisfied. Sorting through the values of parameter

Bl. we attempt to simultaneously satisfy the condition v-O at this point

(we must also be careful that function '1" does not have nodes in the interval
0<x<L). In this way. the values of 1'2. 1. and El are found as a function
of percentage modulation of 1'1. The stability boundary is found from the
condition E-E"+AE‘-0. (In connection with the fact that when T3>T*. where
T* is the root of equation (dF/dT);..;. -0, the quantity [8.] decreases rapidly
with increasing 1'2. the results in some cases are not very sensitive to the
method of estimating A5“)

Host experiments on observation of long laser sparks have been done in
atmospheric air (under laboratory conditions [Ref. 3. S] or in the open air
[Ref. 4]). Therefore it is of interest to calculate the structure of the
plasma colt-n of a laser spark in air. To do this, we use calculations of
the coefficient of absorption based on the Biberman-Norman formula (the cor-
responding graph of pact) can be found for example in Ref. 2).

An example of numerical calculation for air at pressure p-l atm is shown
on Fig. 6. The results correspond to neodymium laser emission power of l m

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(or carbon dioxide laser power of
about 10 RH). Hith increasing modu-
lation maplitude there is an increase
in the space period of the striations
and a reduction in the increment of
instability. Host long-lived are
states with very deep modulation.
where the temperature oscillates
lengtbise of the plans 0011.”! be-
tween values of T; I I. and T; I 16 It!
(degree of ionization varies from
~10" to ~l). Visually one shOuld ob-
Fig. 6. Temperature nodulation along serve brightly luainescing layers

plasma coluln of small dimensions separated by cool

intermediate layers of considerable

length. This pattern nay be mixed in part by an "ionization halo" arising
next to each hot layer [Ref. 2].

    

” “If”

An estinate of the correction to level energy 3 that accounts for two-dinen-
sional affects shows that the resultant solution with deep modulation may

be stable (or metastable). Calculations have shown that additional stability
(or destabilization) of optical striations may result from small perturbations
such as transport of the energy of self-radiation in the plasma. finite diver-
gence of the laser beam. change in power of the laser pulse with time and

the like. For exuple. laser illuaination of the plasma column with power
that decreases in tins and deldT<0 gives rise to additional stabilisation

' of optical striations.

Atmospheric sir always contains dust notes that are destroyed when exposed

to laser radiation. After the dust notes are broken down in dense vapor

(Ref. 13] each of then becomes a focus of ionization. Further evolution of
the plasma cloud will depend on the initial size of a particle. its coupo-
sition and the power density of laser irradiation. The largest notes may
become a center of nucleation of striations. Naturally. the configuration

of the striations will be chaotic. The remarks made above about the stability
of striations apply in equal sensors to these conditions since the interaction
between neighboring striations is insignificant in the most interesting case
of soliton-lilee solutions. (91th high concentration of dust notes in air.
overlapping of plans foci fron individual notes may make itself felt. which
has been experimentally observed [let 5].) -

In conclusion let us note that the feasibility of comparing the nusrical
results with experimental data rests finally on the reliability of the cross
sections used in the calculations (including coefficients of absorption of
laser emission and so on). This applies primarily to conclusions about the
lifetime of the striations that are formed. i. e. the question about whether
the observed striations under given specific conditions will be regular
(whether they will be like the standing striations in the positive 001”
of a glow discharge [Rah 6]). or whether the instability gives rise to hot
- layers that are chaotically configured along the laser spark and that have
parameters fluctuating in time. At the same time. the very existence of

159
ms omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

optical striations scene from fairly general physical considerations. and
therefore it is to be hoped that we will soon have experimental observations
of their formation.

REFERENCES
1. Nastoyashchiy. A. 1’.. KVANTOVAYA 2mm. Vol 8. 1981. p 220.

2. layzer. Yu. P.. “Laurnaya iskra i rasprostraneniye razrysdov" [Laser
Spark and Discharge Propagation]. Moscow. Nauka. 1976.

3. Basov. N. 6.. Boyko. V. A.. Krokhin. A. 11.. Skliakov. G. V.. WY

6. Psrfenov. V. A.. Pakhonov. 1.. Ye., Petrun'kin. V. Yu.. Podlevskiy. V. A..
918'!“ V 2W MICK!” FIZIKI. Vol 2. 1976. p 731; Vol 6. 1978.
p 1.60.

5. Zakharchenko. s. V.. Sintyurin. G. A., Skripkin. A. 11.. PIS'MA V ZHURNAL
MICHESKOY FIZIKI. Vol 6. 1980. P 1065.

6. Nedospesov. A. V.. Khait. V. 0.. "Kolebaniya i neustoychivosti
nizkotenperaturnoy plamy" [Fluctuations and Instabilities of Low-Ten-
persture Plasma]. lbscov. lsuks. 1979.

7. Rastoyashchiy. A. P.. Shevchenko. L. P.. AWAYA MONA. Vol 32. 1972.
p 451.

8. Peierls. 8.. "Kvantovaya teoriys tverdykh tel" [Quanta Theory of Solids],
Moscow. IL. 1956 [English version. Oxford, 1955].

9. Landau. 1.. 1)., Lifshits, Ye. 11., "Kvantovsye nekhenika" [Quantum Mechanics].
Moscow. Pimtgiz. 1963.

10. Barenblst. G. 1.. Zel'dovich. Ya. 3.. ZHURRAL mncuumor HATEIlA‘l'IKI I
WIKI. V01 21. 1957. p 856.

ll. Kurdymov. s. P.. Preprint No 29. Institute of Applied Mathematics. 1979.

12. stontsev. B. V., "Rollektivnyye yavleniys v plane" [Collective Phenonena
in Plasma]. Moscow. Nsuka. 1976.

13. Bunkin. F. V.. Sevrsnskiy. V. V.. ZHURNAL EKSPERIHBNTAL'NOY I TBORBTICHBSKOY
FIZIKI. V01 65. 1973. p 21.

COPYRIGHT: I Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovays elektronika". 1982

6610
C90: 1862/133

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

000 535.375

HARM MEAL TERRY FOR RADIATIOR HIT}! SPATIALLY IMOGBIEOUS DISTRI-
BUTIO!‘ 0? AVERAGE INTENSITY

Moscow KVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 9. No 3(117). Her 82 (manuscript
received 28 May 81) pp 568-553

[Article by I. H. Bel'dyugin and I. c. Zubarev. Physics Institute imeni P. N.
bebedev. USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow]

[Text] Based on a spectral method. an attempt is made at

a unified approach to description of the various modifications
of wavefront reversal with induced scattering: in a light
guide. with lens focusing of spatially inhomogeneous and
single-mode radiation. It is shown that this necessitates
consideration of a certain correlation between spatial spec-
tral components and decomposition of the pulping field.
Approximate solutions are found for the scattered field

in the above-eentioned cases.

Principles of the process of wavefront reversal of radiation by stimulated
Handelstam-Brillouin scattering have now been fairly well covered both experi-
mentally [Ref. 1-H and theoretically [Ref. 5-10]. The result of this research
has been formulation of the idea of existence of three modes of observation
of wavefront reversal: in a waveguide [Ref. 1-3]. and with focusing of multi-
mode [Ref. 2, lo] and single-mode hens in a medium. This division of the
effect of wavefront reversal by stimulated handelstu-Brillouin scattering
into three sub—effects is dictated chiefly by the fact that in qualitative
description of the phenomenon. each of the three modifications of wavefront
reversal is described on the basis of its own theoretical concepts unrelated
to the others.

For ex-ple. wavefront reversal i’ a waveguide is described on the basis of
a spectral approach. and use of the fact that the scattering media for the
Stokes wave is an amplitude volmetric hologr- that is recorded as a result
of the laser been setting up spatially inhomogeneous negative absorption in
the medium on the Stokes frequency (Ref. 5, 6. 10]. This enables one to use
volumetric hologram methods to get the pattern of formation of the scattered
field correlated with pulping.

In describing wavefront reversal of focused multimode beams. a predetermined
form is assigned to the scattered field correlated with pulping (based on

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

certain reasonable assuptions). and then the increnent of amplification of
such a field is calculated and the details of its forn are refined [Ref. 7. 8].
In this approach. the form of the field correlated with pulping, and thus

the judpents on the nature of the process of its amplification are to acne
extent arbitrary.

Wavefront reversal of focused single-node beans is described on the basis

of concepts of constriction of the active waveguide in the region of focusing.
and strong discrilination of the nodes: of this waveguide as compared with

the node corresponding to the field of the focused bean [Bet 9].

Each of these theoretical approaches, while satisfactorily describing its

own nodification of wavefront reversal. does not permit description of the
others. At the sale tine. free the experimental viewpoint these versions

of wavefront reversal are not fundamentally different. and there is the possi-
bility that by varying experimental conditions we could achieve continuous
transition free one of the methods of wavefront reversal to the others. This
shows that wavefront reversal by stimulated Handelstm-Brillouin scattering

is conditioned by physical causes that are cos-Ion to all three methods. and
that the need for dividing the effect into sub-effects is due to inadequacy
of the theoretical description of the process.

In this connection. it is of interest to describe wavefront reversal by stimu-
lated Handelstas-Brillouin scattering with consideration of the various methods
of realization fron a unified standpoint. In this paper. we solve the problem
by using a spectral approach.

In the spectral approach to description of wavefront reversal by stimulated
Mandelstan-Brillouin scattering. the slow nplitudes of the pulping field
e" and the scattered Stokes field ec are represented (e. g. see Ref. 15. 10]
as a sun of planar waves:

N—l N_,
‘c- E a,.(z)cxp(ik,‘.r): e..= 3 A..exp(ik:r).

Here it is assuned that the scattering medium is concentrated in the region
occupied by the half-space z>0;

kﬁ. a — k2, - 2nn,/D: lei, -= — k2, = 2nn,/D.

where D is the transverse dimension of the region in which the problen~is
being_considered; “x' are integers that satisfy conditions “x"' 2‘11},
N- [1N2], and that take on all available values inside the indicate inter-
vals.

Under these conditions. the equations for the anplitudes of plane waves of
the scattered field take the form

3.3. ‘ ”\T" ”T" ° (1
d: - 7 Id a. z AnAm+p—u 0Xp(l.Akm:nl)- (I)
I-0 n-O

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where
M23» .. (mm Wig—ms) (ns— p.) + (n. - m.) (n. - pm:
In is the wave number of the pumping field.

In describing wavefront reversal in a waveguide, it is assured that the slow

amplitude of lumping e,.(n. 2) at the input to the waveguide. i. e. at 2-0,
is a steady-state random process. so that

(c. (n + t. 0) e: (n. 0)) = K (1).

where the angle brackets denote averaging over the set of realizations. and
the correlation function K(t) corresponds to the angle of divergence 9 of

the pulping laser mission. Satisfaction of this condition ensures statistic-
a11v uniform illuaination of the waveguide volune by the pumping radiation,

w -.-ch in terms of spectral analysis means satisfaction of the relations

”-1 , u-n ,
III, B 2 AnAn+m' ‘3 [.60. n’. I“ - 2 An‘“
“-0 II.

(6., n' is the Kronecker delta). that are the nathenatical reflection of sta-
tistical independence of amplitudes of the planar pumping waves.

As shown in Ref. 6. in the case of statistically uniform illulination of the
waveguide value and satisfaction of conditions (m-lgz, gl.llz0‘<l the only
terns that may rennin in the right-hand nenber of equation (1) are those for
which Akﬂ‘I-O as a consequence of n,“ "x.)' or nx.y"Px,y- The resultant
equations satisfactorily describe wavefront reversal in the waveguide dis-

cussed in Ref. 5. 6. but they cannot be used to study wavefront reversal of
focused hens.

In this connection. let us consider the problem of using equations (1) to de-

scribe wavefront reversal of fields with inhomogeneous spatial distribution
of average intensity.

In nost cases that are of interest for applications. a puping field with
spatially inhomogeneous distribution of intensity in plane 2-0 can be repre-

sented as a steady-state randon process with correlation function K(r) nodu-
lated by a regular function that varies slowly with respect to n. Here

(e,.(r“0)¢;(r..0)) —f(rl)K(0). where [(n) is the square of the modulus of the
regular function.

In terns of the spectral approach under these conditions we have the relations

N—l .
I5" “ 2: Al‘ﬂ+u' =Iupu':
III-0

.__ Kl0) 0/2 28 , .
p..- -— m.- if" m. y) exp {I -D—(m.x + maﬁa“

163

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SF. ONLY

This implies that 90- l. and also that p" - 6., .' at [(fllncoml. i. e. in
the case of statistically uniform lighting of a region with transverse dimen-
sion D.

For the sake of definiteness we will assume that [(rL) is even and is a mono-
tonically decreasing function with increasing In! . It is just such a situa-
tion that is realized in focusing of nultimode beams. Under these conditions.
the spectral components of o. are real. Moreover. since the envelope of Kr...)
is a slowly changing function. for the range of values of index n: n§+m§<m
where the quantity 9. is concentrated, relation (MIM'l-«l is satisfied. Fur-
thermore. since 99-1 and po>p. (me), we have the relations

“—1
N'1 2, pm'M0/N< I: Moms 1.

Let us consider solutions of equations (1) in the region of space defined
by inequalities

o < z < kD’l2n (Mmm -1... (2)

i. e. in the region where the envelope practically has no time to change its
form due to effects associated with divergence of pumping radiation. Under
these conditions. plane pumping waves with indices 1: for which

we)“ << I... (3’

where am is the angle between the direction of propagation of planar pumping
waves with indices :- and n, will make an energy contribution to the St: kes

u—n
wave with index n being amplified that is proportional to '12:,“ 2 camp... This

is due to the fact that when condition (3) is met. factor 219(idkg’ﬂugnz) in

III—u .

terms of form “mi-av z A..A..+..-exp (lAk23.+.o,.z) in equation (1) is approximately
m-O

equal to unity for practically all available values of index n'. and for this

reason

as +m' ”if A;Am+n' eXP ((M:)ﬂ+ﬂ'. I I) ‘3 “I‘H'VP'J’I‘ (4)
0-0

In the case where the pumping field is not modulated by a slow envelope.

on- 00, m3 therefore the amplitudes of the plane waves are not phased in any
way, and expression (4) becomes the expression kquan that is well known in
the theory of wavefront reversal by stimulated Handelstam-Brillouin scattering.
and that is responsible for the increment in rise of the Stokes field that
corresponds to the average value of pumping intensity.

Besides, when condition (2) is met. in view of the fact that the corresponding
exponential factor is approximately equal to unity, the unplification of scat-
tered waves will receive a contribution not only from the partial amplifying

161:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gratings of interference origin situated at Bragg angles to the directions

of propagation of plane scattered waves. but also tron gratings situated at

angles close to these directions. For a plane Stokes wave with index n. this

scan: that the effective contribution to its .plification cones” not so euch
,N-I “"

fron a tern of for. A. 2 A». as fron a tern of for. ‘2. AIM- ”Boar‘s”.

p-o - '-

Since the contribution of this tern to asplification is appreciable only when

the Stokes wave being qlified is correlated with the pumping wave. with

consideration of the relation

11-: , u-n ,
2 ADA-4w” P:- 2 ‘0‘!

'-O "o
we can asst-e that
”-1 [1-]
:go AIH- I pg. “DA-+9 ” :2: PIA-1+! '2,“ ‘pAI.

s_ing up all the above discussion. we get the following equations for the
amplitudes of plane Stokes waves in the region of a that satisfies (2):

_%... "' T20 p..a..+u+-§- :2 PmA-H-n 2 “MP (5)

'-0

Let us consider the function 8(2)- ”2 a,A,. Then after asking the following
'o.

substitution that does not significantly influence the final result,

"2"»..a.+.~a.M.. (6)

we get an equation for s(:) free (5):

%-J'—'(M,+N.)S.
N-
where I..N,- E'A, )3 p.A3.+. and N.<Mo
p-o ale-0

The solution of the given equation is

8(z)-”§,'a.<om.cxp I'MI.<M.+~.)21. (7)

and finally free (5) with consideration of (6). (7) we find

”—1
a.(z)= -a.(0)exp{‘/.eI.M.z}+ 2 (p A:+./N.I..) )3 a.(o)A,. x
n-o an.

8
xexl’ Pl: C’uMez) [up {1,8gluNez}_ ll- ( )

165

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The resultant solutions can be interpreted as follows. The first tern in

the right nenber of (8) describes uniforn amplification of all plane Stokes
waves in the pulping field. The increnent of this a-plification in view of
appreciable spatial inhonogeneity of the average value of intensity of pumping
is greater than the increnent in the field of spatially uniform pt-ping of
intensity I... and less than the incre-ent corresponding to the sand-tn value
of intensity of the pumping field.

The second tern in (8) is responsible for forution of the field correlated

with the puping field. The increment of this field is sonewhat less than

twice the increment of uniform nplification of the plane waves. however.

correlation with the puping field is not complete due to the fact that the
- 11—:

second tern in (8) is proportional to E p,A.°..+,., rather than toAﬁ. which

n-O

generally speaking nsans insufficiently exact reproduction in the reversed

wave of the low spatial harmonics of the pulping wave that are responsible

for fornation of the slow envelope of its field.

Equations (5) and their solutions (8) are valid only when z<<lo . When 2:198.
the exponential factors of n' *0 in expressions (5) become osciilating. This
neans that the envelope of the pumping amplitude ceases to retain its shape.
1. e. it blurs due to the finite divergence of the scattered radiation. For
this reason equations (5) and their solutions (8) stop correctly describing
the scattering process at z> 108' However for applications. in particular
for experiments on observing wavefront reversal of focused eultinode beans.

of greatest interest is the region :5 198’ where the resultant solutions (8)
are valid.

Let us now consider the node of wavefront reversal of focused single-node
beans. We will ensue that the transverse dinension of the bean is D and

the focal length of the lens is f. Using equations (1) we can describe the
node of wavefront reversal in the vicinity of the length of focal contraction
zg- u’m’. where x is the wavelength of the pumping radiation. To do this.
we nust eet Ak-An-A for all k and n in equation (1). and also consider that
the relation exp (idkﬂﬁg)zl is satisfied at 0<z< 1°. Under these conditions.
equations (1) take the for:

where Iu-NIAlz- IAI’D‘llzf2 is been intensity on the lens surface.

.The solution of this equation is
N-I
a.(z)-a.(0)+~-I 2 a. (0) [exp(~-‘-‘,'— z)-I ] (9)
9-.

Here the second term corresponds to the field correlated with pulping. This
is implied by the fact that both the amplitudes of the plane pulping waves
and the second terns in the right-hand nenbers of (9) are independent of index
n. The increnent of the rise in the part of the field that is correlated with

166

FOR OFl-TCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pumping is proportional to M... which we can easily see is equal to the in-
tensity of the pumping bean in the region of focal contraction.

Using solutions (9). we can evaluate the intensity of a single-node been at
which wavefront reversal could he observed:

N" exp (gl.Nl.)-Pl’D-‘ exp (gl..D’/l))l.

However. it should he noted that this estimate has been obtained with the
sssmption that the angle of divergence of plane waves of the scattered field
does not exceed the angle of divergence 0 of the focused puming. and that
the .plitudes an(0) of the plane waves are statistically independent. 0n
the other hand. under actual experinental conditions the initiating radiation
on the Stokes frequency arises nainly in the region of the focal contraction.
and as a consequence the mlitudes an(0) are phased to sale extent. and the
estinate given above requires sone refinenent.

armors

l. Zel'dovich. 3. Ya.. Popovichev. V. I.. Ragul'skiy. V. V.. Paysullov, P. 8..
PIS'HA V MEAL “SPRINT“ I BURNING! mm. Vol 15. 1972.
p 160.

2. Bespalov. V. 1.. “tin. A. A.. Pananik. G. A. PIS'HA V ZHURNAL mom
PIZIKI, Vol 3. 1977. p 215.

3. Zuharev. I. 6.. in: "Obrashcheniye volnovogo fronts opticheskogo izlucheniya
v nelineynykh sredskh" [Wavefront Reversal of Optical Radiation in Nonlinear
Hedia]. Gor'kiy. Institute of Applied Physics. USSR Academy of Sciences.
1979.

a. Dolgopolov. Yu. V.. Kasrevskiy. V. A.. Ker-er. s. 3.. Kochenasov. c. 6..
Kulikov. s. 11.. Hurugov. V. H.. Nikolayev. V. 1).. ZHUBNAL nsrnmm'uor
I TBORBTICIESKOY PIZIKI. Vol 76. 1979. p 908.

5. Bel'dyugin. I. EL. Galushkin. H. 0.. Zenskov. Ye. ll” llandrosov. V. 1..
KVANIOVAYA nmoum. Vol 3. 1976. p 21067.

6.' Sidorovich. V. G.. ZHURNAL MICHESKOY PIZIKI. V01 46. 1976. p 2168.

7. Bespalov. V. 1.. Betin. A. A.. Paulanik. G. A.. IZVBSI‘IYA WSSEIKH 00mm
ZAVEDBNIY: SBRIYA RADIOPIZIKA. Vol 21. 1978. p 961.

8. Baranova, ll. 3.. Zel'dovich, 3. Ya.. KVAN‘I’OVAYA ELBKTRONIRA. Vol 7. 19”.

p 973.
9. Bespalov. V. I... Paeaanik. G. A.. DOW mum NAUK 5581!. Vol 210.
1973. p 309.
10. Bel'dyugin. 1. IL. Zubarev. I. 6.. KVANTOVAYA MTRWIKA. Vol 7, 1980.
congress; Isdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1982
6610

cs0: 1862/le
167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 538.3
SIMULATED MANY-Pm armors on DIMION MG

Leningrad ZEURNAL mmcnsmr rum in Russian Vol 52. 80 3. liar 82 (menu-
script received ll May 81) pp 555-556

[Article by s. G. Ogsnssysn and v. A. Yengibaryan. Yerevan State University.
Scientific Research Institute of Physics of Condensed )hdia]

[Text] Ref. [-3 cover theoretical studies of stiauleted nay—photon processes
in honoganeous and inhonogeneous media. However. breakdown of the nedium

and nultipls scattering of a charged particle create additional difficulties
for experinental observation. As noted in Ref. 2. vacuu effects are most
suitable fro. this standpoint. Since a particle does not suit or absorb in
vacuum. the use of diffraction effects is suggested. where an electron inter-
acts with electromagnetic radiation on an opening in an opaque screen.

In this paper we eat-ins stimulated effects when a particle passes over a
diffraction grating (Ref. lo]. The percentage modulation of the electron be-
and broadening of its energy spectrum are proportional to the mnber of lines
8 which in good gratings nay be of the order of 10’ Ref. 5].

Classical Theory

Let a charged particle pass over a diffraction grating with period d and gap
width a. at distance so fro. the grating surface. Incident on the grating from
below and nor-a1 to its surface is a nonochronatic electromagnetic wave linear—
ly polarized along the y-axis. which we take as parallel to the lines of the
grating. Hith consideration of the reflected wave. we find the Fourier com-

ponent of the vector potential
. .. a ' W l 4 up It (N — H (mm sin (N .«l-‘3D
.(ql' '0) d4; "_ed:_‘i+‘z;:' il'll (cad/J, —s"—X

x Mn ('1‘”) '0 + "I6
9: (q.+v'-'=F'=*/c -q. — tam. -- v5=w= -v3 + u)’ m

The infinitesinal corrections :16 select the pole when integrating with re-
spect to wave vector ﬁr

To find the change of energy and nonsntun of the electron. we use the equations

iff- 4%; v.1 (1.: a.) up (M - ‘41.: - W) 44.40. + chip. conj .

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if,

.4? “' "u S (':- '- 'aﬁa - "s)‘ "I; 11,9'” ("4 "' “:7 "- “Is" 41,4”, " COIp ' conj 0

a
73% 4:9, S v.4 (4.: 9.) "MM - m: - 01.8) Jada. + COIP- con! . (2)

and also the expression
u - '8‘?! + 'y‘P' + ',°P,- (3’

Let us solve sy'sten (2) by perturbation theory. substithting the unperturbed
trajectory

’ 3"e+”;‘c "'st '="e U)
in the right-hand part.

Integrating with respect to tine fro. - to «I, we find

sa—Aa'm(:’—l'+a). (5',
where
, .
dd' — E9, '54::— siu 1% e(""l’vm'° W .
ted «1-63
ea—(N—I)Z;+erclg—-p;—, (G)

and z- eAMnc2 is the dimensionless intensity per-eter. "hen condition
«mg-u. where n-tl; 12;}... (7)

is satisfied. the quantity m(N..a;2..)I'-1u(.qzu_)-u. In this case. broadening

of the energy spectra: of the electron bean is proportional to the total nuﬂaer

of openings 1!. Relation (7) corresponds to the result of Ref. 6 if the angle
of spontaneous electron emission is set equal to «[2. At predetermined particle

velocity and external field frequency on hell. we get the condition for the
grating period fro. (7):
d-nwﬂ where link 2; . (8)
The change in particle energy is ninimn if
ltd" («l/3".) I - '- ‘9)

hence we get the condition for the gap size in the diffraction grating

e=(2r+1)lﬂ.]2. mre '3';2;.... . (u),

_ 169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With respect to order of magnitude
A" a: Ntm‘ exp (-8.9:.mc'IW) l“)

(for relativistic particles the angle between the penis and the direction
of electron motion is I~M‘I‘)-

Quanta Theory

An analogous result (6)“equiprobable broadening of the energy spectrum of
a particle be- in the range fir—can be found on the basis of the Klein-
Gordon equation

wﬁ-wm-e+Ve)-2m,n,n+~w -' ' “2)

In the approximation where the change of energy and moeentun Ap<p. any.
we get
4 +-

s-p'Jvup(1¥z + I 'T" y — l fit-t) 2 I, (91%)“? [la-(I -—e;u.)|. (13)

"4-0

Consequently. the probability of encountering a particle with energy 3+“. is
w - i: (sauna). (M)
where s takes on whole-number values. and z. in (6) is replaced by z.

A study of expression (16) shows that in contrast to the classical result
at outta/s. spikes show up with width sch-(u'plmW-[Reh l. 2].

If the fields are such that M'1aegl. a major role is played by first-order
processes. Therefore we will seek the solution of equation (12) in the form

°-'¥'[°‘P(‘£FI+IPT"U _‘%‘)+b93l‘("-ZLU'-‘£‘Fl)+

 

+doxp(t5;_'y—t‘:”‘“a)], (15)

Disregarding terms that are quadratic with respect to the field, we find
' I 156' p“ to 1 53' " I

‘-'2"E°IP[' ’f+,-‘)8]. d--77;up[t(£l-—5;):]. (18)

and substituting in (15). we find that the wave function of the particle is
modulated on frequency w ' .

I-Py'oxp(lll£:+l’%y-l%‘)[i~‘A1§"“”(“5; ] “7’

The percentage nodulation is a purely imaginary quantity. and therefore the
electron density remains constant as contrasted with the case of an interface
(Ref. 1]. The stimulated diffraction effect leads to modulation of electron
velocity. Calculating the current. we find

170
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l-i'lIOVﬁﬂ-m v.+-:‘T;em(t —;3;)] (18)

Conclusion

If the initial field in polarized along the x-axia. and electron velocity
vx- v, than

W - ”In“ oxM-Mc'8Jﬂ) (my
when conditione (8) and (10) are net. where 0—0.

IIe aee free (6) and (19) that only electrona located at diatance a.~i (sine)

fro. the grating aurface take part in induced proceaaee. For nonrelativiatic
energiea. the total nu-ber of interacting particlea can be increased by focueing
the been over the grating aurface. Thinga are ainpler with relativietic parti-
cles. If A-l m. and 5-500'Iiev. then x. =1 -.

Let ua now eatinate the power of electronagnetic radiation neceaaary for in-
creaaing particle energy by 101. Let the amber of grating linea be of the
order of 10’ per nillineter. and the aiae of the light epot he of the order

of 1 cl. Then. considering that thia requiree valuea of 5-3m Nuc'. we find
that for nonralativietic particlea (8-0.1) a power P-2.68 Inn/caz it required.
for energiea t-nc' - P- 120 III/a2. and for relativistic particlea 11w
-- r-smo" ale-1.

to prevent nonentul Ap, from carrying the particle out of the interaction
region. the electrone ehould paaa over the grating at a call angle ¢~ APg/PQa

Percentage nodulation ”win-pa reachee 101 for particles with 6-0.5 at

P- 67 “II/cl2 if the initial field in polarized along the gap. and 16.75 III/cl2
when polarization in perpendicular to the gap. At energiea a-..» a power

of 67 Mil/en2 ia required regardleea of polarization.

The authora than]: V. H. Arutyunyan for diacueeing the results.

1. Arutyunyan, v. 11.. Oganeeyan. s. c'., 21mm. mnmn'uor I
mrcnstor nun, Vol 72. 1977. p 1.66.

2. Arutyunyan. V. IL. Oganeayan. 8. 0.. Preprint No 76-06. mm [expaneion
not know]. Yerevan State University, 1976.

3. Amtyunyan. V. IL, Avetilyan. G. K” mm HSPBRDIBII’IAL'IIOY I.
TBOEI'I'ICIIBSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 5. 1972. p 62.

lo. lolotovakiy. 3. IL, Voakreaenakiy, G. V.. 08PM! PIZICIESKIKII NAIR.
Vol 9b._l968. p 377.

5. Landaherg. G. 8.. "Optika” [Option]. Hoacov. "lauka". 1976.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo "Nam". "Zhurnal tekhnicheakoy fiziki". 1982

6610
C80: 1862/50

171
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 535.21:621.378
LASER DISPBRSAL 01’ POLYDISPERSB HATER AEROSOL

Hoscow KVANTOVAYA 31mm in Russian Vol 9. No 2016). Feb 82 (namecript
received 10 Oct 80. after revision 20 May 81) pp 332-3402

[Article by V. K. Puatovalov. G. s. Roaanov and I. A. Khorunzhiy. Scientific
Research Institute of Applied Physics Problens at Belorussian State University
ineni V. I. Lenin. Hinsk]

[Text] Based on results of material solution of a ayeten
of equations. an investigation is made of the process of
dispersal of a polydisperse water aerosol under the action
of cw laser mission on a wavelength of 10.6 pa with vapori-
zation of water droplets in the diffusion node. Space-

tine curves are obtained. and also the paraneters that char-
acterise the dispersal process. An analysis is ads of

the way that the paransters of the dispersal process depend
on the mission energy flux density. the initial teaperature
of droplets. the coefficient of vaporization and the optical
constants of water. the parneters of the function of the
initial size distribution of the aerosol droplets. The
efficiency of the dispersal process is studied and the re-
sults are colpared with experiment.

Dispersal of a polydisperse water aerosol (clouds. list) under the action

of intense laser enission with wavelength A- 10.6 un has been theoretically
studied in Ref. 1-8 by analytical and m-ericsl methods. In the analytical
description of the process of dispersal. fine-droplet (r.<<x (Ref. [-3. 7].
where r. is the instantaneous radius of aerosol droplets) and coarse-droplet
no»). [Rah 2]) approximations were used under conditions of a quasi-steady
process of droplet vaporization in the dispersal wave and rough accounting
for the losses of radiation energy to scattering and heat- conduction lief.

5. 7. 8]. Bowever. within the framework of the analytical description it

is inposaible to clearly define the region of applicability of the assuptions
that are used. and to study the seat interesting case ro~ A. In the m-erical
study of the dispersal process [Rah lo. 6]. the above-nentioned asetnptions
were not used. and the process was described more completely. At the sane
tine. no consideration was taken in Ref. to of energy losses to scattering

and heat conduction. and an inexact equation of energy balance of vaporizing
droplets was used in Ref. 6 (no consideration was taken of the thermal energy

172
me omen USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the droplets in the process of heating by radiation). Ref. 6. 6 do not
give enough variants of the calculations for detailed tracing of the dependence
of parneters of the dispersal process on the initial parameters of the problem.

In this paper. based on conputer solution of a systen of equations an investi-
gation is made of dispersal of a stationary polydisperae water aerosol under
the action of laser radiation with A- 10.6 um. The investigation of aerosol
dispersal is based on correct consideration of the process of vaporization

of isolated aerosol droplets by radiation. In contrast to Ref. 1-8. we have
accounted for discontinuities of density and tenperature on the surface of

the vaporizing droplets. and have used actual relations for the thermophysical
parameters of the problem as functions of tenperature and for the factors

of effectiveness of absorption and scattering of droplets as functions of n.
which brings the considered nodel of the process much closer to reality. Our
principal attention has been given to investigating the way that the parameters
of the dispersal process depend on the energy flux density I. of the acting radi-
ation on the boundary of the aerosol (at x-O). initial droplet temperature
T... vaporization coefficient a and the indices of refraction n and absorption
at of water. An examination is made of the influence that the initial function
of size distribution of the polydisperse aerosol droplets has on the dispersal
process. Sons of the results are compared with data of experiments on dis-
persal in Ref. 9 and lo.

Pornulation of the Problem

Consider dispersal of a stationary polydispersa water aerosol with initial
concentration No and droplet size distribution fo(ro) under the action of
radiation with constant 1.. The system of equations that describes the pro-
cess of dispersal includes quasi-stationary equations of the transfer of the
acting (x- 10.6 ms) and probing (AP-0.63 um) radiation in the approximation
of single scattering by droplets, equations of energy balance and kinetics
of vaporization of droplets in the approximation of uniforn energy release
and absence of a temperature profile through the volume of a droplet:

a! " 2 . ‘
w-ﬁ-aN.’ Jfo (K309) +Kp ('o»f('e)d’o-o'

%L 4.-...v./. Jr3Ko(ro)f(r.)dr.-03

- or I (I)
”five-37" “T Kn (’0) lS.-i.5.:

- 0V. .
"o T '= — lasso:

where I. I, are the energy flux densities of the acting and probing radiation.
K". KP and It0 are the factors of effectiveness of absorption and scattering
of the acting radiation. and attenuation of the probing radiation for droplets
with instantaneous radius r. [Ref. 10]. c2. n. are the specific heat and den-
sity of water molecules. V.=‘/,nr3. 30-34.!!3 are the volune and surface area

173
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a droplet. In the diffusion node of vaporization, the densities of the
fluxes of ness 1 and energy je from the surface of the vaporizing droplet
are defined by t relations

“.1...‘ — 0.7.“

I“ = (2wn/ka')" 4.6:}? In (WM/o"! 6/12.?“ — 1|; ' n)

i. -—“—ry——1" 7' flux“ “ +1...L(T.).

where n. is the density of saturated water vapor at drop surface teaperature
To [Raf. 12. 13]. n.-n.('r.), '1‘ is air temperature directly at the surface
of the droplet deternined with consideration of taperature discontinuity
[Ref. 11]. a is the coefficient of vaporization (usually taken as equal to
the coefficient of condensation) of water. a is the use of a vapor molecule.
In is Boltznanu'a constant. MT.) is the heat of vaporization of a water drop-
let [Ref. 12. 13]. The coefficient of diffusion of water vapor in air is
given by D-D1.('r/‘l‘.,)b, Dn-const. b- 1.8. r- emu/T.” is the coefficient
of thenal conductivity of air, urn-const. b-p+l [Ref. 12. 13].

The equation that describes the change in the polydieperae aerosol droplet
size distribution function f(r.) as a consequence of droplet vaporization

takes the forn
a 0 dr
1%+'&.-(’-af-)'°' (3)

where Sf(r.)dr.—l. The initial and boundary conditions for (l)-(3) are
0

T.(X,0)-T.; f.(x.0)-f..; ’(’..X,0)-’.(’g):
l(x.0)—I.exp[—nN.x3r3(K.(r.) +Kp(’o))fo ('0) 4’03] (4)

I. (x. 0) =- I. exp [ ~«N.x f r: K. (a) f. (r.) m]-
0

0f considerable interest is the differential parameter (see third equation
of (1))

D: ('o» X. 0 ' ”(u (’J/‘ls. (5)

that could be called the degree of quasi-steadiness of the process of droplet
vaporization. It is the ratio of the energy release in the droplet to the
energy losses due to vaporization and heat conduction. and characterizes the
imbalance between energy release and energy losses. and also the rate of change
in To. Let us also consider integral energy quantities that characterize

the process of droplet vaporization from the tine t-O of onset of action

of the radiation to the given time t: the emission energy Qn(ro. x. t) and
Qp(ro. z. t) respectively absorbed and scattered by the droplet, and energy
Qu(ro. x, t) and QT(ro. x. t) respectively expended on vaporizing the droplet
and releasedby the nechanise of thermal conductivity from the droplet:

17h
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 l

Q.-n I IK. (r.)r3¢t: Q,-u J IK, (r.) r341;

. (5)
Q.=-4a 5mm) rem; 0,-4uf-gi—3 ; [ff/my“ —:]r.dr.
the acne energies for the aerosol as a whole:
8s“! j; st(’o)d'ed‘3 8,-51 pr(’s)d’ed‘3
as as (7)

S.- I ’Q.r(r.)dr.dx: 8. - ETQMIMM"
O

and the energy para-eters 1‘1 that characterize the process of dispersal of
the aerosol as a whole:

r,—s./(s..+s,): r.=-s./(s.+s.); T.==S.I($..+8.)- (8)

A dimensionless spatial variable E will be used below that is associated with
the spatial variable x by the equation

x-1.27¢-10' elm. (9)

where x is in centimeters. No is in inverse cubic centimeters. Let us note
that in the given problen the concentration of d:oplets No appears only in
(9) that relates x and E. and all results of calculations of the process of
dispersal can be recalculated for any initial values of aerosol water content

C

p-%uN.p,Sr: f. (r,)dr.. where ”a is the density of water. with selected initial
0

function f.(ro) corresponding to a change (increase or reduction) of “9.

With the exception of specially stipulated cases. we will take the coefficient
of water vaporization a as equal to unity. and the optical constants of water
for x- 10.6 ml as n- 1.173 and "0.2340" (Ref. 10]. we will use the
initial polydisperae aerosol droplet size distribution function in the fern
of a r-diatribution (Ref. 16]:

"ltd-l ,5 r _
non-rm Wuﬁ—u-t). (10)

In m-erical solution of the problem for approximating fo(ro) (10) we used

a multigroup approximation (from 12 to 211 groups of droplets) including drops
. with radius up to 30-60 um depending on the specific form of f.(r.). During
the mnerical conputation. we checked the balance of radiation energies ab-
sorbed and scattered by the aerosol droplets. and also the balance of absorbed
and initial thermal energies expended on vaporization and heat conduction,.
which were maintained with accuracy of 41.51.

175
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. l. Distributions of te-perature To. radii ro (solid

lines) and paraeter D; (broken lines) for droplets with

rn's (19 4s 7s 10). 15 (as 59 8s 11)! 30 (as 69 99 12) ml

with respect to i at Io-SOO "last. I.- 273 K for t-O (1.

2. 3). 10.7-10-3 (4. 5. 8). 3.75-10'2 (7. 8, 9) and 7.5-10'z
(10. 11. 12) a

Discussion of the Results

1. Let us consider some results of nuserical calculation of the process of
dispersal of a polydisperse water aerosol with initial droplet distribution
function f.(ro) (10) with most probable droplet radius R-S us. parameter
In 2. initial droplet tenpersture T.-273 K under the action of radiation

with Ito-500 "/cm .

Fig. I shows distributions of To. r. and D; in a dispersal wave for aerosol
droplet groups with r.-5, 15 and 30 us: with respect to E for several instants
of tine. Pros: the instant that radiation begins to act on the aerosol the
radiation energy starts to be absorbed and there is a rapid rise in To (energy
liberation is much greater than energy losses). giving rise to vaporization
and an increase in heat losses by the droplets es a consequence of vaporization
and thermal conductivity. Vaporisation of droplets results in propagation

of a dispersal wave into the aerosol. At times tau.) for droplets of dif-
ferent initial radii r. the energy liberation and energy absorption are in
balance at (-0. The tenperatures of the droplets reach naximss values
1'.(r.)(D1(ro. t;- 0. t.)- 1), after which the tenperature of the droplet begins
to fall in the process of quasi-steady vaporization (Ref. 11]. A similar
pattern of attainment of Yuk.) and subsequent reduction of tenpérature is

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

observed for droplets deep inside the aerosol as the dispersing and vaporizing
waves propagate. With the passage or' time. due to a drop in To in the region
of quasi-steady droplet vaporization (r. (to. €-0)<’ro<l'n(ro)) and an in-
crease in '1'. in the region of dispersal. tuperature waves are produced that
advance into the aerosol (see also Ref. lo). In the steady state of dispersal
wave propagation. e. g. for r.-5, 15. 30-pin we have 13-295. 332, 359 K re-
spectively. In the region of decreasing temperature 0.98$D1(ro) < 1. i. e.
energy losses are 4-2: greater than energy liberation in the droplets.

In the region of temperature rise. up to the time of attainment of '1“. and
Bur.) - l. the aerosol droplets vaporize unsteadily under conditions of a
considerable excess of energy liberation over energy losses at I<D,(r.) <15}..(r.).
where D,,-D.(r.. 3-. 00) (see Fig. 1). In the given case Dm(r.) increases
considerably with increasing r. (Table 1). At T. and D‘(ro) - l. the radii

of droplets with ra-S. 15. 30 us: becoee equal to r.- 3.6. 11.2. 23 um.

TABLE 1 Consequently in the process of unsteady vapori—

' ration the aerosol droplets lose ~60! of their
mass. At fixed 01- 1.05. rw-S, 15. 30 um.
we'have rel-10.85. 13.5. 27_un respectively.

In the interval 1.05 <D1 (131.0.) the aerosol
droplets lose ~25! of their uses. Thus a re-
duction in droplet radii in the dispersal wave
iron r. to -0.9r., takes place at 1.05<D1<
Dm(r.). i. e. for appreciably unsteady vapori-
zation under conditions of considerable inhalance

.—-—__——a——— between energy liberation and energy losses. A
further reduction of r. takes place at 0.985D1<1.05. i. e. for imbalance
between energy liberation and energy losses that does not exceed ~51.

 

Fig. 2. Distributions of 2 (solid lines).
7., (broken lines) and no (dot-and-dash)
with respect to F. for '1'..- 273 K. 10-500
H/cnz. c-o (1), 3.75-10'z (2), 7.5-10-2
(3) s; 10-200 v/cu’. “1.87540" (4) s;
1.-1 kH/cuz. t-3.7S-10'2 (5) s (a). and
Ts-273 K. 10-500 H/cmz. 3-5 um. 11-2 (1.
3. 5). 6 (2. 4. s) and :-o (1, 2). 3.75x
to" (a. 4), 7.5-10'2 (5. a) (b)

Fig. 2a shows the distributions of disen-
sionless energy flux densities of the
acting z- III. and probing 23- 13/130
radiation. and the dimensionless coef-
ficient of attenuation of the acting
radiation xou x(ro)/ro(ro) with respect

to g for several t. where K- JIN.£,:(K.(I.)+

 

K,(i,)[(r,)dy,, Ko - K(t'0). As a result of droplet vaporization under the action
of radiation. dispersal waves on A and AP propagate into the aerosol with
different degrees of aerosol dispersal on these wavelengths.

177
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hill OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

(9 I8

Fig. 3. Time dependences of v and v, for transparency levels
2?. 2,0- 0.9 (1. a). 0.75 (2. 7). 0.5 (3). a" (4), e" (5)
o the acting (solid lines) and probing (broken lines) radi-
ation at 1,-500 wIcn’, 1,-273 K. n-s us. u-z (1-5. axis
of ordinates on the left), and R-S ya. u- 6 (6-7. axis of
ordinates on the right). the parameters 1; at 19- 500 H/cmz.
1,-273 K (solid lines) and 13,-273 K (broken lines)

Fig. 3 shows the dependences on time t for velocities v and v, of propa-
gation of the dispersal save at several fixed levels of transparency for the
acting (2°) and probing (Z9 radiation and for parameters 1'1. Here end below.
v and vs are calculated at o - l on". and conversion to other values of a.
is done by the formle v(No) -v(No- l)/No. Velocity v increases monotonically
during the unsteady stage of the dispersal process (0<t< ty). v(t) being

the greater, the lower the Z0. 'l‘he steady state of dispersal vave propagation
on X and AP (steady state of the dispersal process) settles down asymptotically
at sufficiently long times ty. t3y for vhich we take the times of settling

of the steady value of v for rates of propagation of levels 2“,. z -0.9.
Velocity v, at 0<t<t, is less than v for the same and t. vhﬁe t,y>ty,
which is due to the dif¥erence in Kn(ro). Kp(r.)_and t oscillatory depen-
dence Ko(r.) [Bat 10]. The steady-state value v of the velocity of dispersal
wave propagation on A and AP is the same: v- 171/8. (km/s); e. g. at II.- ~
2°10: cn' . v-0.855 Ice/s. Times of settling of the steady state of dispersal
are ty=85 Isa. t3 30.13 s. Parameters T1. ‘1'; during the unsteady stage de-
pend on time. ‘1'; having a naxinun in the interval 0. t . At tzty. parameters

1'1 acquire constant values 1'1 that characterize the steady stage of the dis-
persal process. Parameter 1'; changes little over time interval 0. t,.

Droplet vaporization by radiation deforms distribution function fo(ro): the
function is shifted toward smaller r, along the axis of radii. ﬁn) is sharply
narrowed. and there is a rise in the maxim:- of ﬁn) (see Ref. lo).

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OI OHM 1M, “SI-I ONLY

 

Pig. 6. Distributions of per-eters '1'1(r.) at [(-5 ya.
u- 2. 10-500 "lo-2, r.-273 (solid lines) and 293 x (dot-
and-dash). I.-200 "Iona. T..-273 K (broken lines); at
a- 10 ul. u-z. 1,-500 U/cnz. r.-273 1: (solid lines) and
specific contributions of groups of droplets 5n and 6“ (1.
4). 6’ (2. 5). a, (3. 6). a. (1, 7) at Io-soo was”. 1‘.-
273 x. 11-5 ul. u'2 (1-3) and ll- 10 us. 11-2 (4-7) with
respect to r. at t- 7.5-10‘2 s. and distributions of effec-
tiveness parameters Kn. KP. K. with respect to to

Fig. lo shows the distributions of para-eters 1'10.) and specific contributions
of individual groups of droplets to absorption (6"). scattering (69). vapo-
rization (6,). thermal conductivity (61-) and initial water content of the
“dim (6,) with respect to radius r... Parameters 11(r.) are determined anal-
ogously to pars-eters 1‘1 (8). but they were calculated for individual groups
of droplets with fixed initial radius. The values of T1(r.,) and end-eke
sense only for the reference radii r. of the groups of droplets indicated

by the narhs on Fig. 6. since the specific contribution of a group of droplets
depends on the interval of partitioning Ar. of the aerosol droplet spectrum
into groups (in the given case Ar..- 2.5 an). Here 26,10.) - 1. mph.) - l,
£6u(r.)-l. £6,(r.)- 1. 136 (r.)- I. Let us note that the specific contribu-
tions of the groups practically do not depend on tile. We see from Fig. lo
that in the given case 6“. 6', and 6“ are deter-iced by the specific contribu-
tion of each group of droplets to the initial water content of the media.

The specific contribution of groups of droplets to thsrnel conductivity is
shifted toward lower 2.. coepared with the other specific contributions. Pa-
rsneter '1'; (r.) increases monotonically with increasing r... All this is due to

179
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [PSI-1 ONLY

the considerable reduction in the contribution made by thernal conductivity
to the energy balance of the vaporizing droplets as r. increases Def. ll].

2. Consider the influence that radiation energy flux density Io and initial
droplet teeperature T. have on the dynuics and fundamental parameters of
the dispersal process. Nuerical calculations were done on the process of
dispersal of a polydisperse aerosol with R- 5 ml. 31-2 at I. - 50. 200. 500
H/cn’. and 1 Rule- . T.- 273 and 293 K. The results are s_arized in Table
2. when an aerosol is exposed to radiation with different I. and durations
of action t., of fundamental interest is the attainment of the minus ef-
fectiveness of the action at constant energy density, i. e. at

IJ.=const. (ll)

mu: 2
11-5 um. o-l. ”1.173. "8.2340" [Ref. 10]

1.. w c. so so zoo «a 1m | no no» | no» soo soo
.—
a 2| 2 | 2 2 a o s

 
   

3010‘") I‘ll/s
"n a
ll!- 3 - - ' - .2'

 
 

Fig. 2a shows the distributions of 2 and 2, with respect to E for lg, t’ that
satisfy condition (11). The greater the lo (and the smaller the t.). the
greater will be the degree of dispersal of the medium. and the velocity of
the dispersal wave..and the higher will be the effectiveness of the action
of radiation on the aerosol (see Fig. 2a, A. Table 2). Action of radiation
with greater 1. on the aerosol appreciably decreases Sn. 5 . 8, due to sore
intense vaporization of droplets and a sharp reduction in ghe contribution
of thernal conductivity to the energy balance of the vaporizing droplets.
Failure to account for thermal conductivity and scattering of radiation by
droplets overstates v and understates ty by a factor of -3 (Ref. 0].

At moderate values of 10- SC. 200 H/cnz. an increase in T. noticeably ac-
celerates the dispersal process and increases v. T; and T2. However. with
increasing 1. (e. g. at 19-1 kH/cmz) there is an appreciable decrease in

the influence of '1‘. on parameters of the dispersal process. This is due to
the fact that with increasing Io. energy Q1-(ro) becomes snail compared with
Qn(r.). Qp(ro). Qu(ro). and decreasing Q1- with increasing '1'. has little effect

180
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on G. Paraneters ‘1', and 13(r.) show practically no change with variation
in 1.. ‘1'... just as 630.). 69“.). 6"(r.). 6.,(r.).

TABLE 3

      

 

n—IJN.
enema" [NI

.—

  
 
 
 
     
      

u-mn. mums-Io" no)

T.(r.=s).x 291

1'..(:.=.|5).K 397 330 as: m 231 am an
Tum-3mm a“ an ass nos so: as: 351
3(N.-|).ke/s 24 51 as 3.9 10,155.15 I“
r,. . 0.1 0." 0.12 1.6 .9540— 1.35 0.26 two-a
1..., . o.u 0.13 0.14

  

The steady-state sexist- values of 1‘.(r.) depend appreciably on 1.. 1'... the
dependence of 1'.(r.) on 1‘, becoging weaker with increasing 1.). At Io'l Irv/cl2
for droplets with r.- 25-30 as 1'. sonewhat exceeds the lieit of the diffusion
node of vaporization; however. the contribution of droplets with r.- 25-!) pi
to processes of dispersal is small (less than_51) and the above-nantioned
excess practically introduces no error. The 1.0:.) given in tables 2 and

3 for different variants enable us to estinate the interval of temperature
change for droplets of different initial dinensions as they vaporize in a
dispersal wave.

For the entire range of initial_intensities used I. .50 H/cnz-l lat/ca2 and
tenperatures ‘1'..- 273. 293 K at r. we have r. I 3.5. 11. 23 us for r.- S. 15.
20 us respectively. 1. e. the radius of droplets in the dispersal wave at

‘1'. is about 0.7 r... Consequently. for the case of unsteady vaporization of
polydisperse aerosol droplets over a range of the degree of quasi-steadiness
[<01 (DI. the aerosol loses about 602 of its water content, and this value
is practically independent of changes in 1.. ‘1'... a. n. x. The process of
vaporization inside the aerosol is appreciably unsteady. and the quasi-
steadiness __paraneter 01.0.) depends on the initial parameters of the problen.
Paraneter Duh.) increases sharply with increasing 1.. r, and depends on

T... (see Table 1). For the entire set of initial par-eters used at fixed

01- 1.05. r. depends weakly on lo. '1'... and for rn-S. 15. 30 pl we have

to s 6.85. 13.2. 26.5 un. i. e. r. at 01 - 1.05 is about 0.9 r.. Thus in the
range of 1.os<n.<n.. in the case of appreciably unsteady vaporization in
the dispersal wave the aerosol droplets lose ~25! of their water content.

and this value is practically independent of changes in the initial parameters

of the problsn.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY

Let us consider the influence that the coefficient of vaporization o and the
optical constants of water have on the dispersal process. The values of a.
and of the indices of refraction n and absorption x of water on 1- 10.6 um
differ noticeably from one another. The value of a- 1 used above is apparentl
the most exact according to the results of the latest experiments [Ref. 15].
To determine the influence that c has on the dispersal process, calculations
were done at the ainimum known 0- 3.6.10”2 (see Ref. 15) using the previous
values of n- 1.173 and nt-8.23-l0'2 [Ref. 10]; the results are smarized

in Table 3. Let us note that the minimum a- 3.6-10” was used in Ref. 6 for
all the calculated Versions except for one. The use of o-~3.6~10‘2 leads

to slower vaporization of aerosol droplets under the action of radiation.

an appreciable reduction in the velocity of the dispersal wave and a consid-
erable change in parameters of the dispersal process (see Table 3) with the
exception of parameter T3. Consequently. a change in n can appreciably in-
fluence the parameters of the dispersal process. To determine the effect

of optical parameters n, x on the dispersal process. calculations were done
at (3-1 and the minimum known n- 1.1“. .c-I6.‘Io10"2 [Ref. lb]; the results
are summarized in Table 3. when n._r from Ref. 14 are used. the main param-
eters of the dispersal process T1. v are similar or identical to the corre-
sponding parameters at n. x from Ref. 10. Thus a change in n. r within the
given limits has nearly no effect on the main parameters of the dispersal
process.

Let us determine the spatial dimensions A: of the transition zone in which
the aerosol properties change from the state of total dispersal (on the left
boundary of the zone Z-0.99) to the practically undisturbed state of the
aerosol (on the right-hand boundary rg-I0.99r.). and the dependence of

on To. T. for the steady state of the dispersal process. During the unsteady
stage of the process of dispersal. the dimensions of the transition A: in-
crease; at t?- ty. A6 is constant. The aerosol at to $0.1r. practically does
not attenuate radiation. 1. e. the coefficient of attenuation of radiation
as a result has decreased by ~102-103 times. The spatial dimensions of the
transition zone A; for different variants at 11-5 um. u-Z are: A53 1-1.2
(Ax-1.276-10‘Azlﬂo cm, e. g. at [lo-2°10: cm". Ax: 63-76 m) and are prac-
tically independent of lo, T..

3. 0f considerable interest in the investigation of the process of polydis-
perse aerosol dispersal under the action of radiation is analysis of the in-
fluence that the form of the initial aerosol droplet distribution function
has on the dispersal process. Function fo(ro) (10) with different R. u sat-
isfactorily describes real droplet size distribution functions in clouds and
mist (Ref. 16]. Variations of R and u appreciably change the initial values
of aerosol water content and coefficients of attenuation of the acting and
probing radiation. and accordingly cause a noticeable change in parameters
of the dispersal process.

Let us use the freest possible change in N. for objective comparison of the
effectiveness of dispersal with different functions f.(ro). Consider the
process of dispersing a polydisperse zerosol with constant initial water
content

., __ 34. um. '3’on (mar. == const. (,2)
0

182
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

but with different droplet concentrations No and parueters R. u of distribu-
tion function f .(ro) Calculations were done on the process of dispersal

at a polydisperse aerosol at lot-$00 H/cm . T. -273 K. R- S and 10 um, u-Z.
lo. 6. The results of the calculations demonstrate the influence of a change
in parameter u at fixed It on the dispersal process. At R- 5, 10 us with con-
sideration of the constancy of p (12), for every 100 droplets of aerosol with
distribution function f.(ro) (10) at u- 2. there are 228 aerosol droplets

at u - lo. and 319 droplets at u . 6 respectively. Fig. 2b shows distributions
2(E). 2;“) at 3-5 um and u- 2, 6 for several t. The initial distributions
2(5) and Z,(£) at t-O and different u are near each other. i. e. the initial
coefficients of attenuation of the acting and probing radiation by the aerosol
in the given case are approximately identical. In the process of aerosol
dispersal the distributions 2(5) also practically coincide. i. e. at R-S on
with condition (12), u has no appreciable effect on aerosol dispersal on x.
This is also confirmed by the equality of dispersal wave velocities calcu-
lated with consideration of constancy of p (12) at No -1 ca ", u- 2: v(u-2) 3
v(u- 0/2. 288v(u-6)/3.l9= 166 Its/s (see Table 2). Consequently, only the
water content 9 has a decisive effect on the process of aerosol dispersal on A
at R- 5 un. however. distributions 23(0 in the dispersal process for u-2.
6 differ from 2(5) and from each other. i. e. an increase in u say influence
the aerosol dispersal an AP.

Fig. 3 shows the time dependences of v and v3 for some 2 ”at R- S um.

u- 6. An increase in u appreciably reduces the nulber 0 groups of droplets
that make the main contribution to the water content of the media. absorption,
scattering and so on. and the polydisperse aerosol begins to approach a nono-
disperse condition. This situation as the radii ro of the droplets decrease
as a consequence of vaporization with consideration of the oscillatory de-
pendence of Ko(ro) (see Fig. 4) in the given case u-6 leads to nonlonotonic
behavior of v,(t) and a considerable reduction of t” as compared with ty.

An increase in R to 10 um shifts function fo(ro) (10) toward__larger r. and
appreciably changes the parameters of the dispersal process 1'1, v. ty. t3y (as
compared with R- S um). Fig. lo shows distributions 1 1(r.) and 6" . op. 6" .

61-. 6,. with respect to r. at R'- 10 us. u-2. Parameters 1‘10.) "practically
(‘1';(r.) exactly) coincide at R- 5 and 10 ms. The maxi-a of distributions

of specific contributions of groups to processes shift toward larger 1:... the
nain contribution being made by droplets with r.~ [0-1.0 ma. At R- 10 um and
constant water content 9 (12), an increase in u reduces the steady-state
velocity of the dispersal wave v. e. g. at “-1 cm" " analogously with the
case RI!) 3-. at u-2. a. 6 respectively we have v- 2A. 22. 6. 21.2 kn/s. Con-
sequently at 3-10 us: and constant_p, parameter u may influence aerosol dis-
persal on wavelength X as well as v.

It is of interest to cospare the values of the principal parameter .7 of the
dispersal process at fixed u for R- S and 10 us. At u- 2. lo. 6 with consider-
ation of constancy of o (12), for every 100 aerosol droplets with function _
f.(r.) (10) at R- 10 um there are about 800 droplets at R- 5 us. Velocity v
calculated with consideration of (12) for an aerosol with R- 10 um is greater
than at R- 5 go for the sauna u- With increasing u (at 11-6) the difference

in values of v decreases (see tables 2. 3). Consequently. parameter R has

183
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an influence on 3. The spatial dimensions of the transition zone A: depend
on R, u: at 3-5 pm. u-6. 65834.7; at R-lO um. u-Z, A£-0.2-0.!). and
at u-6, A£10.35-0.105.

The results of calculations given in tables 2. 3 show that par-eter 1'; (the
ratio of the absorbed radiation energy to the sum of the energies of radiation
absorbed and scattered by the aerosol) does not depend on lo, ‘1‘... u. but only
on the parameters R, u of the function f. (to) and to a lesser extent on the
optical constants n. r. The parameter 1', also changes very little in the
interval 0, t (see Fig. 3). All this shows that '1', is apparently determined
by the initia parameters of the probl- R, u. n. x and does not depend on
the dynanics of processes of vaporization and dispersal. of interest is geri-
vation of an approximate formula for 1‘, that describes the dependence of ‘1';

on the initial parameters of the problan. Let us set

'7‘,-=xn./x.. (13)

where x..-nN, In?!“ (r.) I. (r,) dr. is the coefficient of absorption of radiation

by the aerosol. For example at n- 1.173, v:-8.23°IO'2 [Ref. 10]. R- 5 pm.
g-Z. 4. 6. Tg-OJSS. 0.69. 0.694 respectively; at R- 10 no. u- 2. lo. 6.
7,-0.47. 0.1.1.3. 0.437 respectively. At n- 1.144. mew-10-2 (not; 11.]. _
3-5 an and 11-2. 1‘; (13) is equal to 0.655. From a comparison of ‘1'; and T;
from tables 2, 3 it is clear that (13) correctly describes the dependence of
'1'; on the initial parameters of the problem and agrees satisfactorily with
the nuerical values of 1'3.

Fig. 5 shows the calculated and experimental dependence
“Ref. 9] for the velocity v of the dispersal wave as

a function of the initial coefficient of attenuation
of the probing radiation x3. for some 1.. It can be
seen that the results of calculations agree satis-
factorily with experiment.

REFERENCES

 

l. Glickler. S. I... APPL. OPTICS, Vol 10, 1971, p 6610.

Pig. 5. Experinental

(points) [Ref. 9] and

theoretical (curve)

dependence: of v on

It” for 10-50 (I),

180 (2) and 500 (3)
"/4:-2

lo. Romanov. G. 8.. Pustovslov, V. IL. "Prosvetleniye oblachnoy sredy.
soderzhashchey kapli vody, pod deystviyem intensivnogo monokhronaticheskogo
ialucheniya" [Dispersal of Cloudy Hediul Containing Hater Droplets Under the
Action of Intense Monochromatic Radiation]. Preprint. Institute of Physics.
3888 Acedeuy of Sciences. Minsk. 1975; ZHURNAL MIMSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 107.
1977. p 168.

2. Sukhorukov, A. P., Shtllilov, E. IL. ZHURNAL
TWICRSKOY PIZIKI. Vol 63. 1973. p 1029.

3. Bukatyy. V. I.. Zuyev. V. Ye.. Kuzikovskiy. A. V..
Kluelevtsov. S. 8., DOKLADY MD!!! W 8853.
Vol 217, 1976. p 52.

18h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

l3.

I6.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Korotin. A. V.. Svatogorov. D. Ye.. Sedunov. Yu. S.. Smnov. 1.. P..
m maul “AIR 8883. Vol 220. 1975. p 829.

Cardin. 14. P.. Strelkov. 6. IL. KVANTOVAYA ELEMRA. Vol 3. 1976. p 21027.

Volkovitskiy. o. A.. Hanonov. v. K.. namwm max-mum. Vol 6. 1977.
p 1123.

Yegorov. K. 1).. Kandidav. V. P.. Prakhov. H. 5.. “MAYA ELECTRONHA.
Vol 6. 1979. P 2562.

Volkovitskiy. 0. A” Hatvsysv. 0. H.. Pechorin. V. 1.. Skripkin. A. H..
nun! INSTITUTA maximum. lo 13. 1976. p 108.

Zel'ssnovich. I. I... Shift-in. K. 8.. "Tablitsy po svetoraassyaniyu. t. 3.
Koeffitsiysnty oalableniya. rasseyaniya i luchevogo davlsniya" [Tables
on Light Scattering. Vol 3. Coefficients of Attenuation. Scattering and
Radiation Pressure]. Leningrad. Gidroseteoizdat. 1968.

Puatovalov. V. K.. Rosanov. G. 8.. KVAM'OVAYA MMIKA. Vol lo. 1977.
p 810.

Bargaftik. N. 3.. "Spravochnik po teplofizicheskis avoystvas gazov i
rhidkostey” [nandbook on ‘l’hsrnophysical Properties of Gases and Liquids].
Hoscow. Nauka, 1972.

Kay. J.. Luby. 1'.. "l‘sblitsy fizicheskikh i khisichsskikh postoyannykh"
[Tables of Physical and Chenical Constants]. Hoscov. 61m. 1962.

Zuyev. V. Ye.. "Rasprostraneniye vidi-ykh i infrakrasnykh voln v
atuost’sre" [Propagation of Visible and Infrared Haves in the Atnosphere],
Moscow. Sov. radio. 1970.

Neizvestnyy. A. 1.. DOKIADY mam NAUK SSSR. Vol 2103. 1978. p 626;
IZVBSTIYA MENU. NA”! 5888: SERIYA FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA. Vol 15.
1979. P 76.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". "Kvantovaya elektronika". 1982

6610

080:

[862/133

185
FOR OFNCIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MTHDIATICS

UDC 68l.5.015.26
OPERATIVB IDENTIFICATION 01' CONTROL OBJECTS

Hoscou OPERATIVIIAYA IDENTIFIKAISIYA OB'TBCI'OV UPRAVLENIYA in Russian 1982
(signed to press 2 Dec 81) pp 5-12. 271-272

(Annotation. preface. introduction and table of contents from book "Operative
Identification of Control Objects". by Iosif Isaakovich Perel'man. Bnergoizdat.
6000 copies, 272 pages]

[Text] Methods of operative identification are described and analyzed: pro-
cedures for gathering. restoring and processing a posteriori information coming
from an object for the purpose of getting a running mathematical model that

is necessary for control. Principal attention is given to construction and
analysis of dynanic models that provide a quantitative description of the
object in input-output terms.

For engineers. technicians and scientists in the field of autonatic control.
Will be of use to upperclassaen and graduates in the corresponding areas.

Preface

At the present tine. object identification is one of the most intensively
developing divisions of control theory. The extensive literature on this
problem has been enriched in recent years by a mater of detailed monographs
that have deservedly becone well known among specialists. Nevertneless. new
problems have arisen and been solved with the further development of theory
and practice in identification. Advances in modern computer technology and
the extensive use of computers in control systems have eliminated nmerous
difficulties that had been a major topic of discussion until recently in the
literature on identification. At the sane time. more fundamental and important
unsolved problems have appeared. First among these is the problem of a com-
prehensive approach to identification procedures. and nethods of applying
the results to control algoriths; and secondly. the problem of creating
identification netth that are adequate for actual practice of automated
control system design (especially autonatic systems for controlling coupli-
cated technological objects). i. e. under conditions vhere a model of the
object is to be reconstructed on the basis of a limited value of noisy ex-
perimental data and rather vague a priori information on the internal struc-
ture of the object. and on statistical characteristics of perturbations ap-
plied to the object. In many cases. these difficulties are aggravated still

186
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

note by drifting of the characteristics of the object. The enumerated topics
constitute the principal subject natter of the book.

This book has been written for specialists working in the field of designing
and introducing autasated systems for control of technological processes.

It is asst-ed that the reader is acquainted with the principles of autonatic
control theory (including elements of the theory of randon processes).

The author takes this opportunity to express sincere gratitude to s. B.
Denent'yeva. N. K. Kachko and N. A. Usiyevich for assistance in preparing
the manuscript for publication. and to B. G. Borchik and 0. A. Polyakov for
a masher of constructive consents nade in editing and discussing the book.

The author

Introduction

Given a formulated goal of control and a predetermined quality criterion for
its attainment. the development of any control systen. be it in engineering.
economics or any other field of application. reduces to solution of two inter-
related problens: the problem of constructing a model of the object. and

the problem of constructing a control algorithm corresponding to the given
nodel and to the predetermined goal of system operation. here the tern 'bodel"
is used in a broad sense: it is understood to mean such a minim-t volume

of intonation on the object and the seah- acting on 1: as .1111 be sufficient
for consturcting an optimum or at least workable control procedure.

If the first part of the problem of constructing the systen, i. e. the nodel,
has been obtained. then the second part reduces to synthesis of a control
algorithm when all intonation for this is available. Developnent of the
automatic control theory has come about historically in such a way that until

relatively recently attention has been concentrated mainly on the second part
of the problem.

The generally known advances nade in this direction are the core of the present
theory of control. Such are the classical methods of analysis and synthesis
of closed systems of regulation, filtration and extrapolation of random pro-

cesses, optimal control in the presence of constraints. game theory. queueing
theory and the like.

In the em-erated divisions of the theory. for the most part questions remain
open on how information on the nodel necessary for realizing the given control
system is obtained under real conditions; how this information can be supple-
nented and refined in the course of operation of the system and how the design
of the systen should depend on accuracy of initial information. He must assule
that this omission is indeed one of the nain reasons for such a glaring gap
between the advances in control theory and their practical application. These
same circumstances are the cause of the continuously rising interest in the
theory of identification of control objects. and especially in the problen

of reconstructing unknown cheracteristics of an object fron results of obser-
vation of its output signals.

18?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of identification theory has proceeded at a rapidly accel-
erating pace over the last 15 years. The availability of a large number of
definitive papers on the subject (e. g. monographs 47, 52. 65 in the list

of references) permits us to circumvent detailed enumeration of the advances
that have been made in this area. Nonetheless. a number of gaps remain that
prevent the present theory of identification from fully meeting the require-
ments of practice in designing control systems, and above all -- designing
highly efficient automated control systems for complicated technological fa-
cilities. It is the main goal of this book to narrow some of these gaps.
The approach developed herein consists in methods of reconstructing a mathe-
matical model that gives a description of objects in input-output terms. and
directly using this reconstructed model of the object in different control
algorithms. in doing this. both in designing and using the reconstructed
model there is absolutely no need for the model to reflect the internal proper-
ties of the object (such as values of intermediate phase coordinates or of
the individual parameters of the transfer function of the object). As we
will see later, on the one hand the elimination of these requirements appre-
ciably simplifies the identification problem. On the other hand. getting
rid of these requirements necessitates moving to control systems specially
adapted to the use of reconstructed model..

To explain the additional possibilities opened up by the approach developed

in this book. let us consider the problem area associated with designing sys-
tems for controlling linear dynamic objects. In its traditional formulations.
the problem of identifying such objects is usually taken as that of statistical
estimation of coefficients of the transfer function (or coefficien s of the
system of controls in Cauchy form) at a given order of the object. At first
glance, such a formulation completely corresponds to practical requirements
since the information on coefficients of a differential (or difference) equa-
tion of the object is necessary and sufficient for constructing classical
control algorithms (up to those as complex as optimum algorithms with the

use of a Kalmam filter). However. we can point out the following two circum-
stances that appreciably limit the possibility and advisability of such an
approach.

There are fundamental difficulties involved in finding consistent statistical
estimates of coefficients of the transfer function of the object from noisy
experimental data. The fact is that getting such estimates requires using
the maximum likelihood method. which reduces to forming a likelihood function
sn(e) that depends on the vector of unknown parameters 6 and on the volume

n of the experimental sample in such a way that in the asymptotic limit it
has an extremum at point 0 corresponding to the true value of parameters of
the object. However. unfortunately the likelihood function used in identifi-
cation of a dynamic object in the general case is not unimodal, i. e. in ad-
dition to the mentioned true extremum there are false extrema who e number.
location and depth usually cannot be accounted for ahead of time. As a

 

Iln addition. some papers (e. g. Ref. 67) examine the problem of esti-
mating the unknown order of the transfer function.

ilt can be shown [Ref. ‘6] that the number of extrema of the function
Sn(o) is a random quantity with distribution that depends on n. The upper

188
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORG)FFNJAI.USE(NVLY

consequence. finding the true extremum is a practical possibility only when
there is considerable a priori information on the object (mainly information
that enables preliminary isolation of the region of attraction of this extre-
mum). At the same time. as will be shown later. the mentioned fundamental
difficulties are not typical of the problem of synthesizing a reconstructed
model of the object. This advantage is not bestowed gratis. but is achieved
by the fact that the reconstructed model of the object carries less complete
(rougher) infornation on the object. However. as it turns Out. the latter
disadvantage is of no significance with appropriate choice of control methods.

As was stated above. a model in the form of a differential equation (or trans-
fer function) is needed for constructing traditional control algorithms. At
one time. these algorithns were worked out with consideration of rigid con-
straints stemming from the fact that they were to be realized on then available
analog computer facilities. However. simplicity of realization. which was

the principal advantage of classical control algorithms. has lost its former
importance. Thanks to the use of computers in modern automated systems for
controlling technological processes, capabilities have been brought about

for going on to more universal-control methods enabling expansion of the class
of problems that can be solved in the automated control system. and improving
the economic effectiveness of these systems. As demonstrated in this book.
the information on the object that is necessary for realization of these meth-
1ds can be assigned as a reconstructed model of the object. and in the given

case the entire model (rather than individual parameters) is directly included
in the control algorithm.

Clearly. to set up systems based on using reconstructed models. we need first

of all to have methods of identifying these models. procedures that are workable
under conditions typical of actual automated control system design practice.

In particular. as applied to problems of controlling complex technological
processes this means that the model must be reconstructed on~the basis of

a limited volume of noisy experimental data and rather vague a priori infor-
mation on the object. Moreover. in some cases in addition to these diffi-
culties the characteristics of the object may drift in time so that the model
becomes obsolete.

It is natural that the mentioned circumstances cause some specific peculiari-
ties in the methodology of reconstructing models intended for describing the
behavior of an object in input-output terms. Thus the central issue in syn-
thesizing the reconstructed model of the object becomes selection of the struc-
ture of the model. The essence of this problem is briefly as follows.

All models of identification that are used in practice (including the methods
considered in this book) in spite of all their diversity can be reduced to

a combined scheme: on the basis of certain arguments (based mainly on the
available a priori information on the object) the structure of the model is
chosen. 1. e. the future reconstructed model of the object is assigned except

 

limit of this distribution. 1. e. the maximum possible number of extreme of
the likelihood function. increases in proportion to n although the probability
of reaching this boundary then approaches zero.

189
FINICH"WC]A[.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for a certain number of unknown parameters. Then these parameters are esti-
mated by the corresponding methods of mathematical statistics on the basis
of available experimental observations of operation of the object.

At first glance it would seem that the more complex the selected structure

of the model. i. e. the greater the number of its parameters that can be varied
(the number of degrees of freedom). the greater will be the possibilities

for improving accuracy of the reconstructed model. In fact this is not the
case. As will be shown later in this book. if the time of gathering experi-
mental data is limited (and under real conditions this always occurs). the
accuracy of the reconstructed model (as a whole) is an extremum function of

the complexity of the structure: other things being equal. as the complexity
of the structure increases the accuracy of the reconstructed model of the
object at first increases. and then falls off; the optimum complexity depends
on the volume of available experimental information. and on the characteristics
of the object. In view of the fact that with respect to formulation of the
identification problem itself these characteristics are a priori unknown and
can be estimated only by using the reconstructed model. a vicious.circle arises
in selecting the structure that makes a formal approach to optimum construction
of the model impossible. Furthermore, the available information under real
conditions is often inadequate even for sound application of relatively compli-
cated statistical methods of evaluating the parameters of the model (such

as minimizing the Bayes risk).

Thus on some stages of identification (and especially on the stage of choosing
the structure). the developer is faced with a creative task - the necessity
of making a decision under conditions that are not strictly formalized. i. e.
under conditions where an attempt at optimality (like the concept of "optimum
decision" itself) loses its connotative meaning and is replaced by the more
capacious and less specific concept of a rational decision.

At this stage of our presentation it might be advisable to move away from

our main topic and examine the following question. that is in some sense philo-
sophical: what part is played by theory. and first of all by exact mathe-
matical methods. in the solution of creative engineering problems in general.
and in the problem area that we are considering in particular?

Before going on to a specific answer. we should point out the fundamental
difference in the goals of theoretical studies relating to a system with com-
plete information and the problems that are being considered here. In the
former case. the goal is to get an unambiguous operating method that leads

to optimum solution of the foreulated problem. Although the results of the
theory are formally addressed to a human operator. in actuality this situation
can be circumvented by putting the appropriate theoretical results in the

form of a computer program into which the engineer who is developing the system
has only to enter specific numerical material. In other words. application
of theoretical results to solution of practical problems in the given case
does not require the intelligence of the developer. Let us note that this
advantage is typical of many divisions of the technical sciences; for example:
calculation and design of electrical machines. electronic amplifiers. standard
machine components and the like are strictly programmable.

190

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

However. this is not the part played by theory in the other area of practice
where elements of uncertainty make it impossible to establish a strict program
of optimum operations, and one must make do with rational decisions that are
arrived at by application of human intelligence to a specific practical prob-
lem. This area covers such processes of practical activity as scientific
research. diagnosis, administrative management and so on. Here the applied
value of theory consists in providing the ham operator with statuary repre-
sentations that show the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each

of these strategies under various conditions of use. and enable analysis of

the possible results of applying each of these strategies. Thus in contrast

to problems with complete information where the synthesis of Optllll- solutions
is of principal significance. in problems that contain an element of creativity
the main purpose of theory is to provide methods of analysis and to evaluate
the quality of decisions.

All this is applicable to the specific problem under consideration. In solving
the problem of reconstructing a model under conditions of insufficient a priori
information, the designer of the model lust rely on theoretical knowledge

that is provided mainly by the following material:

knowledge of basic patterns in the way that the choice of structures affects
quality of the reconstructed model;

the formalism of theoretical analysis of the quality of identification algo-
rithms, and the principal facts established on the basis of such analysis
concerning the comparative advantages of these algorithms when the models
reconstructed with their aid are used in control problems.

This problem area is the main topic of this book.
Basic notation in the text follows theses principles:

matrices are denoted by boldface upper-case letters;

vectors (column matrices) -- by boldface lower-case letters;

A'-—transpossd matrix;

l-|-norn of a matrix (vector);

spA-Spurof a matrix;

Qr-equality by definition;

H{f(')l--mathematical expectation of f(') taken over sets of all random argu-
ments of this function; Hx,y(f(x. y, 2) and H{f(x, y, z)Iz}--conditional mathe-
matical expectation of function f(x, y, 2) taken over the set of random varia-

bles x and y at given 2;
Vv-quantor of generality (vxc;x corresponds to the formulation "for all x

that belong to the set X").

Contents page
Preface 5
Introduction 6
Chapter 1: Problems of Constructing Models of Regular and Quasirsgular
Control Objects 13
191

FOR¢MHHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.1. Model of control object

1.2. Basic concepts and definitions

1.3. Problem of conditional prediction of object output response

1.6. Problem of model reconstruction

Chapter 2: Role of Model in Control Problems

2.1. Perturbation control system

2.2. Linear dynamic systems with feedback

2.3. Preliminary verification of economic effectiveness of automated
system for control of technological processes by simulation
methods

2.6. Preliminary evaluation of change in production cost

2.5. Dynamic optimization in automated system for control of techno-
logical processes

2.6. Using algoritlm for conditional prediction of object output
response in categorical prediction of perturbing actions

Chapter 3: Models Reconstructed in the Form of Regression Equations

3.1. Fundamental algorithms for evaluating parameters of regression
equation

3.2. Basic information on least-squares method

3.3. Asymptotic properties of error of reconstructed model of object

3.6. Technique for improving convergence of estimates by least-squares
method

3.5. Investigation of error of conditional prediction

3.6. Dynamic regression analysis

3.7. Recurrence algorithms of dynamic least-squares method

3.8. Comparative classification of structural peculiarities of models

3.9. Proofs of the propositions of chapter 3

Chapter 6: Analysis of Models of Linear Dynamic Objects

6.1. Regression models of discrete dynamic objects

6.2. Prediction losses when statistical properties of signals coincide
on learning and examination

6.3. Discrete dynamic object with infinite memory

6.6. Regression discrete model for object with continuous time

6.5. Proofs of the propositions of chapter 6

Chapter 5: Algorithms of Conditional Prediction Based on Models With

Generalized Input

5.1. Estimates of parameters of difference equation and problem of using
them in conditional prediction algorithms

5.2. Hultistep conditional prediction algoriths

5.3. Brrorofestimating parameters of algorithm for conditional pre-
diction of object output response

5.6. Prediction losses in multistep algorithms for conditional pre-
diction of object Output response

5.5. Specifics of multistep algorithms for conditional prediction of
object output response

5.6. Problem of conditional prediction on an interval

5.7. Proofs of propositions of chapter 5

Chapter 6: Adaptive Algorithms of Dynamic Identification

6.1. Problem of adaptation of the function g(s) for objects with
directed drift of parameters

6.2. Characteristics of sinuoaity of trajectory of estimates and its use
for regulating width of the window

192

FOI‘OFFKJALVUSB(NULY

13
21
33
63
56
56
61

65
71

81

95
98

108
11

116
118
129
135
139
155
160
160

168
172
180
192
199

199
203

212
219
225
235
239
262
263

268
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.3. Statistical nodeling of algorittn with variable width of window
6.6. Adaptive algoritln of axponontial weighting

References

COPYRIGHT: hetgoizdnt. 1982

6610
080: [862/157 '

193

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 62-501.l63
“KINDS OF SYNTHESIZUG Mil-SENSITIVITY LINEAR MOI. 91813918

Moscow HBTODY SDITBZA LINEYNY‘ﬂl sxsrsu UMVLENIYA NIZKOY CBUVSTVITBL'NOSTI
in Russian 1981 (signed to press 26 Oct 81) pp 2-9. 100-103. 105

[Annotatiom introduction. conclusion and table of contents from book "Methods
of Synthesizing Low-Sensitivity Linear Control Systems". by Aleksandr lvanovich
Yermachenko. lzdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 1920 copies. 105 pages]

{Text} The book exaeines the theory and practical methods of synthesizing
control systems with low sensitivity to parametric perturbations. Algorithms
are proposed for synthesizing linear singly connected and multiply connected
automatic systems with consideration of requirements for fundamental and ad-
ditional motions. They enable development of modern engineering methods of
design with the use of computers. Examples are given.

The book is intended for scientists and engineers working in the field of
synthesizing control systems.

Table 1. figures 31. references 36.

Introduction

The increasing complication of functions performed by automatic control systems
and rising requirements for working quality of these systems under conditions
of limited resources make it necessary to improve known methods and develop

new ones for designing technical systems. Several approaches have been used

in research on synthesizing automated control systems with consideration of

requirements for insensitivity to changes in the parameters of components
[ufe lls

The first approach is synthesis of systems according to criteria of parametric
invariance and zero sensitivity [Ref. 1-9]. and in the second [Ref. 3. 10.

ill the structure of the system is selected such that the point of inclusion

of an object as the least stable'link is determined by sensitivity requirements.
The third approach (Ref. 6. 12] is based on introducing redundant components
(correcting links) that give rise to an additional degree of freedom in the
system. Such systems with redundant components were called systems with two
degrees of freedom in Ref. 12. The redundancy in these systems is used for
simultaneous satisfaction of requirements for fundamental and additional

19‘:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OII OFFICIAL USE "NIX

notions. He will consider synthesis of optimum crude systems lief. l. 6.
13. u] as a fourth approach. The new factor here with respect to nethods
of optiaua control synthesis is the presence of a crudeness functional that
say be aininized or used as a constraint. depending on the formulation of
the problem. The fifth approach is based on introducing additional feedback
into the system: feedback with respect to sensitivity functions (Ref. 1.

6. M. 15-20].

Analysis of all these approaches shows that each of them asaues a change

in structure of the cantrol device such that one of the properties of the
systan -- sensitivity to variations of system component parameters -- varies
-in a certain way. Sensitivity is closely interrelated with other character-
ietics of the system such as stability. the quality indicators of transient
processes and the like. this relatiouhip does not always permit attsit-ent
of arbitrary sensitivity of the ayaten when other characteristics are assigned.
and requires introduction of constraints on additional variables (sensitivity
functions) when calculating low-sensitivity control of an object.

But introduction of constraints does not mean that they are met. Often such
additional constraints make the problem of choosing the necessary control
unsolvable. hence an important problem arises: finding the conditions under
which predetermined constraints on sensitivity or additional motion can be
ensured. Only when we have such conditions can we go on to calculate the
required low-sensitivity control with firm conviction that such a control
exists. Otherwise the designer will be doomed to prolonged and fruitless
searches for a nonexistent control.

One of the mandatory conditions of meeting arbitrary reatrictionr on sensi-
tivity is its controllability (Ref. 7-9]. Controllability of the vector func-
tion of sensitivity to some parameter scans the capability of converting it
in the space of sensitivity functions from any arbitrary state to the aero
state (coordinate origin).

Disregard of the sensitivity controllability factor when synthesizing low-
aansitivity systems may lead to an unsuccessful search for a usable solution
in the structure of the control device that in principle does not pernit re-
duction of sensitivity to the required level.

Let us consider in more detail methods of synthesizing automated control sys-
tems with regard to sensitivity requirements.

Solutions for the problem of synthesizing systems with respect to criteria

of paruetric invariance and zero sensitivity in Ref. 1-6 lead to very rigid
and often unrealisable conditions under which zero sensitivity is attained.

For example. requirenents of infinite gain. ideal differentiation and others
are extraely difficult to satisfy in real automatic control systems. Other
solutions [Ref. 1. 6] of the given problem are more accessible of realisation.
but have a limited range in the space of parameters of the zero-sensitivity
aysten. This may be an advantage for simultaneous satisfaction of requirements
for sensitivity and for the quality indicea of principal motion.

195
ron omcm. use onur
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Italian authors of Ref. 7-9 have used the principles of higher algebra
and functional analysis as a basis for deriving general conditions of existence
of subspaces with zero sensitivity and of the possibility of conversion of

the vector function of sensitivity in such spaces for linear automatic control
systems.

We should note the limitation of the range of application of results of Ref.
2-6 with respect to synthesizing zero-sensitivity systems. as they deal with
singly connected control systems, whereas any fairly complex objects are multi-
dimensional and multiply connected systems.

On the basis of the above discussion we can conclude that it is more realistic
to formulate the problem of reducing sensitivity to some limited level meeting
our requirements rather than to zero. Problems of reducing sensitivity or
additional motion to a predetermined value are considered in Ref. 1. 3. 6.
[0-20 (the second to fifth approaches).

The possibilities of the methods of synthesis by the second approach (Ref.

3. 10. 11) are limited since frequently from practical considerations or in
accordance with conditions of physical realizability it is impossible to intro-
duce multiple feedbacks on the least stable component of the system (the object
of control is usually such a component).

In the methods of synthesis proposed in Ref. 6. 12. which apply to the third
approach. it is assumed that we are given the maximum variations of system
parameters. the desired sensitivity functions or the requirements for additional
motion caused by maximum deviations of parameters. The requirements for ad-
ditional motion or sensitivity are usually assigned in the frequency region

or in the region of a complex variable; the requirements for additional motion
that occurs in the system in the absence of variations of parameters are anal-
ogously assigned.

Solution of the problem of synthesis with consideration of requirements for
sensitivity (additional motion) is sought in a predetermined class of system
structures (applying to systems with two degrees of freedom). This solution
leads to the use of two types of correcting devices with large gains and high
orders of the numerator and denominator of their transfer functions. A con-
sequence of this is considerable broadening of the passband of the system.
and hence poor interference immunity. Thus high gain and a wide passband

are the price that the designer must pay for the achieved reduction of sensi-
tivity.

In Ref. 6, the method of synthesis with consideration of sensitivity require-
ments that is based on using redundant correcting devices is developed for
the case where there are redundant parameters in the system. Usually this
takes place when calculating the parameters of correcting components. the
above-mentioned redundancy being used to satisfy requirements for sensitivity
of the individual characteristics of the system (it is assumed here that the
structure of the system and the form of the correcting elements are assigned).

Methods of synthesis belonging to the fourth approach in principle enable
us to find the structure and parameters of the controlling device that ensure

196
was omcul. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a given stability. novever. they require complicated and labor-consuming
calculations. and lead to complex realizations of the controlling device.
They are applicable (considering the capabilities of modern computers) to
objects of relatively low order of complexity. Furthermore. in published
paper; .hs results are mainly theoretical. and what is very important. many
of the lack the conditions of existence of the desired controls by which
the given sensitivity is realised.

The approach based on introducing additional feedbacks with respect to sensi-
tivity functions into the system has been defended in some research by Soviet
and other authors lief. l. 6. 14-20] (including the author of this book).

and has now received recognition and the right to life. The idea of this
approach (Ref. 15] consists in assigning the structure of the controlling
device end subsequent selection of its permuters from the condition of satis-
fying requirements for principal and additional motions. The controlling
device proposed in Ref. 15 for linear steady-state singly connected systems
contains feedback with respect to sensitivity functions. Since then. it hes
been successfully demonstrated that the given approach is applicable to synthe-
sis of low-sensitivity multiply connected automatic control systems. Condi-
tions have been derived for the existence of a control that ensures meeting

of predetermined constraints on additional motion. and on the basis of these
conditions algorithms have been developed for synthesizing multiply connected
automatic control systems with consideration of principal and additional mo-
tions. AlthOugh the control derived on the basis of these conditions is rather
complicated. its existence was guaranteed. and this opened up the way for
further simplification with a certain degree of precision in hardware realisa-
tion of the given controlling device. The proposed algorithms of synthesis,
including solution of nonlinear programing problems. systems of linear and
nonlinear equations and inequalities. enable computer automation of all oper-
ations with respect to calculation of the necessary low-sensitivity control.
Analytical solutions (with consideration of relative complexity of the calcula-
tions and the large dimensionality of the problms) were found by considering
linearized systems of equations.

The introduction of constraints on the sensitivity functions does not require
high gain or a side passband for reduction of system sensitivity. therefore
the given method may find application in cases where for some reason it is
impossible to appreciably increase the gain or when there is a high level

of interference at the input of the system or in the feedback circuit. and

a certain degree of interference immunity is required.

Smelling up our brief analysis. we should especially emphasize that in view

of the extreme complexity of the problem of synthesizing control systems with
onsideration of insensitivity. the methods of calculation now known have been
developed chiefly for linear systems. and are mostly theoretical. the majority
of these are still a long way from direct engineering applications.

Among the few methods that have been brought to the point of engineering tech-
niques. we can take notice of methods based on introducing redundant correcting
components and leading to systems with two degrees of freedom. One of the
authors of this approach (A. H. Horowitz. Ref. 12) has developed the method

197
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to an engineering technique. however. his proposed graphic analysis procedure
requires a large nuber of trial versions in the search for a usable solution.
and the designer has to do the work by hand (without a computer).

Therefore in this book the author has attenpted to use the available literature
and his own research as a basis for working out modern engineering procedures
for synthesis with consideration of additional action. based on introducing
constraints on sensitivity functions and use of the principle of two degrees

of freedom. to substantiate these procedures. and to apply the to singly

and nultiply connected autonatic control systens.

The tern modern will be understood to mean synthesis procedures based on ana-
lyrical and nuerical methods of calculation and extensive use of computers.
Computer technology. which assists in automating a nulber of calculations

and additional operations that engineers until recently had done by hand.
considerably extends the capabilities of engineering nethods of design. takes
them nore penetrating. comprehensive and therefore note reliable.

The principal results of development of the methods are presented in Ref.
15-20.

The book consists of three chapters. The first investigates the feasibility
of reducing additional notion caused by variations of paraneters in the class
of structures that contain feedbacka with respect to sensitivity functions.
The problem of synthesizing systems with consideration of principal and ad-
ditional notions is foraulated as applied to linear steady-state singly con-
nected automatic control systems (systems for autcnatic regulation). The
conditions of existence of their solution are considered. An engineering
synthesis technique is presented and computational algoritl-e are given that
are used in this problem. The feasibility of sinplifying constraint: with
respect to the sensitivity functions are studied.

The second chapter is dedicated to presenting a nethod of synthesizing singly
connected systens with consideration of requirenents of principal and addi-
tional notions in the class of structures that contain two types of correcting
components: series and parallel. This chapter describes how the required
(desired) characteristics of the systen are obtained. and investigates condi-
tions of solvability of the for-elated synthesis problu.

The third chapter gives a method of limited synthesis of nultiply connected
automatic regulation system that retain required dynamic properties and sta-
bility reserves when coqonent pamters are varied (within certain linits)
in the class of structures that contain feedbacks with respect to sensitivity
functions. It is shown that the principle of equivalence can be used in cal-
' culating nultiply connected auto-stic regulating eye-.oes with consideration
of principal and additional motions. methods are described for obtaining sensi-
tivity functions (constructing sensitivity nodels). and a synthesis procedure
for linear aultiply connected autonatic regulating systeas with consideration
of principal and additional motions based on the results of the first and
second chapters.

All chapters are illustrated by examples.

198
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The author thanks Doctor of Technical Sciences R. H. Yusupov whose work and
attention were conducive to the appearance of this hook. and also Doctor of
Technical Sciences, Professor Ye. N. lozenvasser for useful advice and for
co-enta aade in editing.

The work was done at the Institute of Autoaetion and Control Processes of
the Par Eastern Science Center. 088! Acadeny of Sciences. The author will
walcoee readsrs' consents on inadequacies:

Counts and suggestions should be addressed to: Hoskva. Gl. pocht-t. a/ya
693. izd-vo "Radio 1 svyaz'".

Conclusion

Research in the field of synthesizing low-sensitivity automatic control systeas
has been asiuly theoretical. At the ease tine. developers of precision and
high-quality systeas need engineering techniques for designing autoaatic con-
trol systens with consideration of additional action that are based on exten-
sive use of coaputers. Considering the needs of practice. an attsnpt hes

been aade in this book to develop nodern enuneering aethods of synthesizing
systeaa with consideration of principal and additional notions that are based
on introducing constraints with respect to sensitivity functions and using

the principle of two degrees of freedoa.

An investigation was nade of the problsn of synthesizing (in the frequency
region) linear autoaatic control systeea that retain their required operational
quality in the presence of uncontrollable variations (over certain limits)

of para-eters. as applied to singly connected and nultiply connected autoaatic
control systems. No classes of structures have been used to solve this prob-
lea. In the first. additional feedbacks with respect to sensitivity functions
are introduced into the initial systaa. The second uses two correcting links
— series and parallel. The purpose of using the letter class of structures
is to simplify the structure of a systen of the first class. In doing this.
the frequency responses of the automatic control systens with constraints on
sensitivity functions were taken as the desired characteristics for which
raquireasnts on principal and additional notions are net. The frequency re-
sponse curves of control systeas with a structure of the second class approach
these characteristics in the process of calculation.

The suggested approach to synthesis of singly connected autoaatic regulating
systs-s was then applied to aultiply connected autoaatic regulating systsns
using the equivalence principle.

In chapter 1 of the book, we derived conditions of existence of a control

in the autaatic control systsa 'enxuring satisfaction of predeterained require-
aents in the system being synthesised on principal and additional notions.
They enable foraulation of algoritlns for calculating the necessary correction
for singly connected and aultiply connected autoaatic control (regulating)
systems realizable by using coaputers.

Conditions were also obtained whose satisfaction in autoaatic control systens
of the second class of structures ensures the desired frequency responses

199
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1. e. the characteristics shown by automatic control systens with constraints
on sensitivity functions for which requirements are satisfied on dynanics

and on stability reserves of the systen. so well as on additional motion in
the frequency region). These constraints are conditions of replacement of
restrictions on sensitivity functions with sinpler correcting links. 1. e.
conditions of si-plification of the constraints on sensitivity functions.

On their basis. an algoritl- can be formulated for calculating the necessary
correcting links (series and parallel). It is noted that when the given con-
ditions cannot be met. the constraints on sensitivity functions cannot be
sinplified. and the correction that accounts for the require-ants on the ad-
ditional motion must be retained in its original fern.

1t out be especially noted thatthe proposed netth of synthesizing auto-
mated control systess and multiply connected automatic regulating systens
with consideration of principal and additional notions ere analytical. This
neans that when calculating controls (correcting links) we can use effective
algorithms and salts extensive use of nodern computers. This capability is
a greet advantage of the techniques.

The search for necessary solutions (correcting links) in the given synthesis
techniques requires a conparetively nail amber of trial versions and calcu-
lations. In calculations of the punters of correcting links. aethods of
optinization are used (nonlinear prograuing nethods). Since the formalise
of nonlinear programing has now been rather well developed. and the conpu-
tetionsl capabilities of modern computers are extensive. the given methods
make the work of designers in synthesizing automatic control systems sore
effective.

An important advantage of the proposed methods is the possibility offered

to the designer at the beginning of synthesis to answer the question: can

1 use the given class of structures to get the desired characteristics in

the system with respect to both principal and additional notion? This con-
siderahly reduces the ties of search for the necessary structure of the con-
trolling device. and hence reduces the time for designing the automatic control
system.

Despite the advantages of the given nethods of synthesis. their application
necessitates a fairly large volume of unual preparatory work (involving una-
voidable errors) and leads to rather complicated control devices (especially
in the first class of structures). Although it is difficult to avoid the
first disadvantage. the second can be overcome. considering the rapid pace
of development and introduction of microprocessor control devices for complex
and decisive objects. as well as eicroprocessor 1.81 chips.

Realization of the proposed correction. including sensitivity nodels. correcting
links md so on. based on the microprocessor f-ily of 1.81 chips will present
no particular difficulties. the norsso as at the present tine the cost of

such a chip is no lore than 10-20 dollars Ref. 36]. and the selection of
microprocessor L31 chips is constantly expanding (and at an increasing pace).

200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contents

Introduction
Chapter 1: Synthesis of Automatic Control Systems With Constraints

on Sensitivity Functions

1.1. Problem of synthesizing automatic systems with consideration of

principal and additional motions

1.2. Approach to solution

1.3. Formulating the problem of synthesis

1.6. Feasibility of satisfying given requirements

1.5. Nonlinear progra-ing matloda

1.6. Choice of computational algorithms

1.). Method of synthesis

1.8. Simplification of sensitivity functions

Chapter 2: Calculation of Automatic Control System with Consideration
of Principal and Additional notions

2.1. Formulation of the problem

2.2. Dimensionality of the problu of synthesis

2.3. Method of synthesis

Chapter 3: Accounting for Principal and Additional Motions "hen
Synthesizing Multiply Connected Systems

3.1. formulation of problem and approach to solution

3.2. Constructing sensitivity models for multiply connected systems

3.3. Equivalence of multiply connected systems and its application

3.5. Method of synthesis

Conclusion

References

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Radio 1 svyaz'". 1981

6610
CSO: 1862/158

201
F0ltlﬂﬂ€1A1.USE(NVLY
k FOR omcm. use ONLY

,.'-'

UDC 519.6
ADAPTIVE CONTROL

Moscow ADAPTIVNOYE UPMVLENIY! in Russian 1981 (signed to press 5 Oct 81)
pp 2-12

[Annotation. preface. introduction and table of contents tron book. "Adaptive
Control". by Vladimir Grigor'yevich Sragovich. Irdatel'stvo 'ﬂauka". 6100
copies. 3“ pages]

[Text] The book gives a fairly couplets exposition of the present state of
the mathematical theory of adaptive control. Controllable random processes
are taken as a model of control objects. Adaptive control algoriths are
presented in a form convenient for coeputer realization. These elgorithss

are intended for a variety of jobs (optimization and stabilization) in discrete
and continuous ties.

The book is written for specialists in cybernetics. applied mathematics and
control theory. It may be of use to undergraduate and graduate students with
majors in the appropriate areas.

Pref ace

In problmas of a number of scientific disciplines relating to decision asking
and data processing. more and more research is being done on situations of
"mcertainty". insufficiency of a priori information. Situations of this
kind have arisen in problems of control, recognition. identification. fore-
casting and filtration. This has prompted the search for methods of solving
the corresponding probleas that are insensitive to scatter of the properties
of the objects of control or identification. recognition patterns and so on.
Such methods have been developed and given special names: in control theory
- "adaptive methods". in identification theory - "robust methods". This
book deals with adaptive methods of control.

when there is insufficient a priori information in control theory. the problea
of reaching a predetermined goal should be solved for an arbitrary object

fron some class or set rather than for a specific. completely defined object.
In accordance with this principle. adaptive control algorithms differ from
algorithms of classical control theory (vhere the object is completely known)
in that it may not be known just what object of a class is to be controlled
and guided to a target. In such cases. it is often said that the algorithm

202
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aust be "adapted" or "adjusted" to the object. and the goal is attained after
"learning" .

Over a period of nearly thirty years. many groups of researchers have been
developing methods of adaptive control for different classes of objects. The
work has been done chiefly in the applied aspect. and the results attained

as a rule have been published in aonograrphs. At present there are several
dozen aonographa in Russian and English. The predoainant style of exposition
- "by engineers for engineers" - should. as the authors intended. be con-
ducive to popularization of the aethode along the representatives of various
technical disciplines. and thereby should promote practical application of
these nethods. This research (and consequently the aonographs) has not always
given due attention to the Iaatheasticsl aspect of the problems considered.
However. a considerable fraction of adaptive research certainly has appre-
ciable asthenatical significance. and in future the role of such research
will be even nore considerable. “therefore it is both desirable and necessary
to sun up at least sons of the development of aatheaatical aspects of adaptive
control theory. This book seena to be a first atteapt to do just that. Here
we have smed up a considerable percentage of the exact results of adaptive
control from a unified standpoint. Probably the tine has not yet cone for

an exhaustive. encyclopedic presentation.

The aaterial is divided into three parts. In the first - "General Problens"
-- we have formulated major concepts (controllable randon process. strategy.
adaptive control). pointed out a useful representation of adaptive controlling
systees (in discrete ties) as autonata. introduced "associated Markov pro-
cesses" and discussed the peculiarities of adaptive control and its difference
fron classical control. Chapter 3 amines the identification method of fora-
ing adaptive control algorithas.

The second part -- "Controlling Classes of Processes Hith Discrete Tine" —
occupies the nest space. In order of increasing coaplexity of the classes
of controllable randon processes, algorithle are synthesized and investi-
gated first for the siaplest processes. and then for control of classes of
Markov chains and functionals on then. and finally methods of controlling
classes of steady-state processes. Chapter 5 studies a specific problea -
games of automate.

The third part -- "Controlling Classes of Processes With Continuous Tine" --
is coaparatively brief. Chapter ll deals with optiairation problems: one
relates to "optinali:ing controllers". and the other refers to seni-Harkov
processes with into-es. Chapter 12 is devoted to problens of stability of
solutions of ordinary and sotchastic differential equations.

Sane of the results given in the book are new, which is indicated in each
case in the "Notes" at the end of the book.‘ As a rule. references are limited
to we ‘ks that are reflected in the nain text.

The attempt to cover the subject as broadly as possible has entailed diversity
in the sense that the book uses methods and facts from different branches
of mathe-atica. This makes elevated demands on education of readers.

203
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aonograph is addressed primarily to nathenaticians and pursues the goal
of turning their attention to a new field of research. It is the author's
hope that the book will be useful to all those interested in control theory.
and also to engineers working in design of auto-sted control systeas.

I was assisted in preparing the aaterials for the book by H. G. Konovalov
and A. A. Burtsev. They have my sincere gratitude.

Introduction

The basic concepts of control theory are "control object".' "control target"
and "control algoritln" (strategy). maples of objects are differential
equations (ordinary and sotchastic) that incorporate controls. and controllable
Markov chains with functionals that are defined on then, etc.

The controls nust be selected so that a certain problens is solved that con-
sists in the object having a certain property: that the solution of a dif-
ferential equation be stable in acne sense. tht-t a functional on a Harkov
chain be extrm. etc. This problen is called the control target.

The problsa of synthesizing controls consists in finding algoriths (strate-
gies) that solve the problen of the required properties of the object. Snee-
tines for the sake of brevity it will be stated that such algorittaas "bring
the object to the target" or "ensure attainnent of the target".

The present divisions of control theory indicate nethods (algorithms) for
controlling specific, conpletely defined objects. "Specificity" of an object
denotes conpleteness of its description within the framework of the fornal
requirements of the corresponding division of control theory. and does not
allow the presence of unknown paraneters and functions. This prenise was
nandatory in the for-alien of the "classical" theory. and was no inpedinent
to diverse applications in the 1950's as long as it was not necessary to con-
trol objects whose description suffers froa incompleteness. Under conditions
of such "uncertainty" there nay be three approaches to the control problen:
a) wait to get exhaustive inforastion on the object; b) attenpt to conbine
control of the inprecisely defined object with acquisition of all lacking
infomtion about it; c) synthesize a theory of adaptive control. These pos-
sibilities have indeed been historically realised, the second of then being
the inpetus to developnent of the identification neth of control, which
consists in conbining estinetes of the characteristics of an object with
classical neth of solving control problens. In the sinplest cases where
the structure of the control object is known beforehand, identification nethods
enable ascertainment of values of the unknown coefficients (for exanple in
linear difference or differential equations). In addition to such problens.
it is frequently necessary in practice to find not only the para-sters, but
also the functions that describe an object. and even to try to establish the
for. of the functional dependence of the output aipal and state of the object
on applied controlling actions. Being self-evident in principle, the identi-
fication aethod inediately becane popular and was used in solving the first
probleas of adaptive control. The limits of applicability of this technique
subsequently becene evident (consistent estiastes of the paraneters of the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

object do not always exist and the algoritln of solution of the problem of
classical control is not necessarily known). Therefore specific "adaptive"
methods of control that do not require detailed investigation of the proper-
ties of the object began to move into first place. A simple idea became clear:
the control system must ensure attainaent of the formulated target. and the
"gathering. storage and processing of information" about the object are neces-
sary only in minimum measure as the information is required for reaching the
target. He now know many different adaptive controlling systems that do not
provide information on the properties of the control object no matter how

long they may operate.

A universal means of representing control objects is "controllable random
processes" that may be assigxed by a family of conditional probability distri-
bution functions that depend on a “control". Uncertainty of assingent of

the object consists in the fact that the family of conditional probabilities
contains unknown parameters or functions. Indication of the possible ranges
of these parameters or the form of the unknown functions delineates the class
of families of conditional distributions. 1. a. the class of controllable
random processes. Operating with such classes distinguishes adaptive control
theory from classical control theory. The adaptive control algorithm rests
on information about the states of the process to be controlled coming through
a feedback channel. and it ensures attainment of the assigned target by any
object of the class. even though it remains unknown just exactly what object
is an element of this class. In other words, algorithm A can be considered
an adaptive control algorittm only in cases where we have a specified class K
of controllable objects and a target 2 such that algorithn A brings any object
of K to this target.

Another difference between adaptive and classical control methods is that

the adaptive methods ensure strait-lent of the designated target for any object
of a certain class rather than for just one precisely known object. In the
course of control. these methods evaluate certain parameters of the object
from observations of the object. These estimates are frequently statistical.
and therefore the duration of the estimation cannot be specified beforehand
without loss of reliability in the result. This implies the necessity of
formulating adpative control algorithms for an unrestricted time interval.
Let us add that the instant when the object begins to be close to the desig-
nated target is a "non-Harkov time". i. e. it is determined by the future
evolution of the object. and its arrival cannot be observed. Consequently

at no instant of the control process can an outside observer state that the
adaptive system has already served its purpose. and its functions can be turned
over to a controlling system of classical type.

The content of the overwhelming majority of results of the mathematical
theory of adaptive control consists in indication of sufficient conditions

of existence of adaptive control. For a class of objects it and control target
2. such conditions not only state the existence of an adaptive control algo-
rithm. but also give its description. 1. e. the sufficient conditions are
constructive. Necessary conditions of existence of adaptive control are known
so far only for a small amber of cases.

205
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In conclusion. let us call attention to the uneven development of adaptive
control theory for objects evolving in discrete and continuous time. Despite
the fact that the theory had its inception with research on objects of the
second type. advances in this direction have been much more nodest than in

the investigation of control of objects with discrete tine. This is because
of the considerable difficulties that arise in the case of continuous time.

So far we have been successful in relatively anbitious advancement of research
on algorithas that ensure stability of solutions of linear differential equa-
tions.

At the present time. numerous problems in the control of “distributed objects"
with description by partial differential equations and integrodifferential
equations remain nearly untouched. Control of such objects has been dealt
with for a considerable time in the nonadaptive theory.

Contents page
Preface 5
Introduction 9
PART I: GENERAL PROBLEMS 13
Chapter 1: Models of Controllable Objects and Controlling Systems 13
1. Graphic description of control object 13
2. Subsidiary infornation 15
3. Controllable randon processes 23
lo. Control targets 28
Chapter 2: Adaptive Control 36
1. Definition of adaptive control 36
2. Learning systena 38
3. Associative Markov processes 1.7
10. General remarks on adaptive control 1.9
Chapter 3: Identification Method 54
I. Prelininary remarks 5/.
2. Uniform estimation procedures 56
3. Bayes method on finite interval 61
PART 2: ADAPTIVE CONTROL OF CLASSES 0F PROCESSES um! DISCRETE TIME 65
Chapter 4: Controlling Homogeneous Processes With Independent Values by
Using Autonata 66
l. Formulation of the problem 66
2. Finite automata for scalar restricted homogeneOus processes with
independent values [HPIV] 7O
3. Algorithas for controlling restricted HPIV 83
lo. Autonata for scalar HPIV 86
5. Asymptotically optinum automate 107
6. Algoritl- for controlling periodic processes with independent values 118
7. Adaptive search for conditional extrem- 122
Chapter 5: Game Problems for Some HPIV [28
1. Preliminary remarks 128
2. Games of automata 129
3. Examples of Cues of Autonata 145
’0. Adaptive games with noncontradictory interests M9
206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6: Controlling Finite Markov Chains

1. Preliminary remarks

2. Structure of finite homogeneous controllable Markov chains

3. Conditions of existence of optim- adsptive strategies for Markov
chains

lo. Pirst algoritlm for control of Markov chains

5. Second algoritlm for control of Markov chains

6. Third algoritlm for control of Markov chains

7. Algorithae for controlling class of inhomogeneous Markov chains

8. Controlling graphs with incomes

9. Generalizations

Chapter 7: Controlling Functionals on Partly Observable Markov Chains

l. Formulation of the problem

2. Subsidiary results

3. Description of adaptive strategies for classes of partly observable
Markov chains with incomes

lo. Controllable conditional Markov chains

Chapter 8: Recurrent Procedures for Controlling MPIV

l. Formulation of the problem

2. Monroe-Robbins procedure

3. Kiefer-Holfowitz procedure

lo. Stochastic programing

Chapter 9: Recurrent Procedures for Problems With Criterial Inequalities

l. Formulation of the problem

2. Finitely convergent procedures for solving countable systems of
inequalities

3. Some general conditions of existence of finitely converging pro-
cedures

Ia. Stabilization of solutions of linear difference equations. I

5. Stabilization of solutions of linear difference equations. II

6. Optimal stabilization of solutions of linear stochastic equations

Chapter 10: Control of Steady-State Processes

l. Formlation of the problem

2. Subsidiary propositions

3. Adaptive algoritl'ns for classes of steady-state processes

pm 3: ADAPTIVE CONTROL OF CLASSES 0P PROCESSES WITH COM'IMWUS TIME

Chapter 11: Optimization Problems of Controlling Classes of Processes

with Continuous Time

1. Extremum problems for solutions of differential equations

2. Optimalizing controllers

3. Optimalising control by observations of derivatives

lo. Controlling classes of semi-Markov processes

Chapter 13: Stabilisation Control Problems for Differential Equations

l. Preliminary remarks

2. Adaptive control with standard model

3. Some matrix equations

10. Method of velocity gradient

5. Stabilization of solutions of ordinary linear differential equations

6. Stabilizing solutions of stochastic differential equations

7. Stabilizing solutions of ordinary differential equations containing
nonlinesrities

8. Dissipative nature of solutions of ordinary differential equations

20?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

155
155
162

167
170
173
178
181
196
202
211
211
215

219
228
236
2310
235
239
2101
266
210‘

246

251
255
261
266
271
271
273
285
291

291
291
296
301
305
313
313
31!.
323
324
331
361

351
3510
notes

Rofcrenccs

List of Sylbols for Classes of Objects
List of Sbeolo for Algorithns
Subject Index

COPYRIGRT:
literatury. 1981

6610
cso:

[862/138

lN)I‘0F1ﬂ(JAl.lﬂ5EZ(NHLV

208
FOI‘OFFTClAl.lEﬂE(HVLY

363
371
378
379
380

Izdatel'atvo "Hanks”. Gluvnaya rcdtktsiya fiziko-Iate-actchookoy